
Mildmay's son Thomas, who, being afterwards knighted, secured to the
cloth-worker's daughter the title of "Lady Mildmay." In the cabinet of
the American Antiquarian Society at Worcester, the visitor, on the
asking, may be gratified with the sight and touch of a curious old relic
which will bring him almost into contact with a most agreeable
family-circle of the olden time. It is a serviceable posset-pot, with a
silver tip and lid, both of which are gilded, the cover, still playing
faithfully on its hinge, being chased with the device of Adam and Eve in
the garden partaking of the forbidden fruit. An accompanying record
reads as follows:--"At ye Feast of St. Michael, Ano. 1607, my Sister,
ye Lady Mildmay, did give me a Stone Pot, tipped & covered wth. a
Silver Lydd." How many comforting concoctions and compounds, alternating
with herb-drinks and medicated potions, may have been quaffed or
swallowed with wry face from that precious old cup, who can now tell?
Probably it ministered its more inviting contents to the elders of the
successive generations in the family, while it was known by the younger
members in their turn in connection with certain penalties for
overeating and chills got from hard play. While having the relic in
hand, the other day, the prompting was irresistible to bring it close to
the appropriate organ, to ascertain, if possible, what had been the
predominant character of its contents. But, faithful as the grave, it
would reveal no secrets; having parted with all transient and artificial
odors, it has resumed, as is most fitting, the smell of its parent
earth.

The writer of that record accompanying the "Stone-Pot" with its "Silver
Lydd" was Adam Winthrop, father of our Governor, and son of the
last-mentioned Lord of Groton. This third Adam Winthrop--the sixth child
of his father's second wife, and the eleventh of his thirteen
children--was born in London, "in the street which is called Gracious,"
(Grace-Church,) August 10, 1548. Losing his father at the age of
fourteen, he was early bred as a lawyer in London, but soon engaged in
agricultural interests at Groton, to the lordship of which he acceded by
a license of alienation from an elder brother. There are sundry
authentic relics and tokens of this good man which reveal to us those
traits of his character, and those ways and influences of his domestic
life, under the high-toned, yet most genial training of which his son
was educated to the great enterprise Providence intended for him. There
are even poetical pieces extant which prove that Adam sought intercourse
with the Muses by making advances on his own part, though we must
confess that he does not appear to have been fairly met half-way by that
capricious and fastidious sisterhood. Many of his almanacs and diaries,
with entries dating from 1595, and from which the author makes liberal
and interesting transcripts in an Appendix, have been happily preserved,
and have a grateful use to us. They help us to reconstruct an old home,
a pleasant one, in or near which three generations of a good stock lived
together after the highest pattern of an orderly, exemplary, prospered,
and pious household. We infer from many significant trifles, that, while
the old English comfort-loving, generous, and hospitable style prevailed
there, the severer spirit of Puritanism had not attained ascendancy.
Intercourse with the metropolis, though embarrassed with conditions
requiring some buffeting and hardship, was compensated by the zest of
adventure, and it was frequent enough to quicken the minds and to add to
the bodily comforts and refinements of the family. Adam Winthrop must
have been a fine specimen of the old English gentleman, with all of
native polish which courtly experiences might or might not have given
him, and with a simple, high-toned, upright, and neighborly spirit,
which made him an apt and a faithful administrator of a great variety of
trusts. His old Bible, now in the possession of Mr. George Livermore of
Cambridge, represented the divine presence and law in his household,
for all its members, parents and children, masters and servants. He
entertained hospitably his full share of "the godly preachers," who were
the wandering luminaries, and, in some respects, the angelic visitants
of those days. He was evidently a very patient listener to sermons,
though we have not the proof in any surviving notebooks of his that one
of his excellent son John's furnishes us, that he took pains to
transcribe the heads, the savory passages, and the textual attestations
of the elaborate, but utterly juiceless sermons of the time. The entries
in his almanacs afford a curious variety, in which interesting events of
public importance alternate with homely details touching the affairs of
his neighborhood and the incidents in the domestic life of his relatives
and acquaintance. One matter, as we shall soon see, on which a fact in
the life, of Governor Winthrop depends, finds an unexpected disclosure
from Adam's pen. Here are a few excerpts from these entries:--"1597. The
VIth of July I received a privie seale to lend the Q. matie [Elizabeth]
£XX. for a yere."--"1602. Sept. the 27th day in ye mornying the Bell
did goe for mother [a conventional epithet] Tiffeyn, but she recouered."
This decides a matter which has sometimes been disputed,--that, while
with us, in our old times, "the passing bell" indicated the progress of
a funeral train, anciently in England it signified that a soul was
believed to be passing from a body supposed to be _in extremis_. And a
doleful sound it must have been to those of whom it made a false report,
as of "mother Tiffeyn."--"_Decem._ ye XXI day my brother Alibaster came
to my house & toulde me yt he made certayne inglishe verses in his
sleepe, wh. he recited unto me, & I lent him XLs."--"1603 April ye
28th day was the funeralles kept at Westminster for our late Queene
Elizabethe."--"1603. On Munday ye seconde of Maye, one Keitley, a
blackesmythe, dwellinge in Lynton in Cambridgeshire, had a poore man to
his father whom he kepte. A gentleman of ye same Towne sent a horse to
shoe, the father held up the horses legge whilest his soonne did shoe
him. The horse struggled & stroke the father on ye belly with his foote
& overthrewe him. The soonne laughed thereat & woulde not helpe his
father uppe, for the which some that were present reproved him greatlye.
The soonne went forwarde in shoinge of ye horse, & when he had donne he
went uppon his backe, mynding to goe home with him. The horse presently
did throughe him of his backe against a poste & clave his hed in sonder.
Mistress Mannocke did knowe ye man, for his mother was her nurse.
_Grave judicium Dei in irrisorem patris sui_." These little scraps of
Latin, sometimes running into a distich, are frequent signs of a certain
classical proclivity of the writer. Any one who should infer, from the
good man's arbitrary mode of spelling many words, that he was an
illiterate person, would be grievously mistaken, in his ignorance of the
universal characteristic and license of that age in that matter. The
Queen herself was by no means so good a "speller," by our standard, as
was Adam Winthrop. The extraordinary way in which letters were then left
out of words where they were needed, and most lavishly multiplied where
no possible use could be made of them, is a phenomenon never accounted
for.

Adam Winthrop was for several years auditor of the accounts of Trinity
and St. John's Colleges, Cambridge, and records his visits to the
University in the discharge of his duties. We have specimens of a
pleasant correspondence between him and his sister, Lady Mildmay, also
with his wife, marked by a sweet and gentle tone, the utterance of a
kindly spirit,--fragrant records of hearts once so warm with love.

It must have been with supreme delight that Adam entered in his diary,
that on January 12, 1587, [January 22, 1588, N.S.,] was born his only
son, John, one of five children by his second wife. John came into the
world between the years that marked, respectively, the execution of
Mary, Queen of Scots, and the visit of the Spanish Armada. We can well
conceive under what gracious and godly influences he received his early
nurture. His mother died only one year before he, at the age of
forty-two, embarked for America, his father having not long preceded
her. Evidence abundant was in our possession that John Winthrop had
received what even now would be called a good education, and what in his
own time was a comparatively rare one. It had generally been taken for
granted, however, that he had never been a member of either of the
Universities. His present biographer tells us that long before
undertaking his present grateful task he had never been reconciled to
admit the inference which had been drawn from silence on this point. He
remembered, by references in his own reading, that by some oversight
there had been an omission of names in the Cambridge University Register
from June, 1589, to June, 1602, and that no admissions were recorded
earlier than 1625. John Winthrop might, therefore, have at least "gone
to college," if he had not "gone through college." His biographer had
also noticed in the Governor's "Christian Experience," drawn up and
signed by him in New England on his forty-ninth birthday, 1636-7, an
allusion to his having been at Cambridge when "about 14 yrs of age," and
having had a lingering fever there. An entry in the records of his
father must have been a most grateful discovery to the Governor's
descendant in the seventh generation. "1602. The 2d of December I rode
to Cambridge. The VIIIth day John my soonne was admitted into Trinitie
College." But the old mystery vanishes only to give place to another,
which has a spice of romance in it. John Winthrop did not graduate at
Cambridge. He was a lawful husband when seventeen years of age, and a
happy father at eighteen.

In a time-stained and most precious document from his pen and from his
heart, relating his religious experience, to be referred to more
particularly by-and-by, he charges himself in his youth with grievous
sin. What we know of his whole life and character would of itself forbid
us to accept literally his severe self-judgment, much more to draw from
his language the inference which like language would warrant, if used in
our times. Those who have even but a superficial acquaintance with
religious diaries, especially with such as date from near that age, need
not be told that their writers, when sincerely devout by the Puritan
standard, aimed to search and judge their own hearts and lives with all
that penetrating, self-revealing, unsparing scrutiny and severity which
they believed were turned upon them by the all-seeing eye of infinite
purity. They wished to anticipate the Great Tribunal, and to avert the
surprise of any new disclosure there by admitting to themselves while
still in the flesh the worst that it could pronounce against them. Men
and women who before the daily companions and witnesses of their lives
would stand stoutly, and honestly too, in self-defence against all
imputations, and might even boast themselves--as St. Paul did--of a
surplusage of merits of some sort, when registering the barometer and
the thermometer of their religious experience were the most unrelenting
self-accusers. It is safe to say, as a general thing, that those who in
that introspection, in the measurement of their heats and chills of
piety, grieved most deeply and found the most ingenious causes for
self-infliction were either the most calculating hypocrites or the most
truly godly. To which of the two classes any one particular individual
might belong could not always be infallibly concluded from what he
wrote. That comfort-loving and greed-indulging, yet picturesque, old
sinner, Samuel Pepys, Esq., did not profess to keep a religious diary.
But many such diaries have been kept by men who might have covered
alternate pages with matter similar to his own, or with worse. We must
interpret the religious diaries of that age by aids independent of
those which their contents furnish us. John Winthrop, writing of his
youth when he had grown to the full exalted stature of Christian
manhood, and though sweetly mellowed in the graces of his character by
genial ripening from within his soul, was still a Puritan of the
severest standard theologically, and, by principle, charges himself with
heinous sin. We feel assured that he was not only guiltless of any folly
or error that would deserve such a designation, but that he even
overstated the degree of his addiction to the lighter human faults. Only
after such a preliminary assertion of incredulity as to any literal
truth in them, could we consent to copy his own words, as follows:--"In
my youth I was very lewdly disposed, inclining unto & attempting (so far
as my heart enabled me) all kinds of wickedness, except swearing &
scorning religion, wh. I had no temptation unto in regard of my
education. About ten years of age I had some notions of God: for, in
some frighting or danger, I have prayed unto God, & found manifest
answer: ye remembrance whereof, many years after, made me think that
God did love me: but it made me no whit the better. After I was twelve
years old, I began to have some more savor of religion: & I thought I
had more understanding in divinity than many of my years," etc. Yes, he
evidently had. And though the kind of "divinity" which had trained his
soul was of a grim sort, his own purity and gentleness of spirit
softened it while accepting it. He adds,--"Yet I was still very wild &
dissolute: & as years came on, my lusts grew stronger, but yet under
some restraint of my natural reason, whereby I had that command of
myself that I could turn into any form. I would, as occasion required,
write letters, &c. of mere vanity; & if occasion was, I could write
savoury & godly counsel." Seeing, however, that he was made a Justice of
the Peace when eighteen years of age, the inference is a fair one--his
own self-accusation to the contrary notwithstanding--that he was known
in his own neighborhood as a youth of extraordinary excellence of
character.

It would appear from the entries in his father's diaries that he was a
member of college some eighteen months. Why he left before completing
his course is to find its explanation for us either in the extreme
sickness before referred to as visited upon him there, or in the
agreeable "change in his condition," as the awkward and sheepish phrase
is, which immediately followed. The latter alternative leaves scope and
offers temptations for such inventiveness of fancy about details and
incidents, whys and wherefores, as the absence of all but the following
stingy revelations may justify. The good Adam, after recording, in
November, 1604, and in the ensuing March, two mysterious rides with his
son, has left, this, under date of March 28th, 1605:--"My soonne was
sollemly contracted to Mary Foorth, by Mr. Culverwell minister of Greate
Stambridge in Essex _cum consensu parentum_." Another ride into Essex,
this time by the son alone, is entered under April 9th, and then on the
16th his marriage, "_Ætatis suæ 17 [annis] 3 mensibus et 4 diebus
completis_." This reads pleasantly:--"The VIIIth of May my soonne & his
wife came to Groton from London, & ye IXth I made a marriage feaste,
when Sr. Thomas Mildmay & his lady my sister were present. The same day
my sister Veysye came to me, & departed on ye 24th of Maye. My dawter
Fones came the VIIIth & departed home ye XXIIId of Maye." An
expeditious closing up, with honey-moon and marriage-feast, of an
evident love-passage, whose longer or shorter antecedents are not
revealed. The biographer leaves his readers their choice of assigning
the abrupt close of the college course of John Winthrop either to his
grievous sickness, or to his love for Mary Forth, daughter and sole heir
of John Forth, Esq., of Great Stambridge. We incline rather to the
latter alternative as the stronger one, inasmuch as love for Mary may
not only have been the direct cause of his loathing Cambridge, but may
even have been the cause of his sickness, which in that case becomes so
secondary a cause as hardly to be a cause at all. One thing is certain:
our honored Puritan ancestors had no scruples against short engagements,
early marriages, or rematings as often as circumstances favored.

The young bridegroom himself, in the record of his experience, which we
quote again for another purpose, reserves the confession of any haste on
his own part to enter the married state, and would seem delicately to
insinuate parental influence in the case. "About eighteen years of age,
being a man in stature & understanding, as my parents conceived me, I
married into a family under Mr. Culverwell his ministry in Essex, &,
living there sometimes, I first found ye ministry of the word come home
to my heart with power (for in all before I found only light): & after
that, I found ye like in ye ministry of many others: so as there began
to be some change: wh. I perceived in myself, & others took notice of."

Six children were born to John Winthrop and his first wife,--three sons
and three daughters. John, the eldest of these, afterwards Governor of
Connecticut, was born February 22, 1606. Mary, the only one of the
daughters surviving infancy, also came to this country, and married a
son of Governor Thomas Dudley. In less than eleven years after her
marriage, Mary Forth died, the husband being not yet twenty-eight years
old, and the eldest child but nine.

The earliest record of his religious experience appears to have been
made under date of 1606. Read with the allowances and abatements to
which reference has already been made, all that this admirable man has
left for us of this self-revelation--little dreaming that it would have
such readers--is profoundly interesting and instructive, when estimated
from a right point of view and with any degree of congeniality of
spirit. Those who are familiar with his published New-England Journal
have already recognized in him a man of a simple and humble spirit, of a
grave, but not a gloomy temperament, kindly in his private estimate and
generous in his public treatment of others, most unselfish, and rigidly
upright. The noble native elements of his character, and the peculiar
tone and style of the piety under which his religious experience was
developed, mutually reacted upon each other, the result being that his
natural virtues were refined and spiritualized, while the morbid and
superstitious tendencies of his creed were to a degree neutralised. He
seems to refer the _crisis_ in his religious experience to a date
immediately following upon his first marriage. But, as we shall see, a
repeated trial in the furnace of sharp affliction deepened and enriched
that experience. He tells us that during those happy years of his first
marriage he had proposed to himself a change from the legal profession
to the ministry. By a second marriage, December 6, 1615, to Thomasine
Clopton, of a good family in the neighborhood, he had the promise of
renewed joy in a condition which his warm-hearted sociability and his
intense fondness for domestic relations made essential to his happiness,
if not to his virtue. But one single year and one added day saw her and
her infant child committed to the tomb, and made him again desolate. His
biographer, not without misgivings indeed, but with a deliberation and
healthfulness of judgment which most of his readers will approve as
allowed to overrule them, has spread before us at length, from the most
sacred privacy of the stricken mourner, heart-exercises and scenes in
the death-chamber, such as engage with most painful, but still
entrancing sympathy, the very soul of the reader. We know not where, in
all our literature, to find matter like this, so bedewed and steeped in
tenderness, so swift in its alternations between lacerating details and
soothing suggestions. The author has put into print all that remains of
the record of John Winthrop's "Experience," in passages written
contemporaneously with its incidents,--a document distinct from the
record of his "Christian Experience," written here. The account of
Thomasine's death-bed exercises, as deciphered from the perishing
manuscript, must, we think, stand by itself, either for criticism, or
for the defiance of criticism. What we have had of similar scenes only
in fragments, and as seen though veils, is here in the fulness of all
that can harrow or comfort the human heart, spread before us clear of
any withholding. It was the same year in which Shakspeare died, in a
house built by Sir Hugh Clopton, a member of the same family-connection
with Thomasine. Hour by hour, almost minute by minute, the stages of her
transition are reported with infinite minuteness. Her own prayers, and
those of a steady succession of religious friends, are noted; the
melting intonations of her own utterances of anxiety or peace; the
parting counsels or warnings addressed to her dependants; the last
breathings of affection to those dearest; the occasional aberrations and
cloudings of intelligence coming in the progress of her disease, which
were assigned to temptations from Satan: all these are given to us. "Her
feaver increased very violently upon hir, wh. the Devill made advantage
of to moleste hir comforte, but she declaringe unto us with what
temptations the devill did assault hir, bent hirselfe against them,
prayinge with great vehemence for Gods helpe, & that he would not take
away his lovinge kindnesse from hir, defyinge Satan, & spitting at him,
so as we might see by hir setting of hir teethe, & fixinge her eyes,
shakinge hir head & whole bodye, that she had a very greatt conflicte
with the adversarye." The mourner follows this scene to its close.
Having transfigured all its dreariest passages with the kindling glow of
his own undismayed faith, he lets his grateful spirit crown it with a
sweet peace, and then he pays a most tender tribute to the gentle
loveliness, fidelity, and Christian excellence of her with whom he had
shared so true, though so brief, a joy.

This renewed affliction is turned by the still young sufferer to uses
which should assure and intensify his piety according to the best
Puritan type of it. He continues his heart-record. He subjects his mode
of life, his feelings, habits and aims, the material of his daily food,
and the degree of his love for various goods, as they are to be measured
by a true scale, to the most rigid tests. He spares himself in nothing.
The Bible does him as direct a service in rebuke and guidance as if
every sentence in it had been written for himself. It is interesting to
note that the quotations from it are from a version that preceded our
own. His rules of self-discipline and spiritual culture, while wholly
free from unwholesome asceticism, nevertheless required the curbing of
all desires, and the utter subjection of every natural prompting to a
crucial test, before its innocent or edifying character could pass
unchallenged.

Vain would be the attempt in our generation to make Puritanism lovely or
attractive. Its charms were for its original and sincere disciples, and
do not survive them. There is no fashion of dress or furniture which may
not be revived, and, if patronized as fashion, be at least tolerated.
But for Puritanism there is no restoration. Its rehabilitated relics do
not produce their best influence in any attempt to attract our
admiration,--which they cannot do,--but in engaging our hearts' tolerant
respect and confidence towards those who actually developed its
principles at first-hand, its original disciples, who brought it into
discredit afterwards by the very fidelity of their loyalty to it.
Puritanism is an engaging and not offensive object to use, when regarded
as the characteristic of only one single generation of men and women and
children. It could not pass from that one generation into another
without losing much of what grace it had, and acquiring most odious and
mischievous elements. Entailed Puritanism being an actual impossibility,
all attempts to realize it, all assumptions of success in it, have the
worst features of sham and hypocrisy. The diligent students of the
history and the social life of our own colonial days know very well what
an unspeakable difference there was, in all that makes and manifests
characters and dispositions, between the first comers here and the first
native-born generation, and how painfully that difference tells to the
discredit of the latter. The tap-roots of Puritanism struck very deep,
and drew the sap of life vigorously. They dried very soon; they are now
cut; and whatever owed its life exclusively to them has withered and
must perish. A philosophy of Nature and existence now wholly discredited
underlay the fundamental views and principles of Puritanism. The early
records of our General Court are thickly strown with appointments of
Fast-Days that the people might discover the especial occasion of God's
anger toward them, manifested in the blight of some expected harvest, or
in a scourge upon the cattle in the field. Some among us who claim to
hold unreduced or softened the old ancestral faith have been twice in
late years convened in our State-House, by especial call, to legislate
upon the potato-disease and the pleuro-pneumonia among our herds. Their
joint wisdom resulted in money-appropriations to discover causes and
cures. The debates held on these two occasions would have grievously
shocked our ancestors. But are there any among us who could in full
sincerity, with logic and faith, have stood for the old devout theory of
such visitations?

But if it would be equally vain and unjust to attempt to make Puritanism
lovely to ourselves,--a quality which its noblest disciples did not
presume to make its foremost attraction,--there is all the more reason
why we should do it justice in its original and awfully real presentment
in its single generation of veritable discipleship. What became
drivelling and cant, presumption and bigotry, pretence and hypocrisy, as
soon as a fair trial had tested it, was in the hearts, the speech, the
convictions, and the habits of a considerable number of persons in one
generation, the most thoroughly honest and earnest product of all the
influences which had trained them. We read the heart-revelations of John
Winthrop with the profoundest confidence, and even with a constraining
sympathy. We venture to say that when this book shall be consulted,
through all time to come, for the various uses of historical, religious,
or literary illustration, not even the most trifling pen will ever turn
a single sentence from its pages to purposes of levity or ridicule. Here
we have Puritanism at first-hand: the original, unimitated, and
transient resultant of influences which had been working to produce it,
and which would continue their working so as to insure modifications of
it. Winthrop notes it for a special Providence that his wife discovered
a loathsome spider in the children's porridge before they had partaken
of it. His religious philosophy stopped there. He did not put to himself
the sort of questions which open in a train to our minds from any one
observed fact, else he would have found himself asking after the special
Providence which allowed the spider to fall into the porridge. His
friend and successor in high-magistracy in New England, Governor John
Endecott, wrote him a letter years afterward which is so characteristic
of the faith of both of them that we will make free use of it. The
letter is dated Salem, July 28th, 1640, and probably refers to the
disaster by which the ship Mary Rose "was blown in pieces with her own
powder, being 21 barrels," in Charlestown harbor, the day preceding.[A]

    "DEAREST SIR,--Hearing of ye remarkable stroake of Gods
    hand uppon ye shippe & shippes companie of Bristoll, as also of
    some Atheisticall passages & hellish profanations of ye Sabbaths
    & deridings of ye people & wayes of God, I thought good to desire
    a word or two of you of ye trueth of what you have heard. Such an
    extraordinary judgement would be searched into, what Gods meaninge
    is in it, both in respect of those whom it concernes more
    especiallie in England, as also in regard of ourselves. God will
    be honred in all dealings. We have heard of severall ungodlie
    carriadges in that ship, as, first, in their way overbound they
    wld. constantlie jeere at ye holy brethren of New England, & some
    of ye marineer's would in a scoffe ask when they should come to
    ye holie Land? 2. After they lay in the harbor Mr. Norice sent to
    ye shippe one of our brethren uppon busines, & hee heard them
    say, This is one of ye holie brethren, mockinglie &
    disdainefullie. 3. That when some have been with them aboard to
    buy necessaries, ye shippe men would usuallie say to some of them
    that they could not want any thinge, they were full of ye
    Spiritt. 4. That ye last Lords Day, or ye Lords Day before,
    there were many drinkings aboard with singings & musick in tymes
    of publique exercise. 5. That ye last fast ye master or captaine
    of the shippe, with most of ye companie, would not goe to ye
    meetinge, but read ye booke of common prayer so often over that
    some of ye company said hee had worne that threed-bare, with many
    such passages. Now if these or ye like be true, as I am persuaded
    some of them are, I think ye trueth heereof would be made knowen,
    by some faithfull hand in Bristoll or else where, for it is a very
    remarkable & unusuall stroake," etc., etc.

Governor Winthrop, who was a man of much milder spirit than Endecott,
faithfully records this judgment, under its date in his Journal, with
additional particulars. The explosion took place "about dinner time, no
man knows how, & blew up all, viz. the captain, & nine or ten of his
men, & some four or five strangers. There was a special providence that
there were no more, for many principal men were going aboard at that
time, & some were in a boat near the ship, & others were diverted by a
sudden shower of rain, & others by other occasions." The good Governor
makes this startling record the occasion for mentioning "other examples
of like kind." Yet the especial providential significance which both he
and Endecott could assign to such a calamity would need a readjustment
in its interpretation, if compelled to take in two other conditions
under which the mysterious ways of that Providence are manifested,
namely: first, that many ships on board which there have been no such
profane doings have met with similar disaster; and second, that many
ships on board which there has been more heinous sinning have escaped
the judgment.

But, as we have said, Puritanism was temporarily consistent with the
philosophy of life and Nature for one age. It held no divided sway over
John Winthrop, but filled his heart, his mind, and his spirit. If, by
its influence over any one human being, regarded as an unqualified,
unmodified style of piety, demanding entire allegiance, and not yielding
to any mitigation through the tempering qualities of an individual,--if,
of itself and by itself, Puritanism could be made lovely to us, John
Winthrop might well be charged with that exacting representative office.
We repeat, that we have no abatement to make of our exalted regard for
him through force of a single sentence from his pen. Most profoundly are
we impressed by the intensity and thoroughness of conviction, the
fulness and frankness of avowal, and the delicate and fervent
earnestness of self-consecration, which make these ancient oracles of a
human heart fragrant with the odor of true piety. He uses no hackneyed
terms, no second-hand or imitated phrases. His language, as well as his
thoughts, his method, and ideal standard, are purely his own. Indeed, we
might set up and sustain for him a claim of absolute individuality, if
not even of originality, in the standard of godliness and righteousness
which he fashioned for himself, and then with such zeal and heroism
sought to attain.

Entering a third time the married state, John Winthrop, in April, 1618,
took to wife Margaret, daughter of Sir John Tyndal. The clouds, which
had gathered so deeply in repeated bereavement and gloom over his
earlier years of domestic life, yielded now, and left alike the sky and
the horizon of his prospects, to give place soon to the anxieties of
grave enterprises, which animated while they burdened his spirit. This
excellent and brave-hearted lady, as she opens her soul, and almost
reveals what must have been a sweet and winning countenance, to the
reader of her own letters in these pages, will henceforward be one of
the enshrined saints of the New-England calendar. Little did she dream
at her marriage what a destiny was before her. There was in store for
her husband nearly thirty years of the truest heart-love and the closest
sympathy in religious trust and consecration with her. We may anticipate
our narrative at this point, to say that her situation did not allow her
to accompany him on his own removal to this side of the ocean, but she
followed him a year and a half afterwards, arriving in November, 1631,
with his eldest son and others of his children, having lost on the
voyage an infant whom he had probably never seen. Her death, in a
prevailing sickness, June 14, 1647, drew from her husband this tribute
to her:--"In this sickness the Governour's wife, daughter of Sir John
Tindal, Knight, left this world for a better, being about fifty-six
years of age: a woman of singular virtue, prudence, modesty, & piety &
specially beloved & honored of all the country." Though in the December
of the same year we find the Governor again married, now to the Widow
Martha Coytemore, we refer the incident to wilderness-straits and the
exactions of necessity or expediency in domestic life.

But we must return to Margaret, the bride. It seems that there was some
objection offered to Winthrop's suit by the lady's relatives. In one of
the two charming letters which are preserved as written during his
courtship to her, he refers to some "unequall conflicte" which she had
to bear. These two letters, with one addressed to the lady by Father
Adam, are unique as specimens of Puritan love-making. Solomon's Song is
here put to the best use for which it is adapted, its only safe use.

The family-letters, which now increase in number, and vastly in their
cheerfulness and radiance of spirit, and the birth of more children,
present to us the most captivating glimpses of the English life of our
first Chief Magistrate. From a will which he made in Groton in 1620, of
course superseded after his change of country, it appears that he had
then five sons and one daughter. The Lordship of Groton had been
assigned to him by his father. This was the year of the hegira of the
Plymouth Pilgrims, but we have as yet no intimation that Winthrop was
looking in this direction.

For more than a decade of years the family-history now passes on, for
the most part placidly, interspersed with those incidents and anxieties
which give alike the charm and the import to the routine of existence to
any closely knit fellowships sharing it together. Enough of the fragrant
old material, in fast decaying papers, has come to light and been
transcribed for security against all future risks, to preserve to us a
fair restoration of the lights and shades of that domestic experience.
Time has dealt kindly in sparing a variety of specimens, so as to give
to that restoration a kaleidoscopic character. Winthrop's frequent
visits to London, on his professional errands, gave occasion to constant
correspondence between him and his wife, and so we have epistles
burdened with the intensities and refinements of the purest affection.
An occasional reference to church affairs by the Patron of Groton, with
extracts from the record of his religious experience, continue for us
the evidence that Winthrop was growing and deepening in the roots of
his noble style of life. His piety evidently ripened and mellowed into
the richest fruitage which any form of theological or devotional faith
can produce. A severe and wellnigh fatal illness in London, which he
concealed from his wife at Groton till its crisis was past, was made by
him the occasion, as of many other good resolutions, so also of a
renouncement of the use of tobacco, in which, by his own account, he,
like many men as well as women at that time, had gone to excess. His
good wife, though positively enjoined by him not to venture upon the
winter's journey, in the letter which communicated to her the first
tidings of his illness, immediately went to him in the great city,
attended only by a female servant. In a previous malady from which he
had suffered severely in one of his hands while at home, his son John,
in London, had consulted in his behalf one of the helpful female
practitioners of the time, and the correspondence relating to her
advice, her ointments, and their efficacy, gives us some curiously
illustrative matter in the history of the healing art. The good woman
was sure that she could at once cure her patient, if he could be beneath
her hands. She would receive no compensation.

A mystery has attached to a certain "office" which Winthrop held in
London, and to which, in one of his previously published letters, he
referred as having lost it. It now appears that that office was an
Attorneyship of the Court of Wards and Liveries, an honorable and
responsible trust. Its duties, with other provisional engagements,
separated him so much from his home at one period, that he meditated the
removal of his family from Groton. His wife's letters on the subject are
delightful revelations of confidences. It is still only by inference
that we can assign the loss of his office, to the business of which we
have many references, to any especial cause. It may have been
surrendered by him because he longed for more home-life, or because the
growing spirit of discontent and apprehension as to the state of public
affairs, which he shared with so many of his friends, made him obnoxious
to the controlling heads in civil life.

We have also some admirable specimens of his correspondence with his son
John, who, after his preliminary education at the school at Bury St.
Edmund's, became, in 1622, in his seventeenth year, a member of Trinity
College, Dublin, near his uncle and aunt Downing, parents of the famous
Sir George Downing. These are beautiful and wise and generous
expressions of a father's love and advice and dealings with a son,
exposed to temptation at a critical age, and giving promise of the
abilities and virtues which he afterwards exhibited so nobly as Governor
of Connecticut. In one of the letters, to which the father asks replies
in Latin, he writes, "I will not limit your allowance less than to ye
uttermost of mine own estate. So as, if £20 be too little (as I always
accounted it), you shall have £30; & when that shall not suffice, you
shall have more. Only hold a sober & frugal course (yet without
baseness), & I will shorten myself to enlarge you." In another letter
there is this fit commemoration of his father, Adam, dying at the age of
seventy-five:--"I am sure, before this, you have knowledge of that wh.,
at the time when you wrote, you were ignorant of: viz., the departure of
your grandfather (for I wrote over twice since). He hath finished his
course: & is gathered to his people in peace, as the ripe corn into the
barn. He thought long for ye day of his dissolution, & welcomed it most
gladly. Thus is he gone before; & we must go after, in our time. This
advantage he hath of us,--he shall not see ye evil wh. we may meet with
ere we go hence. Happy those who stand in good terms with God & their
own conscience: they shall not fear evil tidings: & in all changes they
shall be ye same."

There are likewise letters to the student at Dublin from his brother
Forth, who succeeded him at the school at St. Edmund's. It is curious to
note in these epistles of the school-boy the indifferent success of his
manifestly sincere effort to use the technical language of Puritanism
and to express its aims and ardors. The youth evidently feels freer when
writing of the fortunes of some of his school-mates. This same Forth
Winthrop became in course a student at Cambridge, and we have letters to
his father, carried by the veritable Hobson immortalized by Milton.

The younger John went, on graduating, to London, to fit himself for the
law. His name is found on the books as admitted to the Inner Temple in
1624. He appears early to have cherished some matrimonial purposes which
did not work felicitously. Not liking his profession, he turned his
thoughts toward the sea. He obtained a secretaryship in the naval
service, and joined the expedition under the Duke of Buckingham,
designed to relieve the French Protestants at Rochelle, in 1627. He
afterwards made an Oriental tour, of the stages of which we have some
account in his letters, in 1628-9, from Leghorn, Constantinople, etc. He
was thwarted in a purpose to visit Jerusalem, and returned to England,
by Holland. Notwithstanding the industrious fidelity of his father as a
letter-writer, the son received no tidings from home during his whole
absence of nearly fifteen months. What a contrast with our times!

Before undertaking this Oriental tour, the younger John had had
proposals made to him, which seem to have engaged his own inclinations,
to connect himself with Endecott's New-England enterprise. He wrote to
consult the wishes of his father on the subject; but that father, who in
less than two years was to find himself pledged to a more comprehensive
scheme, involving a life-long exile in that far-off wilderness,
dissuaded his son from the premature undertaking. It does not appear
that the father had as yet presented to his mind the possibility of any
such step. Yet, from the readiness which marked his own earnest and
complete sympathy in the enterprise when first we find him concerned in
it, we must infer that he had much previous acquaintance and sympathy
with the early New-England adventurers from the moment that a religious
spirit became prominent in their fellowship. He was a man who undertook
no great work without the most careful deliberation, and a slow maturing
of his decision.

During the absence of John at the East, many interesting and serious
incidents occurred in the personal experience and in the domestic
relations of his father, which doubtless helped the preparation of his
spirit for the critical event of his life. He had that severe and
threatening illness in London already referred to. We have many letters
covering the period, filled with matter over which, as so full of what
is common to the human heart in all time, we linger with consenting
sympathy. A wayward and unconverted son, Henry by name, caused his
father an anxiety which we see struggling painfully with parental
affection and a high-toned Christian aim for all the members of his
family. The son's course indicated rather profitlessness and
recklessness than vice. He connected himself with an enterprise at
Barbadoes. He drew heavily on his father's resources for money, and
returned him some tobacco, which the father very frankly writes to him
was "very ill-conditioned, foul, & full of stalks, & evil-colored." He
came over in the same expedition, though not in the same ship, with his
father, and was accidentally drowned at Salem, July 2, 1630. In the
first letter which the good Governor wrote to his wife after his landing
here, dated "Charlestown, July 16, 1630," are these sentences:--"We have
met with many sad & discomfortable things, as thou shalt hear after; &
ye Lord's hand hath been heavy upon myself in some very near to me. My
son Henry! my son Henry! ah, poor child!" While the father was writing
from London to this son, then supposed to be at Barbadoes, he had other
matters of anxiety. His endeared brother-in-law, Fones, died, April 15,
1629, and four days afterwards Winthrop was called to part, at Groton,
with his venerated mother, who died under the roof where she had lived
so happily and graciously with his own family in his successive sorrows
and delights.

The loss or resignation of his office, with the giving up of his
law-chamber in London, and his evident premonitions of the sore troubles
in affairs of Church and State which were soon to convulse his native
land, doubtless guided him to a decision, some of the stages and
incidents of which have left no record for us. Enough, however, of the
process may still be traced among papers which have recently come to
light, to open to us its inner workings, and to explain its development.
A ride with his brother Downing into Lincolnshire, July 28, 1629, finds
an entry in Winthrop's "Experiences," that it may mark his gratitude to
the Providence which preserved his life, when, as he writes, "my horse
fell under me in a bogge in the fennes, so as I was allmost to ye
waiste in water." Beyond all doubt this ride was taken by the
sympathizing travellers on a prearranged visit to Isaac Johnson, another
of the New-England worthies, at Sempringham, on business connected with
the Massachusetts enterprise. But the first recovered and extant
document which proves that Winthrop was committing himself to the great
work is a letter of his son John's, dated London, August 21, 1629, in
reply to one from his father, which, it is evident from the tenor of the
answer, had directly proposed the embarking of the interest of the whole
family in the enterprise. A certain mysterious paper of "Conclusions,"
referred to by the son, had been inclosed in the father's letter, which
appears to be irrecoverable. There has been much discussion, with rival
and contested claims and pleas, as to the authorship of that most
valuable and critical document containing the propositions for the
enterprise, with reasons and grounds, objections and answers. Our author
urges, with force of arguments and the evidence of authentic papers,
entirely to our satisfaction, that John Winthrop was essentially and
substantially the digester and exponent of those pregnant
considerations. The correspondence which follows proves how
conscientiously the enterprise was weighed, and the reasons and
objections debated. Godly ministers were consulted for their advice and
coöperation. No opposition or withholding of any shade or degree would
seem to have been made by any member of Winthrop's family; his gentle,
meek-hearted, but most heroic and high-souled wife, being, from first to
last, his most cordial sympathizer and ally. We next find him entering
into the decisive "Agreement," at Cambridge, with eleven other of the
foremost adventurers to New England, which pledged them "to inhabit and
continue there." It was only after most protracted, and, we may be sure,
most devout deliberation, that the great decision was made, which
involved the transfer of the patent, the setting up of a self-governing
commonwealth on the foreign soil, and the committal of those who were to
be its members to a life-long and exacting undertaking, from which there
were to be no lookings-back. A day was appointed for the company to
meet, on which two committees were chosen, to weigh and present with
full force, respectively, the reasons for a removal, and the reasons
against it. The "show of hands," when these committees reported, fixed
the purpose of the company on what they did not hesitate to believe was
the leading of Providence.

From that moment we find Winthrop busy with cares and efforts of the
most exacting character, drawing upon all his great energies, and
engaging the fondest devotion of his manly and Christian heart. He gave
himself, without stint or regret, with an unselfish and supreme
consecration, to the work, cherishing its great aim as the matter of his
most earnest piety, and attending to its pettiest details with a
scrupulous fidelity which proved that conscience found its province
there. We seem almost to be made spectators of the bustle and fervor of
the old original Passover scenes of the Hebrew exodus. It is refreshing
to pause for a moment over a touch of our common humanity, which we meet
by the way. Winthrop in London "feeds with letters" the wife from whom
he was so often parted. In one of them he tells her that he has
purchased for her the stuff for a "gowne" to be sent by the carrier, and
he adds, "Lett me knowe what triminge I shall send for thy gowne." But
Margaret, who could trust her honored husband in everything else, was a
woman still, and must reserve, not only the rights of her sex, but the
privilege of her own good taste for the fitnesses of things. So she
guardedly replies,--in a postscript, of course,--"When I see the cloth,
I will send word what triminge will serve." In a modest parenthesis of
another letter to her, dated October 29, 1629, he speaks of himself, as
if all by the way, as "beinge chosen by ye Company to be their
Governor." The circumstances of his election and trust, so honorable and
dignified, are happily told with sufficient particularity on our own
Court Records. Governor Cradock, his honored predecessor, not intending
immediate emigration, put the proposition, and announced the result
which gave him such a successor.

Attending frequently upon meetings of the Company, and supervising its
own business as well as his private affairs, all having in view what
must then have been in the scale of the time a gigantic undertaking,
full of vexations and embarrassments, Winthrop seizes upon a few days of
crowded heart-strugglings to make his last visit at the dear homestead,
and then to take of it his eternal farewell. How lovingly and admiringly
do we follow him on his way from London, taking his last view of those
many sweet scenes which were thenceforward to embower in his memory all
the joys of more than forty years! He did not then know for what a
rugged landscape, and for what uncouth habitations, he was to exchange
those fair scenes and the ivy-clad and -festooned churches and cottages
of his dear England. His wife, for reasons of prudence, was to remain
for a while with some of his children, beside his eldest son, and was to
follow him when he had made fit preparation for her. His last letters to
her (and each of many was written as the last, because of frequent
delays) after the embarkation of the company, are gems and jewels of a
heart which was itself the pure shrine of a most fond and faithful love.
His leave-taking at Groton was at the end of February, 1630; his
embarkation was on March 22. The ships were weather-bound successively
at Cowes and at Yarmouth, whence were written those melting epistles. A
letter which he wrote to Sir William Spring, one of the Parliamentary
members from Suffolk, a dear religions friend of his, overflows with an
ardor and intenseness of affection which passes into the tone and
language of feminine endearment, and fashions passages from the Song of
Solomon into prayers. One sentence of that letter keeps sharp its
lacerating point for the reader of to-day. "But I must leave you all:
our farewells usually are pleasant passages; mine must be sorrowful;
this addition of forever is a sad close." And it was to be forever.
Winthrop was never to see his native land again. Many of his associates
made one or more homeward voyages. A few of them returned to resume
their English citizenship in those troublous times which invited and
exercised energies like those which had essayed to tame a wilderness.
But the great and good leader of his blessed exodus never found the
occasion, we know not that he ever felt the prompting, to recross the
ocean. The purpose of his life and soul was a unit in its substance and
consecration, and it had found its object. For nineteen years, most of
them as Governor, and always as the leading spirit and the recognized
Moses of the enterprise, he was spared to see the planting and the
building-up which subdued the wilderness and reared a commonwealth. He
had most noble and congenial associates in the chief magistrates of the
other New-England colonies. Bradford and Winslow of Plymouth, Eaton of
New Haven, his own son and Haynes and Hopkins of Connecticut, and
Williams of Providence Plantations, were all of them men of signal
virtue. They have all obtained a good report, and richly and eminently
do they deserve it. They were, indeed, a providential galaxy of
pure-hearted, unspotted, heroic men. There is a mild and sweet beauty in
the star of Winthrop, the lustre of which asks no jealous or rival
estimation.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLANTING OF THE APPLE-TREE.


    Come, let us plant the apple-tree!
    Cleave the tough greensward with the spade;
    Wide let its hollow bed be made;
    There gently lay the roots, and there
    Sift the dark mould with kindly care,
      And press it o'er them tenderly,
    As, round the sleeping infant's feet,
    We softly fold the cradle-sheet:
      So plant we the apple-tree.

    What plant we in the apple-tree?
    Buds, which the breath of summer days
    Shall lengthen into leafy sprays;
    Boughs, where the thrush with crimson breast
    Shall haunt and sing and hide her nest.
      We plant upon the sunny lea
    A shadow for the noontide hour,
    A shelter from the summer shower,
      When we plant the apple-tree.

    What plant we in the apple-tree?
    Sweets for a hundred flowery springs,
    To load the May-wind's restless wings,
    When, from the orchard-row, he pours
    Its fragrance through our open doors;
      A world of blossoms for the bee;
    Flowers for the sick girl's silent room;
    For the glad infant sprigs of bloom.
      We plant with the apple-tree.

    What plant we in the apple-tree?
    Fruits that shall swell in sunny June,
    And redden in the August noon,
    And drop, as gentle airs come by
    That fan the blue September sky;
      While children, wild with noisy glee,
    Shall scent their fragrance as they pass,
    And search for them the tufted grass
      At the foot of the apple-tree.

    And when above this apple-tree
    The winter stars are quivering bright,
    And winds go howling through the night,
    Girls, whose young eyes o'erflow with mirth,
    Shall peel its fruit by cottage-hearth,
      And guests in prouder homes shall see,
    Heaped with the orange and the grape,
    As fair as they in tint and shape,
      The fruit of the apple-tree.

    The fruitage of this apple-tree
    Winds and our flag of stripe and star
    Shall bear to coasts that lie afar,
    Where men shall wonder at the view,
    And ask in what fair groves they grew;
      And they who roam beyond the sea
    Shall look, and think of childhood's day,
    And long hours passed in summer play
      In the shade of the apple-tree.

    Each year shall give this apple-tree
    A broader flush of roseate bloom,
    A deeper maze of verdurous gloom,
    And loosen, when the frost-clouds lower,
    The crisp brown leaves in thicker shower;
      The years shall come and pass, but we
    Shall hear no longer, where we lie,
    The summer's songs, the autumn's sigh,
      In the boughs of the apple-tree.

    And time shall waste this apple-tree.
    Oh, when its aged branches throw
    Thin shadows on the sward below,
    Shall fraud and force and iron will
    Oppress the weak and helpless still?
      What shall the tasks of mercy be,
    Amid the toils, the strifes, the tears
    Of those who live when length of years
      Is wasting this apple-tree?

    "Who planted this old apple-tree?"
    The children of that distant day
    Thus to some aged man shall say;
    And, gazing on its mossy stem,
    The gray-haired man shall answer them:
      "A poet of the land was he,
    Born in the rude, but good old times;
    'Tis said he made some quaint old rhymes
      On planting the apple-tree."

       *       *       *       *       *

RAY.


So Beltran was a Rebel.

Vivia stood before the glass, brushing out black shadows from her long,
fine hair. There lay the letter as little Jane had left it, as she had
let it lie till all the doors had clanged between, as she had laid it
down again. She paused, with the brush half lifted, to glance once more
at the clear superscription, to turn it and touch with her finger-tips
the firm seal. Then she went on lengthening out the tresses that curled
back again at the end like something instinct with life.

How long it had been in coming!--gradual journeys up from those Southern
shores, and slumber in some comrade's care till a flag of truce could
bear it across beneath the shelter of its white wing. Months had passed.
And where was Beltran now? Living,--Vivia had a proud assurance in her
heart of that! Her heart that went swiftly gliding back into the past,
and filling old scenes with fresh fire. Thinking thus, she bent forward
with dark, steady gaze, as if she sought for its pictures in the
uncertain depths of the mirror, and there they rose as of old the
crystal gave them back to the seeker. It was no gracious woman bending
there that she saw, but a scene where the very air infused with sunlight
seemed to glow, the house with its wide veranda veiled in vines, and
above it towering the rosy cloud of an oleander-tree, behind it the far
azure strip of the bay, before it the long low line of sandy beach where
the waters of the Gulf forever swung their silver tides with a sullen
roar,--for the place was one of those islands that make the perpetual
fortifications of the Texan coast. Vivia, a slender little maiden of
eleven summers, rocks in a boat a rod from shore, and by her side, his
length along the warm wave, his arm along the boat, a boy floats in his
linen clothes, an amphibious child, so undersized as to seem but little
more than a baby, and yet a year her senior. He swims round and round
the skiff in circling frolics, followed by the great dog who gambols
with them, he dives under it and comes up far in advance, he treads
water as he returns, and, seizing the painter, draws it forward while
she sits there like Thetis guiding her sea-horses. Then, as the sun
flings down more fervid showers, together they beach the boat and
scamper up the sand, where old Disney, who has been dredging for oysters
in the great bed below, crowns his basket with little Ray, and bears him
off perched aloft on his bent back. Vivia walks beside the old slave in
her infantile dignity, and disregards the sundry attempts of Ray's
outstretched arms, till of a sudden the beating play of hoofs runs along
the ground, and Beltran, with his morning's game, races by on his fiery
mustang, and, scarcely checking his speed as he passes, stoops from the
saddle and lifts the little girl before him. Vivia would look back in
triumph upon Ray in his ignoble conveyance, but the affair has already
been too much for him, he has flung himself on the instant from old
Disney's basket, as if he were careless whether he fell under the
horse's feet or not, but knowing perfectly well that Beltran will catch
him. And Beltran, suddenly pulling up with a fierce rein, does catch
him, bestows him with Vivia, slightly to her dainty discomfort, and
dashes on. Noon deepens; Vivia does not sleep, she seeks Ray, Ray who
does not sleep either, but who is not to be beguiled. For, one day, the
child in his troubled dreams had been found by Beltran with a white coil
of fangs and venom for his pillow; and never since has Beltran taken his
noontide siesta but Ray watches beside him till the thick brown lashes
lift themselves once more. For, if Ray knows what worship is, he would
show you Beltran enshrined in his heart, this brother a dozen years his
elder, who had hailed his birth with stormy tears of joy, who had
carried him for years when he was yet too weak to walk, who in his own
full growth would seem to have absorbed the younger's share, were it not
that, tiny as Ray may be, his every nerve is steel, made steel, though,
by the other, and so trained and suppled and put at his service. It was
Beltran who had first flung him astride the saddle and sent him loping
off to town alone, but who had secretly followed him from thicket to
thicket, and stood ready in the market-place at last to lift him down;
it was Beltran who had given him his own rifle, had taught him to take
the bird on the wing, had led him out at night to see the great silent
alligator in his scale-armor sliding over the land from the coast and
plunging into the fresh waters of the bay,--who took him with him on the
long journeys for gathering in the cattle of the vast stock-farm, let
him sleep beside himself on the bare prairie-floor, like a man, with his
horse tethered to his boot, told him the spot in the game on which to
draw his bead, showed him what part to dress, and made him _chef de
cuisine_ in every camp they crossed; it was he who had taught him how to
hold himself in any wild stampede, on the prairie how to conquer fire
with fire, to find water as much his element as air; it is Beltran, in
short, who has made him this little marvel which at twelve years old he
finds himself to be,--this brother who serves him so, and whom he
adores, for whom he passionately expresses his devotion,--this brother
whom he loves as he loves the very life he lives. So Vivia, too, sits
down at Beltran's feet that day, and busies herself with those pink
plumes of the spoonbill's wings which he brought home to her,--so that,
when he wakes, he sees her standing there like the spirit of his dream,
her dark eyes shining out from under the floating shadowy hair, and the
rosy wings trembling on her little white shoulders. And just then
Beltran has no word for Ray, the customary smiling word always waited
for, since his eyes are on the vision at his feet, and straightway the
child springs down, springs where he can intercept Beltran's view, seems
to rise in his wrath a head above the girl, and, looking at Beltran all
the while, slaps Vivia on the cheek. Instantly two hands have clasped
about his wrists, two hands that hold him in a vice, and two eyes are
gazing down into his own and paralyzing him. Still the grasp, the gaze,
continue; as Vivia watches that look, a great blue glow from those eyes
seems to cloud her own brain. The color rises on Ray's cheeks, his angry
eyes fall, his chest heaves, his lips tremble, off from the long black
lashes spin sprays of tears, he cannot move, he is so closely held, but
slowly he turns his head, meets the red lips of the forgiving girl with
his, then casts himself with sobs on Beltran's breast. And all that
evening, as the sudden heavy clouds drive down and quench sunset and
starlight, while they sit about a great fire, Beltran keeps her at his
side and Ray maintains his place, and within there is light and love,
and without the sand trembles to the shock of sound and the thunder of
the surf, and the heaven is full of the wildly flying blast of the
Norther.

Still, as Vivia gazed into the silent mirror, the salient points of her
life started up as if memory held a torch to them in their dark
recesses, and another picture printed its frosty _spiculæ_ upon the gray
surface of the glass before her. No ardent arch of Southern noontide
now, no wealth of flower and leaf, no pomp of regnant summer, but winter
has darkened down over sad Northern countries, and white Arctic splendor
hedges a lake about with the beauty of incomparable radiance; the trees
whose branches overhang the verge are foamy fountains, frozen as they
fall; distantly beyond them the crisp upland fields stretch their snowy
sparkle to touch the frigid-flashing sapphire of the sky, and bluer than
the sky itself their shadows fall about them; every thorn, every stem,
is set, a spike of crusted lustre in its icy mail; the tingling air
takes the breath in silvery wreaths; and wherever the gay garment of a
skater breaks the monotone with a gleam of crimson or purple, the
shining feet beneath chisel their fantastic curves upon a floor that is
nothing but one glare of crystal sheen. And here, hero of the scene,
glides Beltran, master of the Northern art as school-days made him,
skates as of old some young Viking skated, all his being bubbling in a
lofty glee, with blue eyes answering this icy brilliance as they dazzle
back from the tawny countenance, with every muscle rippling grace and
vigor to meet the proud volition, lithely cutting the air, swifter than
the swallow's wing in its arrowy precision, careless as the floating
flake in effortless motion, skimming along the lucid sheathing that
answers his ringing heel with a tune of its own, and swaying in his
almost aërial medium, lightly, easily, as the swimming fish sways to the
currents of the tide. Scoring whitely their tracery of intricate lines,
the groups go by in whorls, in angles, in sweeping circles, and the ice
shrinks beneath them; here a fairy couple slide along, waving and bowing
and swinging together; far away some recluse in his pleasure sports
alone with folded arms, careening in the outward roll like the mast of a
phantom-craft; everywhere inshore clusters of ruddy-cheeked boys race
headlong with their hawkey-sticks, and with their wild cries, making
benders where the ice surges in a long swell: and constantly in
Beltran's wake slips Vivia, a scarlet shadow, while a clumsy little
black outline is ever designing itself at her heels as Ray strives in
vain to perfect the mysteries of the left stroke. All about, the keen
air breathes its exhilaration, and the glow seems to penetrate the pores
till the very blood dances along filled with such intoxicating
influence; all above, the afternoon heaven deepens till it has no hidden
richness, and between one and the pale gold of the coldly reddening
horizon the white air seems hollow as the flaw in some great transparent
jewel. Still they wind away in their gladness, when hurriedly Beltran
reaches his hand for the heedless Vivia's, and hurriedly she sees
terrifying grooves spreading round them, a great web-work of
cracks,--the awful ice lifts itself, sinks, and out of a monstrous
fissure chill death rises to meet them and ingulf them. In an instant,
Ray, who might have escaped, has hurled himself upon them, and then, as
they all struggle for one drowning breath in the flood, Vivia dimly
divines through her horror an arm stretched first towards Ray, snatched
back again, and bearing her to safety. Ray has already scrambled from
the shallow breach where his brother alone found bottom; waiting hands
assist Beltran; but as she lingers that moment shivering on the brink,
blindly remembering the double movement of that arm beneath the ice, she
silently asks, with a thrill, if he suffered Ray to save himself because
he was a boy, and could, or because--because she was Vivia!

Southern noontide, winter twilight lost themselves again, as Vivia
gazed, in the soft starry gleam of an April midnight. A quiet room,
dimly lighted by a flame that dying eyes no longer see; two figures
kneeling, one at either side of the mother,--the little apple-blossom of
a mother brought up to die among her own people,--one shaking with his
storm of sobs, the other supporting the dear, weary head on his strong
breast, and stifling his very heart-beat lest it stir the frail life too
roughly. And the mother lifts the lids of her faint eyes, as when a
parting vapor reveals rifts of serene heaven, gazes for a moment into
the depths of her first-born's tenderness, gropes darkly for his fingers
and for the hot little hand thrust eagerly forth to meet hers, closes
one about the other, and folds them both upon her own heart. Then
Beltran bends and gathers from the lips the life that kindled his. With
a despairing cry, Ray flings himself forward, and dead and living lie in
Beltran's arms, while the strong convulsion of his heart rends up a
hollow groan from its emptiness. And Vivia draws aside the curtain, and
the gentle wind brings in the sweet earthy scent of fresh furrows lately
wet with showers, and the ever-shifting procession of the silent stars
unveil themselves of gauzy cloud, and glance sadly down with their
abiding eyes upon these fleeting shadows.

After all, who can deny that there is magic in a mirror, a weird
atmosphere imprisoned, between the metal and the glass, borrowing the
occult powers of the gulf of space, and returning to us our own wraith
and apparition at any hour of the day or night when we smite it with a
ray of light,--reaching with its searching power into the dark places
where we have hidden ourselves, and seizing and projecting them in open
sight? Who doubts that this sheeny panel on so many walls, with wary art
slurring off its elusive gleam, could, at the one compelling word, paint
again the reflections of all on which it silently dreams in its reticent
heart,--the joy, the grief, the weeping face, the laughing lip, the
lover's kiss, the tyrant's sneer, almost the crouched and bleeding soul
on which that sneer descended, of which some wandering beam carried
record? When we remember the violin, inwardly ridged with the vibrations
of old tunes, old discords, who would wonder to find some charactery of
light tracing its indelible script within the crystal substance? And
here, if Vivia saw one other scene blaze out before her and vanish, why
not believe, for fancy's sake, that it was as real a picture as the
image of the dark and beautiful girl herself bending there with the
carmine stain upon her cheek, the glowing, parted lips, the shining
eyes, the shadowy hair?

Late spring down on the Maryland farm: you know it by the intense blue
through that quaint window draped with such a lushness of vines, such a
glory of blossom. In at the open door, whose frame is arabesqued with
hanging sprays of sweetbrier, with the pendent nest, with fluttering
moth-wings sunshine-dusted, with crowds of bursting buds, pours the
mellow sun in one great stream, pours from the peach-orchards the
fragrant breeze laden with bird-song. A girl, standing aside, with
clasped hands drooping before her, her gaze upon a shadow on the floor
in the midst of that broad stream of light. Casting that shadow, under
the lintel, a young man clad for travel. Since he left his Southern
home, ruin has befallen it; he dares not ask one lapped in luxury to
share such broken fortunes as his seem to-day, even though such stout
shoulders, so valiant a heart, buffet them. If she loves, it is enough;
they can wait; their treasure neither moth nor rust can corrupt; their
jewel is imperishable. If she loves--He is looking in her eyes, holding
to her his hands. Slowly the girl meets his glance. A long look, one
long, silent look, infinitude in its assurance, its glow wrapping her,
blue and smiling as heaven itself, reaching him like the evening star
seen through tears,--a word, a touch, had profaned with a trait of
earthliness so remote, so spiritual a betrothal. He goes, and still the
upward-smiling girl sees the sunshine, hears the bird-song,--a boy
dashes by the door and down the path to meet the last, close-lingering
embrace of two waiting arms at the gate,--and then there is nothing but
Vivia bending and gazing at herself in the glass with a flushed and
fevered eagerness of rapture.

    "The wild, sweet tunes that darkly deep
    Thrill through thy veins and shroud thy sleep,
    That swing thy blood with proud, glad sway,
    And beat thy life's arterial play,--
      Still wilt thou have this music sweep
      Along thy brain its pulsing leap,--
    Keep love away! keep love away!

    "The joy of peace that wide and high
    Like light floods through the soaring sky,
    The day divine, the night akin,
    Heaven in the heart, ah, wilt thou win,
      The secret of the hoarded years,
      Life rounded as the shining spheres,--
    Let love come in! let love come in!"

she sang, to case her heart of its swelling gladness.

But here Vivia dared not concentrate her recollections, dared not dally
with such distant delight,--twisted and tossed her hair into its coils,
and once more opened the letter. Ray had not lived for three years under
converging influences, years which are glowing wax beneath the seal of
fresh impressions, years when one puts off or takes on the tendencies
of a lifetime,--Ray had not lived those three school-years without
contracting habits, whims, determinations of his own: let her have
Beltran's reasons to meet Ray's objections.

They were up at the little meadow-side cottage of Mrs. Vennard, Ray's
maternal aunt, a quiet widow, who was glad to receive her dying sister
in her house a year and a half ago, as she had often received her boys
before, and who was still willing to eke out her narrow income with the
board of one nephew and any summer guest; and as that summer guest,
owing to an old family-friendship that overlooked differences of rank
and wealth, Vivia had, for many a season, been established. Here, when
bodings of trouble began to darken her sunny fields, she had, in early
spring, withdrawn again, leaving her maiden aunt to attend to the
affairs of the homestead, or to find more luxurious residence in
watering-places or cities, as she chose. For Vivia liked the placid life
and freedom of the cottage, and here, too, she had oftenest met those
dear friends to whom one winter her father, long since dead, had taken
her, and half of all that was pleasant in her life had inwoven itself
with the simple surroundings of the place. Here, in that fatal spring
when the first tocsin alarmed the land, Ray, now scarcely any longer a
boy, yet with a boy's singleness of mind, though possessing neither
patience nor power for subtilties of difficult reason and truth,
thinking of no lonely portion, but of the one great fact of country, had
been fired with spontaneous fervor, and had ever since been like some
restive steed champing the bit and quivering to start. As for Vivia, she
was a Maryland woman. Too burningly indignant, the blood bubbled in her
heart for words sometimes, and she would be glad of Beltran's weapons
with which to confront Kay when he returned from Boston, whither, the
day before, without a word's explanation, he had betaken himself. So she
turned again to the open letter, and scanned its weightiest paragraphs.

"There is a strange reversal of right and wrong, when the American Peace
Society declares itself for war. There is, then, a greater evil than
war, even than civil war, with its red, fratricidal hands?--Slavery.
But, could that be destroyed, it would be the first great evil ever
overcome by force of arms. They fight tangibly with an intangible foe;
tangible issues rise between them; the black, intangible phantom hovers
safe behind. But even should they visibly succeed, is there not left the
very root of the matter to put forth fresh growth,--that moral condition
in which the thing lived at all? An evil that has its source in the
heart must be eradicated by slow medicinal cure of the blood. To fight
against the stars in their courses, one must have brands of starry
temper. No sudden shocks of battle will sweep Slavery from the sphere.
Can one conquer the universe by proclamation? 'Lyra will rise
to-morrow,' said some one, after Cæsar reformed the calendar.
'Doubtless,' replied Cicero, 'there is an edict for it.' But, believe
me, there can be no broad, stupendous evil, unless it be a part of God's
plan; and in His own time, without other help from us than the
performance of our duty, it will slough off its slime and rise into some
fair superstructure. Our efforts dash like spray against the rock,--the
spray is broken, the rock remains. To annihilate evil with evil,--that
is an error in itself against which every man is justified in taking up
his sword.

"So far, I have allowed the sin. Yet, sin or not, in this country the
estate of the slave is unalterable. Segregately, the institution is
their protection. For though there is no record of the contact of
superior and inferior races on a basis of equality, where the inferior
did not absorb the superior, yet, if every slave were set free to-day,
imbruted through generations, it could not be on a basis of equality
that we should meet, and they would be as inevitably sunk and lost as
the detritus that a river washes into the sea. If the black stay here,
it must be as a menial. In his own latitudes, where, after the third
generation, the white man ceases to exist, he is the stronger; there the
black man is king: let him betake himself to his realm. Abolition is
impracticable, colonization feasible; on either is gunpowder wasted: one
cannot explode a lie by the blast.

"But saying the worst of our incubus that can be said, could all its
possible accumulation of wrong and woe exceed that of four years of such
a war as this? Think a moment of what this land was, what a great beacon
and celestial city across the waves to the fugitives from tyranny; think
of our powerful pride in eastern seas, in western ports, when each
ship's armament carried with it the broadside of so many sovereign
States, when each citizen felt his own hand nerved with a people's
strength, when no young man woke in the morning without the perpetual
aurora of high hopes before him, when peace and plenty were all about
us,--and then think of misery at every hearth, of civilization thrust
back a century, of the prestige of freedom lost among the nations, of
the way paved for despots. And how needlessly!

"They taunted us, us the source of all their wealth, with the pauper's
deserting the poor-house; we put it to proof; when, lo! with a hue and
cry, the blood-hounds are upon us, the very dogs of war. So needless a
war! For has it not been a fundamental principle that every people has a
right to govern itself? We chose to exercise that right. Was it worth
the while to refuse it? Exhausted, drained, dispeopled, they may chain a
vassal province to their throne; but, woe be to them, upon that
conquering day, their glory has departed from them! The first Revolution
was but the prologue to this: that was sealed in blood; in this might
have been demonstrated the progress made under eighty years of freedom,
by a peaceful separation. It is the Flight of the Tartar Tribe anew, and
the whole barbarous Northern nation pours its hordes after, hangs on the
flank, harasses, impedes, slaughters,--but we reach the shadow of the
Great Wall at last. If we had not the right to leave the league, how had
we the right to enter? If we had not the right to leave, they also had
not the right to withhold us. Yet, when we entered, resigning much,
receiving much, retaining more, we were each a unit, a power, a
commonwealth, a nation, or, as we chose to term it, a State,--as much a
state as any of the great states of Europe, as Britain, as France, as
Spain, and jealously ever since have we individually regarded any
infringement on our integrity. That, and not the mere tangle of race
that in time must unravel itself, is the question of the age. Long ago
it was said that our people, holding it by transmission, never having
struggled for it, would some day cease rightly to value the one chief
bulwark of liberty. Nothing is more true. They of the North will lose
it, we of the South shall gain it; for, battling on a grander scale than
our ancestors, the South is to-day taking out the great _habeas corpus_
of States!"

No matter whether all this was sophistry or truth. Beltran had said
it,--that was enough; so strongly did she feel his personality in what
he wrote, that the soul was exultant, jubilant, defiant, within her.
Other words there were in the letter, such words as are written to but
one; the blood swept up to Vivia's lips as she recalled them, and her
heart sprang and bounded like one of those balls kept in perpetual play
by the leaping, bubbling column of a fountain. She was in one of those
dangerous states of excitement after which the ancients awaited
disaster. That last picture of the mirror dazzled her vision again; she
saw the sunshine, smelt the perfume, heard the bird-song. How a year had
changed the scene! The house was a barrack; now down in her Maryland
peach-orchards the black muzzles of Federal cannon yawned, and under the
flickering shadows and sunshine the grimy gunners, knee-deep in grass
and dew, brushed away the startled clover-blooms, as they touched fire
to the breach. Beltran was a Rebel. Vivia was a Rebel, too! She ran
down-stairs into her little parlor overflowing with flowers. As she
walked to and fro, the silent keys of her pianoforte met her eye.
Excellent conductors. Half standing, half sitting, she awoke its voices,
and, to a rolling, silvery thunder of accompaniment, commenced
singing,--

    "The lads of Kilmarnock had swords and had spears
    And lang-bladed daggers to kill cavaliers,
    But they shrunk to the wall and the causey left free
    At one toss of the bonnet of Bonny Dundee!
      So fill up my cup, come fill up my can,
      Saddle my horses and call up my men,
      Open your west-port and let me gae free,
      For it's up with the bonnets of Bonny Dundee!"

Some one in the distance, echoing the last line with an emphasis, caught
her ear in the pause. It was Ray. He had already returned, then. She
snatched the letter and sped into the kitchen, where she was sure to
find him.

Mrs. Vennard rocked in her miniature sitting-room at one side,
contentedly matching patchwork. Little Jane Vennard, her
step-daughter,--usually at work in the mills, but, since their close,
making herself busy at home, whither she had brought a cookery-book
through which Ray declared he expected to eat his way,--bustled about
from room to room. Ray sat before the fire in the kitchen and toasted
some savory morsel suspended on a string athwart the blaze.

"Where have you been, Ray?" said Vivia, approaching, with her glowing
cheeks, her sparkling eyes. "And what are you doing now?"

"Trying camp-life again," replied Ray, looking up at her in a fixed
admiration.

"I've had a letter from Beltran."

"Oh! where is he?" cried Ray.

"Beltran is in camp."

"And where?"

"Perhaps on the Rio Grande, perhaps on the Potomac."

"Do you mean to say," cried Ray, springing up, while string and all fell
into the coals, "that Beltran, my brother"--

"Is a Rebel."

"Then I am a rebel, too," said Ray, chokingly, sitting down again, and
mechanically stooping to pick up the burning string,--"a rebel to him!"

"You won't be a rebel to him, if you'll listen to reason,--his reason."

"He's got no reason. It's only because he was there."

"Now, Raymond Lamar! if you talk so, you sha'n't read the letter!"

"I don't want to read it."

"Have you left off loving Beltran, because he differs from you?"

"Left off loving Beltran!"

Vivia waited a moment, leaning on the back of his chair, and then Ray,
bending, covered his face with his hands, and the large tears oozed from
between his brown fingers.

Little Jane, whipping the frothy snow of her eggs, went on whipping all
the harder for fear Ray should know she saw him. And Vivia, with one
hand upon his head, took away the brown fingers, that her own cool,
fragrant palm might press upon his burning lids. Such sudden tears
belong to such tropical natures. For there was no anger or sullenness in
Ray's grief; he was just and simply sorry.

"He must have forgotten me," said Ray, after a sober while.

"There was this note for you in mine, and a draft on New York, because
he thought you might be in arrears."

"No, I'm not. Aunty can have the draft, though; she may need it before I
come back," said Ray, brokenly, gazing into the fire. "Do you suppose
Beltran wrote mine or yours first?"

"Yours."

"Then you've the last thing he ever set his hand to, perhaps!"

"Don't talk so, child!" said Vivia, with an angry shiver. "Come back!
Where are you going?"

"I enlisted, yesterday, in the Kansas Cavalry."

"Great heavens, Ray! was there not another regiment in all the world
than one to be sent down to New Mexico to meet Beltran and the Texan
Rangers?" cried Vivia, wringing her hands.

Ray was on his feet again, a swarm of expletives buzzing inarticulately
at his lips.

"I never thought of that," said he, whiter than ashes.

"What made you? oh, what made you?"

"There was no other company. I liked this captain. He gave me to-day's
furlough. I'm going to-night; little Jane's promised to fix my traps;
she's making me these cookies now, you see. Pshaw! Beltran's up on the
Potomac, or else you couldn't have gotten this letter,--don't you know?
You made my heart jump into my mouth!"

And resuming his seat, to find his string and jack in cinders, he turned
round astride his chair and commenced notching his initials into its
back, with cautious glances at his aunt.

"That's for little Jane to cry over after I'm gone," said he.

"Ray--How do you think Beltran will like it?"

"I can't help what Beltran likes. I shall be doing God's work."

"Beltran says God does His own work. He only requires of us our duty."

"That is my duty."

"You feel, Ray, as if you were possessed by the holy ardor of another
Sir Galahad!"

"I feel, Vivia, that I shall give what strength I have towards ridding
the world of its foulest disease."

"With what a good grace that comes from you!"

"With all the better grace."

"The old Berserker rage over again!"

"Quite as fine as running amuck."

"Ray, the race that does not rise for itself deserves its fate."

"Vivia, no race deserves such a fate as this one has found."

"Idle! I have seen slavery; own slaves: there is nothing monstrous in
it."

"In Maryland."

"Anywhere."

"Wailing children, sundered families, women under the lash"--

"You know very well, Ray, that there is a law against the separation of
families."

"I never heard of it."

"Audubon says there is."

"A little bird told him," interpolated Jane.

"But I've seen them separated."

"I don't believe," urged Vivia, "but for exceptional abuses, there's a
system providing for a happier peasantry on the face of the earth."

"It can't be a good system that allows such abuses."

"There are even abuses of the sacraments."

"Pshaw, Vivia!"

"Well, Ray, I don't believe in this pseudo-chivalry of yours, any more
than Beltran does."

"If Beltran said black was white, you'd think that true!"

"_If_ Beltran said so, it _would_ be true."

"It's no more likely that he should be right than that I should be."

"You couldn't have spoken so about Beltran once!"

"Well, black or white, slave or free, never think I shall sit by and see
my country fall to ruins."

"Your country? Do you suppose you love it any more than I do?"

"You're a woman."

"Suppose I am a woman, you unkind boy"--

"Well, you only love half of it,--the Southern half."

"I love my whole country!" cried Vivia, all aflame. "I love these
purple, rust-stained granites here, the great savannas there,--the pine
forests, the sea-like prairies,--every river rolling down its rocky
bed,--every inch of its beautiful, glorious soil,--all its proud, free
people. I love my whole country!"

"Only you hate some of its parasites. But Beltran would tell you that
you haven't got any country. You may love your native State. As for
country, it's nothing but a--what-you-may-call-it."

"Very true. It is in observing the terms of that
what-you-may-call-it,--that federation, that bond,--in mutual
concessions, in fraternal remembrances, that we gain a country. And what
a country!"

"Yes, what a country, Vivia! And shall I consent to resign an atom of it
while there's a drop of blood in my body, to lose a single grain of its
dust? When Beltran brought me here three years ago, I sailed day and
night up a mighty river, from one zone into another,--sailed for weeks
between banks that were still my own country. And if I had ever
returned, we should have passed by the thundering ledges of New England,
Jersey surfs and shallows, the sand-bars of the Carolinas, the shores of
Florida lying like a faint green cloud long and low upon the
horizon,--sailing a thousand miles again in our own waters. Enormous
borders! and throughout their vast stretch happiness and promise! And
shall I give such dominion to the first traitor that demands it? No! nor
to the thousandth! There she lies, bleeding, torn, prostrate, a byword!
Why, Vivia, this was my country, she that made me, reared me, gladdened
me! It is the now crusade. I understand none of your syllogisms. My
country is in danger. Here's my hand!"

And Ray stood erect, bristling and fiery, as some one reddening in the
very light of battle.

And answering him only with flashing eyes, Vivia sang, in her
triumphant, thrilling tones,--

    "Hark to a wandering child's appeal,
      Maryland! my Maryland!
    My mother State, to thee I kneel,
      Maryland! my Maryland!
    For life and death, for woe and weal,
    Thy peerless chivalry reveal,
    And gird thy beauteous limbs with steel,
      Maryland! my Maryland!"

"You're a wicked girl, Vivia, if you _are_ as beautiful as Phryne!"
exclaimed Ray, while little Jane picked herself up from the table,
across which she had been leaning with both arms and her dish-towel, and
staring forgetfully at him.

Vivia laughed.

"Well, you young fanatic," said she, "we can't convert each other. We
are both incontrovertible. Let us be friends. One needs more time than
we have to quarrel in."

"Yes," said Ray. "I am going this afternoon, and I shall drink of every
river west of the Mississippi before I come back. It's a wild life, a
royal life; I am thirsty for its excitement and adventure."

"Jane," called Mrs. Vennard from within, "did you find all the nests
to-day?"

"All but two, Ma'am," said little Jane, as she let a tempting odor
escape from the tin oven. "The black hen got over the fence last night;
she's down in the lot. And the cropple-crown laid away."

"You'd better get them."

"Yes, Ma'am."

"If you'd just as lief."

"Oh, yes, Ma'am!"

"We'll go, too," said Ray.

"Oh, no, you needn't."

"We'd like to, little Jane. Are the cookies done? By George! don't they
look like manna? They'll last all the way to Fort Riley. And be manna in
the wilderness. Smoking hot. Have some, Vivia? Little Jane, I say, 't
would be jolly, if you'd go along and cook for the regiment."

"Is that all you'd want of me?"

"It's a wonderful region for grasshoppers out there, you know; you'd
improvise us such charming dishes of locusts and wild honey! As for
cookies, a snowflake and a sunbeam, and there they are," said Ray,
making inroads on the Fort-Riley stores; while little Jane set down a
cup of beaten cream by his side.

"Janets are trumps! Vivia, don't you wish you were going to the war?"

"Yes," said Vivia.

"There is something in it, isn't there?" said Ray. "You'll sit at home,
and how your blood will boil! What keeps you women alive? Darning
stockings, I suppose. There's only one thing I dread: 't would be hard
to read of other men's glory, and I lying flat on my back. Would you
make me cookies then, little Jane?"

Little Jane only gave him one swift, shy look: there was more promise in
it than in many a vow. In return, Ray tossed her the sparkle of his
dancing glance an instant, and then his eager fancies caught him again.

"We read of them," said he, "those splendid scenes. What can there be
like acting them? Ah, what a throb there is in it! The rush, the roar,
the onslaught, the clanging trumpet, the wreathing smoke, and the mad
horses. Dauntlessly defying danger. Ravishing fame from the teeth of the
battery. See in what a great leap of the heart you spring with the
forlorn hope up the escalade! Your soul kindles and flashes with your
blade. You are nothing but a wrath. To die so, with all one's spirit at
white-heat, awake, alert, aflame, must send one far up and along the
heights of being. And if you live, there are other things to do; and how
the women feel their fiery pulses fly, their hot tears start, as you go
by, thinking of all the tumult, the din, the daring, the danger, and you
a part of it!"

Little Jane was trembling and tying on her bonnet. As for Vivia, she
burst into tears.

"Oh, Ray!" sobbed she, "I wish I were a man!"

"I don't!" said he. "Oh, it's rip-roarious! Come, let's follow our
leader. We'll bring you back the cropple-crown, auntie."

And so they departed, while, breaking into fresh carols, ringing and
dulcet, as they went, Vivia's voice resounded till the woods pealed to
the echo:--

    "He waved his proud arm, and the trumpets were blown
    The kettle-drums clashed, and the horsemen rode on,
    Till o'er Ravelston crags and on Clermiston lea
    Died away the wild war-notes of Bonny Dundee!"

Pursuing the white sun-bonnet down the pasture, Ray kept springing ahead
with his elastic foot, threshing the juniper-plats that little Jane had
already searched, and scattering about them the pungent fragrance of the
sweet-fern thickets,--the breath of summer itself; then returning for a
sober pace or two, would take off his hat, thrust a hand through the
masses of his hair that looked like carved ebony, and show Vivia that
his shadow was exactly as long as her own. And Vivia saw that all this
beating and longing and burning had loosened and shot into manhood a
nature that under the snow of its eightieth winter would yet be that of
a boy. Ray could never be any taller than he was to-day, but he had
broad, sturdy shoulders and a close-knit, nervous frame, while in his
honest, ugly face, that, arch or grave, kept its one contrast of black
eyes and brilliant teeth, there was as much to love as in the superb
beauty of Beltran.

They had reached the meadow's edge at length; Ray was growing more
serious, as the time hurried, when little Jane, with a smothered
exclamation, prepared to cross the wall. For there they were, sleek and
glossy, chattering gently to each other, pecking about, the wind blowing
open their feathers till they became top-heavy, and looking for all the
world, as Janet said, like pretty little old ladies dressed up to go out
to tea. And near them, quite at home in the marshy domain, strutted and
lunched a fine gallant of a turkey, who ruffled his redness, dropped all
his plumes about him, and personated nothing less than some stately
dowager sailing in flounces and brocades. Ray caught back their
discoverer, launched a few stepping-stones across, and, speeding from
foothold to foothold, very soon sent His Magnificence fluttering over
the fence and forward before them, and returned with the two little
runaway hens slung over his arm, where, after a trifle of protestation
and a few subdued cackles of crestfallen acquiescence, having a great
deal to tell the other hens on reaching home once more, they very
contentedly enjoyed the new aspect of the world upsidedown.

"And here's where she's made her nest," said little Jane, stepping aside
from a tangle of blackberry-vines, herds-grass, and harebells, where lay
a half-dozen pullet pearls. "A pretty mother you'd make, Miss, gadding
and gossiping down in the meadow with that naughty black hen! Who do you
suppose is going to bring up your family for you? Did you speak to the
butterflies to hatch them under their yellow wings? I shall just tie you
to an old shoe!"

And taking the winking, blinking culprits from Kay, she ran along home
to make ready his package, for which there was not more than an hour
left. Vivia turned to follow, for she also wanted to help; but Ray,
lingering by the wall and pointing out some object, caused her to
remain.

"It will be such a long time before I see it again," said he.

They leaned upon the stone wall, interspersed, overgrown, and veiled
with moss and maiden-hair and blossoming brambles. Before them lay the
long meadow, sprinkled with sunbeams, green to its last ripe richness,
discolored only where the tall grass made itself hoary in the breeze, or
where some trail of dun brown ran up through all intermediate tints to
break in a glory of gold at the foot of the screen of woods that far
away gloomed like a frowning fortress of shade, but, approaching,
feathered off its tips in the glow, and let the mellow warmth of olive
light gild to a lustrous depth all its darkly verdurous hollows. Near
them the vireos were singing loud and sweet.

"Vivia," said Ray, after a pause, "if I should never come back"--

"You will come back."

"But if I never did,--should you greatly care?"

"Beginning to despond! That is good! You won't go, then?"

"If the way lay over the bottomless pit, I should go."

"And you can't get free, if you want to?"

"No!"

"Ray, I could easily raise money enough upon my farm to buy"--

"If you talk so," said Ray, whipping off the flowers, but looking up at
her as he bent, and smiling, "I shall inform against you, and have your
farm confiscated."

"What! I can't talk as I please in a free country? Oh, it's not free,
then! They've discovered at length that there's something better than
freedom. They sent a woman to prison this spring for eating an orange in
the street. They confiscated a girl's wedding-gown the other day, and
now they've confiscated her bridegroom. Oh, it's a great cause that
can't get along without my wedding-gown! _Noblesse oblige_!"

"It takes more wedding-gowns than yours, Vivia. Dips them in mourning."

"Pray God it won't take mine yet!" cried she, with sudden fire.

"Vivia," said Ray, facing her, "I asked you a question. Why didn't you
answer it? Shouldn't you care?"

"You know, dear child, I should,--we all should, terribly."

"But, Vivia, I mean, that you--that I"--

He paused, the ardor and eagerness suspended on cheek and lip, for Vivia
met his glance and understood its simple speech,--since in some degree a
dark eye lets you into the soul, where a blue one bluffs you off with
its blaze, and under all its lucent splendor is as impenetrable as a
turquoise. A girl of more vanity would have waited for plainer words.
But Vivia only placed her warm hand on his, and said gently,--

"Ray, I love Beltran."

There was a moment's quiet, while Ray looked away,--supporting his chin
upon one hand, and a black cloud sweeping torridly down the stern face.
One sharp struggle. A moment's quiet. Into it a wild rose kept shaking
sweetness. After it a vireo broke into tremulous melody, gushing higher,
fuller, stronger, clearer. Ray turned, his eyes wet, his face beaming.
Said he,--

"I am more glad than if it were myself!"

Then Vivia bent, and, flushed with noble shame, she kissed him on the
lips. A word, a grasp, she was leaning alone over the old stone wall,
the birds were piping and fluting about her, and Ray was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

A month of rushing over land and lake, of resting at the very spots
where he and Beltran had stayed together three years ago, of repeating
the brief strolls they took, of reading again and again that last note,
and Ray had crossed the great river of the West, and reached the
headquarters of his regiment. There, induing their uniforms, and
training their horses, all of which were yet to be shod, they brushed
about the country, and skirmished with guerrillas, until going into camp
for thorough drill preparatory to active service.

Convoying Government-trains through a region where were assembled in
their war-paint thousands of Indians from the wild tribes of the plains
and hills was venturous work enough, but it was not that to which Ray
aspired. He must be one of those cherubim who on God's bidding speed; he
could not serve with those who only stand and wait. His hot soul grew
parched and faint with longing, and all the instincts of his battling
blood began to war among themselves. At length one night there was
hammering and clinking at the red field-fires, and by daybreak they were
off for a mad gallop over plain and mountain, down river-banks and
across deserts into New Mexico.

Fording the shallow Arkansas, trailing their way through prairie and
timber,--reaching and skirting the scorching stretch,--riding all day,
consumed with thirst, from green-mantling pool to pool, till the last
lay sixty miles behind them, and men and horses made desperately for the
stream, dashing in together to drink their fill, when they found it
again foaming down the centre of its vast level plain, that receded
twenty miles on either side without shrub or hillock,--finally their
path wound in among the hills, and a day dawned that Ray will never
forget.

The stars were large and solemn, hovering golden out of the high, dark
heaven, as the troop defiled into the _cañon_; they glinted with a
steely lustre through the roof of fallen trees that arched the gorge
from side to side, then a wind of morning blew and they grew pallid and
wan in a shining haze, and, towering far up above them, vaguely terrific
in shadow, the horsemen saw the heights they were to climb all grayly
washed in the night-dew. So they swept up the mountain-side in their gay
and breezy career, on from ascent to ascent, from abutment to abutment,
crossing shrunken torrents, winding along sheer precipices, up into the
milky clouds of heaven itself, till the rosy flare of dawn bathed all
the air about them. There they halted, while, struggling after them, the
first triumphant beam struck the bosses of their harness to glittering
jewel-points, and, breaking through layer on layer of curdling vapor at
their feet, suffused it to a wondrous fleece, where carnation and violet
and the fire that lurks in the opal, wreathing with gorgeous involution,
seethed together, until, at last, the whole resplendent mist wound
itself away in silver threads on the spindles of the wind. Then boot in
the stirrup again, onward, over the mountain's ridge, desolate rook
defying the sun, downward, plunging through hanging forests, clearing
the chasm, bridging ravines, and still at noon the eagles, circling and
screaming above them, shook over them the dew from their plumes.
Downward afresh in their wild ride, the rainbows of the cascades flying
beside them, their afternoon shadows streaming up behind them, darkness
beginning to gather in the deeps below them, the mighty mountain-masses
around rearing themselves impenetrably in boding blackness and mystery
against the yellow gleam, the purple breath of evening wrapping them,
the dew again, again the stars, and they camped at the foot of a spur
of hills with a waterfall for sentry on their left.

Through all the dash of the day, Ray had been in sparkling spirits, a
very ecstasy of excitement, brimmed with an exuberance of valiant glee
that played itself away in boyish freaks of daring and reckless acts of
horsemanship. Now a loftier mood had followed, and, still wrought to
some extreme tension, full of blind anticipation and awful assurance, he
sat between the camp-fires, his hands clasped over his knees, and
watched the evening star where it hung in a cleft of the rocks and
seemed like the advent of some great spirit of annunciation. The tired
horses had been staked out to graze, a temporary abatis erected,
scouting-parties sent off in opposite directions, and at last the frosty
air grew mild and mellow over the savory steam of broiling steaks and
coffee smoking on beds of coals. There was a moment's lull in the hum of
the little encampment, in all the jest and song and jingling stir of
this scornfully intrepid company; perhaps for an instant the sense of
the wilderness overawed them; perhaps it was only the customary
precursor of increasing murmur;--before leaving his place, Ray suddenly
stooped and laid his ear on the earth. There it was! Far off, far off,
the phantasmal stroke of hoofs, rapid, many, unswerving. It had
come,--all that he had awaited,--fate, or something else. Low and clear
in the distance one bugle blew blast of warning. When he rose, the great
yellow planet, wheeling slowly down the giant cleft in the rock, had
vanished from sight.

Every man was on his feet, the place in alarum. Behind and beside them
loomed the precipice and the waterfall;--there was surrender, there was
conquest; there was no retreat. The fires were extinguished, the
breastworks strengthened, weapons adjusted, and all the ireful
preparations for hasty battle made. Then they expected their foe. Slowly
over the crown of the mountain above them an aurora crept and brandished
its spears.

As they waited there those few breathless moments, Ray examined his
rifle coolly enough, and listened to the chirp of a solitary cricket
that sung its thin strain so unbrokenly on the edge of strife as to
represent something sublime in its petty indifference. He was stationed
on the extreme left; near him the tumult of the torrent drowned much
discordant noise, its fairy scarf forever forming and falling and
floating on the evening air. He thought of Vivia sitting far away and
looking out upon the quiet starlight night; then he thought of swampy
midnight lairs, with maddened men in fevered covert there,--of little
children crying for their mothers,--of girls betrayed to hell,--of flesh
and blood at price,--of blistering, crisping fagot and stake to-day,--of
all the anguish and despair down there before him. And with the vivid
sting of it such a wrath raged along his veins, such a holy fire, that
it seemed there were no arms tremendous enough for his handling, through
his shut teeth darted imprecatory prayers for the power of some almighty
vengeance, his soul leaped up in impatient fury, his limbs tingled for
the death-grapple, when suddenly sound surged everywhere about them and
they were in the midst of conflict. Silver trumpet-peals and clash and
clang of iron, crying voices, whistling, singing, screaming shot,
thunderous drum-rolls, sharp sheet of flame and instant abyss of
blackness, horses' heads vaulting into sight, spurts of warm blood upon
the brow, the bullet rushing like a blast beside the ear, all the
terrible tempest of attack, trampled under the flashing hoof, climbing,
clinching, slashing, back-falling beneath cracking revolvers, hand to
hand in the night, both bands welded in one like hot and fusing metal, a
spectral struggle of shuddering horror only half guessed by lurid gleams
and under the light cloud flying across the stars. Clearly and remotely
over the plain the hidden east sent up a glow into the sky; its
reflection lay on Ray; he fought like one possessed of a demon,
scattering destruction broadcast, so fiercely his anger wrapped him,
white and formidable. Fresh onset after repulse, and, like the very
crest of the toppling wave, one shadowy horseman in all the dark rout,
spurring forward, the fight reeling after him, the silver lone star
fitfully flashing on his visor, the boy singled for his rifle;--inciting
such fearless rivalry, his fall were the fall of a hundred. Something
hindered; the marksman delayed an instant; he would not waste a shot;
and watching him, the dim outline, the sweeping sabre, the proud
prowess, a strange yearning pity seized Ray, and he had half the mind to
spare. In the midst of the shock and uproar there came to him a pulse of
the brain's double action; he seemed long ago to have loved, to have
admired, to have gloried in this splendid valor. But with the hint, and
the humanity of it, back poured the ardor of his sacred devotion, all
the impulsions of his passionate purpose: here was God's work! And then,
with one swift bound of magnificent daring and defiance, the horseman
confronted him, the fore-feet of his steed planted firmly half up the
abatis, and his steel making lightnings round about him. There was a
blinding flare of light full upon Ray's fiery form; in the sudden
succeeding darkness horseman and rider towered rigid like a monolith of
black marble. A great voice cried his name, a sabre went hurtling in one
shining crescent across the white arc of the waterfall. Too late! There
was another flare of light, but this time on the rider's face, a sound
like the rolling of the heavens together in a scroll, and Ray, in one
horrid, dizzy blaze, saw the broad gleam of the ivory brow, of the azure
fire in the eyes, heard the heavy, downfalling crash, and, leaping over
the abatis, deep into the midst of the slippery, raging death below,
seized and drew something away, and fell upon it prostrate. There, under
the tossing torrent, dragging himself up to the seal of their agony and
their reproach, Ray looked into those dead eyes, which, lifted beyond
the everlasting stars, felt not that he had crossed their vision.

Far away from outrage and disaster, many a weary stretch of travel, the
meadow-side cottage basked in the afternoon sunlight of late
Indian-summer. All the bare sprays of its shadowing limes quivered in
the warmth of their purple life against a divine depth of heaven, and
the woody distances swathed themselves in soft blue smoke before the
sighing south-wind.

Round the girl who sat on the low door-stone, with idle hands crossed
before her, puffs of ravishing resinous fragrance floated and fainted.
Two butterflies, that spread their broad yellow wings like detached
flakes of living sunshine stolen out of the sweet November weather,
fluttered between the glossy darkness of her hair and a little
posthumous rose, that, blowing beside the door, with time only half to
unfold its white petals, surveyed the world in a quaint and sad
surprise.

Vivia looked on all the tender loveliness of the dying year with a
listless eye: waiting, weary waiting, makes the soul torpid to all but
its pain. It was long since there had been any letter from Ray. In all
this oppression of summer and of autumn there had come no report of
Beltran. Her heart had lost its proud assurance, worn beneath the long
strain of such suspense. Could she but have one word from him, half the
term of her own life would be dust in the balance. A thousand
fragmentary purposes were ever flitting through her thought. If she
might know that he was simply living, if she could be sure he wanted
her, she would make means to break through that dividing line, to find
him, to battle by his side, to die at his feet! Her Beltran! so grave,
so good, so heroic! and the thought of him in all his pride and beauty
and power, in all his lofty gentleness and tender passion, in his
strength tempered with genial complaisance and gracious courtesy, sent
the old glad life, for a second, spinning from heart to lip.

The glassy lake began to ruffle itself below her, feeling the pulses of
its interfluent springs, or sending through unseen sluices word of
nightfall and evening winds to all its clustering companions that
darkened their transparent depths in forest-shadows. As she saw it, and
thought how soon now it would ice itself anew, the remembrance rushed
over her, like a warm breath, of the winter's night after their escape
from its freezing pool, when Beltran sat with them roasting chestnuts
and spicing ale before the fire that so gayly crackled up the
kitchen-chimney, a night of cheer. And how had it all faded! whither had
they all separated? where were those brothers now? Heaven knew.

It had been a hard season, these months at the cottage. The price of
labor had been high enough to exceed their means, and so the land had
yielded ill, the grass was uncut on many a meadow; Ray's draft had not
been honored; Vivia had of course received no dividend from her
Tennessee State-bonds, and her peach-orchards were only a place of
forage. Still Vivia stayed at the cottage, not so much by fervent
entreaty, or because she had no other place to go to, as because there
were strange, strong ties binding her there for a while. Should all else
fail, with the ripened wealth of her voice at command, her future was of
course secure from want. But there was a drearier want at Vivia's door,
which neither that nor any other wealth would ever meet.

Little Jane came up the field with a basket of the last barberries
lightly poised upon her head. A narrow wrinkle was beginning to divide
the freckled fairness of her forehead. She kept it down with many an
endeavor. Trying to croon to herself as she passed, and stopping only to
hang one of the scarlet girandoles in Vivia's braids, she went in. The
sunshine, loath to leave her pleasant little figure, followed after her,
and played about her shadow on the floor.

Vivia still sat there and questioned the wide atmosphere, that, brooding
palpitant between her and the lake, still withheld the desolating secret
that horizon must have whispered to horizon throughout the aching
distance.

    "Oh that the bells in all these silent spires
       Would clash their clangor on the sleeping air,
    Ring their wild music out with throbbing choirs,
      Ring peace in everywhere!"

she sang, and trembled as she sang. But there the burden broke, and
rising, her eyes shaded by her hand, Vivia gazed down the lonely road
where a stage-coach rolled along in a cloud of dust. What prescience,
what instinct, it was that made her throw the shawl over her head, the
shawl that Beltran liked to have her wear, and hasten down the field and
away to lose herself in the wood, she alone could have told.

The slow minutes crept by, the coach had passed at length with loud
wheel and resounding lash, its last dust was blowing after it, and it
had left upon the door-stone a boy in army-blue, with his luggage beside
him. A ghastly visage, a shrunken form, a crippled limb, were what he
brought home from the war. With his one foot upon the threshold, he
paused, and turned the face, gray under all its trace of weather, and
furrowed, though so young, to meet the welcoming wind. He gazed upon the
high sky out of which the sunshine waned, on the long champaign blending
its gold and russet in one, on the melancholy forest over which the
twilight was stealing; he lifted his cap with a gesture as if he bade it
all farewell,--then he grasped his crutch and entered.

Without a word, Mrs. Vennard dropped the needles she was sorting upon
the mat about her. Little Jane sprang forward, but checked herself in a
strange awe.

"Let me go to bed, auntie," said he, with a dry sob; "and I never want
to get up again!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Midnight was winding the world without in a white glimmer of misty
moonlight, when the sharp beam of a taper smote Ray's sleepless eyes,
and he saw Vivia at last standing before him. Over her wrapper clung the
old shawl whose snowy web was sown with broidery of linnæa-bells, green
vine and rosy blossom. Round her shoulders fell her shadowy hair.
Through her slender fingers the redness of the flame played, and on her
cheek a hectic coming and going like the broad beat and flush of an
artery left it whiter than the spectral moonlight on the pane. She took
away her hand, and let the illumination fall full upon his face,--a face
haggard as a dead man's.

"Ray," she said, "where is Beltran?" Only silence replied to her. He lay
and stared up at her in a fixed and glassy glare. Breathless silence.
Then Ray groaned, and turned his face to the wall. Vivia blew out the
light.

       *       *       *       *       *

The weeks crept away with the setting-in of the frosts. Little Jane's
heart was heavy for all the misery she saw about her, but she had no
time to make moan. Ray's amputated ankle was giving fresh trouble, and
after that was well over, he still kept his room, refusing food or fire,
and staring with hot, wakeful eyes at the cold ceiling. Vivia lingered,
subdued and pale, beside the hearth, doing any quiet piece of work that
came to hand; no one had seen her shed tears,--she had shown no
strenuous sorrow; on the night of Ray's return she had slept her first
unbroken sleep for months; her nerves, stretched so intensely and so
long, lay loosely now in their passionate reaction; some element more
interior than they saved her from prostration. She stayed there, sad and
still, no longer any sparkle or flush about her, but with a mildness so
unlike the Vivia of June that it had in it something infinitely
touching. She would have been glad to assist little Jane in her crowded
duties, yet succeeded only in being a hindrance; and learning a little
of broths and diet-drinks every day, she contented herself with sitting
silent and dreamy, and transforming old linen garments into bandages.
Mrs. Vennard, meanwhile, waited on her nephew and bewailed herself.

But for little Jane,--she had no time to bewail herself. She had all
these people, in fact, on her hands, and that with very limited means to
meet their necessities. It was true they need not experience actual
want,--but there was her store to be managed so that it should be at
once wholesome and varied, and the first thing to do was to take an
account of stock. The autumn's work had already been well done. She had
carried berries enough to market to let her preserve her quinces and
damsons in sirups clear as sunshine, and make her tiny allowance of
currant and blackberry wines, where were innocently simulated the
flavors of rare vintages. Crook-necked squashes decked the tall
chimney-piece amid bunches of herbs and pearly strings of onions. She
and Vivia had gathered the ripened apples themselves, and now goodly
garlands of them hung from the attic-rafters, above the dried beans
whose blossoms had so sweetened June, and above last year's corn-bins.
That corn the first passing neighbor should take to mill and exchange a
portion of for cracked wheat; and as the flour-barrel still held out,
they would be tolerably well off for cereals, little Jane thought. They
had kept only one cow, and Tommy Low would attend to her for the sake of
his suppers,--suppers at which Vivia must forego her water-cresses now;
but Janet had a bed of mushrooms growing down-cellar, that, broiled and
buttered, were, she fancied, quite equal to venison-steaks. The hens, of
course, must be sacrificed, all but a dozen of them; for, as there was
no fresh meat for them in winter, they wouldn't lay, and would be only a
dead weight, she said to herself, as, with her apron thrown over her
neck, she stood watching them, finger on lip. However, that would give
them poultry all through the holidays. Then there were the pigs to be
killed on halves by a neighbor, as almost everything else out-doors had
now to be done; and when that was accomplished, she found no time to
call her soul her own while making her sausage and bacon and souse and
brawn. Part of the pork would produce salt fish, without which what
farm-house would stand?--and with old hucklebones, her potatoes and
parsnips, those ruby beets and golden carrots, there was many a Julien
soup to be had. Jones's-root, bruised and boiled, made a chocolate as
good as Spanish. Instead of ginger, there were the wild caraway-seeds
growing round the house. If she could only contrive some sugar and some
vanilla-beans, she would be well satisfied to open her campaign. But as
there had been for weeks only one single copper cent and two
postage-stamps in the house, that seemed an impossibility. Hereupon an
idea seized little Jane, and for several days she was busy in a
mysterious rummage. Garrets and closets surrendered their hoards to her;
files of old newspapers, old ledgers, old letter-backs, began to
accumulate in heaps,--everything but books, for Jane had a religious
respect for their recondite lore; she cut the margins off the magazines,
and she grew miserly of the very shreds ravelling under Vivia's fingers.
At length, one morning, after she had watched the windows unweariedly as
a cat watches a mouse-hole, she hurriedly exclaimed,--

"There he is!"

"Who" asked Mrs. Vennard as hurriedly, with a dim idea that people in
their State received visits from the sheriff.

"Our treasurer!" said little Jane.

And, indeed, the red cart crowned with yellow brooms and dazzling tin,
the delight of housewives in lone places, was winding along the road;
and in a few moments little Jane accosted its driver, standing
victorious in the midst of her bags and bundles and baskets.

"How much were white rags?"

"Twelve cents."

Laconic, through the urgencies of tobacco.

"What?"

"Twelve cents."

"And colored?"

"Wal, they were consider'ble."

"And paper?"

"Six cents. 'T used to be half a cent Six cents now."

"But the reason?" breathlessly.

"Reckoned 'twas the war's much as anything."

One good thing out of Nazareth! Little Jane saw herself on the road to
riches, and immediately had thoughts of selling the whole
household-equipment for rags. She displayed her commodities.

"Did he pay in money?"

"Didn't like to; but then he did."

"Fine day, to-day."

"Wal, 'twas."

And when the reluctant tinman went on his way again, she returned to
spread the fabulous result before her mother. There were sugars and
spices and whatnot. And though--woe worth the day!--she found that the
sum yielded only half what once it would, still, by drinking her own tea
in its acritude, they would do admirably; for tea even little Jane
required as her tonic, and without it felt like nothing but a mollusk.

All this was very well, so far as it went; but the thrifty housekeeper
soon found that it went no way at all. Those for whom she made her
efforts wanted none of their results. She would have given all she had
in the world to help these suffering beings; but her little cooking and
concocting were all that she could do, and those they disregarded
utterly. When in the dull forenoon she would have enlivened Vivia with
her precious elderberry-wine, that a connoisseur must taste twice before
telling from purplest Port, and Vivia only wet her lips at it, or when
she carried Ray a roasted apple, its burnished sides bursting with juice
and clotted with cream, and the boy glanced at it and never saw it,
little Jane felt ready to cry; and she set to bethinking herself
seriously if there were nothing else to be done.

One day, it was the day before Christmas, Jane took up to Ray's room one
of her trifles, a whip, whose _suave_ and frothy nothingness was piled
over the sweet plum-pulp at bottom. Ray lay on the outside of the bed,
with his thick poncho over him; he looked at her and at her tray, played
with the teaspoon a moment, then rolled upon his side and shut his
eyes. Little Jane took a half-dozen steps about the room, reached the
door, hesitated, and came back.

"Ray," said she, under her breath and with tears in her voice, "I wish
you wouldn't do so. You don't know how it makes me feel. I can't do
anything for you but bring whips and custards; and you won't touch
those."

Ray turned and looked up at her.

"Do you care, Janet?" said he; and, rising on one arm, he lifted the
glass, and finished its delicate sweetmeat with a gust.

But as he threw himself back, little Jane took heart of grace once more.

"Ray, dear," said she, "I don't think it's right for you to stay here
alone in the cold. Won't you come down where it's warm? It's so much
more cheerful by the fire."

"I don't want to be cheerful," said Ray.

Janet looked at the door, then summoned her forces, and, holding the
high bedpost with both hands, said,--

"Ray, if God sent you any trouble, He never meant for you to take it so.
You are repulsing Him every day. You are straightening yourself against
Him. You are like a log on His hands. Can't you bend beneath it? Dear
Ray, you need comfort, but you never will find it till you take up your
life and your duties again, and come down among us."

"What duties have I?" said Ray, hoarsely, looking along his footless
limb. "The sooner my life ends, oh, the better! I want no comfort!"

But little Jane had gone.

Christmas day dawned clear and keen; the sky was full of its bluest
sparkle, and, wheresoever it mounted and stretched over snowy fields,
seemed to hold nothing but gladness. Vivia had wrapped herself in her
cloak, and walked two miles to an early church-service, so if by any
accord of worship she might put her heart in tune with the universe. She
had been at home a half-hour already, and sat in her old nook with some
idle work between her fingers. A broad blaze rolled its rosy volumes up
the chimney, and threw its reflections on the shining shelves and into
the great tin-kitchen, that, planted firmly, held up to the heat the
very bird that had moved so majestically over the spring meadow, and
which Mrs. Vennard was at present basting with such assiduity, that, if
ever the knife should penetrate the crisp depth of envelope, it would
certainly find the inclosure unscathed by fire. Little Jane was stirring
enormous raisins into some wonderful batter of a pudding,--for she
remembered the time when somebody used to pick out all his plums and
leave the rest, and she meant, that, so far as her skill and her
resources would go, there should be no abatement of Christmas cheer
to-day. And if, after all, everybody disdained the bounteous affair, why
it could go to Tommy Low's mother, who would not by any means disdain
it. Every now and then she turned an anxious ear for any movement in the
cold distance,--but there was only silence.

Suddenly Vivia started. A door had swung to, a strange sharp sound
echoed on the staircase, the kitchen-door opened and closed, and Ray set
his back against it. He did not attempt to move, but stood there darkly
surveying them. Vivia looked at him a second, then rose quickly, crossed
the room, and kissed him. Immediately Mrs. Vennard made a commotion,
while the other led him forward and placed him in her chair. Little Jane
pushed aside the pudding hastily, and proceeded to mull some of her mock
Sherry, that his heart might be warmed within him; and the cat came
rubbing against his crutch, as if she would make friends with it and
take it into the family. Mrs. Vennard resumed her basting; Vivia began
talking to him about her work and about her walk, murmuring pleasantly
in her clear, low tone,--Janet now and then putting in a word. Ray sat
there, sipping his spicy draught, and looking out with an unacquainted
air at the stir to which his coming had lent some gladness. But his face
was yet overcast with the shadows of the grave. In vain Mrs. Vennard
fussed and fidgeted, in vain little Jane uttered any of her brisk, but
sorry jesting, in vain Vivia's gentle voice;--it all touched Ray's heart
no other way than as the rain slips along a tombstone. Vivia folded her
work and disappeared; she was going to light a fire in her parlor, where
there had been none yet, and where by-and-by in the evening shadows she
might play to Ray, and charm him, perhaps, to rest. Mrs. Vennard divined
her purpose, and hurried after her to join in the task. Ray found
himself alone in his corner; he shivered. In spite of all the weeks of
solitude, a sudden chill seized him; he gathered up his crutches, and
stalked on them to the table where little Jane was yet finding something
to do. She brought him a chair, and for a minute or two he watched her;
then he was only staring vacantly at his hands, as they lay before him
on the table.

If Janet was a busy soul, she was just as certainly a busybody. She had
the loving and innocent habit of making herself a member of every one's
equation. Just now she ached inwardly, when looking at Ray, and it was
impossible for her not to try and help him.

"Ray, dear," said she, leaving her work and standing before him, "I
think you ought to smile now. Vivia has forgiven you. Take it as an
earnest that God forgives you, too."

"I haven't sinned against God," said Ray. "I don't know who I sinned
against. I killed my brother."

And his face fell forward on his hands and wet them with jets of
scalding tears. Full of awe and misery, little Jane dropped upon her
knees beside him, and, clasping his hands in hers, said to herself some
silent prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

After that placid-ending Christmas, after that first prayer, those first
tears, after Vivia's music at nightfall, Ray was another creature. He no
longer shut himself up in his room, but was down and about with little
Jane at peep of day. Indeed, he had now a horror of being alone,
following Janet from morn till eve, like a shadow, and stooping forward,
when the dark began to gather, with great, silent tears rolling over his
face, unless she came and took the cricket at his foot, slipping her
warm hand into his, and helping him to himself with the unspoken
sympathy. But it was a horror which nothing wholly lulled to sleep at
last but Vivia's singing. Every night, for an hour or more, Vivia
wrought the music's spell about him, while he lay back in his chair, and
little Jane retreated across the hearth, not daring to intrude on such a
season. They were seldom purely sad things that she played: sometimes
the melody murmured its _cantabile_ like a summer brook into which
moonbeams bent, flowing along the lowland, breaking only in sprays of
tune, and seeming to paint in its bosom the sleeping shadows of the fair
field-flowers; and if ever the gentle strain lost its way, and found
itself wandering among the massive chords, the profound melancholy, the
blind groping of any Fifth Symphony or piercing Stabat Mater, she
answered it, singing Elijah's hymn of rest; and as she sang, there grew
in her voice a strength, a sweetness, that satisfied the very soul. When
the nine-o'clock bell rang in from the village through the winter
night's crystal clearness, little Jane would lightly nudge her mother
and steal away to bed; and in the ruddy twilight of the felling fire the
two talked softly, talked,--but never of that dark thing lying most
deeply in the heart of either. Perhaps, by-and-by, when the thrilling
wound should be only a scar, if ever that time should come, the one
would be able to speak, the other to hear.

Week after week, now, Ray began to occupy himself about the house more
and more, resuming in succession odd little jobs that during all this
time had remained unfinished as on the day he went. He seemed desirous
of taking up the days exactly as he had left them, of bridging over this
gap and chasm, of ignoring the fatal summer. Something so dreadful had
fallen into his life that it could not assimilate itself with the
tissues of daily existence. The work must be slow that would volatilize
such a black body of horror till it leavened all the being into power
and grace undreamed of before.

But little Jane did not philosophize upon what she was so glad to see;
she hailed every sign of outside interest as a symptom of returning
health, and gave him a thousand occasions. Yesterday there were baskets
to braid, and to-day he must initiate her in the complications of a
dozen difficult sailor's-knots that he knew, and to-morrow there would
be woodchuck-traps to make and show her how to set. For Janet's chief
vexation had overtaken her in the absence of fresh eggs for breakfast,
an absence that would be enduring, unless the small game of the forest
could be lured into her snares and parcelled among the apathetic hens.
Many were the recipes and the consultations on the subject, till at last
Ray wrote out for her, in black-letter, a notice to be pinned up in the
sight of every delinquent: "Twelve eggs, or death!" Whether it were the
frozen rabbit-meat flung among them the day before, or whether it were
the timely warning, there is no one to tell; but the next morning twelve
eggs lay in the various hiding-places, which Mrs. Vennard declared to be
as good eggs as ever were laid, and custards and cookies renewed their
reign. Here, suddenly, Ray remembered the purse in his haversack,
containing all his uncounted pay. It was a weary while that he stayed
alone in the cold, leaning over it as if he stared at the thirty pieces
of silver, a faint sickness seized him, then hurriedly sweeping it up,
with a red spot burning cruelly into either cheek, he brought it down,
and emptied it in little Jane's lap, though he would rather have seen it
ground to impalpable dust. But, after a moment's thought, the astonished
recipient kept it for a use of her own. Finally, one night, Ray proposed
to instruct Janet in some particular branch of his general ignorance;
and after those firelight-recitations, little Jane forgot to move her
seat away, and her hand was kept in his through all the hour of Vivia's
slow enchantment.

So the cold weather wore away, and spring stole into the scene like a
surprise, finding Vivia as the winter found her,--but Ray still
undergoing volcanic changes, now passionless lulls and now rages and
spasms of grief: gradually out of them all he gathered his strength
about him.

It was once more a morning of early June, sunrise was blushing over the
meadows, and the gossamers of hoar dew lay in spidery veils of woven
light and melted under the rosy beams. From her window one heard Vivia
singing, and the strain stole down like the breath of the heavy
honeysuckles that trellised her pane:--

    "No more for me the eager day
      Breaks its bright prison-bars;
    The sunshine Thou hast stripped away,
      But bared the eternal stars.

    "Though in the cloud the wild bird sings,
      His song falls not for me,
    Alone while rosy heaven rings,--
      But, Lord, alone with Thee!"

One well could know, in listening to the liquid melody of those clear
tones, that love and sorrow had transfused her life at last to woof and
warp of innermost joy that death itself could neither tarnish nor
obscure. In a few moments she came down and joined Ray, where he stood
upon the door-stone, with one arm resting over the shoulder of little
Jane, and watched with him the antics of a youth who postured before
them. It was some old acquaintance of Ray's, returned from the war; and
as if he would demonstrate how wonderfully martial exercise supples
joint and sinew, he was leaping in the air, turning his heel where his
toe should be, hanging his foot on his arm and throwing it over his
shoulder in a necklace, skipping and prancing on the grass like a
veritable saltinbanco. Ray looked grimly on and inspected the
evolutions; then there was long process of question and answer and
asseveration, and, when the youth departed, little Jane had announced
with authority that Ray should throw away his crutch and stand on two
feet of his own again.

"What a gay fellow he is!" said Ray, drawing a breath of relief.
"They're all alike, dancing on graves. To be an old Téméraire decked out
in signal-flags after thunderous work well done, and settling down, is
one thing. But we,--to-day, when one would think every woman in the land
should wear the sackcloth and ashes of mourning, we break into a
splendor of apparel that defies the butterflies and boughs of the dying
year."

"Two striking examples before you," said little Jane, with a laugh, as
she looked at her old print and at Vivia's gray gown.

"I wasn't thinking of you. I saw the ladies in the village
yesterday,--they were pied and parded."

"Children," said Mrs. Vennard from within, "I've taken up the coffee
now. I sha'n't wait a minute longer. Vivia, I'll beat an egg into
yours."

But the children had wandered down to the lake-shore, oblivious of her
cry, and were standing on the rock watching their images glassed below
and ever freshly shattered with rippling undulations. A wherry chained
beside them Vivia rocked lightly with her foot.

"You and little Jane will set me down by-and-by?" she asked. "'T will be
so much pleasanter than the coach."

"And, Vivia dear, you will go, then?" exclaimed little Jane, with
tearful eyes. "You will certainly go?"

"Yes," said Vivia, looking out and far away, "I shall go to do that"--

"Which no one can ever do for _you_," said Ray, with a shudder.

"Which some woman will praise Heaven for."

"God bless you, Vivia!" cried little Jane.

"He has already blessed me," said Vivia, softly.

Janet nestled nearer to Ray's side, as they stood. There was a tremor of
gladness through all the dew of her glance. Ray looked down at her for a
moment, and his hard brow softened, in his eyes hung a light like the
reflection of a star in a breaking wave.

"He has blessed me, too," said he. "Some day I shall be a man again. I
have thrown away my crutch, Vivia,--for all my life I am going to have
this little shoulder to lean upon."

And over his sombre face a smile crept and deepened, like the yellow
ray, that, after a long, dark day of driving rain, suddenly gilds the
tree-tops and brims the sky; and though, when it went, the gloom shut
drearily down again, still it bore the promise of fair day to-morrow.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOUSE AND HOME PAPERS.

BY CHRISTOPHER CROWFIELD.


I.

THE RAVAGES OF A CARPET.


"My dear, it's so cheap!"

These words were spoken by my wife, as she sat gracefully on a roll of
Brussels carpet which was spread out in flowery lengths on the floor of
Messrs. Ketchem & Co.

"It's _so_ cheap!"

Milton says that the love of praise is the last infirmity of noble
minds. I think he had not rightly considered the subject. I believe that
last infirmity is the love of getting things cheap! Understand me, now.
I don't mean the love of getting cheap things, by which one understands
showy, trashy, ill-made, spurious articles, bearing certain apparent
resemblances to better things. All really sensible people are quite
superior to that sort of cheapness. But those fortunate accidents which
put within the power of a man things really good and valuable for half
or a third of their value what mortal virtue and resolution can
withstand? My friend Brown has a genuine Murillo, the joy of his heart
and the light of his eyes, but he never fails to tell you, as its
crowning merit, how he bought it in South America for just nothing,--how
it hung smoky and deserted in the back of a counting-room, and was
thrown in as a makeweight to bind a bargain, and, upon being cleaned,
turned out a genuine Murillo; and then he takes out his cigar, and calls
your attention to the points in it; he adjusts the curtain to let the
sunlight fall just in the right spot; he takes you to this and the other
point of view; and all this time you must confess, that, in your mind as
well as his, the consideration that he got all this beauty for ten
dollars adds lustre to the painting. Brown has paintings there for which
he paid his thousands, and, being well advised, they are worth the
thousands he paid; but this ewe-lamb that he got for nothing always
gives him a secret exaltation in his own eyes. He seems to have credited
to himself personally merit to the amount of what he should have paid
for the picture. Then there is Mrs. Croesus, at the party yesterday
evening, expatiating to my wife on the surprising cheapness of her
point-lace set,--"Got for just nothing at all, my dear!" and a circle of
admiring listeners echoes the sound. "Did you ever _hear_ anything like
it? I never heard of such a thing in my life"; and away sails Mrs.
Croesus as if she had a collar composed of all the cardinal virtues. In
fact, she is buoyed up with a secret sense of merit, so that her satin
slippers scarcely touch the carpet. Even I myself am fond of showing a
first edition of "Paradise Lost," for which I gave a shilling in a
London book-stall, and stating that I would not take a hundred dollars
for it. Even I must confess there are points on which I am mortal.

But all this while my wife sits on her roll of carpet, looking into my
face for approbation, and Marianne and Jane are pouring into my ear a
running-fire of "How sweet! How lovely! Just like that one of Mrs.
Tweedleum's!"

"And she gave two dollars and seventy-five cents a yard for hers, and
this is"--

My wife here put her hand to her mouth, and pronounced the incredible
sum in a whisper, with a species of sacred awe, common, as I have
observed, to females in such interesting crises. In fact, Mr. Ketchem,
standing smiling and amiable by, remarked to me that really he hoped
Mrs. Crowfield would not name generally what she gave for the article,
for positively it was so far below the usual rate of prices that he
might give offence to other customers; but this was the very last of
the pattern, and they were anxious to close off the old stock, and we
had always traded with them, and he had a great respect for my wife's
father, who had always traded with their firm, and so, when there were
any little bargains to be thrown in any one's way, why, he naturally, of
course--And here Mr. Ketchem bowed gracefully over the yardstick to my
wife, and I consented.

Yes, I consented; but whenever I think of myself at that moment, I
always am reminded, in a small way, of Adam taking the apple; and my
wife, seated on that roll of carpet, has more than once suggested to my
mind the classic image of Pandora opening her unlucky box. In fact, from
the moment I had blandly assented to Mr. Ketchem's remarks, and said to
my wife, with a gentle air of dignity, "Well, my dear, since it suits
you, I think you had better take it," there came a load on my prophetic
soul, which not all the fluttering and chattering of my delighted girls
and the more placid complacency of my wife could entirely dissipate. I
presaged, I know not what, of coming woe; and all I presaged came to
pass.

In order to know just _what_ came to pass, I must give you a view of the
house and home into which this carpet was introduced.

My wife and I were somewhat advanced housekeepers, and our dwelling was
first furnished by her father, in the old-fashioned jog-trot days, when
furniture was made with a view to its lasting from generation to
generation. Everything was strong and comfortable,--heavy mahogany,
guiltless of the modern device of veneering, and hewed out with a square
solidity which had not an idea of change. It was, so to speak, a sort of
granite foundation of the household structure. Then, we commenced
housekeeping with the full idea that our house was a thing to be lived
in, and that furniture was made to be used. That most sensible of women,
Mrs. Crowfield, agreed fully with me that in our house there was to be
nothing too good for ourselves,--no rooms shut up in holiday attire to
be enjoyed by strangers for three or four days in the year, while we
lived in holes and corners,--no best parlor from which we were to be
excluded,--no best china which we were not to use,--no silver plate to
be kept in the safe in the bank, and brought home only in case of a
grand festival, while our daily meals were served with dingy Britannia.
"Strike a broad, plain average," I said to my wife; "have everything
abundant, serviceable; and give all our friends exactly what we have
ourselves, no better and no worse";--and my wife smiled approval on my
sentiment.

Smile! she did more than smile. My wife resembles one of those convex
mirrors I have sometimes seen. Every idea I threw out, plain and simple,
she reflected back upon me in a thousand little glitters and twinkles of
her own; she made my crude conceptions come back to me in such perfectly
dazzling performances that I hardly recognized them. My mind warms up,
when I think what a home that woman made of our house from the very
first day she moved into it. The great, large, airy parlor, with its
ample bow-window, when she had arranged it, seemed a perfect trap to
catch sunbeams. There was none of that discouraging trimness and newness
that often repel a man's bachelor-friends after the first call, and make
them feel,--"Oh, well, one cannot go in at Crowfield's now, unless one
is dressed; one might put them out." The first thing our parlor said to
any one was, that we were not people to be put out, that we were
wide-spread, easy-going, and jolly folk. Even if Tom Brown brought in
Ponto and his shooting-bag, there was nothing in that parlor to strike
terror into man and dog; for it was written on the face of things, that
everybody there was to do just as he or she pleased. There were my books
and my writing-table spread out with all its miscellaneous confusion of
papers on one side of the fireplace, and there were my wife's great,
ample sofa and work-table on the other; there I wrote my articles for
the "North American," and there she turned and ripped and altered her
dresses, and there lay crochet and knitting and embroidery side by side
with a weekly basket of family-mending, and in neighborly contiguity
with the last book of the season, which my wife turned over as she took
her after-dinner lounge on the sofa. And in the bow-window were canaries
always singing, and a great stand of plants always fresh and blooming,
and ivy which grew and clambered and twined about the pictures. Best of
all, there was in our parlor that household altar, the blazing
wood-fire, whose wholesome, hearty crackle is the truest household
inspiration. I quite agree with one celebrated American author who holds
that an open fireplace is an altar of patriotism. Would our
Revolutionary fathers have gone barefooted and bleeding over snows to
defend air-tight stoves and cooking-ranges? I trow not. It was the
memory of the great open kitchen-fire, with its back-log and fore-stick
of cord-wood, its roaring, hilarious voice of invitation, its dancing
tongues of flame, that called to them through the snows of that dreadful
winter to keep up their courage, that made their hearts warm and bright
with a thousand reflected memories. Our neighbors said that it was
delightful to sit by our fire,--but then, for their part, they could not
afford it, wood was so ruinously dear, and all that. Most of these
people could not, for the simple reason that they felt compelled, in
order to maintain the family-dignity, to keep up a parlor with great
pomp and circumstance of upholstery, where they sat only on
dress-occasions, and of course the wood-fire was out of the question.

When children began to make their appearance in our establishment, my
wife, like a well-conducted housekeeper, had the best of
nursery-arrangements,--a room all warmed, lighted, and ventilated, and
abounding in every proper resource of amusement to the rising race; but
it was astonishing to see how, notwithstanding this, the centripetal
attraction drew every pair of little pattering feet to our parlor.

"My dear, why don't you take your blocks up-stairs?"

"I want to be where oo are," said with a piteous under-lip, was
generally a most convincing answer.

Then the small people could not be disabused of the idea that certain
chief treasures of their own would be safer under papa's writing-table
or mamma's sofa than in the safest closet of their own domains. My
writing-table was dockyard for Arthur's new ship, and stable for little
Tom's pepper-and-salt-colored pony, and carriage-house for Charley's new
wagon, while whole armies of paper dolls kept house in the recess behind
mamma's sofa.

And then, in due time, came the tribe of pets who followed the little
ones and rejoiced in the blaze of the firelight. The boys had a splendid
Newfoundland, which, knowing our weakness, we warned them with awful
gravity was never to be a parlor-dog; but, somehow, what with little
beggings and pleadings on the part of Arthur and Tom, and the piteous
melancholy with which Rover would look through the window-panes, when
shut out from the blazing warmth into the dark, cold veranda, it at last
came to pass that Rover gained a regular corner at the hearth, a regular
_status_ in every family-convocation. And then came a little
black-and-tan English terrier for the girls; and then a fleecy poodle,
who established himself on the corner of my wife's sofa; and for each of
these some little voices pleaded, and some little heart would be so near
broken at any slight, that my wife and I resigned ourselves to live in
menagerie, the more so as we were obliged to confess a lurking weakness
towards these four-footed children ourselves.

So we grew and flourished together,--children, dogs, birds, flowers, and
all; and although my wife often, in paroxysms of housewifeliness to
which the best of women are subject, would declare that we never were
fit to be seen, yet I comforted her with the reflection that there were
few people whose friends seemed to consider them better worth seeing,
judging by the stream of visitors and loungers which was always setting
towards our parlor. People seemed to find it good to be there; they said
it was somehow home-like and pleasant, and that there was a kind of
charm about it that made it easy to talk and easy to live; and as my
girls and boys grew up, there seemed always to be some merry doing or
other going on there. Arty and Tom brought home their college friends,
who straightway took root there and seemed to fancy themselves a part of
us. We had no reception-rooms apart, where the girls were to receive
young gentlemen; all the courting and flirting that were to be done had
for their arena the ample variety of surface presented by our parlor,
which, with sofas and screens and lounges and recesses and writing-and
work-tables disposed here and there, and the genuine _laisser aller_ of
the whole _menage_, seemed, on the whole, to have offered ample
advantages enough; for, at the time I write of, two daughters were
already established in marriage, and a third engaged, while my youngest
was busy, as yet, in performing that little domestic ballet of the cat
with the mouse, in the case of a most submissive youth of the
neighborhood.

All this time our parlor-furniture, though of that granitic formation I
have indicated, began to show marks of that decay to which things
sublunary are liable. I cannot say that I dislike this look in a room.
Take a fine, ample, hospitable apartment, where all things, freely and
generously used, softly and indefinably grow old together, there is a
sort of mellow tone and keeping which pleases my eye. What if the seams
of the great inviting arm-chair, where so many friends have sat and
lounged, do grow white? What, in fact, if some easy couch has an
undeniable hole worn in its friendly cover? I regard with tenderness
even these mortal weaknesses of these servants and witnesses of our good
times and social fellowship. No vulgar touch wore them; they may be
called, rather, the marks and indentations which the glittering in and
out of the tide of social happiness has worn in the rocks of our strand.
I would no more disturb the gradual toning-down and aging of a well-used
set of furniture by smart improvements than I would have a modern dauber
paint in emendations in a fine old picture.

So we men reason; but women do not always think as we do. There is a
virulent demon of housekeeping, not wholly cast out in the best of them,
and which often breaks out in unguarded moments. In fact, Miss Marianne,
being on the lookout for furniture wherewith to begin a new
establishment, and Jane, who had accompanied her in her peregrinations,
had more than once thrown out little disparaging remarks on the
time-worn appearance of our establishment, suggesting comparison with
those of more modern-furnished rooms.

"It is positively scandalous, the way our furniture looks," I one day
heard her declaring to her mother; "and this old rag of a carpet!"

My feelings were hurt, not the less so that I knew that the large cloth
which covered the middle of the floor, and which the women call a
bocking, had been bought and nailed down there, after a solemn
family-counsel, as the best means of concealing the too evident darns
which years of good cheer had made needful in our stanch old household
friend, the three-ply carpet, made in those days when to be a three-ply
was a pledge of continuance and service.

Well, it was a joyous and bustling day, when, after one of those
domestic whirlwinds which the women are fond of denominating
house-cleaning, the new Brussels carpet was at length brought in and
nailed down, and its beauty praised from mouth to mouth. Our old friends
called in and admired, and all seemed to be well, except that I had that
light and delicate presage of changes to come which indefinitely brooded
over me.

The first premonitory symptom was the look of apprehensive suspicion
with which the female senate regarded the genial sunbeams that had
always glorified our bow-window.

"This house ought to have inside blinds," said Marianne, with all the
confident decision of youth; "this carpet will be ruined, if the sun is
allowed to come in like that."

"And that dirty little canary must really be hung in the kitchen," said
Jane; "he always did make such a litter, scattering his seed-chippings
about; and he never takes his bath without flirting out some water. And,
mamma, it appears to me it will never do to have the plants here. Plants
are always either leaking through the pots upon the carpet, or
scattering bits of blossoms and dead leaves, or some accident upsets or
breaks a pot. It was no matter, you know, when we had the old carpet;
but this we really want to have kept nice."

Mamma stood her ground for the plants,--darlings of her heart for many a
year,--but temporized, and showed that disposition towards compromise
which is most inviting to aggression.

I confess I trembled; for, of all radicals on earth, none are to be
compared to females that have once in hand a course of domestic
innovation and reform. The sacred fire, the divine _furor_, burns in
their bosoms, they become perfect Pythonesses, and every chair they sit
on assumes the magic properties of the tripod. Hence the dismay that
lodges in the bosoms of us males at the fateful spring and autumn
seasons, denominated house-cleaning. Who can say whither the awful gods,
the prophetic fates, may drive our fair household divinities; what sins
of ours may be brought to light; what indulgences and compliances, which
uninspired woman has granted in her ordinary mortal hours, may be torn
from us? He who has been allowed to keep a pair of pet slippers in a
concealed corner, and by the fireside indulged with a chair which he
might, _ad libitum_, fill with all sorts of pamphlets and miscellaneous
literature, suddenly finds himself reformed out of knowledge, his
pamphlets tucked away into pigeon-holes and corners, and his slippers
put in their place in the hall, with, perhaps, a brisk insinuation about
the shocking dust and disorder that men will tolerate.

The fact was, that the very first night after the advent of the new
carpet I had a prophetic dream. Among our treasures of art was a little
etching, by an English artist-friend, the subject of which was the
gambols of the household fairies in a baronial library after the
household were in bed. The little people are represented in every
attitude of frolic enjoyment. Some escalade the great arm-chair, and
look down from its top as from a domestic Mont Blanc; some climb about
the bellows; some scale the shaft of the shovel; while some, forming in
magic ring, dance festively on the yet glowing hearth. Tiny troops
promenade the writing-table. One perches himself quaintly on the top of
the inkstand, and holds colloquy with another who sits cross-legged on a
paper-weight, while a companion looks down on them from the top of the
sand-box. It was an ingenious little device, and gave me the idea which
I often expressed to my wife, that much of the peculiar feeling of
security, composure, and enjoyment which seems to be the atmosphere of
some rooms and houses came from the unsuspected presence of these little
people, the household fairies, so that the belief in their existence
became a solemn article of faith with me.

Accordingly, that evening, after the installation of the carpet, when my
wife and daughters had gone to bed, as I sat with my slippered feet
before the last coals of the fire, I fell asleep in my chair, and, lo!
my own parlor presented to my eye a scene of busy life. The little
people in green were tripping to and fro, but in great confusion.
Evidently something was wrong among them; for they were fussing and
chattering with each other, as if preparatory to a general movement. In
the region of the bow-window I observed a tribe of them standing with
tiny valises and carpet-bags in their hands, as though about to depart
on a journey. On my writing-table another set stood around my inkstand
and pen-rack, who, pointing to those on the floor, seemed to debate some
question among themselves; while others of them appeared to be
collecting and packing away in tiny trunks certain fairy treasures,
preparatory to a general departure. When I looked at the social hearth,
at my wife's sofa and work-basket, I saw similar appearances of
dissatisfaction and confusion. It was evident that the household fairies
were discussing the question of a general and simultaneous removal. I
groaned in spirit, and, stretching out my hand, began a conciliatory
address, when whisk went the whole scene from before my eyes, and I
awaked to behold the form of my wife asking me if I were ill or had had
the nightmare that I groaned so. I told her my dream, and we laughed at
it together.

"We must give way to the girls a little," she said. "It is natural, you
know, that they should wish us to appear a little as other people do.
The fact is, our parlor is somewhat dilapidated; think how many years we
have lived in it without an article of new furniture."

"I hate new furniture," I remarked, in the bitterness of my soul. "I
hate anything new."

My wife answered me discreetly, according to approved principles of
diplomacy. I was right. She sympathized with me. At the same time, it
was not necessary, she remarked, that we should keep a hole in our
sofa-cover and arm-chair; there would certainly be no harm in sending
them to the upholsterer's to be new-covered; she didn't much mind, for
her part, moving her plants to the south back-room, and the bird would
do well enough in the kitchen: I had often complained of him for singing
vociferously when I was reading aloud.

So our sofa went to the upholsterer's; but the upholsterer was struck
with such horror at its clumsy, antiquated, unfashionable appearance,
that he felt bound to make representations to my wife and daughters:
positively, it would be better for them to get a new one, of a tempting
pattern, which he showed them, than to try to do anything with that.
With a stitch or so here and there it might do for a basement
dining-room; but, for a parlor, he gave it as his disinterested
opinion,--he must say, if the case were his own, he should get, etc.,
etc. In short, we had a new sofa and new chairs, and the plants and the
birds were banished, and some dark green blinds were put up to exclude
the sun from the parlor, and the blessed luminary was allowed there only
at rare intervals when my wife and daughters were out shopping, and I
acted out my uncivilized male instincts by pulling up every shade and
vivifying the apartment as in days of old.

But this was not the worst of it. The new furniture and new carpet
formed an opposition party in the room. I believe in my heart that for
every little household fairy that went out with the dear old things
there came in a tribe of discontented brownies with the new ones. These
little wretches were always twitching at the gowns of my wife and
daughters, jogging their elbows, and suggesting odious comparisons
between the smart new articles and what remained of the old ones. They
disparaged my writing-table in the corner; they disparaged the
old-fashioned lounge in the other corner, which had been the maternal
throne for years; they disparaged the work-table, the work-basket, with
constant suggestions of how such things as these would look in certain
well-kept parlors where new-fashioned furniture of the same sort as ours
existed.

"We don't have any parlor," said Jane, one day. "Our parlor has always
been a sort of log-cabin,--library, study, nursery, greenhouse, all
combined. We never have had things like other people."

"Yes, and this open fire makes such a dust; and this carpet is one that
shows every speck of dust; it keeps one always on the watch."

"I wonder why papa never had a study to himself; I'm sure I should think
he would like it better than sitting here among us all. Now there's the
great south-room off the dining-room; if he would only move his things
there, and have his open fire, we could then close up the fireplace, and
put lounges in the recesses, and mamma could have her things in the
nursery,--and then we should have a parlor fit to be seen."

I overheard all this, though I pretended not to,--the little busy chits
supposing me entirely buried in the recesses of a German book over which
I was poring.

There are certain crises in a man's life when the female element in his
household asserts itself in dominant forms that seem to threaten to
overwhelm him. The fair creatures, who in most matters have depended on
his judgment, evidently look upon him at these seasons as only a
forlorn, incapable male creature, to be cajoled and flattered and
persuaded out his native blindness and absurdity into the fairy-land of
their wishes.

"Of course, mamma," said the busy voices, "men can't understand such
things. What _can_ men know of housekeeping, and how things ought to
look? Papa never goes into company; he don't know and don't care how the
world is doing, and don't see that nobody now is living as we do."

"Aha, my little mistresses, are you there?" I thought; and I mentally
resolved on opposing a great force of what our politicians call
_backbone_ to this pretty domestic conspiracy.

"When you get my writing-table out of this corner, my pretty dears, I'd
thank you to let me know it."

Thus spake I in my blindness, fool that I was. Jupiter might as soon
keep awake, when Juno came in best bib and tucker, and with the _cestus_
of Venus, to get him to sleep. Poor Slender might as well hope to get
the better of pretty Mistress Anne Page, as one of us clumsy-footed men
might endeavor to escape from the tangled labyrinth of female wiles.

In short, in less than a year it was all done, without any quarrel, any
noise, any violence,--done, I scarce knew when or how, but with the
utmost deference to my wishes, the most amiable hopes that I would not
put myself out, the most sincere protestations, that, if I liked it
better as it was, my goddesses would give up and acquiesce. In fact, I
seemed to do it of myself, constrained thereto by what the Emperor
Napoleon has so happily called the logic of events,--that old,
well-known logic by which the man who has once said A must say B, and he
who has said B must say the whole alphabet. In a year, we had a parlor
with two lounges in decorous recesses, a fashionable sofa, and six
chairs and a looking-glass, and a grate always shut up, and a hole in
the floor which kept the parlor warm, and great, heavy curtains that
kept out all the light that was not already excluded by the green
shades.

It was as proper and orderly a parlor as those of our most fashionable
neighbors; and when our friends called, we took them stumbling into its
darkened solitude, and opened a faint crack in one of the window-shades,
and came down in our best clothes, and talked with them there. Our old
friends rebelled at this, and asked what they had done to be treated so,
and complained so bitterly that gradually we let them into the secret
that there was a great south-room which I had taken for my study, where
we all sat, where the old carpet was down, where the sun shone in at the
great window, where my wife's plants flourished and the canary-bird
sang, and my wife had her sofa in the corner, and the old brass andirons
glistened and the wood-fire crackled,--in short, a room to which all the
household fairies had emigrated.

When they once had found _that_ out, it was difficult to get any of them
to sit in our parlor. I had purposely christened the new room _my
study_, that I might stand on my rights as master of ceremonies there,
though I opened wide arms of welcome to any who chose to come. So, then,
it would often come to pass, that, when we were sitting round the fire
in my study of an evening, the girls would say,--

"Come, what do we always stay here for? Why don't we ever sit in the
parlor?"

And then there would be manifested among guests and family-friends a
general unwillingness to move.

"Oh, hang it, girls!" would Arthur say; "the parlor is well enough, all
right; let it stay as it is, and let a fellow stay where he can do as he
pleases and feels at home"; and to this view of the matter would respond
divers of the nice young bachelors who were Arthur's and Tom's sworn
friends.

In fact, nobody wanted to stay in our parlor now. It was a cold,
correct, accomplished fact; the household fairies had left it,--and when
the fairies leave a room, nobody ever feels at home in it. No pictures,
curtains, no wealth of mirrors, no elegance of lounges, can in the least
make up for their absence. They are a capricious little set; there are
rooms where they will _not_ stay, and rooms where they _will_; but no
one can ever have a good time without them.

       *       *       *       *       *

THREE CANTOS OF DANTE'S "PARADISO."

[Transcribers Note: Line that had notes associated with them have been
numbered. The notes have been moved to the end of the canto.]


CANTO XXIII.

    Even as a bird, 'mid the beloved leaves,                      [1]
      Quiet upon the nest of her sweet brood
      Throughout the night, that hideth all things from us,
    Who, that she may behold their longed-for looks
      And find the nourishment wherewith to feed them,
      In which, to her, grave labors grateful are,
    Anticipates the time on open spray
      And with an ardent longing waits the sun,
      Gazing intent, as soon as breaks the dawn:
    Even thus my Lady standing was, erect
      And vigilant, turned round towards the zone
      Underneath which the sun displays least haste;             [12]
    So that beholding her distraught and eager,
      Such I became as he is, who desiring
      For something yearns, and hoping is appeased.
    But brief the space from one When to the other;
      From my awaiting, say I, to the seeing
      The welkin grow resplendent more and more.
    And Beatrice exclaimed: "Behold the hosts
      Of the triumphant Christ, and all the fruit
      Harvested by the rolling of these spheres!"                [21]
    It seemed to me her face was all on flame;
      And eyes she had so full of ecstasy
      That I must needs pass on without describing.
    As when in nights serene of the full moon
      Smiles Trivia among the nymphs eternal
      Who paint the heaven through all its hollow cope,
    Saw I, above the myriads of lamps,
      A sun that one and all of them enkindled,                  [29]
      E'en as our own does the supernal stars.
    And through the living light transparent shone
      The lucent substance so intensely clear
      Into my sight, that I could not sustain it.
    O Beatrice, my gentle guide and dear!
      She said to me: "That which o'ermasters thee
      A virtue is which no one can resist.
    There are the wisdom and omnipotence
      That oped the thoroughfares 'twixt heaven and earth,
      For which there erst had been so long a yearning."
    As fire from out a cloud itself discharges,
      Dilating so it finds not room therein,
      And down, against its nature, falls to earth,
    So did my mind, among those aliments
      Becoming larger, issue from itself,
      And what became of it cannot remember.
      "Open thine eyes, and look at what I am:                   [45]
      Thou hast beheld such things, that strong enough
      Hast thou become to tolerate my smile."
    I was as one who still retains the feeling
      Of a forgotten dream, and who endeavors
      In vain to bring it back into his mind,
    When I this invitation heard, deserving
      Of so much gratitude, it never fades
      Out of the book that chronicles the past.
    If at this moment sounded all the tongues
      That Polyhymnia and her sisters made                       [55]
      Most lubrical with their delicious milk,
    To aid me, to a thousandth of the truth
      It would not reach, singing the holy smile,
      And how the holy aspect it illumed.
    And therefore, representing Paradise,
      The sacred poem must perforce leap over,
      Even as a man who finds his way cut off.
    But whoso thinketh of the ponderous theme,
      And of the mortal shoulder that sustains it,
      Should blame it not, if under this it trembles.
    It is no passage for a little boat
      This which goes cleaving the audacious prow,
      Nor for a pilot who would spare himself.
      "Why does my face so much enamor thee,
      That to the garden fair thou turnest not,
      Which under the rays of Christ is blossoming?
    There is the rose in which the Word Divine                   [72]
      Became incarnate; there the lilies are
      By whose perfume the good way was selected."
    Thus Beatrice; and I, who to her counsels
      Was wholly ready, once again betook me
      Unto the battle of the feeble brows.
    As in a sunbeam, that unbroken passes                        [78]
      Through fractured cloud, ere now a meadow of flowers
      Mine eyes with shadow covered have beheld,
    So I beheld the multitudinous splendors
      Refulgent from above with burning rays,
      Beholding not the source of the effulgence.
    O thou benignant power that so imprint'st them!              [89]
      Thou didst exalt thyself to give more scope
      There to the eyes, that were not strong enough.
    The name of that fair flower I e'er invoke
      Morning and evening utterly enthralled
      My soul to gaze upon the greater fire.
    And when in both mine eyes depicted were
      The glory and greatness of the living star
      Which conquers there, as here below it conquered,
    Athwart the heavens descended a bright sheen                 [98]
      Formed in a circle like a coronal,
      And cinctured it, and whirled itself about it.
    Whatever melody most sweetly soundeth
      On earth, and to itself most draws the soul,
      Would seem a cloud that, rent asunder, thunders,
    Compared unto the sounding of that lyre
      Wherewith was crowned the sapphire beautiful,
      Which gives the clearest heaven its sapphire hue.         [106]
      "I am Angelic Love, that circle round
      The joy sublime which breathes from out the bosom
      That was the hostelry of our Desire;
    And I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while
      Thou followest thy Son, and mak'st diviner
      The sphere supreme, because thou enterest it."
    Thus did the circulated melody
      Seal itself up; and all the other lights
      Were making resonant the name of Mary.
    The regal mantle of the volumes all                         [116]
      Of that world, which most fervid is and living
      With breath of God and with his works and ways,
    Extended over us its inner curve,
      So very distant, that its outward show,
      There where I was, not yet appeared to me.
    Therefore mine eyes did not possess the power
      Of following the incoronated flame,
      Which had ascended near to its own seed.
    And as a little child, that towards its mother
      Extends its arms, when it the milk has taken,
      Through impulse kindled into outward flame,
    Each of those gleams of white did upward stretch
      So with its summit, that the deep affection
      They had for Mary was revealed to me.
    Thereafter they remained there in my sight,
      _Regina coeli_ singing with such sweetness,        [132]
      That ne'er from me has the delight departed.
    Oh, what exuberance is garnered up
      In those resplendent coffers, which had been
      For sowing here below good husbandmen!
    There they enjoy and live upon the treasure                 [137]
      Which was acquired while weeping in the exile
      Of Babylon, wherein the gold was left.
    There triumpheth beneath the exalted Son
       Of God and Mary, in his victory,
       Both with the ancient council and the new,
    He who doth keep the keys of such a glory.                  [143]

[Line 1: Dante is with Beatrice in the eighth circle, that of the fixed
stars. She is gazing upwards, watching for the descent of the Triumph of
Christ.]

[Line 12: Under the meridian, or at noon, the shadows being shorter move
slower, and, therefore the sun seems less in haste.]

[Line 21: By the beneficent influences of the stars.]

[Line 29: The old belief that the stars were fed by the light of the
sun. So Milton,--

    "Hither, as to their fountain, other stars
    Repair, and in their golden urns draw light."

Here the stars are souls, the sun is Christ.]

[Line 45: Beatrice speaks.]

[Line 55: The Muse of harmony and singing.]

[Line 72: The rose is the Virgin Mary, _Rosa Mundi, Rosa Mystica_; the
lilies are the Apostles and other saints.]

[Line 78: The struggle between his eyes and the light.]

[Line 89: Christ reascends, that Dante's dazzled eyes, too feeble to
bear the light of his presence, may behold the splendors around him.

The greater fire is the Virgin Mary, greater than any of those
remaining. She is the living star, surpassing in brightness all other
souls in heaven, as she did here on earth: _Stella Maris, Stella
Matutina_.]

[Line 98: The Angel Gabriel, or Angelic Love.]

[Line 106: Sapphire is the color in which the old painters arrayed the
Virgin.]

[Line 116: The regal mantle of all the volumes, or rolling orbs, of the
world is the crystalline heaven, or _Primus Mobile_, which infolds all
the others like a mantle.]

[Line 132: Easter hymn to the Virgin.]

[Line 137: Caring not for gold in the Babylonian exile of this life,
they laid up treasures in the other.]

[Line 143: St. Peter, keeper of the keys, with the holy men of the Old
and the New Testament.]


CANTO XXIV.

    "O company elect to the great supper                          [1]
       Of the Lamb glorified, who feedeth you
       So that forever full is your desire,
    If by the grace of God this man foretastes
       Of whatsoever falleth from your table,
       Or ever death prescribes to him the time,
    Direct your mind to his immense desire,                       [7]
       And him somewhat bedew; ye drinking are
       Forever from the fount whence comes his thought."          [9]
    Thus Beatrice; and those enraptured spirits
       Made themselves spheres around their steadfast poles,
       Flaming intensely in the guise of comets.
    And as the wheels in works of horologes
       Revolve so that the first to the beholder
       Motionless seems, and the last one to fly,
    So in like manner did those carols, dancing                  [16]
       In different measure, by their affluence
       Make me esteem them either swift or slow.
    From that one which I noted of most beauty
       Beheld I issue forth a fire so happy
       That none it left there of a greater splendor;
    And around Beatrice three several times                      [22]
       It whirled itself with so divine a song,
       My fantasy repeats it not to me;
    Therefore the pen skips, and I write it not,
       Since our imagination for such folds,
       Much more our speech, is of a tint too glaring.           [27]
    "O holy sister mine, who us implorest                        [28]
       With such devotion, by thine ardent love
       Thou dost unbind me from that beautiful sphere!"
    Thus, having stopped, the beatific fire
       Unto my Lady did direct its breath,
       Which spake in fashion as I here have said.
    And she: "O light eterne of the great man
       To whom our Lord delivered up the keys
       He carried down of this miraculous joy,
    This one examine on points light and grave,
       As good beseemeth thee, about the Faith
       By means of which thou on the sea didst walk.
    If he loves well, and hopes well, and believes,
       Is hid not from thee; for thou hast thy sight
       Where everything beholds itself depicted.                 [42]
    But since this kingdom has made citizens
       By means of the true Faith, to glorify it
       'Tis well he have the chance to speak thereof."
    As baccalaureate arms himself, and speaks not
      Until the master doth propose the question,
      To argue it, and not to terminate it,
    So did I arm myself with every reason,
      While she was speaking, that I might be ready
      For such a questioner and such profession.
    "Speak on, good Christian; manifest thyself;                 [52]
      Say, what is Faith?" Whereat I raised my brow
      Unto that light from which this was breathed forth.
    Then turned I round to Beatrice, and she
      Prompt signals made to me that I should pour
      The water forth from my internal fountain.
    "May grace, that suffers me to make confession,"
      Began I, "to the great Centurion,                          [59]
      Cause my conceptions all to be explicit!"
    And I continued: "As the truthful pen,
      Father, of thy dear brother wrote of it,
      Who put with thee Rome into the good way,
    Faith is the substance of the things we hope for,
      And evidence of those that are not seen;
      And this appears to me its quiddity."                      [66]
    Then heard I: "Very rightly thou perceivest,
      If well thou understandest why he placed it
      With substances and then with evidences."
    And I thereafterward: "The things profound,
      That here vouchsafe to me their outward show,
      Unto all eyes below are so concealed,
    That they exist there only in belief,
      Upon the which is founded the high hope,
      And therefore take the nature of a substance.
    And it behooveth us from this belief
      To reason without having other views,
      And hence it has the nature of evidence."
    Then heard I: "If whatever is acquired
      Below as doctrine were thus understood,
      No sophist's subtlety would there find place."
    Thus was breathed forth from that enkindled love;
      Then added: "Thoroughly has been gone over
      Already of this coin the alloy and weight;
    But tell me if thou hast it in thy purse?"
      And I: "Yes, both so shining and so round,
      That in its stamp there is no peradventure."
    Thereafter issued from the light profound
      That there resplendent was: "This precious jewel,
      Upon the which is every virtue founded,
    Whence hadst thou it?" And I: "The large outpouring
      Of the Holy Spirit, which has been diffused
      Upon the ancient parchments and the new,                   [93]
    A syllogism is, which demonstrates it
      With such acuteness, that, compared therewith,
      All demonstration seems to me obtuse."
    And then I heard: "The ancient and the new
      Postulates, that to thee are so conclusive,
      Why dost thou take them for the word divine?"
    And I: "The proof, which shows the truth to me,
      Are the works subsequent, whereunto Nature
      Ne'er heated iron yet, nor anvil beat."
    'Twas answered me: "Say, who assureth thee
      That those works ever were? the thing itself
      We wish to prove, nought else to thee affirms it."
    "Were the world to Christianity converted,"
      I said, "withouten miracles, this one
      Is such, the rest are not its hundredth part;
    For thou didst enter destitute and fasting
      Into the field to plant there the good plant,
      Which was a vine and has become a thorn!"
    This being finished, the high, holy Court
      Resounded through the spheres, "One God we praise!"
      In melody that there above is chanted.
    And then that Baron, who from branch to branch,             [115]
      Examining, had thus conducted me,
      Till the remotest leaves we were approaching,
    Did recommence once more: "The Grace that lords it
      Over thy intellect thy mouth has opened,
      Up to this point, as it should opened be,
    So that I do approve what forth emerged;
      But now thou must express what thou believest,
      And whence to thy belief it was presented."
    "O holy father! O thou spirit, who seest
      What thou believedst, so that thou o'ercamest,
      Towards the sepulchre, more youthful feet,"               [126]
    Began I, "thou dost wish me to declare
      Forthwith the manner of my prompt belief,
      And likewise thou the cause thereof demandest.
    And I respond: In one God I believe,
      Sole and eterne, who all the heaven doth move,
      Himself unmoved, with love and with desire;
    And of such faith not only have I proofs
      Physical and metaphysical, but gives them
      Likewise the truth that from this place rains down
    Through Moses, through the Prophets and the Psalms,
      Through the Evangel, and through you, who wrote
      After the fiery Spirit sanctified you;                    [138]
    In Persons three eterne believe I, and these
      One essence I believe, so one and trine,
      They bear conjunction both with _sunt_ and _est_.
    With the profound conjunction and divine,
      Which now I touch upon, doth stamp my mind
      Ofttimes the doctrine evangelical.
    This the beginning is, this is the spark
      Which afterwards dilates to vivid flame,
      And, like a star in heaven, is sparkling in me."
    Even as a lord, who hears what pleases him,
      His servant straight embraces, giving thanks
      For the good news, as soon as he is silent;
    So, giving me its benediction, singing,
      Three times encircled me, when I was silent,
      The apostolic light, at whose command
    I spoken had, in speaking I so pleased him.

[Line 1: Beatrice speaks.]

[Line 7: Hunger and thirst after things divine.]

[Line 9: The grace of God.]

[Line 16: The carol was a dance as well as a song.]

[Line 22: St. Peter thrice encircles Beatrice, as the Angel Gabriel did
the Virgin Mary in the preceding canto.]

[Line 27: Too glaring for painting such delicate draperies of song.]

[Line 28: St. Peter speaks to Beatrice.]

[Line 42: Fixed upon God, in whom all things reflected.]

[Line 52: St. Peter speaks to Dante.]

[Line 59: The great Head of the Church.]

[Line 66: In the Scholastic Philosophy, the essence of a thing,
distinguishing it from all other things, was called its _quiddity_: an
answer to the question, _Quid est?_]

[Line 93: The Old and New Testaments.]

[Line 115: In the Middle Ages earthly titles were sometimes given to the
saints. Thus, Boccaccio speaks of _Baron Messer San Antonio_.]

[Line 126: St. John, xx. 3-8. St. John was the first to reach the
sepulchre, but St. Peter the first to enter it.]

[Line 138: St. Peter and the other Apostles after Pentecost.]


CANTO XXV.

    If e'er it happen that the Poem Sacred,                       [1]
      To which both heaven and earth have set their hand
      Till it hath made me meagre many a year,
    O'ercome the cruelty that bars me out
      From the fair sheepfold, where a lamb I slumbered,
      Obnoxious to the wolves that war upon it,
    With other voice henceforth, with other fleece
      Will I return as poet, and at my font
      Baptismal will I take the laurel-crown;                     [9]
    Because into the Faith that maketh known
      All souls to God there entered I, and then
      Peter for her sake so my brow encircled.
    Thereafterward towards us moved a light
    Out of that band whence issued the first-fruits              [14]
      Which of his vicars Christ behind him left,
    And then, my Lady, full of ecstasy,
      Said unto me: "Look, look! behold the Baron
      For whom below Galicia is frequented."                     [18]
    In the same way as, when a dove alights
      Near his companion, both of them pour forth,
      Circling about and murmuring, their affection,
    So I beheld one by the other grand
      Prince glorified to be with welcome greeted,
      Lauding the food that there above is eaten.
    But when their gratulations were completed,
      Silently _coram me_ each one stood still,
      So incandescent it o'ercame my sight.
    Smiling thereafterwards, said Beatrice:
      "Spirit august, by whom the benefactions
      Of our Basilica have been described,                       [30]
    Make Hope reverberate in this altitude;
      Thou knowest as oft thou dost personify it
      As Jesus to the three gave greater light,"--               [33]
    "Lift up thy head, and make thyself assured;                 [34]
      For what comes hither from the mortal world
      Must needs be ripened in our radiance."
    This exhortation from the second fire                        [37]
      Came; and mine eyes I lifted to the hills,                 [38]
      Which bent them down before with too great weight,
    "Since, through his grace, our Emperor decrees
      Thou shouldst confronted be, before thy death,
      In the most secret chamber, with his Counts,               [42]
    So that, the truth beholding of this court,
      Hope, which below there rightly fascinates,
      In thee and others may thereby be strengthened;
    Say what it is, and how is flowering with it
      Thy mind, and say from whence it came to thee":
      Thus did the second light continue still.
    And the Compassionate, who piloted                           [49]
      The plumage of my wings in such high flight,
      In the reply did thus anticipate me:
    "No child whatever the Church Militant
      Of greater hope possesses, as is written
      In that Sun which irradiates all our band;                 [54]
    Therefore it is conceded him from Egypt
      To come into Jerusalem to see,                             [56]
      Or ever yet his warfare is completed.
    The other points, that not for knowledge' sake               [58]
      Have been demanded, but that he report
      How much this virtue unto thee is pleasing,
    To him I leave; for hard he will not find them,
      Nor to be boasted of; them let him answer;
      And may the grace of God in this assist him!"
    As a disciple, who obeys his teacher,
      Ready and willing, where he is expert,
      So that his excellence may be revealed,
    "Hope," said I, "is the certain expectation                  [67]
      Of glory in the hereafter, which proceedeth
      From grace divine and merit precedent.
    From many stars this light comes unto me;
      But he instilled it first into my heart,
      Who was chief singer unto the chief captain.               [72]
    _Hope they in thee_, in the high Theody
      He says, _all those who recognize thy name_;          [74]
      And who does not, if he my faith possesses?                [75]
    Thou didst instil me, then, with his instilling
      In the Epistle, so that I am full,
      And upon others rain again your rain."                     [78]
    While I was speaking, in the living bosom
      Of that effulgence quivered a sharp flash,
      Sudden and frequent, in the guise of lightning.
    Then breathed: "The love wherewith I am inflamed
      Towards the virtue still, which followed me
      Unto the palm and issue of the field,
    Wills that I whisper thee, thou take delight
      In her; and grateful to me is thy saying
      Whatever things Hope promises to thee."
    And I: "The ancient Scriptures and the new
      The mark establish, and this shows it me,                  [89]
      Of all the souls whom God has made his friends.
    Isaiah saith, that each one garmented
      In his own land shall be with twofold garments,            [92]
      And his own land is this sweet life of yours.
    Thy brother, too, far more explicitly,
      There where he treateth of the robes of white,             [95]
      This revelation manifests to us."
    And first, and near the ending of these words,
      _Sperent in te_ from over us was heard,
      To which responsive answered all the carols.               [99]
    Thereafterward among them gleamed a light,                  [100]
      So that, if Cancer such a crystal had,
      Winter would have a month of one sole day.                [102]
    And as uprises, goes, and enters the dance
      A joyous maiden, only to do honor
      To the new bride, and not from any failing,               [105]
    So saw I the illuminated splendor
      Approach the two, who in a wheel revolved,                [107]
      As was beseeming to their ardent love.
    It joined itself there in the song and music;
      And fixed on them my Lady kept her look,
      Even as a bride, silent and motionless.
    "This is the one who lay upon the breast
      Of him our Pelican; and this is he
      To the great office from the cross elected."              [114]
    My Lady thus; but therefore none the more
      Removed her sight from its fixed contemplation,
      Before or afterward, these words of hers.
    Even as a man who gazes, and endeavors
      To see the eclipsing of the sun a little,
      And who, by seeing, sightless doth become,
    So I became before that latest fire,                        [122]
      While it was said, "Why dost thou daze thyself
      To see a thing which here has no existence?               [124]
    Earth upon earth my body is, and shall be
      With all the others there, until our number
      With the eternal proposition tallies;                     [127]
    With the two garments in the blessed cloister               [128]
      Are the two lights alone that have ascended:              [129]
      And this shalt thou take back into your world."           [130]
    And at this utterance the flaming circle
      Grew quiet, with the dulcet intermingling
      Of sound that by the trinal breath was made,              [133]
    As to escape from danger or fatigue
      The oars that erst were in the water beaten
      Are all suspended at a whistle's sound.
    Ah, how much in my mind was I disturbed,
      When I turned round to look on Beatrice,
      At not beholding her, although I was
    Close at her side and in the Happy World!


[Line 1: This "Divina Commedia," in which human science or Philosophy is
symbolized in Virgil, and divine science or Theology in Beatrice.

"_Fiorenza la Bella_," Florence the Fair. In one of his Canzoni, Dante
says,--

    "O mountain-song of mine, thou goest thy way;
    Florence my town thou shalt perchance behold,
    Which bars me from itself,
    Devoid of love and naked of compassion."]


[Line 9: This allusion to the Church of San Giovanni, "_il mio bel San
Giovanni_," as Dante calls it elsewhere, (Inf. xix. 17,) is a fitting
prelude to the Canto in which St. John is to appear. Like the "laughing
of the grass" in Canto xxx. 77, it is a "foreshadowing preface,"
_ombrifero prefazio_, of what follows.

See Canto xxiv. 150;

    "So, giving me its benediction, singing,
      Three times encircled me, when I was silent,
      The apostolic light."]

[Line 14: St. Peter. "That we should be a kind of first-fruits of his
creatures." Epistle of St. James, i. 18.]

[Line 18: St. James. Pilgrimages are made to his tomb at Compostella in
Galicia.]

[Line 30: The General Epistle of St. James, called the _Epistola
Cattolica_, i. 17. "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from
above, and cometh down from the Father of lights." Our Basilica:
Paradise: the Church Triumphant.]

[Line 33: Peter, James, and John, representing the three theological
virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and distinguished above the other
apostles by clearer manifestations of their Master's favor.]

[Line 34: St. James speaks.]

[Line 37: The three Apostles, luminous above him, overwhelming him with
light.]

[Line 38: "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh
my help." Psalm cxxi. 1.]

[Line 42: The most august spirits of the Celestial City.]

[Line 49: Beatrice.]

[Line 54: In God,

    "Where everything beholds itself depicted."

Canto xxiv. 42.]

[Line 56: To come from earth to heaven.]

[Line 58: "Say what it is," and "whence it came to thee."]

[Line 67: "_Est spes certa expectatio futuræ beatitudinis, veniens ex
Dei gratia et meritis præcedentibus_." Petrus Lombardus, _Magister
Sententiarum_.]

[Line 72: The Psalmist David.]

[Line 74: The Book of Psalms, or Songs of God.]

[Line 75: "And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee."
Psalm ix. 10.]

[Line 78: Your rain: that is, of David and yourself.]

[Line 89: "The mark of the high calling and election sure."]

[Line 92: The twofold garments are the glorified spirit and the
glorified body.]

[Line 95: St. John, in the Apocalypse, vii. 9. "A great multitude which
no man could number ... clothed with white robes."]

[Line 99: Dances and songs commingled; the circling choirs, the
celestial choristers.]

[Line 100: St. John the Evangelist.]

[Line 102: In winter the constellation Cancer rises at sunset; and if it
had one star as bright as this, it would turn night into day.]

[Line 105: Such as vanity, ostentation, or the like.]

[Line 107: St. Peter and St. James are joined by St. John.]

[Line 114: Christ. "Then saith he to the disciple, 'Behold thy mother!'
And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home." St. John,
xix. 27.]

[Line 122: St. John.]

[Line 124: "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee."]

[Line 127: Till the predestined number of the elect is complete.]

[Line 128: The two garments: the glorified spirit and the glorified
body.]

[Line 129: The two lights: Christ and the Virgin Mary.]

[Line 130: Carry back these tidings.]

[Line 133: The sacred trio of St. Peter, St. James, and St. John.]

       *       *       *       *       *

EXTERNAL APPEARANCE OF GLACIERS.


Thus far we have examined chiefly the internal structure of the glacier;
let us look now at its external appearance, and at the variety of
curious phenomena connected with the deposit of foreign materials upon
its surface, some of which seem quite inexplicable at first sight. Among
the most striking of these are the large boulders elevated on columns of
ice, standing sometimes ten feet or more above the level of the glacier,
and the sand-pyramids, those conical hills of sand which occur not
infrequently on all the large Alpine glaciers. One is at first quite at
a loss to explain the presence of these pyramids in the midst of a
frozen ice-field, and yet it has a very simple cause.

I have spoken of the many little rills arising on the surface of the ice
in consequence of its melting. Indeed, the voice of the waters is rarely
still on the glacier during the warm season, except at night. On a
summer's day, a thousand streams are born before noontide, and die again
at sunset; it is no uncommon thing to see a full cascade come rushing
out from the lower end of a glacier during the heat of the day, and
vanish again at its decline. Suppose one of these rivulets should fall
into a deep, circular hole, such as often occur on the glacier, and the
nature of which I shall presently explain, and that this cylindrical
opening narrows to a mere crack at a greater or less depth within the
ice, the water will find its way through the crack and filter down into
the deeper mass; but the dust and sand carried along with it will be
caught there, and form a deposit at the bottom of the hole. As day after
day, throughout the summer, the rivulet is renewed, it carries with it
an additional supply of these light materials, until the opening is
gradually filled and the sand is brought to a level with the surface of
the ice. We have already seen, that, in consequence of evaporation,
melting, and other disintegrating causes, the level of the glacier sinks
annually at the rate of from five to ten feet, according to stations.
The natural consequence, of course, must be, that the sand is left
standing above the surface of the ice, forming a mound which would
constantly increase in height in proportion to the sinking of the
surrounding ice, had it sufficient solidity to retain its original
position. But a heap of sand, if unsupported, must very soon subside and
be dispersed; and, indeed, these pyramids, which are often quite lofty,
and yet look as if they would crumble at a touch, prove, on nearer
examination, to be perfectly solid, and are, in fact, pyramids of ice
with a thin sheet of sand spread over them. A word will explain how this
transformation is brought about. As soon as the level of the glacier
falls below the sand, thus depriving it of support, it sinks down and
spreads slightly over the surrounding surface. In this condition it
protects the ice immediately beneath it from the action of the sun. In
proportion as the glacier wastes, this protected area rises above the
general mass and becomes detached from it. The sand, of course, slides
down over it, spreading toward its base, so as to cover a wider space
below, and an ever-narrowing one above, until it gradually assumes the
pyramidal form in which we find it, covered with a thin coating of sand.
Every stage of this process may occasionally be seen upon the same
glacier, in a number of sand-piles raised to various heights above the
surface of the ice, approaching the perfect pyramidal form, or falling
to pieces after standing for a short time erect.

The phenomenon of the large boulders, supported on tall pillars of ice,
is of a similar character. A mass of rock, having fallen on the surface
of the glacier, protects the ice immediately beneath it from the action
of the sun; and as the level of the glacier sinks all around it, in
consequence of the unceasing waste of the surface, the rock is
gradually left standing on an ice-pillar of considerable height. In
proportion as the column rises, however, the rays of the sun reach its
sides, striking obliquely upon them under the boulder, and wearing them
away, until the column becomes at last too slight to sustain its burden,
and the rock falls again upon the glacier; or, owing to the unequal
action of the sun, striking of course with most power on the southern
side, the top of the pillar becomes slanting, and the boulder slides
off. These ice-pillars, crowned with masses of rock, form a very
picturesque feature in the scenery of the glacier, and are represented
in many of the landscapes in which Swiss artists have endeavored to
reproduce the grandeur and variety of Alpine views, especially in the
masterly Aquarelles of Lory. The English reader will find them admirably
well described and illustrated in Dr. Tyndall's work upon the glaciers.
They are known throughout the Alps as "glacier-tables"; and many a time
my fellow-travellers and I have spread our frugal meal on such a table,
erected, as it seemed, especially for our convenience.

Another curious effect is that produced by small stones or pebbles,
small enough to become heated through by the sun in summer. Such a
heated pebble will of course melt the ice below it, and so wear a hole
for itself into which it sinks. This process will continue as long as
the sun reaches the pebble with force enough to heat it. Numbers of such
deep, round holes, like organ-pipes, varying in size from the diameter
of a minute pebble or a grain of coarse sand to that of an ordinary
stone, are found on the glacier, and at the bottom of each is the pebble
by which it was bored. The ice formed by the freezing of water
collecting in such holes and in the fissures of the surface is a pure
crystallized ice, very different in color from the ice of the great mass
of the glacier produced by snow; and sometimes, after a rain and frost,
the surface of a glacier looks like a mosaic-work, in consequence of
such veins and cylinders or spots of clear ice with which it is inlaid.

Indeed, the aspect of the glacier changes constantly with the different
conditions of the temperature. We may see it, when, during a long dry
season, it has collected upon its surface all sorts of light floating
materials, as dust, sand, and the like, so that it looks dull and
soiled,--or when a heavy rain has washed the surface clean from all
impurities and left it bright and fresh. We may see it when the heat and
other disintegrating influences have acted upon the ice to a certain
superficial depth, so that its surface is covered with a decomposed
crust of broken, snowy ice, so permeated with air that it has a
dead-white color, like pounded ice or glass. Those who see the glacier
in this state miss the blue tint so often described as characteristic of
its appearance in its lower portion, and as giving such a peculiar
beauty to its caverns and vaults. But let them come again after a summer
storm has swept away this loose sheet of broken, snowy ice above, and
before the same process has had time to renew it, and they will find the
compact, solid surface of the glacier of as pure a blue as if it
reflected the sky above. We may see it in the early dawn, before the new
ice of the preceding night begins to yield to the action of the sun, and
the surface of the glacier is veined and inlaid with the water poured
into its holes and fissures during the day and transformed into pure,
fresh ice during the night,--or when the noonday heat has wakened all
its streams, and rivulets sometimes as large as rivers rush along its
surface, find their way to the lower extremity of the glacier, or,
dashing down some gaping crevasse or open well, are lost beneath the
ice.

It would seem from the quantity of water that is sometimes ingulfed
within these open breaks in the ice, that the glacier must occasionally
be fissured to a very great depth. I remember once, when boring a hole
in the glacier in order to let down a self-regulating thermometer into
its interior, seeing an immense fissure suddenly rent open, in
consequence, no doubt, of the shocks given to the ice by the blows of
the instruments. The effect was like that of an earthquake; the mass
seemed to rock beneath us, and it was difficult to keep our feet. One of
these glacial rivers was flowing past the spot at the time, and it was
instantly lost in the newly formed chasm. However deep and wide the
fissure might be, such a stream of water, constantly poured into it, and
daily renewed throughout the summer, must eventually fill it and
overflow, unless it finds its way through the whole mass of the glacier
to the bottom on which it rests; it must have an outlet above or below.
The fact that considerable rivulets (too broad to leap across, and too
deep to wade through safely even with high boots) may entirely vanish in
the glacier unquestionably shows one of two things,--that the whole mass
must be soaked with water like a wet sponge, or the cavities reach the
bottom of the glacier. Probably the two conditions are generally
combined.

In direct connection with the narrower fissures are the so-called
_moulins_,--the circular wells on the glacier. We will suppose that a
transverse, narrow fissure has been formed across the glacier, and that
one of the many rivulets flowing longitudinally along its surface
empties into it. As the surface-water of the glacier, producing these
rivulets, arises not only from the melting of the ice, but also from the
condensation of vapor, or even from rain-falls, and flows over the
scattered dust-particles and fragments of rock, it has always a
temperature slightly above 32°, so that such a rivulet is necessarily
warmer than the icy edge of the fissure over which it precipitates
itself. In consequence of its higher temperature it melts the edge,
gradually wearing it backward, till the straight margin of the fissure
at the spot over which the water falls is changed to a semicircle; and
as much of the water dashes in spray and foam against the other side,
the same effect takes place there, by which a corresponding semicircle
is formed exactly opposite the first. This goes on not only at the upper
margin, but through the whole depth of the opening as far down as the
water carries its higher temperature. In short, a semicircular groove is
excavated on either side of the fissure for its whole depth along the
line on which the rivulet holds its downward course. After a time, in
consequence of the motion of the glacier, such a fissure may close
again, and then the two semicircles thus brought together form at once
one continuous circle, and we have one of the round deep openings on the
glacier known as _moulins_, or wells, which may of course become
perfectly dry, if any accident turns the rivulet aside or dries up its
source. The most common cause of the intermittence of such a waterfall
is the formation of a crevasse higher up, across the watercourse which
supplied it, and which now begins another excavation.

These wells are often very profound. I have lowered a line for more than
seven hundred feet in one of them before striking bottom; and one is by
no means sure even then of having sounded the whole depth, for it may
often happen that the water meets with some obstacle which prevents its
direct descent, and, turning aside, continues its deeper course at a
different angle. Such a well may be like a crooked shaft in a mine,
changing its direction from time to time. I found this to be the case in
one into which I caused myself to be lowered in order to examine the
internal structure of the glacier. For some time my descent was straight
and direct, but at a depth of about fifty feet there was a
landing-place, as it were, from which the opening continued its farther
course at quite a different angle. It is within these cylindrical
openings in the ice that those accumulations of sand collect which form
the pyramids described above.

One may often trace the gradual formation of these wells, because, as
they require certain similar conditions, they are very apt to be found
in various stages of completion along the same track where these
conditions occur. Fissures, for instance, will often be produced along
the same line, because, as the mass of the glacier moves on, its upper
portions, as they advance, come successively in contact with
inequalities of the bottom, in consequence of which the ice is strained
beyond its power of resistance and cracks across. Rivulets are also
likely to be renewed summer after summer over the same track, because
certain conditions of the surface of the glacier, to which I have not
yet alluded, and which favor the more rapid melting of the ice, remain
unchanged year after year. Of course, the wells do not remain stationary
any more than any other feature of the glacier. They move on with the
advancing mass of ice, and we consequently find the older ones
considerably lower down than the more recent ones. In ascending such a
track as I have described, along which fissures and rivulets are likely
to occur, we may meet first with a sand-pyramid; at a certain distance
above that there may be a circular opening filled to its brim with the
sand which has just reached the surface of the ice; a little above may
be an open well with the rivulet still pouring into it; or higher up, we
may meet an open fissure with the two semicircles opposite each other on
the margins, but not yet united, as they will be presently by the
closing of the fissure; or we may find near by another fissure, the
edges of which are just beginning to wear in consequence of the action
of the water. Thus, though we cannot trace the formation of such a
cylindrical shaft in the glacier from the beginning to the end, we may
by combining the separate facts observed in a number decipher their
whole history.

In describing the surface of the glacier, I should not omit the shallow
troughs which I have called "meridian holes," from the accuracy with
which they register the position of the sun. Here and there on the
glacier there are patches of loose materials, dust, sand, pebbles, or
gravel, accumulated by diminutive water-rills, and small enough to
become heated during the day. They will, of course, be warmed first on
their eastern side, then, still more powerfully, on their southern side,
and in the afternoon with less force again on their western side, while
the northern side will remain comparatively cool. Thus around more than
half of their circumference they melt the ice in a semicircle, and the
glacier is covered with little crescent-shaped troughs of this
description, with a steep wall on one side and a shallow one on the
other, and a little heap of loose materials in the bottom. They are the
sundials of the glacier, recording the hour by the advance of the sun's
rays upon them.

In recapitulating the results of my glacial experience, even in so
condensed a form as that in which I intend to present them here, I shall
be obliged to enter somewhat into personal narration, though at the risk
of repeating what has been already told by the companions of my
excursions, some of whom wrote out in a more popular form the incidents
of our daily life which could not be fitly introduced into my own record
of scientific research. When I first began my investigations upon the
glaciers, now more than twenty-five years ago, scarcely any measurements
of their size or their motion had been made. One of my principal
objects, therefore, was to ascertain the thickness of the mass of ice,
generally supposed to be from eighty to a hundred feet, and even less.
The first year I took with me a hundred feet of iron rods, (no easy
matter, where it had to be transported to the upper part of a glacier on
men's backs,) thinking to bore the glacier through and through. As well
might I have tried to sound the ocean with a ten-fathom line. The
following year I took two hundred feet of rods with me, and again I was
foiled. Eventually I succeeded in carrying up a thousand feet of line,
and satisfied myself, after many attempts, that this was about the
average thickness of the glacier of the Aar, on which I was working. I
mention these failures, because they give some idea of the
discouragements and difficulties which meet the investigator in any new
field of research; and the student must remember, for his consolation
under such disappointments, that his failures are almost as important to
the cause of science and to those who follow him in the same road as his
successes. It is much to know what we _cannot_ do in any given
direction,--the first step, indeed, toward the accomplishment of what we
can do.

A like disappointment awaited me in my first attempt to ascertain by
direct measurement the rate of motion in the glacier. Early observers
had asserted that the glacier moved, but there had been no accurate
demonstration of the fact, and so uniform is its general appearance from
year to year that even the fact of its motion was denied by many. It is
true that the progress of boulders had been watched; a mass of rock
which had stood at a certain point on the glacier was found many feet
below that point the following year; but the opponents of the theory
insisted that it did not follow, because the mass of rock had moved,
that therefore the mass of ice had moved with it. They believed that the
boulder might have slid down for that distance. Neither did the
occasional encroachment of the glaciers upon the valleys prove anything;
it might he solely the effect of an unusual accumulation of snow in cold
seasons. Here, then, was another question to be tested; and one of my
first experiments was to plant stakes in the ice to ascertain whether
they would change their position with reference to the sides of the
valley or not. If the glacier moved, my stakes must of course move with
it; if it was stationary, my stakes would remain standing where I had
placed them, and any advance of other objects upon the surface of the
glacier would be proved to be due to their sliding, or to some motion of
their own, and not to that of the mass of ice on which they rested. I
found neither the one nor the other of my anticipated results; after a
short time, all the stakes lay flat on the ice, and I learned nothing
from my first series of experiments, except that the surface of the
glacier is wasted annually for a depth of at least five feet, in
consequence of which my rods had lost their support, and fallen down.
Similar disappointment was experienced by my friend Escher upon the
great glacier of Aletsch.

My failure, however, taught me to sink the next set of stakes ten or
fifteen feet below the surface of the ice, instead of five; and the
experiment was attended with happier results. A stake planted eighteen
feet deep in the ice, and cut on a level with the surface of the
glacier, in the summer of 1840, was found, on my return in the summer of
1841, to project seven feet, and in the beginning of September it showed
ten feet above the surface. Before leaving the glacier, in September,
1841, I planted six stakes at a certain distance from each other in a
straight line across the upper part of the glacier, taking care to have
the position of all the stakes determined with reference to certain
fixed points on the rocky walls of the valley. When I returned, the
following year, all the stakes had advanced considerably, and the
straight line had changed to a crescent, the central rods having moved
forward much faster than those nearer the sides, so that not only was
the advance of the glacier clearly demonstrated, but also the fact that
its middle portion moved faster than its margins. This furnished the
first accurate data on record concerning the average movement of the
glacier during the greater part of one year. In 1842 I caused a
trigonometric survey of the whole glacier of the Aar to be made, and
several lines across its whole width were staked and determined with
reference to the sides of the valley;[B] for a number of successive
years the survey was repeated, and furnished the numerous data
concerning the motion of the glacier which I have published. I shall
probably never have an opportunity of repeating these experiments, and
examining anew the condition of the glacier of the Aar; but as all the
measurements were taken with reference to certain fixed points recorded
upon the map mentioned in the note, it would be easy to renew them over
the same locality, and to make a direct comparison with my first results
after an interval of a quarter of a century. Such a comparison would be
very valuable to science, as showing any change in the condition of the
glacier, its rate of motion, etc., since the time my survey was made.

These observations not only determined the fact of the motion of the
glacier itself, as well as the inequality of its motion in different
parts, but explained also a variety of phenomena indirectly connected
with it. Among these were the position and direction of the crevasses,
those gaping fissures of unknown depths, sometimes a mile or more in
length, and often measuring several hundred feet in width, the terror,
not only of the ordinary traveller, but of the most experienced
mountaineers. There is a variety of such crevasses upon the glacier, but
the most numerous and dangerous are the transverse and lateral ones. The
transverse ones were readily accounted for after the motion of the
glacier was admitted; they must take place, whenever, the glacier
advancing over inequalities or steeper parts of its bed, the tension of
the mass was so great that the cohesion of the particles was overcome,
and the ice consequently rent apart. This would be especially the case
wherever some steep angle in the bottom over which it moved presented an
obstacle to the even advance of the mass. But the position of the
lateral ones was not so easily understood. They are especially apt to
occur wherever a promontory of rock juts out into the glacier; and when
fresh, they usually slant obliquely upward, trending from the prominent
wall toward the head of the glacier, while, when old, on the contrary,
they turn downward, so that the crevasses around such a promontory are
often arranged in the shape of a spread fan, diverging from it in
different directions. When the movement of the glacier was fully
understood, however, it became evident, that, in its effort to force
itself around the promontory, the ice was violently torn apart, and that
the rent must take place in a direction at right angles with that in
which the mass was moving. If the mass be moving inward and downward,
the direction of the rent must be obliquely upward. As now the mass
continues to advance, the crevasses must advance with it; and as it
moves more rapidly toward the middle than on the margins, that end of
the crevasse which is farthest removed from the projecting rock must
move more rapidly also; the consequence is, that all the older lateral
crevasses, after a certain time, point downward, while the fresh ones
point upward.

