Produced by Karen Fabrizius, David Starner,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


MANY WAYS FOR COOKING EGGS

By Mrs. S.T. Rorer

Author of Mrs. Rorer's New Cook Book, Philadelphia Cook Book, Bread
and Bread-Making, and other Valuable Works on Cookery.


CONTENTS

SAUCES

English Drawn Butter, Plain Hollandaise; Anchovy, Bechamel, Tarragon,
Horseradish, Cream or White, Brown Butter, Perigueux, Tomato, Paprika,
Curry, Italian

COOKING OF EGGS

To Preserve Eggs, Egging and Crumbing, Shirred Eggs, Mexicana, On a
Plate, de Lesseps, Meyerbeer, a la Reine, au Miroir, a la Paysanne, a
la Trinidad, Rossini, Baked in Tomato Sauce, a la Martin, a la
Valenciennes, Fillets, a la Suisse, with Nut-Brown Butter, Timbales,
Coquelicot, Suzette, en Cocotte. Steamed in the Shell, Birds' Nests,
Eggs en Panade, Egg Pudding, a la Bonne Femme, To Poach Eggs, Eggs
Mirabeau, Norwegian, Prescourt, Courtland, Louisiana, Richmond,
Hungarian, Nova Scotia, Lakme, Malikoff, Virginia, Japanese, a la
Windsor, Buckingham, Poached on Fried Tomatoes, a la Finnois, a la
Gretna, a l'Imperatrice, with Chestnuts, a la Regence, a la
Livingstone, Mornay, Zanzibar, Monte Bello, a la Bourbon, Bernaise, a
la Rorer, Benedict, To Hard-boil, Creole, Curried, Beauregard,
Lafayette, Jefferson, Washington, au Gratin, Deviled, a la Tripe, a
l'Aurore, a la Dauphin, a la Bennett, Brouilli, Scalloped, Farci,
Balls, Deviled Salad, Japanese Hard, en Marinade, a la Polonnaise, a
la Hyde, a la Vinaigrette, a la Russe, Lyonnaise, Croquettes, Chops,
Plain Scrambled, Scrambled with Chipped Beef, Scrambled with Lettuce,
Scrambled with Shrimps, Scrambled with Fresh Tomatoes, Scrambled with
Rice and Tomato, Scrambled with Asparagus Tips, Egg Flip

OMELETS

Omelet with Asparagus Tips, with Green Peas, Havana, with Tomato
Sauce, with Oysters, with Sweetbreads, with Tomatoes, with Ham, with
Cheese, with Fine Herbs, Spanish, Jardiniere, with Fresh Mushrooms,
O'Brien, with Potatoes

SWEET OMELETS

Omelet a la Washington, with Rum, Swiss Souffle, a la Duchesse,
Souffle


SAUCES


The philosophy of a sauce, when understood, enables even an untrained
cook to make a great variety of every day sauces from materials
usually found in every household; to have them uniform, however,
flavorings must be correctly blended, and measurements must be rigidly
observed. Two level tablespoonfuls of butter or other fat, two level
tablespoonfuls of flour, must be used to each half pint of liquid. If
the yolks of eggs are added, omit one tablespoonful of flour or the
sauce will be too thick. Tomato sauce should be flavored with onion, a
little mace, and a suspicion of curry. Brown sauce may be simply
seasoned with salt and pepper, flavored and colored with kitchen
bouquet. Spanish sauce should also be flavored with mushrooms, or if
you can afford it, a truffle, a little chopped ham, a tablespoonful of
chives, shallot and garlic. Water sauce, drawn butter and simple sauce
Hollandaise, when they are served with fish, must be flavored with a
dash of tarragon vinegar, salt and pepper.


ENGLISH DRAWN BUTTER

    3 tablespoonfuls of butter
  1/2 pint of boiling water
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of pepper

Rub two tablespoonfuls of butter and the flour together, add the
boiling water, stir until boiling, add the salt and pepper; take from
the fire, add the remaining tablespoonful of butter and it is ready
for use. It must not be boiled after the last butter is added.


PLAIN SAUCE HOLLANDAISE

Make English drawn butter and add to it, when done, the yolks of two
eggs beaten with two tablespoonfuls of water; cook until thick and
jelly-like, take from the fire and add one tablespoonful of tarragon
vinegar or the juice of half a lemon.


ANCHOVY SAUCE

Rub two teaspoonfuls of anchovy essence with the butter and flour and
then finish the same as English drawn butter.


SAUCE BECHAMEL

    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 yolk of an egg
  1/2 cup of milk
    1 saltspoonful of pepper
    1 tablespoonful of flour
  1/2 cup of stock
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt

Rub the butter and flour together, add the stock and the milk and stir
until boiling; add the salt and pepper, take from the fire and add the
beaten yolk of the egg, heat for a moment over hot water, and it is
ready for use.


TARRAGON SAUCE

Add two tablespoonfuls of tarragon vinegar to an English drawn butter.


HORSERADISH SAUCE

Make an English drawn butter, and, just at serving time, add a half
cupful of freshly grated horseradish. If you are obliged to use that
preserved in vinegar, press it perfectly dry before using it.


CREAM OR WHITE SAUCE

    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
  1/2 pint of milk
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Rub the butter and flour together, add the milk cold and stir until
boiling; add the pepper and salt and it is ready for use.


BROWN BUTTER SAUCE

    6 tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 teaspoonful of mushroom catsup
    1 tablespoonful of vinegar
    4 tablespoonfuls of stock

Melt the butter, brown it and then skim; pour it carefully into a
clean saucepan, add the vinegar, catsup and stock, boil a minute, and
it is ready for use.


SAUCE PERIGUEUX

    4 tablespoonfuls of butter
  1/2 pint of stock
    1 glass of white wine
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour
    1 bay leaf
    2 chopped truffles
    1 saltspoonful of pepper
    1 teaspoonful of kitchen bouquet

Chop the truffles and put them with the bay leaf and wine in a
saucepan on the back of the stove. Rub half the butter and flour
together, add the stock, stir until boiling and add one teaspoonful of
kitchen bouquet, the salt and pepper, and then the truffles; cook ten
minutes, add the remaining quantity of butter and use at once.


TOMATO SAUCE

Rub together two level tablespoonfuls of flour and two of butter. Add
a half pint of strained tomatoes. Stir until boiling. Add a
teaspoonful of onion juice, a half teaspoonful of salt and a
saltspoonful of pepper. Strain and use.


PAPRIKA SAUCE

Rub together two level tablespoonfuls of flour and two of butter, with
a tablespoonful of paprika. Add a half pint of chicken stock. Stir
until boiling. Add a half teaspoonful of salt, and strain. This sauce
may be used over chicken as well as eggs.


CURRY SAUCE

Chop fine one onion. Cook it with two level tablespoonfuls of butter
until soft. Do not brown. Add two level tablespoonfuls of flour, one
teaspoonful of curry powder and a half teaspoonful of salt. Mix and
add a half pint of boiling water. Stir until boiling, and strain.


ITALIAN SAUCE

Chop sufficient carrot to make a tablespoonful; chop one onion. Place
them in a saucepan with three level tablespoonfuls of butter, a bay
leaf and a blade of mace. Shake the pan over the fire until the
vegetables are slightly browned. Drain off the butter and add to it
two level tablespoonfuls of flour, a half cupful of good stock, a half
cupful of strained tomatoes, and bring to a boil. Add a half
teaspoonful of salt and a dash of cayenne. Strain. Stir until boiling,
strain again and add four tablespoonfuls of sherry.


COOKING OF EGGS


Any single food containing all the elements necessary to supply the
requirements of the body is called a complete or typical food. Milk
and eggs are frequently so called, because they sustain the young
animals of their kind during a period of rapid growth. Nevertheless,
neither of these foods forms a perfect diet for the human adult. Both
are highly nutritious, but incomplete.

Served with bread or rice, they form an admirable meal and one that is
nutritious and easily digested. The white of eggs, almost pure
albumin, is nutritious, and, when cooked in water at 170 degrees
Fahrenheit, requires less time for perfect digestion than a raw egg.
The white of a hard-boiled egg is tough and quite insoluble. The yolk,
however, if the boiling has been done carefully for twenty minutes, is
mealy and easily digested. Fried eggs, no matter what fat is used, are
hard, tough and insoluble. The yolk of an egg cooks at a lower
temperature than the white, and for this reason an egg should not be
boiled unless the yolk alone is to be used.

Ten eggs are supposed to weigh a pound, and, unless they are unusually
large or small, this is quite correct.

Eggs contain from 72 to 84 per cent. of water, about 12 to 14 per
cent. of albuminoids. The yolk is quite rich in fat; the white
deficient. They also contain mineral matter and extractives.

To ascertain the freshness of an egg without breaking it, hold your
hand around the egg toward a bright light or the sun and look through
it. If the yolk appears quite round and the white clear, it is fresh.
Or, if you put it in a bucket of water and it falls on its side, it is
fresh. If it sort of topples in the water, standing on its end, it is
fairly fresh, but, if it floats, beware of it. The shell of a fresh
egg looks dull and porous. As it begins to age, the shell takes on a
shiny appearance. If an egg is kept any length of time, a portion of
its water evaporates, which leaves a space in the shell, and the egg
will "rattle." An egg that rattles may be perfectly good, and still
not absolutely fresh.


TO PRESERVE EGGS

To preserve eggs it is only necessary to close the pores of the
shells. This may be done by dipping them in melted paraffine, or
packing them in salt, small ends down; or pack them in a keg and cover
them with brine; or pack them in a keg, small ends down and cover them
with lime water; this not only protects them from the air, but acts as
a germicide.

Eggs should not be packed for winter use later than the middle of May
or earlier than the first of April. Where large quantities of the
yolks are used, the whites may be evaporated and kept in glass bottles
or jars. Spread them out on a stoneware or granite plate and allow
them to evaporate at the mouth of a cool oven. When the mixture is
perfectly dry, put it away. This powder is capable of taking up the
same amount of water that has been evaporated from it, and may then be
used the same as fresh whites.


EGGS AND CRUMBING

To do this successfully one must prepare a mixture, and not use the
egg alone. If an egg mixture or a croquette is dipped in beaten egg
and rolled in cracker crumbs and dropped into fat, it always has a
greasy covering. This is the wrong way. To do it successfully and have
the articles handsome, beat the egg until well mixed, add a
teaspoonful of olive oil, a tablespoonful of water and a dash of
pepper. Dip the articles into this mixture, and then drop them on
quite a thick bed of either sifted dry bread crumbs or soft white
bread crumbs.

I prefer sifted dry bread crumbs for croquettes, and soft white crumbs
for lobster cutlets and deviled crabs.


SHIRRED EGGS

Cover the bottoms of individual dishes with a little butter and a few
fresh bread crumbs; drop into each dish two fresh eggs; stand this
dish in a pan of hot water and cook in the oven until the whites are
"set." Put a tiny bit of butter in the middle of each, and a dusting
of salt and pepper.


EGGS MEXICANA

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan. Add four
tablespoonfuls of finely chopped onion and shake until the onion is
soft, but not brown. Then add four Spanish peppers cut in strips, a
dash of red pepper and a half pint of tomatoes; the tomatoes should be
in rather solid pieces. Add a seasoning of pepper and salt. Let this
cook slowly while you shir the desired quantity of eggs. When the eggs
are ready to serve, put two tablespoonfuls of this sauce at each side
of the dish, and send at once to the table.


EGGS ON A PLATE

Rub the bottom of a baking dish with butter. Dust it lightly with salt
and pepper. Break in as many fresh eggs as required. Stand the dish in
a basin of water and cook in the oven five minutes, or until the
whites are "set." While these are cooking, put two tablespoonfuls of
butter in a pan and shake over the fire until it browns. When the eggs
are done, baste them with the browned butter, and send to the table.


EGGS DE LESSEPS

Shir the eggs as directed. Have ready, carefully boiled, two sets of
calves' brains; cut them into slices; put two or three slices between
the eggs, and then pour over browned butter sauce.


EGGS MEYERBEER

To each half dozen eggs allow three lambs' kidneys. Broil the kidneys.
Shir the eggs as directed in the first recipe. When done, put half a
kidney on each side of the plate and pour over sauce Perigueux.


EGGS A LA REINE

    6 eggs
  1/2 pint of chopped cold cooked chicken
  1/2 can of mushrooms
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Use ordinary shirring dishes for the eggs; butter them, break into
each one egg, stand these in a pan of boiling water and in the oven
until they are "set." Rub the butter and flour together, add the milk,
stir until boiling, add the salt, pepper, chopped chicken and
mushrooms, and put one tablespoonful of this on top of each egg and
send at once to the table. This is also nice if you put a
tablespoonful of the mixture in the bottom of the dish, break the egg
into it, and then at serving time put another tablespoonful over the
top.


EGGS AU MIROIR

Cover the bottom of a graniteware or silver platter with fresh bread
crumbs, break in as many eggs as are needed for the number of persons
to be served. Put bits of butter here and there, stand the platter
over a baking pan of hot water in the oven until the eggs are "set,"
dust them with salt and pepper and send them to the table.


EGGS A LA PAYSANNE

    6 eggs
  1/2 cupful of cream
    2 tablespoonfuls of grated onion
    1 clove of garlic
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Add the onion and the garlic, mashed, to the cream; pour it in the
bottom of a baking dish, break on top the eggs, dust with salt and
pepper, stand the baking dish in a pan of water and cook in the oven
until the eggs are "set." Serve in the dish in which they are cooked.


EGGS A LA TRINIDAD

    6 eggs
    2 lamb's kidneys
    1 cupful of fresh bread crumbs
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of stock
    1 teaspoonful of kitchen bouquet
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Split the kidneys, cut out the tubes; scald them, drain, and cut them
into thin slices. Put the butter into a saucepan, add the kidneys,
toss until the kidneys are cooked, then add the flour, stock, kitchen
bouquet, salt and pepper; stir until boiling. Grease a shallow granite
or silver platter, break into it the eggs, sprinkle over the bread
crumbs and stand them in the oven until the eggs are "set," then pour
over the sauce, arrange the kidneys around the edge of the dish and
send at once to the table.


EGGS ROSSINI

    6 eggs
    4 chicken livers
   12 nice mushrooms
  1/2 cupful of stock
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of pepper

Put the stock in a saucepan and boil rapidly until reduced one-half,
add a drop or two of browning. Throw the chicken livers into boiling
water and let them simmer gently for ten minutes; drain. Slice the
mushrooms and put them, with the livers, into the stock; let them
stand until you have cooked the eggs. Put a tablespoonful of butter in
the bottom of a shallow platter; when melted break in the eggs, stand
them in the oven until "set," garnish with the livers and mushrooms
and pour over the sauce.


EGGS BAKED IN TOMATO SAUCE

Make a tomato sauce. Pour one-half in the bottom of a baking dish or
granite platter, break in from four to six fresh eggs, cover with the
other half of the sauce, dust the top with grated cheese, and bake in
a moderate oven until "set," about fifteen or twenty minutes. Serve
for supper in the place of meat.


EGGS A LA MARTIN

Make a half pint of cream sauce. Put half of it in the bottom of a
baking dish or into the bottom of ramekin dishes or individual cups.
Break fresh eggs on top of the cream sauce, dust with a little salt
and pepper, pour over the remaining cream sauce, sprinkle the top with
grated cheese, and bake in a moderate oven until the cheese is browned
and eggs are "set." Serve in the dish or dishes in which they are
cooked.


EGGS A LA VALENCIENNE

    6 eggs
    1 pint of dry boiled rice
  1/2 pint of strained tomato
    2 mushrooms
    2 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 saltspoonful of grated nutmeg
  1/2 teaspoonful of paprika
    1 teaspoonful of salt
  1/2 saltspoonful of pepper

Rub the butter and flour together, add the strained tomato, stir until
boiling, add the mushrooms, sliced, salt, paprika, nutmeg and pepper.
Take a granite or silver platter, put in two tablespoonfuls of butter
extra, let the butter melt and heat; break into this the eggs, being
very careful not to break the yolks. Let the eggs cook in the oven
until "set." Then put around the edge of the dish as a garnish the
boiled rice, pour over the eggs the tomato sauce, dust the top with
the Parmesan cheese and send at once to the table.


FILLETS OF EGGS

    6 eggs
    4 tablespoonfuls of good stock
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Beat the eggs with the stock, add the salt and pepper. Turn them into
a buttered square pan, stand this in another of boiling water, and
cook in the oven until the eggs are thoroughly "set." Cut the
preparation into thin fillets or slices, dip in either a thin batter
made from one egg, a half cupful of milk and flour to thicken, or they
may be dipped in beaten egg, rolled in bread crumbs and fried in deep
hot fat. Arrange the fillets in a platter on a napkin, one overlapping
the other; garnish with parsley and send to the table with a boat of
tomato or white sauce.


EGGS A LA SUISSE

Cover the bottom of a baking dish with about two tablespoonfuls of
butter cut into bits. On top of this, very thin slices of Swiss
cheese. Break over some fresh eggs. Dust with salt and pepper. To each
half dozen eggs, pour over a half cup of cream. Then cover the top
with grated Swiss cheese and bake in the oven until the cheese is
melted and the eggs "set." Send this to the table with a plate of dry
toast.


EGGS WITH NUT-BROWN BUTTER

These eggs may be shirred or poached and served on toast. Put two
tablespoonfuls of butter in a saute or frying pan. As soon as it
begins to heat, break into it the eggs and cook slightly until the
yolks are "set;" dish them at once on toast or thin slices of broiled
ham. Put two more tablespoonfuls of butter in the pan, let it brown,
and add two tablespoonfuls of vinegar; boil it up once and pour over
the eggs.


EGG TIMBALES

Butter small timbale molds or custard cups, dust the bottoms and sides
with chopped tongue and finely chopped mushrooms. Break into each mold
one fresh egg. Stand the mold in a baking pan half filled with boiling
water, and cook in the oven, until the eggs are "set." Have ready
nicely toasted rounds of bread, one for each cup, and a well-made
tomato or cream sauce. Loosen the eggs from the cups with a knife,
turn each out onto a round of toast, arrange neatly on a heated
platter, fill the bottom of the platter with cream or tomato sauce,
garnish the dish with nicely seasoned green peas and serve at once.


EGGS COQUELICOT

Grease small custard or timbale cups and put inside of each a cooked
Spanish pepper. Drop in the pepper one egg. Dust it lightly with salt,
stand the cups in a pan of boiling water and cook in the oven until
the eggs are "set." Toast one round of bread for each cup and make a
half pint of cream sauce. When the eggs are "set," fill the bottom of
the serving platter with cream sauce, loosen the peppers from the cups
and turn them out on the rounds of toast. Stand them in the cream
sauce, dust on top of each a little chopped parsley and send to the
table.


EGGS SUZETTE

Bake as many potatoes as you have persons to serve. When done, cut off
the sides, scoop out a portion of the potato, leaving a wall about a
half inch thick. Mash the scooped-out portion, add to it a little hot
milk, salt and pepper, and put it into a pastry bag. Put a little
salt, pepper and butter into each potato and break in a fresh egg.
Press the potato from the pastry bag through a star tube around the
edge of the potato, forming a border. Stand these in a baking pan and
bake until the eggs are "set." Put a tablespoonful of cream sauce in
the center of each, and send to the table.


EGGS EN COCOTTE

Chop fine one good-sized onion. Cook it, over hot water, in two level
tablespoonfuls of butter. When the onion is soft add a quarter of a
can of mushrooms, chopped fine, two level tablespoonfuls of flour and
one cupful of stock. Stir until boiling. Add a tablespoonful of
chopped parsley, a half teaspoonful of salt and a saltspoonful of
pepper. Put a tablespoonful of this sauce in the bottom of individual
cups. Break into each cup one egg. Pour over the remaining mixture.
Stand the cups in a pan of hot water and bake in a moderate oven about
five minutes.


EGGS STEAMED IN THE SHELL

Eggs put into hot water and kept away from the fire are much better
than eggs actually boiled for only a short time. The greater the
number of eggs to be cooked, the greater the amount of water that must
be used. To cook four eggs, put them into a kettle, pour over them two
quarts of water, cover the kettle and allow them to stand for ten
minutes. Lift them from the water, put them into a large bowl, cover
with boiling water, and send at once to the table. The whites will be
coagulated, but should be soft and creamy, while the yolks will be
perfectly cooked. If you should add six eggs to this volume of water,
lengthen the time of standing. A single egg, dropped into a quart of
water, must stand five minutes.


BIRDS' NESTS

Separate the eggs, allowing one to each person. Beat the whites to a
stiff froth. Heap them into individual dishes, make a nest, or hole,
in the center. Drop into this a whole yolk. Stand the dish in a pan of
water, cover, and cook in the oven about two or three minutes. Dust
lightly with salt and pepper, put a tiny bit of butter in the center
of each, and send at once to the table. This is one of the most
sightly of all egg dishes.


EGGS EN PANADE

    2 eggs
    6 slices of bread
  1/2 cupful of milk or cream
    4 tablespoonfuls of olive oil
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Trim the crusts from the bread. Beat the eggs until well mixed, but
not light, then add the milk or cream, salt and pepper. Put the oil in
a shallow frying pan, dip the slices of bread in the beaten egg and
drop them into the hot oil; when brown on one side, turn and brown the
other. Dish on a hot platter, dust with the chopped parsley and send
at once to the table.


EGG PUDDING

    6 eggs
    6 slices of bread
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    2 tablespoonfuls of chopped chives
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 tablespoonful of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of white pepper

Break the eggs in a bowl, add all the seasoning. Rub the butter and
flour together, add the milk, stir until boiling, and then add this to
the eggs; beat together until thoroughly mixed. Crumb the bread,
removing the crusts; stir this in at last. Turn into a buttered baking
dish, cover with grated cheese, and bake in the oven until thoroughly
"set" and a nice brown. It makes an exceedingly good, easily digested
luncheon or supper dish for children.


EGGS A LA BONNE FEMME

    1 Spanish or 2 Bermuda onions
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
    6 eggs
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper
  1/2 saltspoonful of grated nutmeg

Separate the whites and yolks of the eggs. Put the butter into a
saucepan, add the onions, cut into _very thin_ slices; shake until the
onions are soft, but not brown, then dust over the flour, mix, and add
the milk, salt, pepper and nutmeg. Stir carefully until this reaches
boiling point, then stand it on the back part of the stove where it
will keep hot for at least ten minutes. Beat the yolks of the eggs
until very creamy, then stir them into the sauce, take from the fire,
and fold in the well-beaten whites of the eggs. Turn into a baking
dish or casserole and bake in a hot oven fifteen minutes; serve at
once.


TO POACH EGGS

Use a shallow frying pan partly filled with boiling water. The eggs
must be perfectly fresh. The white of an egg is held in a membrane
which seems to lose its tenacity after the egg is three days old. Such
an egg, when dropped into boiling water, spreads out; that is, it does
not retain its shape. When ready to poach eggs, take the required
number to the stove. The water must be boiling hot, but not actually
bubbling. Break an egg into a saucer, slide it quickly into the water,
and then another and another. Pull the pan to the side of the stove,
where the water cannot possibly boil. With a tablespoon, baste the
water over the yolks of the eggs, if they happen to be exposed. They
must be entirely covered with a thin veil of the white. Have ready the
desired quantity of toast on a heated platter, lift each egg with a
slice or skimmer, trim off the ragged edges and slide them at once on
the toast. Dust with salt and pepper, baste with melted butter, and
send to the table.


EGGS MIRABEAU

Cut a sufficient number of rounds of bread, toast them carefully and
cover them with _pate de foie gras_, put on top of each a poached egg,
pour over sauce Perigueux, and send to the table.


EGGS NORWEGIAN

Cover rounds of toasted bread first with butter and then with anchovy
paste, put on top of each a poached egg, pour over anchovy sauce, and
send at once to the table.


EGGS PRESCOURT

Toast slices of bread, put thin slices of chicken on each, on top of
this a poached egg, cover with sauce Bernaise, and serve at once.


EGGS COURTLAND

Mince sufficient cold chicken to make a half cupful. Make a half pint
of cream sauce, add the minced chicken, a half teaspoonful of salt and
a dash of red pepper. Toast a sufficient quantity of bread, put it on
a heated platter, pour over a small quantity of the minced chicken and
cream sauce, put on each a poached egg, cover with the remaining
sauce, dust with parsley and serve with a garnish of green peas.


EGGS LOUISIANA

Make a half pint of tomato sauce, toast a sufficient quantity of
bread, butter the bread and put on each slice a poached egg; cover
with the tomato sauce.


EGGS RICHMOND

Chop sufficient cold chicken to make a half cupful, add an equal
quantity of finely-chopped mushrooms, add this to a half pint of cream
sauce. Add one unbeaten egg to a pint of cold boiled rice, season it
with salt and pepper, make into round, flat cakes, and fry in hot fat.
Arrange these on a heated platter, pour over the cream sauce mixture,
and put on top of each a poached egg.


HUNGARIAN EGGS

Boil a cup of rice until tender and dry. Make a half pint of paprika
sauce. Turn the rice into the center of a platter, smooth it down,
cover the top with poached eggs, pour over the paprika sauce and send
at once to the table.


EGGS NOVA SCOTIA

Put a poached egg on top of a flat codfish cake, pour over cream or
tomato sauce, and send to the table.


EGGS LAKME

Cut cold chicken or turkey into very thin slices, and stand over hot
water, in a dish, until heated; toast a sufficient quantity of bread,
butter the slices, put on each a slice of chicken or turkey, dust
lightly with salt and pepper. On top of these place a poached egg,
cover with tarragon sauce, and send to the table.


EGGS MALIKOFF

Toast rounds of bread, cover them with caviar which has been seasoned
with a little onion and pepper. Put on top of each a poached egg,
cover with horseradish sauce, and send to the table.


EGGS VIRGINIA

Grate six ears of corn. Add half cupful of milk, a half cupful of
flour and two eggs, beaten separately, and a half teaspoonful of salt
and a dash of pepper. Drop the mixture in large tablespoonfuls in hot
fat. When brown on one side, turn and brown on the other. Drain and
arrange neatly on a large platter. Put a poached egg on the top of
each cake, cover with cream sauce and send to the table. This dish,
with green peas, makes quite a complete meal.


JAPANESE EGGS

Carefully boil one cup of rice, drain dry. Make a half pint of cream
sauce, add to it a teaspoonful of grated onion and a teaspoonful of
chopped celery. Poach the desired number of eggs. Put the rice in the
center of a platter, cover it with the eggs, pour over the sauce. Dust
the dish with parsley, and send at once to the table. The edge of this
dish may be garnished with broiled sardines or carefully broiled
smoked salmon.


EGGS A LA WINDSOR

    6 eggs
    6 rounds of toast
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of chicken stock
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    1 tablespoonful of chopped olive
    1 tablespoonful of chopped Spanish pepper
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of black pepper

Rub the butter and flour together and add the stock; stir until
boiling, and add the salt and pepper. Toast the bread. Poach the eggs,
put them on the toast, pour over carefully the sauce, heap the chopped
vegetables, mixed, in the center of each egg and send to the table.


EGGS BUCKINGHAM

Allow one egg to each person that is to be served. Cut either a dry or
a Virginia ham into very thin slices; allow one thin square to each
person. Toast squares of bread, remove the crust. Broil the ham
quickly; put each square of ham on a square of toast, put on top a
poached egg, dust lightly with pepper and send to the table.


POACHED EGGS ON FRIED TOMATOES

Cut solid tomatoes into slices a quarter of an inch thick, dust them
with salt and pepper, dip them in egg beaten with a tablespoonful of
water, roll them thickly with bread crumbs, dip them again in the egg,
dust again with bread crumbs, and fry in deep hot fat. Drain on brown
paper, dish on a heated platter, put a poached egg in the center of
each slice, dust with salt and pepper, put a tablespoonful of tomato
sauce over each egg and send at once to the table. Cream sauce may be
used in the place of tomato sauce.


EGGS A LA FINNOIS

    6 eggs
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of strained tomato
    1 tablespoonful of chopped chives
    2 green peppers

Rub the butter and flour together, add the tomatoes, and the peppers,
chopped very fine. Stir until this reaches boiling point, and stand it
over hot water. Poach the eggs in deep water. Toast six rounds of
bread; arrange the toast on a platter, put one egg on each slice, pour
around the tomato sauce, dust thickly with the chives and send to the
table.


EGGS A LA GRETNA

    6 eggs
    2 heads of celery
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Cut the celery into inch lengths, wash thoroughly, cover with boiling
water and simmer gently thirty minutes until the celery is tender;
drain, saving the water in which the celery was cooked for another
purpose. Rub the butter and flour together, add the milk, salt and
pepper; when boiling add the celery; stand this over hot water while
you poach the eggs and toast six squares of bread. Butter the toast,
put on each slice one egg; put these around the edge of a large
platter, turn the celery into the middle of the dish and send at once
to the table. To increase the beauty of this dish, and to give it a
greater food value, you may garnish between the toast and celery with
carefully boiled rice; this then makes an exceedingly nice supper
dish.


EGGS A L'IMPERATRICE

Toast six slices of bread; butter them, put on top a thin slice of
_pate de foie gras_, and on top of this a hot poached egg. Baste with
a little melted butter, dust with salt and pepper and send at once to
the table. This is one of the most elegant of all the egg dishes.


EGGS WITH CHESTNUTS

This is an exceedingly nice dish to serve in the Fall when chestnuts
are fresh. Shell a quart of chestnuts, blanch them, then boil them
until tender; drain and press through a colander. Add a half cupful of
hot milk, a tablespoonful of butter, a teaspoonful of salt and a
saltspoonful of pepper. Beat until light and stand over a kettle of
hot water while you poach six or eight eggs. Dish the chestnut puree
in a small platter, cover the poached eggs over the top, dust them
with salt, pepper and chopped parsley.


EGGS A LA REGENCE

    6 eggs
  1/2 cupful of chopped cold cooked ham
    1 grated onion
  1/2 can of chopped mushrooms
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of chicken stock
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Stand the ham over hot water until thoroughly heated. Rub the butter
and flour together, add the stock, stir until boiling, add the
mushrooms, sliced, the salt, pepper and the onion; stand this over hot
water while you poach the eggs. Dish the eggs, cover them with the
sauce, strained, and cover with the chopped ham. Garnish the dish with
mashed potatoes or boiled rice, and send at once to the table.


EGGS A LA LIVINGSTONE

    6 squares of toast
    1 tureen of pate-de-foie-gras
    6 eggs
  1/2 cupful of good stock
    2 tablespoonfuls of sherry
    1 teaspoonful of kitchen bouquet
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of pepper

Toast the bread, butter it and put on top of each slice of toast a
slice of _pate de foie gras_; put this on a heated dish, stand it at
the mouth of the oven door while you poach the eggs. Put into a
saucepan all the other ingredients, bring to a boil, put one poached
egg on each slice of _pate de foie gras_; baste with the sauce and
send at once to the table.


EGGS MORNAY

    6 eggs
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
  1/2 teaspoonful of paprika
    4 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese

Rub the butter and flour together, add the milk, stir until boiling,
add the salt and paprika, and if you have it, a teaspoonful of soy;
pour half of this sauce in a shallow granite platter or baking dish.
Poach the eggs, drain them carefully, and put them over the top of the
sauce, cover with the remaining sauce, dust with Parmesan cheese and
run in the oven a moment to brown.


EGGS ZANZIBAR

    1 small egg plant
    1 thin slice of ham
    6 eggs
    2 tablespoonfuls of sherry
    2 tablespoonfuls of tomato catsup
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 dash of pepper

Cut the egg plant into slices, season it with salt and pepper, dip in
egg and bread crumbs and fry carefully in deep hot fat; put this on
brown paper in the oven to dry. Broil the ham, cut it into squares
sufficiently small to go neatly on top of each slice of egg plant.
Poach the eggs, and heat the other ingredients for the sauce. Dish the
egg plant on a platter, put on the ham, and on each piece of ham an
egg; baste with sauce and send to the table.


EGGS MONTE BELLO

    6 eggs
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of strained tomato
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Put about two quarts of water into a small deep saucepan; when boiling
very hard drop in, one at a time, the eggs. In dropping them in, the
white will fold over the yolk and make the eggs round. Push them to
the back of the stove to stand for two minutes. Lift them with a
skimmer, dip them in an egg beaten with a tablespoonful of water, dust
them with bread crumbs and fry them in deep hot fat. You cannot use a
frying basket. Just drop them in the fat, and as they are browned lift
them out onto soft paper to drain. Rub the butter and flour together,
add the tomato and seasoning; when boiling dish the eggs on a heated
platter, pour around tomato sauce and send to the table.


EGGS A LA BOURBON

    6 eggs
  1/2 pint of stock
    1 tablespoonful of butter
    6 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of pepper

Put the stock in a small saucepan, poach the eggs in it, two at a
time; lift them carefully and lay them on a hot granite or silver
dish. When all are poached, dust over the cheese and stand them in the
hot oven for just a moment until the cheese is melted. In the meantime
boil the stock until it is reduced one-half, add the butter, baste it
over the eggs and send to the table. This dish may be garnished with
triangular pieces of toast.


EGGS BERNAISE

    6 whole eggs
    4 yolks of eggs
    4 tablespoonfuls of stock
    4 tablespoonfuls of olive oil
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    1 tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar
    1 tablespoonful of butter
    1 tablespoonful of flour
  1/2 cupful of strained tomato
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt

Put the stock, yolks of eggs and olive oil into a saucepan, stir over
hot water until you have a thick, smooth sauce like mayonnaise; take
from the fire, and when slightly cool stir in the tarragon vinegar and
parsley. Rub the butter and flour together, add the tomato, and when
boiling add a palatable seasoning of salt and pepper. Toast six halves
of English muffins or squares of bread. Heat a platter, butter the
toast, put it on the hot platter, and poach the eggs. Put one poached
egg on each slice of toast, fill the bottom of the dish with tomato
sauce and put a tablespoonful of Bernaise sauce on top of each egg.
These may be garnished with a little chopped truffle, or a little
chopped parsley.


EGGS A LA RORER

Toast rounds of bread, one for each person. Butter them. Heat, in
boiling water, the choke of a French artichoke, one for each slice of
bread. Make sauce Hollandaise, and put one artichoke bottom on each
slice of bread on a heated platter. Put in the center a poached egg
and pour over the sauce Hollandaise. Garnish the dish with nicely
cooked French or fresh green peas.


EGGS BENEDICT

Separate two eggs. Break the yolks, add a cupful of milk, a half
teaspoonful of salt, one and a half cupfuls of flour and a
tablespoonful of melted butter. Beat well, add two level teaspoonfuls
of baking powder and fold in the well-beaten whites. Bake on a griddle
in large muffin rings. Broil thin slices of ham. Make a sauce
Hollandaise. Chop a truffle. Poach the required number of eggs. Dish
the muffins, put a square of ham on each, then a poached egg and cover
each egg nicely with sauce Hollandaise. Dust with truffle and serve at
once.


TO HARD-BOIL EGGS

Put the eggs in warm water, bring the water quickly to the boiling
point, then push the kettle to the back of the stove, where the water
will remain at 200 degrees Fahrenheit, for twenty minutes. If these
are to be used for made-over dishes, throw them at once into cold
water, remove the shells, or the yolks will lose their color.


EGGS CREOLE

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter and four of chopped onions into a
saucepan, cook until the onion is soft, but not brown. Then add four
peeled fresh tomatoes that have been cut into pieces, and three finely
chopped green peppers. Cook this fifteen minutes, and add a level
teaspoonful of salt. Have the eggs hard-boiled, and cut into slices.
Put them into a baking dish, pour over the sauce, re-heat in the oven,
and serve with a dish of boiled rice.


CURRIED EGGS

Peel, and cut into slices, three large onions. Put them in a saucepan
with two tablespoonfuls of butter. Stand over hot water and cook until
the onions are soft. Add a teaspoonful of curry powder, a clove of
garlic mashed, a saltspoonful of ground ginger, a half teaspoonful of
salt and a tablespoonful of flour; mix thoroughly and add a half pint
of water. Stir until boiling. Have ready six hard-boiled eggs, cut
them into slices, arrange them over a dish of carefully boiled rice,
on a hot platter, strain over the sauce, and send at once to the
table. This dish is made more attractive by a garnish with sweet
Spanish peppers, cut into strips.


EGGS BEAUREGARD

Hard-boil five eggs. Separate the whites from the yolks. Put the yolks
through a sieve. Put the whites either through a vegetable press, or
chop them very fine. Make a half pint of cream sauce, season it and
add the whites. Have ready a sufficient amount of toast, carefully
buttered. Put this on a heated platter, cover over the cream sauce and
the whites, dust the tops with the yolks, then with salt and pepper.
Garnish the edge of the dish with finely chopped parsley, and send at
once to the table.


EGGS LAFAYETTE

Hard-boil six eggs, chop them, but not fine. Make a half pint of curry
sauce. Put the chopped eggs over a bed of carefully boiled rice, cover
with the curry sauce, garnish with strips of Spanish pepper and serve.
This dish may be changed by using tomato sauce in place of the curry
sauce.


EGGS JEFFERSON

Select the desired number of good-sized tomatoes, allowing one to each
person. Cut off the blossom end, scoop out the seeds, stand the
tomatoes in a baking pan in the oven until they are partly cooked. Put
a half teaspoonful of butter and a dusting of salt and pepper into the
bottom of each, and break in one egg. Put these back in the oven until
the eggs are "set." Have ready a round of toasted bread for each
tomato, stand the tomato in the center of the bread, fill the bottom
of the dish with cream sauce, and send to the table.


EGGS WASHINGTON

Add a half pint of crab meat to a half pint of cream sauce. Season
with salt and pepper. Have ready either bread pates or pates made from
puff paste. Put a tablespoonful of the crab mixture in the bottom of
each. Break in an egg. Stand in the oven until the egg is "set." Or
you may poach the eggs and slide them into the pate. Pour over the
remaining quantity of crabmeat sauce, and send at once to the table.


EGGS AU GRATIN

Make a pint of cream sauce. Hard-boil six eggs. Cut them into slices.
Put them in the baking dish and cover with the cream sauce. Dust
thickly with cheese, and brown quickly in the oven.


DEVILED EGGS

Hard-boil twelve eggs. Remove the shells. Cut the eggs into halves,
crosswise. Take out the yolks without breaking the whites. Press the
yolks through a sieve. Add four tablespoonfuls of finely chopped
chicken, tongue or ham. Add a half teaspoonful of salt, a saltspoonful
of pepper and two tablespoonfuls of melted butter. Rub the mixture.
Form it into balls the size of the yolks and put them into the places
in the whites from which the yolks were taken. Put two halves
together, roll them in tissue paper that has been fringed at the ends,
giving each a twist. If these balls are made the size of the yolk, and
put back into the whites, they may be placed on a platter, heated, and
served on toast, with cream sauce; then they are very much like the
eggs Bernhardt.


EGGS A LA TRIPE

Hard-boil eight eggs. Remove the shells, cut eggs crosswise in rather
thick slices. Cut three small onions into very thin slices. Separate
them into rings, cover them with boiling water and boil rapidly ten
minutes; drain, then cover them with fresh water and boil until they
are tender; drain again, but save the water. Now mix the eggs and
onions carefully, without breaking. Put two level tablespoonfuls of
butter and two of flour into a saucepan. Mix. Add a grating of nutmeg,
a saltspoonful of black pepper, the juice of a lemon, and a half-pint
of the water in which the onions were boiled. Bring to the boiling
point, add two tablespoonfuls of cream; then add the eggs and onions.
When thoroughly hot, dish them in a conical form, garnish with
triangular pieces of toast, and serve.


EGGS A L'AURORE

Hard-boil six eggs, cut them into halves lengthwise, take out the
yolks, keeping them whole. Cut the whites into fine strips. Make a
cream sauce. Add to it two tablespoonfuls of finely chopped sardines
or finely chopped lobster or crab, a tablespoonful of tarragon
vinegar. Add the whites of the eggs, and, when quite hot, add the
yolks, without breaking them. Turn this at once into a heated dish,
garnish the dish with triangular pieces of toast, and send to the
table. Or, if you like, make the sauce, season it and put a layer into
the bottom of the baking-dish, then a layer of Parmesan cheese, then a
layer of the yolks, pressed through a sieve, and so on, alternating,
having the last layer of the yolks of the eggs. Dust over a few bread
crumbs, put here and there bits of butter, and brown quickly in the
oven.


EGGS A LA DAUPHIN

Remove the shells from six hard-boiled eggs, cut them into halves,
lengthwise, take out the yolks, press them through a sieve. Add four
level tablespoonfuls of melted butter, and half a teaspoonful of salt,
a grating of nutmeg and two tablespoonfuls of Parmesan cheese. Add
half a cupful of cream to a half cupful of sifted bread crumbs. Mix
this with the yolks, rub until smooth, then add one well-beaten egg,
and the yolk of one egg. Cover the bottom of the baking dish with the
mixture forming it in a pyramid and cover with the chopped whites.
Have ready two extra hard-boiled eggs, take out the yolks, press them
through a sieve, all over the top. Garnish the edges of the dish with
triangular pieces of toasted bread, cover the whole with cream sauce,
brown in the oven, and serve at once.


EGGS A LA BENNETT

    6 hard-boiled eggs
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 teaspoonful of anchovy sauce
    1 tablespoonful of finely chopped chives or onion
  1/2 cupful of bread crumbs
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt

Cut the eggs into halves lengthwise; remove the yolks, rub them with
half the butter, salt, onion and anchovy paste. Fill these back into
the whites. Cover the bottom of a baking dish with ordinary white
sauce, stand in the eggs, put over the bread crumbs, baste them with
the remaining butter, melted, and stand in the oven long enough to
brown.


EGGS BROULLI

Beat four eggs. Add to them four tablespoonfuls of stock, four
tablespoonfuls of cream, a saltspoonful of salt and half a
saltspoonful of pepper. Turn them into a saucepan, stand in a pan of
hot water, stir with an egg-beater until they are thick and
jelly-like. Turn at once into a heated dish, garnish with toast and
send to the table.


SCALLOPED EGGS

    4 hard-boiled eggs
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
    1 cupful of finely chopped cold cooked chicken or fish
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Chop the eggs rather fine. Rub the butter and flour together, add the
milk, stir until boiling, add the salt and pepper. Put a layer of eggs
in the bottom of a casserole, or baking dish, then a layer of the fish
or chicken, then a little white sauce, and so continue until the
ingredients are used. Dust the top thickly with bread crumbs and bake
in a moderate oven until nicely browned.


EGG FARCI

    6 hard-boiled eggs
    2 cupfuls of mashed potatoes
    1 cupful of finely chopped cold cooked meat
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    1 tablespoonful of butter
    1 tablespoonful of flour
    1 gill (a half cupful) of milk
    1 level teaspoonful of salt
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs, chop them fine, mix them with the meat, add the
salt, pepper and parsley. Rub the butter and flour together, add the
milk, stir until boiling; add this gradually to the potatoes. When
smooth add the hard-boiled eggs, meat and parsley. Fill into small
custard cups or into shirring dishes, brush with milk and brown in the
oven. These make a nice supper or luncheon dish.


EGG BALLS

These are used for soup and for garnishing of vegetable dishes.
Hard-boil four eggs, throw them at once into cold water, remove the
shells. Put the yolks through a sieve, then add a half teaspoonful of
salt, a dash of white pepper and the yolk of one raw egg, or you may
take a part of the white of one egg. Mix thoroughly and make into
balls the size of a marble, using enough flour to prevent sticking to
the hands. Drop these into a kettle of boiling stock, or into hot fat.
Drain on brown paper.


DEVILED EGG SALAD

    6 eggs
    1 head of lettuce
    1 pimiento
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
  1/2 teaspoonful of paprika
  1/2 cupful of chopped boiled tongue
    1 saltspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs, throw them into cold water, remove the shells, cut
them lengthwise. Take out the yolks without breaking the whites. Rub
the yolks through a sieve into a bowl, then add the tongue and all the
seasoning. If the mixture is dry add a tablespoonful or two of cream
or olive oil. Roll the mixture into balls that will fit the spaces
from which they were taken in the whites, making each ball round.
Arrange the lettuce over a platter, stand the whites in the lettuce,
and at serving time baste thoroughly with French dressing.


JAPANESE HARD EGGS

    1 cupful of rice
  1/2 pint of white sauce
    6 eggs
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley, if you have it, and a
       suspicion of onion juice

Put the eggs into a saucepan of cold water, bring to boiling point,
and simmer gently twenty minutes. Wash the rice through several cold
waters, sprinkle it into a kettle of boiling water and boil it for
thirty minutes. Remove the shells, break the eggs while they are hot,
cut them into halves crosswise. Make the cream sauce, and add the
onion juice. When the rice is done, drain, sprinkle it in the center
of a large platter, press the halves of the eggs down into it, and
pour over the cream sauce. Garnish with the chopped parsley. This
takes the place of both meat and starchy vegetables for either
luncheon or supper.


EGGS EN MARINADE

    1 dozen eggs
    3 very red beets
    1 quart of cider vinegar
   24 whole cloves
    1 teaspoonful of mustard seed
    1 saltspoonful of celery seed
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    2 saltspoonfuls of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs; plunge them into cold water and remove the shells.
Stick the cloves into the eggs. Pare the beets, cut them into blocks
and boil them in about a pint of water. To this water add the vinegar,
bring it to boiling point, add salt, pepper and the celery and mustard
seed. Put the eggs into a glass jar and pour over the boiling vinegar;
put on the tops and stand them aside for three weeks. A tablespoonful
of grated horseradish or a half cupful of nasturtium seeds will
improve the flavor and prevent mold.


EGGS A LA POLONAISE

    6 eggs
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Hard-boil four of the eggs; when done remove the shells, cut the eggs
into halves lengthwise and take out the yolks, without breaking the
whites. Press the yolks through a sieve into a bowl, and add the raw
yolks of the remaining two eggs, with the parsley, salt and pepper.
Beat the white of the raw eggs until light, not stiff, then work them
into the yolk mixture. Cover the bottom of a shallow baking pan with
part of this mixture, then fill the spaces in the whites with some of
the remaining mixture. Put the whites of the eggs together, making
them look like whole eggs. Arrange these in the center of the dish. If
you have any of the yolk mixture left, put it around in a sort of a
border. Pour over a little melted butter, dust thickly with soft bread
crumbs and bake in a quick oven until slightly brown. Serve plain or
with cream sauce.


EGGS A LA HYDE

    6 eggs
  1/2 can of mushrooms
    1 tablespoonful of grated onion
    2 tablespoonfuls of chopped parsley
  1/2 cupful of sweet cream
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of chicken stock or cocoanut milk
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs, and when done remove the shells and cut the eggs
into halves lengthwise, keeping the whites whole. Remove the yolks,
press them through a sieve, add to them the cream, half the salt and a
dash of cayenne. Mix thoroughly and fill into the whites and arrange
them neatly on a granite or silver platter. Put the butter into a
saucepan, add the onion and flour, then the stock or cocoanut milk,
and the mushrooms; stir, until it boils, add the remaining salt and
pepper; take from the fire and add the parsley. Pour this over the
eggs on the platter, dust thickly with bread crumbs, run into a quick
oven until brown.


EGGS A LA VINAIGRETTE

    6 eggs
    1 head of lettuce
    8 tablespoonfuls of olive oil
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    4 tablespoonfuls of vinegar
    1 tablespoonful of chopped gherkin
    1 tablespoonful of chopped olives
    1 tablespoonful of grated onion

Hard-boil the eggs, throw them into cold water; remove the shells and
cut them into slices lengthwise. Wash and dry the lettuce, arrange it
on a small meat platter, put over the top slices of hard-boiled eggs,
letting one slice overlap the other. Fill the center of the dish with
sliced, peeled tomatoes. Put a half teaspoonful of salt in a soup
plate, add a saltspoonful of pepper and the oil; put in a piece of ice
and stir until the salt is dissolved. Remove the ice, add all the
other ingredients but the parsley, mix thoroughly, pour this over the
eggs, dust with parsley and serve as a supper dish.


EGGS A LA RUSSE

    6 eggs
    1 small can of caviar (2 tablespoonfuls)
  1/2 pint of stock
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
    1 dash of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs, remove the shells, cut them into halves
lengthwise; take out the yolks without breaking the whites, and press
them through a sieve, then add the caviar, onion juice and pepper.
Heap these back into the whites. Boil the stock until reduced
one-half, baste the eggs carefully, run them into the oven until hot,
pour over the remaining hot stock and send to the table.


EGGS LYONNAISE

    6 eggs
    1 onion
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  1/2 pint of milk
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs, remove the shells, throw them in cold water. Cut
the onion into thin slices; put it, with the butter, into a saucepan,
shake until the onion is tender, then add the flour, milk and
seasoning; stir until boiling. At serving time cut the eggs into
slices crosswise, put them in a shallow baking dish, cover with cream
sauce and run in the oven just a moment until they are very hot.


EGG CROQUETTES

    6 eggs
  1/2 pint of milk
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    3 level tablespoonfuls of flour
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
  1/2 saltspoonful of grated nutmeg
    1 teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Hard-boil the eggs and chop them fine. Rub the butter and flour
together, add the milk, stir until you have a thick, smooth paste. Add
all the seasoning to the egg, mix the eggs into the white sauce and
turn out to cool. When cold form into cylinders, dip in egg beaten
with a tablespoonful of water, roll in bread crumbs and fry in deep
hot fat. Serve with cream sauce.


EGG CHOPS

    6 hard-boiled eggs
  1/2 pint of finely chopped cooked ham
  1/2 pint of milk
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    4 level tablespoonfuls of flour
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of cayenne
    1 dash of white pepper

Chop the eggs very fine, mix them with the ham; add the parsley, onion
juice and pepper. Rub the butter and flour together and add the milk.
Stir until you have a smooth, thick sauce, then add the salt; mix this
with the other ingredients and turn it out to cool. When cold form
into a chop about the size of an ordinary mutton chop. Dip first in
egg beaten with a tablespoonful of water, then cover carefully with
bread crumbs and fry in deep hot fat. Serve with either tomato or
brown sauce.


PLAIN SCRAMBLED EGGS

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in a shallow frying pan. Add a
tablespoonful of water to each egg. Six eggs are quite enough for four
people. Add a half teaspoonful of salt, and a saltspoonful of pepper.
Give two or three beats--enough to break the eggs; turn them into the
frying pan, on the hot butter. Constantly scrape from the bottom of
the pan with a fork, while they are cooking. Serve with a garnish of
broiled bacon and toast.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH CHIPPED BEEF

Pull apart a quarter of a pound of chipped beef, cover with boiling
water, let it stand ten minutes, drain and dry. Put it into a saucepan
with two level tablespoonfuls of butter, four eggs, beaten until they
are well mixed, and a dash of pepper. Stir with a fork until the eggs
are "set."


EGGS SCRAMBLED WITH LETTUCE

Remove the outside leaves from one head of lettuce; wash, dry, and
with a very sharp knife cut them into shreds. Chop sufficient onion to
make a tablespoonful. Put a tablespoonful of butter into a saucepan,
add the onion, shake until the onion is soft, then add six eggs,
beaten without separating until well mixed, but not light. Add a half
teaspoonful of salt, a half saltspoonful of pepper and the shredded
lettuce. Stir with a fork until the eggs are "set," turn at once onto
a heated platter, garnish with triangular pieces of toast and send to
the table.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH SHRIMPS

    6 eggs
    1 can of shrimps or its equivalent in fresh shrimps
    1 green pepper
  1/2 pint of strained tomato
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt

Beat the eggs until well mixed, without separating. Put the butter in
a saucepan, add the pepper, chopped; shake until the pepper is soft,
add the tomato and all the seasoning, and the shrimps. Bring to
boiling point, push to the back of the stove where it will simmer
while you scramble the eggs. Put the scrambled eggs on toast in the
center of a platter, pour over and around the shrimp mixture and send
to the table.


EGGS SCRAMBLED WITH FRESH TOMATOES

    3 tomatoes
    4 eggs
    1 teaspoonful of onion juice
    1 level teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter

Peel the tomatoes, cut them into halves and squeeze out the seeds. Cut
the tomatoes into small bits, put them into a saucepan with the salt,
pepper and butter; when these are hot add the eggs, beaten until well
mixed, stir until the eggs are "set," turn into a heated dish, garnish
with toast and send to the table.


EGGS SCRAMBLED WITH RICE AND TOMATO

This is an exceedingly nice dish for supper where one does not care
for meat. Four or six eggs can be used to each half-pint of cold
boiled rice, and either three fresh tomatoes, chopped, or two-thirds
of a cupful of solid strained tomato. Put a tablespoonful of butter, a
half teaspoonful of salt, a saltspoonful of pepper and the tomatoes
into a saucepan; when hot add the rice, and when the rice is hot add
the eggs, beaten without being very light. As soon as the eggs are
"set" serve this in a vegetable dish covered with squares of toasted
bread. This recipe is also nice with hard-boiled eggs; proceed as
directed, and at last add the hard-boiled eggs, sliced.


SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH ASPARAGUS TIPS

    1 small can of asparagus tips
    6 eggs
    1 tablespoonful of butter
  1/2 teaspoonful of salt
    1 dash of pepper

Beat the eggs, add the salt, pepper and butter. Put them into a
saucepan, add at once the asparagus tips and stir with a fork until
the mixture is "set."


EGG FLIP

This dish is exceedingly nice for a child or an invalid. Separate one
egg, beat the white to a stiff froth, add the yolk and beat again.
Heap this in a pretty saucer, dust lightly with powdered sugar, put in
the center a teaspoonful of brandy, and serve at once. Sherry or
Madeira may be substituted for the brandy.


OMELETS


A plain French omelet is, perhaps, one of the most difficult of all
things to make; that is, it is the most difficult to have well made in
the ordinary private house. Failures come from beating the eggs until
they are too light, or having the butter too hot, or cooking the
omelet too long before serving.

In large families, where it is necessary to use a dozen eggs, two
omelets will be better than one. A six-egg omelet is quite easily
handled. Do not use milk; it toughens the eggs and gives an unpleasant
flavor to the omelet. An "omelet pan," a shallow frying pan, should be
kept especially for omelets. Each time it is used rub until dry, but
do not wash. Dust it with salt and rub it with brown paper until
perfectly clean.

To make an omelet: First, put a tablespoonful of butter in the middle
of the pan. Let it heat slowly. Break the eggs in a bowl, add a
tablespoonful of water to each egg and give twelve good, vigorous
beats. To each six eggs allow a saltspoonful of pepper, and, if you
like, a tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley. Take the eggs, a
limber knife and the salt to the stove. Draw the pan over the hottest
part of the fire, turn in the eggs, and dust over a half teaspoonful
of salt. Shake the pan so that the omelet moves and folds itself over
each time you draw the pan towards you. Lift the edge of the omelet,
allowing the thin, uncooked portion of the egg to run underneath.
Shake again, until the omelet is "set." Have ready heated a platter,
fold over the omelet and turn it out. Garnish with parsley, and send
to the table.

If one can make a plain French omelet, it may be converted into many,
many kinds.


OMELET WITH ASPARAGUS TIPS

Make a plain omelet from six eggs, have ready a half pint of cream
sauce, and either a can or a bundle of cooked asparagus. Cut off the
tips, preserving the lower portions for another dish. When the omelet
is turned onto the heated platter, put the asparagus tips at the ends,
cover them with cream sauce, pour the rest of the cream sauce in the
platter, not over the omelet.


OMELET WITH GREEN PEAS

Make a six-egg omelet. Have ready one pint of cooked peas, or a can of
peas, seasoned with salt, pepper and butter. Just before folding the
omelet put a tablespoonful of peas in the center, fold, and turn out
on a heated platter. Pour the remaining quantity of peas around the
omelet, and send at once to the table. If you like, you may pour over,
also, a half pint of cream sauce.


HAVANA OMELET

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter and two chopped onions over hot water
until the onion is soft and thoroughly cooked. Peel four tomatoes, cut
them into halves and press out the seeds. Then cut each half into
quarters, add four Spanish peppers cut in strips, a level teaspoonful
of salt and a dash of red pepper. Cook until the tomato is soft. Make
a six-egg omelet. Turn it onto a heated platter, put the tomato
mixture at the ends, and send at once to the table.


OMELET WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Make a plain omelet with six eggs. Pour over a half pint of tomato
sauce, and send to the table.


OMELET WITH OYSTERS

Drain, wash, and drain again twenty-five oysters. Throw them into a
hot saucepan and shake until the gills curl. Rub together two level
tablespoonfuls of flour and two of butter. Drain the oysters, put the
liquor into a half-pint cup, add sufficient milk to fill the cup. Add
this to the butter and flour. When boiling, add the oysters, a level
teaspoonful of salt and a dash of red pepper. Make a six-egg omelet,
turn it onto a heated dish, arrange the oysters around the omelet,
pour over the cream sauce, and send to the table.


OMELET WITH SWEETBREADS

This is a very good way to make sweetbreads do double duty. Boil a
pair of sweetbreads until they are tender. Remove the membrane, cut
them into slices; make a cream sauce. Add the sweetbreads, and, if you
like, a half can of chopped mushrooms. Make a six-egg omelet, arrange
the slices of sweetbread around the omelet and pour over the cream
sauce.


OMELET WITH TOMATOES

Beat six eggs. Add a half pint of rather thick stewed tomatoes, a
level teaspoonful of salt and a saltspoonful of pepper. Beat the eggs
and tomatoes together, and make precisely the same as a plain omelet.
Do not, however, add water, as the tomatoes answer the purpose.


OMELET WITH HAM

Mix a half cup of chopped ham with the eggs after they have been
beaten with the water, and finish the same as a plain omelet.


OMELET WITH CHEESE

Beat six eggs until they are thoroughly mixed. Add a half cupful of
thick cream, four tablespoonfuls of grated cheese, a saltspoonful of
black pepper and a half teaspoonful of salt. Mix and finish the same
as plain omelet.


OMELET WITH FINE HERBS

Beat six eggs until thoroughly mixed. Add a half cupful of cream, a
tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley, a saltspoonful of pepper and
a half teaspoonful of salt. Finish the same as a plain omelet. Serve
on a heated platter and put over a little thin Spanish sauce.


SPANISH OMELET

Beat six eggs. Add six tablespoonfuls of water. Add a saltspoonful of
pepper, a tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of
onion juice. Put six thin slices of bacon in the omelet pan. Cook
slowly until all the fat is tried out. Remove the bacon, add a
tablespoonful of chopped onion. Cook until the onion is slightly
brown, turn in the eggs and finish the same as a plain omelet. Turn
onto a heated platter, garnish with red and green peppers, and, if you
like, put two tablespoonfuls of stewed tomatoes at each end of the
omelet.


OMELET JARDINIERE

Chop sufficient chives to make a tablespoonful. Add a tablespoonful of
parsley, a tablespoonful of finely chopped onion, and, if you have it,
a little of the green tops of celery. Mix this with six eggs, add six
tablespoonfuls of water and beat. Make the same as a plain omelet.


OMELET WITH FRESH MUSHROOMS

This is one of the most delicious of all the luncheon dishes. Put two
tablespoonfuls of butter, a pound of mushrooms, sliced, a half cup of
milk and a teaspoonful of salt into a saucepan. Cover and cook slowly
for twenty minutes. Make two six-egg omelets. Turn them, side by side,
on a large heated platter, pour over the fresh mushrooms and serve at
once.


OMELET O'BRIEN

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan with four
tablespoonfuls of chopped onion. Cook until the onion is tender. Then
add four chopped Spanish peppers, two tablespoonfuls of thick tomato,
or one whole raw tomato cut into bits, four sliced cooked okra, a
teaspoonful of salt, a dash of pepper. Let these cook twenty minutes.
Make a six-egg plain omelet, using bacon fat instead of butter for the
cooking. Remove the slices of bacon before they are too hard, as they
must be used for a garnish. Turn the omelet onto a heated platter,
pour around it the pepper mixture, garnish with the bacon, and send to
the table. Canned mushrooms may be added, if desired.


OMELET WITH POTATOES

    4 eggs
    1 cupful of mashed potatoes
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
    1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
    1 level teaspoonful of salt
    1 saltspoonful of pepper

Beat the eggs, without separating, until thoroughly mixed; add them
gradually to the mashed potato, beating all the while; add the salt
and pepper. Put the butter into a good-sized saute or omelet pan; when
hot, turn the ingredients into the pan, and smooth it down with a
pallet knife. Let this cook slowly until nicely browned; fold it over
as you would a plain omelet, and turn onto a heated dish. The parsley
may be sprinkled over the top, or added to the mixture.


SWEET OMELETS


OMELET A LA WASHINGTON

Put three eggs into a bowl, and three into another bowl. Add three
tablespoonfuls of water to each, and beat. Have two omelet pans, in
which you have melted butter. Grate an apple into one bowl, and into
the other put a little salt and pepper. Stand two tablespoonfuls of
jelly in a dish over hot water while you cook the omelets. Proceed as
for plain omelet. The one to which you have added the apple, turn out
on a plate. Before folding the other, put in the center the softened
currant jelly, then fold it and turn it out by the side of the other
omelet. Dust both with powdered sugar, and send at once to the table.
Serve a portion of each.


OMELET WITH RUM

Make a plain omelet with six eggs, turn it on a heated platter. Dust
it with powdered sugar, and score it across the top with a red-hot
poker. Dip four lumps of sugar into Jamaica rum and put them on the
platter. Put over the omelet four tablespoonfuls of rum; touch a
lighted match to the rum, and carry the omelet to the table, burning.
Baste it with the burning rum until the alcohol is entirely burned
off.


SWISS SOUFFLE

Allow one egg to each person. Have everything in readiness. The
maraschino cherries must be drained free from the liquor. Separate the
eggs. Beat the whites until they are stiff. Add a level tablespoonful
of powdered sugar to each white, and beat until dry and glossy. Add
the yolks of three eggs. Mix quickly. Add the grated rind of one lemon
and a tablespoonful of lemon juice. Heap this into individual dishes.
Make a tiny little hole in the center and put in a maraschino cherry,
leaving the hole large enough to hold a tablespoonful of the liquor
when the omelet is ready to serve; dust it with powdered sugar, bake
in a quick oven about three minutes, take it from the oven, pour in
the maraschino juice and send _at once_ to the table. These will fall
if baked too much, but when well made and served quickly, is one of
the daintiest of desserts.


OMELET A LA DUCHESSE

This is a sweet baked omelet, and is
served the same as one would serve an omelet
souffle.

    6 eggs
  1/2 cupful of water
  1/2 a lemon's yellow rind, grated
  1/2 cupful of thick cream
  1/2 cupful of granulated sugar
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla or orange flower water
    1 small bit of cinnamon

Put the sugar, water, cinnamon and lemon rind over the fire, boil
until it spins a thread and stand aside to cool. Separate the eggs;
beat the yolks until creamy, and add the cream, then the strained
syrup. Add the vanilla, and when cool fold in the well-beaten whites.
Turn at once into a shallow silver or granite dish, dust thickly with
powdered sugar and bake in a quick oven until brown.


OMELET SOUFFLE

This is, perhaps, one of the most difficult of all dishes to make.
When, however, you have accomplished the art, you have one of the most
satisfactory desserts. Like the preceding recipe, it must be made at
the last moment and sent from the oven directly to the table. The eggs
must be beaten to just the right point and the oven must be very hot.
Get everything in readiness before beginning to make the souffle.

Select a bowl, perfectly clean, and arrange the star tube and pastry
bag, if you are going to use one. If not, get out a baking dish. Sift
six tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar. Separate six eggs. Put three of
the yolks aside (as you will only use three), and beat the other three
until creamy. Beat the whites until they are very stiff but not dry or
broken. Now add three tablespoonfuls of the sifted powdered sugar.
Beat for fully ten minutes. Then add the beaten yolks, the grated rind
of a lemon and at the last a tablespoonful of lemon juice. Mix
carefully and quickly, but thoroughly. Put four or five tablespoonfuls
of this in the bottom of a platter, or baking dish. Put the remaining
quantity quickly in the pastry bag, and press it out into roses. It is
easier to make it in small rosettes all over the foundation. Dust
quickly with the remaining three tablespoonfuls of sugar. Bake in a
quick oven until golden brown. This will take about five minutes.
Serve immediately. To be just right, this must be hot to the very
center, crisp on top, moist underneath. If baked too long, the moment
the top is touched it will fall, becoming stringy and unpalatable.

Omelet souffles are frequently flavored with rum, which must be mixed
with the sugar. Sometimes they are sprayed with sherry just as they
are taken from the oven. They may be built up into different forms,
and garnished with candied or maraschino cherries, or chopped nuts.