Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


AMERICAN MISSIONARY

APRIL, 1890. VOL. XLIV. NO. 4.


CONTENTS


EDITORIAL

REMOVAL--REV. FRANK P. WOODBURY, D.D.

INDIAN CIVILIZATION--EMIGRATION OF COLORED PEOPLE

A COMPARISON

THE STEREOPTICON IN NEW ENGLAND

MRS. JANE TWICHELL WARE--PARAGRAPHS

AN ENTERPRISING WOMAN


THE SOUTH.

DEDICATION OF CHANDLER NORMAL INSTITUTE

CONGREGATIONALISM AROUND PARIS, TEXAS

MISSION CHURCH--PROSPEROUS CHURCH

THE WHITE CROSS LEAGUE

BEREA AND TEMPERANCE--"BECCA MUST GO"


THE INDIANS.

STREAKS OF LIGHT--ELIZABETH WINYAN

AN EXEMPLARY MOTHER


THE CHINESE.

TWO CHINESE ANNIVERSARIES


ADDRESS.

A COLORED MAN SPEAKS FOR HIS RACE

REV. GEO. M. MCCLELLAN


BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.

PARAGRAPHS

NOVEL DISH--MANY-SIDED WORK

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS


RECEIPTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION,

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESIDENT, Rev. WM. M. TAYLOR, D.D., LL.D., N.V.


_Vice-Presidents._

Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y. Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass. Rev.
F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill. Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass. Rev. HENRY HOPKINS,
D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._ Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D.,
_Bible House, N.Y._ Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House. N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._


_Auditors._

PETER McCARTEE. CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman. ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.


_For Three Years._

S.B. HALLIDAY, SAMUEL HOLMES, SAMUEL S. MARPLES, CHARLES L. MEAD, ELBERT
B. MONROE.


_For Two Years._

J.E. RANKIN, WM. H. WARD, J.W. COOPER, JOHN H. WASHBURN, EDMUND L.
CHAMPLIN.


_For One Year._

LYMAN ABBOTT, CHAS. A. HULL, CLINTON B. FISK, ADDISON P. FOSTER ALBERT
J. LYMAN.


_District Secretaries_.

Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._ Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D.,
_151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._ Rev. C.W. HIATT, _64 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, Ohio._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or 64 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a
Life Member.


NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I BEQUEATH to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XLIV. APRIL, 1890. No. 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

American Missionary Association

       *       *       *       *       *

REMOVAL.


The Rooms of the American Missionary Association are now in the Bible
House, New York City. Correspondents will please address us
accordingly.

Visitors will find our Rooms on the sixth floor of the Bible House,
corner Ninth Street and Fourth Avenue; entrance by elevator on Ninth
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. FRANK P. WOODBURY, D.D.


It gives us great pleasure to announce the acceptance by Rev. Frank P.
Woodbury, D.D., of the position of Corresponding Secretary of this
Association. Since the death of our dear Brother Powell, with the large
increase of special resources and the general expansion of our work, an
addition to our administrative force has become an absolute necessity.
Dr. Woodbury brings to his new position special qualifications. His
eighteen years of successful work in his pastorate at Rockford, Ill.,
and his very effective two years' service in Minneapolis, have made him
acquainted with the work of a pastor and the needs of the churches. In
these pastorates, and in other services for the general interests of the
church, he has shown exceptional administrative gifts. These will find
ample range for activity in the Secretaryship. His public address at
several of our own Annual Meetings and on many other similar occasions,
attest his power as a platform speaker. He will meet with a warm welcome
to the duties of this office, and we are confident that he will receive
an equally cordial greeting in the churches, Conferences and
Associations.

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIAN CIVILIZATION--NOW FOR A PUSH FORWARD.


The time has come for new vigor in the Indian service. Gen. Morgan has
been confirmed as Indian Commissioner, and his broad and well-matured
plans are ready to be put into operation. We hope that Congress will
make the necessary appropriations, and that nothing will hinder the
multiplication of Indian schools and the ingathering of pupils. With the
Sioux Indians, a great crisis has come. Their reservation is severed,
and a broad belt is opened in it for the incoming of the white man.
There will, of course, be the rush and confusion of new settlers, with
the almost inevitable demoralization of the Indians. But a still more
serious and protracted evil will grow out of the conflict of the two
races and the temptations to the Indians. If ever the friends of the
Sioux Indians needed to bestir themselves, it is just now. The helping
hand, the open school and the sanctifying Gospel, must forestall all bad
influences. So far as the work of the American Missionary Association is
concerned, the opening of this reservation to white settlement will
necessitate the removal of five or six of its out-stations, occasioning
spiritual loss and additional money appropriations.

While we hail with satisfaction the inauguration of Gen. Morgan's broad
plans, we feel that there should not be the least relaxation on the part
of the churches, in the "contract schools" and in the preaching of the
gospel. From John Eliot down, the gospel has been the great civilizing
power among the Indians, and it will be a fatal mistake to withhold it.
If the new Government policy is successful, the gospel is its essential
adjunct, and if there should be hindrances in carrying out that policy,
the steady stream of gospel influences will be all the more necessary.

       *       *       *       *       *

EMIGRATION OF COLORED PEOPLE.


We have seen a large map of a Southern railroad, on one side of which
were some highly-colored pictures. The first showed the tumble-down
cabin of a colored man, himself, wife and boy carrying from it their few
belongings to the favored land of promise. The next picture shows him
and his family in the woods in his new location, getting ready to build
his house. The third picture represents a fine log house, with green
fields well fenced, a mule and pigs and chickens in the yard; and the
last picture presents a large frame house with a veranda, in which the
colored man is seated in a large arm-chair, reading a magazine, and his
wife sitting by his side in a rocking chair, while near at hand is the
capacious barn, with mules grazing in the adjacent lot.

By the side of each picture is a running comment, supposed to be made by
the colored man himself, describing his hard lot 'where he first lived,
then telling of his purchase in the new land of promise, stating the
price and the terms of purchase; then follows his happy rejoicing over
his new location, and finally his triumphant joy in his wealth and fine
mansion.

It is by such representations, we are told, that the colored people in
various parts of the South are tempted to leave their homes for new
locations. The experience of those of their number who have made such
migrations has not usually been encouraging, and we fear that thousands
more will acquire a good deal of bitter knowledge learned in that same
expensive school.

       *       *       *       *       *

A COMPARISON.

_The French and the Negro._


A writer in the March number of The Forum has drawn a vivid picture of
France in its poverty, misery and tyranny in 1789, and contrasted with
this the thrift, the improved land culture, and the better clothing,
food, home and intelligence of the French peasantry of 1889. The
Revolution of 1789 broke the tyranny of the old crushing regime and
opened the way for the new world that brightens and gladdens the France
of to-day. But the Revolution did not itself make the great change; it
simply made it possible.

Two factors developed in French character were the practical forces in
the new prosperity--economy and the desire for ownership of lands and
homes. That economy was pushed, in many cases, almost to the extreme of
miserly hoarding. We give below a few brief extracts illustrating the
point in question:

    "The life led by a comfortable English or American farmer would
    represent wicked waste and shameful indulgence to a much richer
    French peasant. I, myself, know a laborer on wages of less than
    twenty shillings a week, who by thrift has bought ten acres of the
    magnificent garden land between Fontainebleau and the Seine, worth
    many thousand pounds, on which grow all kinds of fruits and
    vegetables, and the famous dessert grapes; yet who, with all his
    wealth and abundance, denies himself and his two children meat on
    Sundays, and even a drink of the wine which he grows and makes for
    the market."

    "The French peasant has great virtues, but he has the defects of
    his virtues, and his home life is far from idyllic. He is
    laborious, shrewd, enduring, frugal, self-reliant, sober, honest
    and capable of intense self-control for a distant reward; but that
    reward is property in land, in pursuit of which he may become as
    pitiless as a bloodhound."

