I wish to suggest to any of your legal or other well-informed
correspondents, who will have the kindness to take a little trouble for the
benefit of your general readers, that an instructive and interesting
communication might be made by noting down the periods at which the various
more revolting punishments under the English law were repealed, or fell
into disuse. For instance, when torture, such as the rack, was last
applied; when embowelling alive and quartering ceased to be practised; and
whose was the last head that fell under the axe's bloody stroke. A word
also on the use of the pillory, ducking-stool, stocks, &c. would interest.
Any illustrations of the modification of our penal code would throw
valuable light on the philosophy and improvement of the national character.
And I believe it would appear that the Reformation gradually swept away the
black horrors of the torture-room; that the butchery of the headsman's
block ceased at the close of the civil contest which settled the line of
regal succession; and that hanging, which is the proper death of the cur,
is now reserved for those only who place themselves out of the pale of
humanity by striking at human life.

ALFRED GATTY.

Ecclesfield.

E. S. S. W. (Vol. ii., p. 6.) will find a case of burning in _Dodsley's
Annual Register_, 1769, p. 117.: a Susannah Lott was burned for the murder
of her husband at Canterbury, Benjamin Buss, her paramour, being hanged
about fifteen minutes before she was burned.

T. S. N.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOLK LORE.

_Death-bed Mystery._--In conversation with an aged widow,--as devout and
sensible as she is unlettered,--I yesterday learned a death-bed mystery
which appeared new to me, and which (if not more commonly known than I take
it to be) you may perhaps think worthy of a place in "NOTES AND QUERIES,"
to serve as a minor satellite to some more luminous communication, in reply
to B. H. at Vol. i., p. 315. My informant's "_religio_" (as she appears to
have derived it by tradition from her mother, and as confirmed by her own
experience in the case of a father, a {52} husband, several children, and
others), is to the effect that a considerable interval _invariably_ elapses
between the first semblance of death, and what she considers to be the
departure of the soul.

About five minutes after the time when death, to all outward appearance,
has taken place, "the last breath," as she describes, may be seen to issue
with a vapour, or "steam," out of the mouth of the departed.

The statement reminds me of Webster's argument, in his _Display of supposed
Witchcraft_, chap. xvi., where, writing of the bleeding of corpses in
presence of their murderers, he observes:

    "If we physically consider the union of the soul with the body by the
    mediation of the spirit, then we cannot rationally conceive that the
    soul doth utterly forsake that union, until by putrefaction, tending to
    an absolute mutation, it is forced to bid farewell to its beloved
    tabernacle; for its not operating _ad extra_ to our senses, doth not
    necessarily infer its total absence. And it may be, that there is more
    in that of _Abel's blood crying unto the Lord from the ground_, in a
    physical sense than is commonly conceived," &c.

Sir Kenelm Digby (I think I remember) has also made some curious remarks on
this subject, in his observations on the _Religio Medici_ of Sir T. Brown.

J. SANSOM.

_Easter Eggs._-The custom of dyeing eggs at Easter (alluded to, Vol. i.,
pp. 244. and 397.) prevails in different parts of Cumberland, and is
observed in this city probably more specially than in any other part of
England. On Easter Monday and Tuesday the inhabitants assemble in certain
adjacent meadows, the children all provided with stores of hard-boiled
eggs, coloured or ornamented in various ways,--some being dyed an even
colour with logwood, cochineal, &c.; others stained (often in a rather
elegant manner) by being boiled in shreds of parti-coloured ribbons; and
others, again, covered with gilding. These they tumble about upon the grass
until they break, when they finish off by eating them. These they call
_pace_-eggs, being no doubt a corruption for _pasche_.

This custom is mentioned by Brande as existing among the modern Greeks; but
I believe it will be found more or less in almost all parts of Christendom.

I observed when in Syria during Easter quantities of eggs similarly dyed;
but it did not occur to me at the time to inquire whether the practice was
connected with the season, and whether it was not confined to the native
Christians.

Information upon this point, and also upon the general origin of this
ancient custom, would be interesting.

A SUBSCRIBER.

Carlisle, June 3. 1850.

_May Marriages_ (Vol. i., p. 467.).--This superstition is one of those
which have descended to Christianity from Pagan observances, and which the
people have adopted without knowing the cause, or being able to assign a
reason. Carmelli tells us that it still prevailed in Italy in 1750.[2] It
was evidently of long standing in Ovid's time as it had passed then into a
proverb among the people; nearly two centuries afterwards Plutarch (_Quæst.
Rom._ 86.) puts the question: [Greek: Dia ti toi Maiou mênos ouk agontai
gunaikas], which he makes a vain endeavour to answer satisfactorily. He
assigns three reasons: _first_, because May being between April and June,
and April being consecrated to Venus, and June to Juno, those deities held
propitious to marriage were not to be slighted. The Greeks were not less
observant of fitting seasons and the propitiation of the [Greek: gamêlioi
theoi]. _Secondly_, on account of the great expiatory celebration of the
_Lemuria_, when women abstained from the bath and the careful cosmetic
decoration of their persons so necessary as a prelude to marriage rites.
_Thirdly_, as some say, because May was the month of old men, _Majus a
Majoribus_, and therefore June, being thought to be the month of the young,
_Junius a Junioribus_, was to be preferred. The Romans, however, held other
seasons and days unpropitious to matrimony, as the days in February when
the Parentalia were celebrated, &c. _June_ was the favourite month; but no
marriage was celebrated without an augury being first consulted and its
auspices proved favourable (_Val. Max._ lib. ii. c. 1.). It would be well
if some such superstitions observance among us could serve as a check to
ill-advised and ill-timed marriages; and I would certainly advise all
prudent females to continue to think that

 "The girls are all stark naught that wed in May."

S. W. SINGER.

Mickleham, June 12.

[Footnote 2: Storia di Vari Costumi, t. ii. p. 221.]

_"Trash" or "Skriker."_--Many hundreds of persons there are in these
districts who place implicit credence in the reality of the appearance of a
death sign, locally termed _trash_ or _skriker_. It has the appearance of a
large black dog, with long shaggy hair, and, as the natives express it,
"eyes as big as saucers." The first name is given to it form the peculiar
noise made by its feet when passing along, resembling that of a heavy shoe
in a miry road. The second appellation is in allusion to the sound of its
voice when _heard_ by those parties who are unable to _see_ the appearance
itself. According to the statements of parties who have seen the _trash_
frequently, it makes its appearance to some member of that family from
which death will shortly select his victim; and, at other times, to some
very intimate acquaintance. Should any one be so courageous as to follow
the appearance, it usually makes its retreat with its eyes _fronting_ {53}
the pursuer, and either sinks into the earth with a _strange noise_, or is
lost upon the slightest momentary inattention. Many have attempted to
strike it with any weapon they had at hand; but although the appearance
stood its ground, no _material_ substance could ever be detected. It may be
added that "trash" does not confine itself to churchyards, though
frequently seen in such localities.

T. T. W.

Burnley.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES ON MILTON.

(Continued from Vol. i., p. 387.)

          _L'Allegro._

On l. 6. (D.):--

 "Where triumphant Darkness hovers
  With a sable wing, that covers
  Brooding Horror."
              _Crashaw_, Psalm xxiii.

On l. 11. (G.) Drayton has this expression in his _Heroical Epistles_:--

 "Find me out one so young, _so fair, so free_."
              _King John to Matilda._

and afterwards,--

         "Leave that accursed cell;
  There let black Night and Melancholy dwell."

On l. 24. (G.) Most probably from a couplet in Burton's _Anatomy of
Melancholy_:--

 "And ever and anon she thinks upon the man,
  That was so fine, so fair, _so blith, so debonaire_."
              P. 3. Sc. 2. p. 603. ed. 1621. 4to.

And in Randolph's _Aristippus_,--

 "A bowle of wine is wondrous boone chere
  To make one _blith, buxome, and deboneere_."
              P. 13. ed. 1630. 4to.

On l. 27. (G.):--

 "_Manes._ Didst thou not find I did _quip_ thee?
 "_Psyllus._ No, verily; why, what's a _quip_?
 "_Manes._ We great girders call it a short saying of a sharp wit, with a
     bitter sense in a sweet word."
              _Alexander and Campaspe, Old Plays_,
              vol. ii. p. 113. ed. 1780.

 "Then for your Lordship's _Quippes_ and quick jestes,
  Why Gesta Romanorum were nothing to them."
      _Sir Gyles Goosecappe_, a Com., Sig. G. 2. 4to. 1606.

_Crank_ is used in a different sense by Drayton:--

 "Like Chanticleare he crowed _crank_,
  And piped full merily."
              Vol. iv. p. 1402. ed. 1753.

On l. 31. (M.):--

 "There dainty Joys laugh at white-headed Caring."
              _Fletcher's Purple Island_, C. vi. St. 35.

On l. 42. (G.):--

 "The cheerful lark, mounting from early bed,
  With sweet salutes awakes the drowsy Light;
  The earth shee left, and up to Heaven is fled:
  There chants her Maker's praises out of sight."
              _Purple Island_, C. ix. St. 2.

 "From heaven high to chase the cheareless darke,
  With mery note her lowd salutes the morning larke."
              _Faery Queene_, B. i. c. 11.

On l. 45. (G.):--

 "The chearful birds, chirping him sweet good-morrow,
  With nature's music do beguile his sorrow."
              _Sylvester's Du Bartas._

On l. 67. (G.) See note already inserted in "NOTES AND QUERIES," p. 316.

On l. 75. (G.):--

 "In May the meads are not so _pied with flowers_."
              _Sylvester's Du Bartas._

On l. 78. (G.) So in _Comus_:--

 "And casts a gleam over the _tufted grove_."
              v. 225.

On l. 80. (G.):--

 "Loadstar of Love and Loadstone of all hearts."
              _Drummond._

On l. 117. (Anon.) See extracts from the _Diary of a Lover of Literature_.
To me this line seems to allude to the imagination in sleep:--

 "Such sights as youthful poets dream."

On l. 121. (G.):--

 "Yet served I, gentles, seeing _store_
  _Of dainty girls_ beside."
              _Albion's England_, p. 218. 4to. 1602.

On l. 125. (G.):--

 "_In saffron robes_ and all his solemn rites,
  Thrice sacred _Hymen_."
              _Sylvester's Du Bartas._

and in Spanish Tragedy:--

 "The two first the nuptial torches bore,
  As brightly burning as the mid-day's sun:
  But after them doth _Hymen_ hie as fast,
  Clothed in sable and a _saffron robe_."

On l. 187. (G.):--

 "Marrying their sweet tunes to the angels' lays."
              _Sylvester's Du Bartas._

On l. 144. (D.):--

     "Those precious mysteries that dwell
  In Music's ravished soul."
              _Crashaw's Music's Duet._

J. F. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

COLVIL'S WHIGG'S SUPPLICATION.

Heber possessed a curious MS. volume entitled _A Poetical Miscellany,
selected from the Works of the Men of Genius of the XVIIth Century_. In
Part XI. of the _Bibliotheca Heberiana_ it is thus described:--

    "The first part of this volume was obviously collected by a Scotchman,
    and it includes pieces by Ben Jonson, Wither, Dr. Donne, &c. It must
    have been made in the latter part of the reign of Charles I. The second
    portion of the volume is a later production; a humourous poem, called a
    _Whig's Supplication_, by {54} S. C., in which there is a remarkable
    notice of Cleveland, Donne, and 'Bass Divine.' The latter name somebody
    has ignorantly altered, not knowing, probably, who 'Bass Divine' was.
    The poem is in imitation of Hudibras, both in style and metre."

It is somewhat singular that the writer of this notice never suspected that
the _author_ of the second part, and the _collector_ of the first part of
the volume, was Samuel Colvil, whose celebrated poem, _The Whigg's
Supplication, or the Scotch Hudibras_, went through so many editions, from
1667 to 1796. This "mock poem", as the author terms it, turns upon the
insurrection of the Covenanters in Scotland in the reign of Charles the
Second. An interesting notice of it, and other imitations of Hudibras, will
be found in the _Retrospective Review_, vol. iii. pp. 317-335.

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

HUBERT LE SOEUR'S SIX BRASS STATUES.

In a curious MS. Diary of the early part of the seventeenth century, lately
come into my possession, I find the following entry concerning the
sculptor, Hubert le Soeur:--

    "March 7. 1628. Had an interview with y^e famous and justly renowned
    artiste H. le Sueur, who, being late come to this countrie, I had never
    seene before. He showed me several famous statues in brasse."

This is probably the earliest notice of the celebrated pupil of John of
Bologna after his settlement in England. Dallaway, in his _Anecdotes of the
Arts in England_ (p. 395.), after stating that Hubert le Soeur arrived here
about the year 1630, says,--

    "If he was associated with Pierre Tacca, who finished the horse in the
    equestrian statue of Henry IV. in 1610, left incomplete on the death of
    his master, John of Bologna, two years preceding, he must have been far
    advanced in life. Three only of his works in bronze are now known with
    certainty to exist: the equestrian statue of Charles I. [at Charing
    Cross], a bust of the same monarch with a casque in the Roman style
    [now at Stourhead], and a statue in armour of William Herbert, Earl of
    Pembroke, Lord High Chamberlain and Chancellor of Oxford. The last was
    given to the University by T., Earl of Pembroke, about the time of the
    restoration."

The "several famous statues in brasse" alluded to by the writer of the
Diary above quoted, were probably those which afterwards ornamented the
gardens of St. James's Palace. Peacham, in his _Complete Gentleman_ (2nd
edit., 4to. 1634), having spoken of the collection of statues at Arundell
House, says:--

    "King Charles also, ever since his coming to the Crown, hath amply
    testified a royal liking of ancient Statues, by causing a whole army of
    foreign Emperors, Captains, and Senators, all at once to land on his
    coasts, to come and do him homage and attend him in his Palaces of
    Saint James and Somerset House. A great part of these belonged to the
    great Duke of Mantua; and some of the old Greek marble bases, columns,
    and altars were brought from the ruins of Apollo's temple at Delos, by
    that noble and absolutely complete gentleman, Sir Kenelm Digby, Kn^t.
    In the garden of St. James, there are also _half a dozen brass
    statues_, rare ones, cast by Hubert le Sueur, his Majesty's servant,
    now dwelling in St. Bartholomew's, London; the most industrious and
    excellent statuary, in all materials, that ever this country enjoyed.
    The best of them is the Gladiator, moulded from that in Cardinal
    Borghesi's Villa, by the procurement and industry of ingenious Master
    Gage. And at this present, the said Master Sueur hath divers other
    admirable moulds to cast in brass for his Majesty, and among the rest,
    that famous Diana of Ephesus. But the great Horse with his Majesty upon
    it, twice as great as the life, and now well nigh finished, will
    compare with that of the New Bridge at Paris, or those others at
    Florence and Madrid, though made by Sueur, his master John de Bologna,
    that rare workman, who not long since lived at Florence."

The bronze statue of the Gladiator originally stood (according to Ned
Ward's _London Spy_) in the Parade facing the Horse Guards. Dodsley
(_Environs_, iii. 741.) says it was removed by Queen Anne to Hampton Court,
and from thence, by George the Fourth, to the private grounds of Windsor
Castle, where it now is. Query, What has become of the other five "famous
statues in brass?"

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *

BISHOP JEWELL'S LIBRARY.

What became of Bishop Jewell's library? Cassan mentions (_Lives of Bishops
of Salisbury_, vol. ii. p. 55.) that

    "He had collected an excellent library of books of all sorts, not
    excepting the most impertinent of the Popish authors, and here it was
    that he spent the greatest and the best part of his time," &c.

Bishop Jewell died Sept. 22. 1571.

In the Account Books of Magdalen College, Oxford, I find the following
items:--

    "A. D. 1572. Solut. D^{no} Præsidi equitanti Sarisbur. pro libris per
    billam, iij^{li} xvi^s.

    "Solut. pro libris D^{ni}, episcopi Sar., c^{li}.

    "A. D. 1574. Solut per Dom. Præsidem pro libris M^{ri} Jewell,
    xx^{li}."

Whether these books were a portion only, or the whole of the library of
Bishop Jewell, I am unable to discover; nor am I aware at present whether
Bishop Jewell's autograph is in any of the books of Magdalen College
Library. The president was Lawrence Humphrey, author of a Life of Jewell.

MAGDALENENSIS.

{55}

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LOW WINDOW.

The low windows in the chancel of so many of our ancient churches have
proved a fruitful source of discussion among archæologists, and numerous
theories have been advanced respecting their use. Perhaps the words of the
chameleon in the fable might be addressed to many who have attempted to
account for their existence, "You all are right and all are wrong"--right
in your supposition that they were thus used; but wrong in maintaining that
this was the exclusive purpose. Some example, in fact, may be adduced
irreconcileable with any particular conjecture, and sufficient to overturn
every theory which may be set up. One object assigned is, the distribution
of alms; and it is surely reasonable to imagine that money collected at the
offertory should have been given to paupers from the chancel through this
convenient aperture. The following passage from the _Ecclesiologist_,
quoted in page 441. of "NOTES AND QUERIES," has induced me to bring this
subject forward:--

    "In them (churchyards) prayers are not now commonly poured forth to
    God, nor are doles distributed to his poor."

Now it must be admitted that relief could scarcely be given to a crowd of
importunate claimants without the interposition of some barrier; and where
could a more appropriate place be found than the low window? Can any of
your readers, therefore, oblige me with some information upon these points?
Where were the alms bestowed, if not here? An almonry is described in some
recent works as "a building near the church." What authority is there for
such an assertion, and do any examples of such structures remain? What
evidence is there that this business was transacted in the churchyard, in
the porch, or in any particular part of the edifice?

Although these mysterious openings are probably, with one or two exceptions
in Normandy, peculiar to this country, it is desirable to ascertain where
the poor on the Continent usually receive such charitable donations. In an
interior of a Flemish cathedral, by an artist of the sixteenth century, a
man is represented in the act of delivering bread to a number of eager
beggars, from a sort of pew; showing, at least, as above remarked, that
some such protection was requisite.

There is another Query connected with this subject, which I beg to submit.
Some ancient frescoes were lately discovered in the chapel of Eton College,
with a compartment containing (according to a letter in the
_Ecclesiologist_) a bishop administering the Holy Communion to a converted
Jew, through a low window. Can any one, from recollection or the inspection
of drawings, (for the original has disappeared,) assure me that he does not
hold in his hand a piece of money, or a portion of bread, for the supply of
his bodily wants?

T.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries.

_North Sides of Churchyards unconsecrated._--In the West of England I have
found an opinion to prevail in rural parishes, that the north side of our
churchyards was left unconsecrated very commonly, in order that the youth
of the village might have the use of it as a playground. And, in one
parish, some few years ago, I had occasion to interrupt the game of
football in a churchyard on the "revel" Sunday, and again on another
festival. I also found some reluctance in the people to have their friends
buried north of the church.

Is there any ground for believing that our churchyards were ever thus
consecrated on the south side of the church to the exclusion of the north?

J. SANSOM.

_Hatfield--Consecration of Chapel there._--Le Neve, in his _Lives of
Protestant Bishops_ (ii. 144.), states, that Richard Neile, Bishop of
Lincoln, went to Hatfield, 6th May, 1615, to consecrate the chapel in the
house there lately built by Robert, Earl of Salisbury. I have applied to
the Registrar of Lincoln diocese, in which Hatfield was (until recently)
locally situated, for a copy of the notarial act of consecration; but it
appears that the register of Bishop Neile was taken away or destroyed in
the Great Rebellion, and that, consequently, no record of his episcopality
now exists at Lincoln.

Le Neve says he had the most part of his account of Bishop Neile from
Thomas Baker, B.D. of St. John's College, Cambridge, who had it from a
grandson of the Bishop's. He quotes also Featley's MS. Collections.

Can any of your readers inform me whether Bishop Neile's episcopal register
for Lincoln is in existence, or whether any transcript of it is known? or
if any evidence, confirmatory of Le Neve's statement of the fact and date
of the consecration of the chapel of Hatfield, is known to exist?

WILLIAM H. COPE.

P.S. I have examined Dr. Matthew Hutton's transcripts of the Lincoln
registers, in the Harleian MSS., but they do not come down to within a
century of Bishop Neile's episcopate.

