WALES (L.). I'm going to try to find out who killed Spencer Lee.

CROSBY. Still harping on the murder of Spencer Lee?

(STANDISH _places the chairs above and below the table in the circle,
then the chair on the_ R. _side of the fireplace in the circle_.)

WALES. Yes.

MASON (_over_ R.--_opening window curtains and raising window blind_).
Who was Spencer Lee?

WALES. The best friend I ever had.

(TRENT _and_ WILLIAM _enter door_ R.C., _each carrying two chairs. They
bring them down_ R.C. _and exit_ R.C.)

STANDISH (_placing chairs_ C. _with backs to audience_). We all knew Lee
pretty well. And I know he was no good.

WALES (_moving to_ L.C., _outside the circle_). You mustn't talk like
that about him, Standish!

CROSBY (_inside the circle and coming down_ C.). The man's dead: why not
let him rest in peace?

(STANDISH _outside of circle_ L.C. _seat_.)

STANDISH. I didn't bring up the matter, you know, and I don't want to
hurt Ned's feelings, but I know that the police found a lot of
compromising letters and rotten things of that sort.

(WILLIAM _and_ TRENT _re-enter from_ R.C., _each carrying two chairs._
WILLIAM _crosses and places two chairs_ R. _side of circle then goes
back to close the door_.)

WALES (L.C.). I don't care what they found, or what anyone thinks of
Lee: he was my best friend, and if I can find out who killed him I'm
going to do it. It was a damned brutal murder, stabbed in the back, poor
chap, with never a chance to fight for his life. (_Moves over_ L.)

MASON (_by table_ R.). I don't seem to remember anything about the case.

WALES. It happened before you got back from France--no, by Jove, it
didn't either. It was a day or two after. I remember you and I had lunch
together the day you got home and I had dinner that night with Spencer.
Funny you don't remember anything about it.

(WILLIAM _sits_ R. _in circle_.)

MASON. Well, of course, I must have seen it in the papers, but I don't
go in much for crimes, and not knowing the man I wasn't interested.

STANDISH (_sitting in circle_ L.C.). It was a good deal of a sensation.
The man knew a lot of nice people. Came here a good deal, didn't he,
Mr. Crosby?

CROSBY (_sitting in circle up_ C.). At one time. But after Helen married
he rather dropped out of it. Fact is, until Trent here appeared on the
scene he was always hanging around.

(TRENT _comes down and sits in_ R. _side of circle_.)

STANDISH. Funny they never found out who killed him.

WALES (_standing outside of circle_, L. _side_). They may not. They
haven't stopped trying.

MASON (_seated on table_ R.). Oh, are the police still interested?

WALES. Yes, they're interested. As a matter of fact there's a reward of
five thousand dollars for the discovery of the murderers.

STANDISH. Are you sure of that?

WALES. I offered it.

TRENT. You?

WALES. Yes. What sort of a man do you think I am? Do you expect me to
sit still and let the murderers of Spencer Lee go free? Why, I'd known
the man all his life. We were the closest friends.

WILLIAM. But if he was the kind of a man that Standish says--

WALES. I don't give a damn what he was. He was my friend, and I'm never
going to rest till I find out who killed him.

TRENT. But.

WALES. I wouldn't care so much if they'd given the poor devil half a
chance for his life, but they stabbed him in the back.

MASON. Wasn't there any indication--

WALES. There wasn't a thing to show who did it, or how it was done. A
knife-wound between the shoulder-blades and no knife ever found. Nothing
stolen, nothing disturbed. The police have found out that a young woman
called to see him that afternoon, two or three hours before his body was
discovered. That's all that we know.

TRENT (_with a laugh--still seated in circle_). And now you're going to
try spiritualism?

WALES. Why not? (_There is a pause._) Do any of you object?

TRENT. Certainly not. I'm rather for it.

MASON (_rises, still on_ L. _of table_ R.). You are doing this
seriously? This is not a joke?

WALES. Quite seriously. (_There is a pause._) Well, why won't somebody
laugh?

CROSBY. My dear fellow, why should anyone laugh? This queer old woman
may have powers of which we know nothing at all. Personally, I haven't
much belief in that sort of thing, but I'm not going to laugh at it.
(_Rise._) Neither am I going to have any trickery, or if there is any
I'm going to expose it.

WALES (_over_ L.). That's perfectly fair.

CROSBY. You've been at her séances, or whatever they call them, before?

WALES. Yes.

CROSBY. In the dark?

WALES. Invariably.

CROSBY. I may want light. (_He turns to his son._) Billy, if I call for
lights you give them to me. Don't wait for anything. Understand?

WILLIAM. Perfectly, dad.

(WILLIAM _goes up to small table_ R. _of chesterfield. Brings table with
lamp on it down to his chair and the chair next to it in the circle_.)

CROSBY (_still in circle._) That's all right then.

(_The door_ L. _opens_. MRS. CROSBY _enters, followed by_ MADAME LA
GRANGE _and the other ladies_. WALES _moves to_ R.C. _outside circle_,
STANDISH _to upper end of table_ R., TRENT _to_ L. _side of circle_.)

MRS. CROSBY. I think it wasn't fair of us.

ROSALIE. Oh, madame, I did not mind.

(MRS. CROSBY _crosses back of chesterfield to up_ R.C.)

MISS EASTWOOD (_down_ L.). I can assure you there isn't anything up her
sleeve.

ROSALIE. Well, what did you expect? Burglar's tools?

(MISS EASTWOOD _goes up to_ L. _end of chesterfield_. MRS. TRENT _closes
door down_ L. _She and_ HELEN _move up_ L. _with_ Miss STANDISH.)

WALES (_over_ R.). Madame la Grange, we've fastened the windows.

(TRENT, STANDISH, ERSKINE _by console table_ L. _of chesterfield_.)

ROSALIE. That is right. You cannot be too careful, eh?

CROSBY. And now, if you don't mind, I'm going to lock the doors and keep
the keys in my pocket.

ROSALIE. Anything you do wish, sir. It is all the same to me.

(_Goes inside circle and sits down up_ C. _in circle_.)

MASON (R.C.). May I see that it's done, Mr. Crosby?

CROSBY (L.C., _with a laugh_). Can't you trust me?

MASON. It isn't that--I--well, I just want to be sure. To see for myself.

CROSBY. Lock that one yourself, then. (_Indicating door_ R.C. MASON
_goes to and locks the door_. CROSBY _goes to door_ L.C., _locks it,
takes out the key and puts it in his pocket_.) Better try it, Mason.
(MASON _crosses to door_ L.C.--_shows it is locked_.) Now well do this
one. (_He starts to door down_ L. _Then stops suddenly_.) No, I've got a
better way than this. My dear, will you ring for Pollock?

MRS. CROSBY (_upper end of table_ R.). What are you going to do now?

CROSBY. Wait and see. (_To_ ROSALIE.) You don't object to this?

ROSALIE. Oh, no, sir.

(BUTLER _enters from door_ L.--_comes well on stage_.)

CROSBY. Oh, Pollock, I want you to put these keys in your pocket.
(_Hands them to him_. POLLOCK _puts them in his waistcoat pocket_.)

POLLOCK. Yes, sir.

CROSBY (L.C.). Now then, I want you to take the key out of that door,
and lock it on the outside, understand?

POLLOCK. Perfectly, sir.

CROSBY. Then take the key from the lock and put that one in your pocket
also, after that you are to stand outside that door, and you are not to
unlock it until I tell you to. Understand?

POLLOCK. Yes, sir, I'm to lock this door on the outside, keep the key in
my pocket, and then stay just outside, and not open it for anyone until
you tell me.

CROSBY. Exactly. (_General buzz of conversation._ POLLOCK _goes to the
door_ L., _takes out the key and exits, closing the door after him. The
key is heard turning in the lock._) Now then, Mason, you'd better try
that door, too. (MASON _goes over and tries the door_ L. CROSBY _follows
him. Speaking through the door_ L.) Are you there, Pollock?

POLLOCK (_outside._) Yes, sir.

CROSBY. And the keys are in your pocket?

POLLOCK. Quite so, sir.

CROSBY. Now we're ready, Madame la Grange.

ROSALIE. Then please you will all sit in a circle and hold hands.

MISS ERSKINE. Hold hands! I'm going to love this.

(_All laugh._)

MASON (_moving down to a chair on the_ L. _of the circle_). How shall we
sit? I mean, do you want us in any particular order?

ROSALIE. Any way at all.

WILLIAM. I'll sit here. (_Takes chair and sits in reach of lamp on
table_ R.C.)

ROSALIE. Any way will do.

(HELEN _and_ MRS. TRENT _come down_ L.)

(_They all sit in a circle in the following order_: ROSALIE, C.; CROSBY
L. _of_ ROSALIE; MISS ERSKINE, MISS STANDISH, TRENT, MISS EASTWOOD;
MASON; HELEN; MRS. TRENT; STANDISH _and_ MRS. CROSBY; WILLIAM _sits on_
ROSALIE'S _right side. This will bring_ WALES _sitting at_ C. _with his
back to the audience_. ROSALIE _directly opposite up stage facing him.
The thirteen chairs in the circle consist of two brought from the
fireplace, two from the table_ R., _eight from the room_ R.C., _and the
armchair_ L.C., _which is moved_ C. _and used by_ ROSALIE. _As they are
being seated there is a general buzz of conversation as follows_:--)

MISS ERSKINE. I'm to sit next to you, Mr. Crosby.

CROSBY. I've always wanted to hold your hand, my dear.

MRS. CROSBY. Don't trust him, Daisy.

MISS ERSKINE. I won't, Mrs. Crosby.

MISS STANDISH. I'll chaperone them.

MASON (_to_ HELEN). Will you sit by me?

TRENT. I'll take this place then.

MISS EASTWOOD. I'm really getting quite a thrill. (ROSALIE _laughs_.)
What's the joke, Madame la Grange?

(MRS. TRENT _moves outside of circle to_ R.C., _then sits_.)

ROSALIE. I did not know anything could give to you a thrill.

MISS EASTWOOD. You don't like me, do you, Madame la Grange?

ROSALIE. Oh, mademoiselle, I am indeed very fond of you.

WALES (_standing below circle_ R.C.). I think we're all ready.

(_The others are all seated and_ WALES _is about to sit down_.)

MISS ERSKINE (_counting hurriedly_). Oh! There are thirteen of us. Don't
sit there, Mr. Wales.

WALES. Oh, I don't mind those little superstitions. (_Sits down stage
side of circle between_ HELEN _and_ MRS. TRENT.)

MRS. CROSBY. What do we do now?

ROSALIE. Now, will you please all join your 'ands, and then sit very,
_very_ quiet. Do not try to think of anything.

TRENT. By Jove, that'll be easy for me.

(_The others laugh_.)

WALES. We can't get any results if you treat this as a joke.

(_All laugh_.)

STANDISH. Oh, let's be serious.

MISS ERSKINE. Why, Howard?

STANDISH. Well, there might be something in it. Anyhow, it's only fair
to do what Madame la Grange wants. I suppose you'd like the lights out?
I've always understood that was necessary.

ROSALIE. We shall 'ave better results in that way.

CROSBY. Right! (_He rises, goes to door_ L., _and switches off light.
This leaves only the two table lamps_ R. _and_ L. _of the chesterfield_
C. _still lit. All other lights on scene out. Crosses back to his
chair--turns out table lamp_ L. _of chesterfield._) Billy, you turn out
that light as soon as we are ready.

WILLIAM. Right you are, dad.

ROSALIE. That is all, then. Now you are not to be afraid if I cry or
moan when I do go into a trance. I am not in pain or anything like that.
I do not even know that I do such things, but I 'ave been told that
it sometime 'appen. My spirit control is a sweet little child named
Laughing Eyes. When she begins to talk you can ask 'er anything you do
want. If she do not answer you she do not want to talk to you. Then
whoever it is speaking must let someone else try. That is all, ladies
and gentlemen. (_She settles back in her chair._) Now then, sir,
please to put out that light.

(WILLIAM _turns off the light, and the stage is in darkness all but
spots on ceiling._)

CROSBY. That won't do. Billy, pull down the blind, that light on the
ceiling is too strong.

(WILLIAM _turns on light, crosses_ R., _pulls blind down and closes
curtains, then resumes his seat and puts light out._ ROSALIE _rises,
crosses back of circle to the back of_ MISS EASTWOOD'S _chair. There
is a pause. Suddenly_ MISS EASTWOOD _screams shrilly._)

MISS EASTWOOD. There's a hand on my face. There's a hand on my face!

CROSBY. Will, the light!

(_The light on the table goes up, showing_ WILLIAM _leaning back in his
chair with one hand on the switch, the other is tightly clasped in his
father's hand._ ROSALIE _is seen standing behind_ MISS EASTWOOD, _with
her hand resting on_ MISS EASTWOOD'S _cheek._)

(_They all start to speak._)

MRS. TRENT. It's a trick.

ROSALIE. Yes, it is a trick. (_They stop and stare at her. Her manner is
commanding, and a little stern._) I was going to ask you to tie my 'ands
to the arm of the chair, but I thought I would show you this first.

MASON. I don't see how you did it--even now.

ROSALIE (_standing outside of circle_ L.). Things 'appen in the dark.
The sense of touch is not much developed except in those who are blind.
When this young gentleman did let go my 'and to turn out the light,
I did take my other 'and away from Mr. Crosby and when we joined 'ands
again the two gentlemen were 'olding 'ands as comfortable as you please.
And I was free. It is an old trick. All the mediums do use it. Anyone
can do it. (_She moves back to her chair and sits._) Now, if someone
will tie me in, we will go on.

MASON. How do we know that you can't get free even then?

ROSALIE. Tie me so that I cannot.

CROSBY (_rising_). I'll see to that. I want something strong.

MASON. Take handkerchiefs, they are strong enough. (_Takes handkerchief._)

CROSBY. They'll do very well. (_Takes out his own._) I want three more.

WILLIAM. Here's mine. (_Hands his handkerchief to his father._ MASON
_and_ TRENT _give_ CROSBY _theirs._)

CROSBY. Now, Madame la Grange, if you don't mind. (_He ties her hands to
the arm of the chair._) I don't see why you did that just now.

ROSALIE. I told you I wanted to be sure.

CROSBY. Why?

ROSALIE. Because I think something is going to 'appen. I think there
will be manifestations. I wanted you to know I was not faking.

MISS EASTWOOD. Why should we think that you were?

ROSALIE. Why, you 'ave thought nothing else ever since I did come into
the room.

CROSBY. Mason, see if she can get free from that now.

(MASON _comes over, inspects the knot._ CROSBY _tying the other hand._)

MASON. That seems pretty secure--someone else look at it.

(WILLIAM _and_ TRENT _rise and go to_ ROSALIE'S _chair._)

CROSBY. I'm going to fasten your ankles now, Madame la Grange.

ROSALIE. Yes, that is right.

(CROSBY _ties_ ROSALIE'S _ankles to leg of chair. The other two men look
on._)

WALES. I don't believe all this is necessary.

ROSALIE. Why not, if they do want it.

CROSBY. Now I'm sure she can't get away.

(MASON _inspects knot._)

MASON. So am I.

(_The men resume their places._)

ROSALIE. Well, now, if you will all sit down, please-- (_Pause._)
You will have to reach over and take my hands this time--are you all
satisfied now? Is there anything more you want me to do? (_There is no
answer._) Then if you will all sit quiet, just keep your minds perfectly
free, that is all you 'ave to do. Now, sir, please to turn out the light.

(WILLIAM _turns out the light._)

(_There is a long pause._ ROSALIE _moans and whispers as if in pain._)

HELEN. I can't stand this, I--

WALES. Please keep still--she asked us to keep still.

(ROSALIE _moans again; after a short pause, she gives a choking sob;
another pause. Finally she speaks with frequent pauses, using the
voice of a little child._)

ROSALIE. Laughing Eyes is sad, very sad. I a ma long way off--a long
way. (_Pause._) Bad people, bad people, un'appy--he is un'appy--
(_Pause._) (_Knife is set down in sight of audience, sticking in the
ceiling._) Spencer wants to tell Ned-- (_She moans heavily._) It
hurts--terrible--like a knife--it burns--burns, in the back--

(_A man's voice from the chesterfield, facing fireplace, speaks:_)

VOICE. Ned, I want Ned--why in _Hell_ doesn't Ned answer?

ROSALIE (_in child's voice_). He wants to talk to Ned--is Ned here?

STANDISH. Ned who? Who is it? Who does he want to speak to?

ROSALIE (_in child's voice_). Tell Ned it is Spencer--Spencer wants
to tell Ned about the letters and the pain in the back--in the back.

STANDISH. What was in the back? (_There is no answer._) Ask him what was
in the back?

ROSALIE (_still using child's voice_). The knife--Ned--he wants Ned.

WALES. What do you want!

ROSALIE. A swimming pool--do not forget the swimming pool. Do not ever
forget--

WALES. You mean the time he went in after me when I was drowning? When
we were little boys? Is that what he wants me to remember?

ROSALIE. Spencer says he cannot rest--he wants to tell you it is hard to
reach--too far away--you promised--

WALES. Promised what? When did I promise!

ROSALIE. Your life saved--

WALES. Now I know--I told him I'd do anything in the world for him.
Spencer, of course, I remember--what do you want me to do?

ROSALIE. Find--find--

WALES. Do you want me to find the letters?

ROSALIE. In the back--someone came--someone came.

WALES. You're trying to tell who killed you?

ROSALIE. Ask--ask--ask.

WALES. You want me to ask questions? Is that it? You mean you can't talk
much?

ROSALIE. Too far away.

CROSBY. You know who killed you?

(_There is a pause, but no answer._)

ROSALIE. He says Ned, he wants Ned.

WALES. You want me to ask.

ROSALIE. He wants Ned to ask.

WALES. Do you know who killed you?

MRS. TRENT (_hysterically_). Oh, my God!

CROSBY. Keep still, Helen.

WALES. Can you tell the name? (ROSALIE _suddenly gives a long moan._)
Quick, the name, the name. Spencer, tell me who killed you--she's coming
out of her trance. I want the name. (ROSALIE _moans again. Her cry is
overtopped by a shriek from_ WALES.) Oh, my God! My back--oh! (_Then
there is a dead silence that lasts as long as it will hold._)

CROSBY. Wales, is anything the matter?

MRS. TRENT. Father, he's pulling at my hand.

CROSBY. The light, Will.

(WILLIAM _suddenly turns on the light at table._ WALES _is discovered
leaning forward, the circle is unbroken._)

MRS. TRENT. Look at him! Father! Look at him!

(CROSBY _drops_ ROSALIE'S _hand and springs forward towards_ WALES.
_At the same instant_ WALES _falls forward on his face to the floor.
The others all rise, chairs are knocked over in the confusion which
follows._)

CROSBY. Stand back, please. (_The others move back a little._ CROSBY
_leans over_ WALES.) Why, he--why--it's impossible.

MRS. CROSBY. Roscoe, look at your hand.

(CROSBY _looks at his hand, takes out his handkerchief and wipes it
hurriedly, then crosses suddenly to the door_ L. ROSALIE _has come out
of her trance and sits staring at_ WALES _as he lies on the floor in
front of her. The two figures are thrown out from the shadows of the
room by the light on the table at the back of_ MADAME LA GRANGE. _The
rest of the room is in semi-darkness._ TRENT _kneels by_ WALES' _body._)

CROSBY. Pollock! Pollock!

POLLOCK (_outside_). Yes, sir.

(TRENT _turns_ WALES' _body over on back._)

CROSBY. Get on the 'phone at once and call up Police Headquarters. Get
Inspector Donohue if you can. Tell him to come to the house at once.

POLLOCK. Very good, sir.

(CROSBY _turns away from the door, and faces the others who have
followed him over._)

WILLIAM. Father, what do you suppose it is? Are you sure that--

MRS. TRENT. It can't be. He was talking and--

MRS. CROSBY. Roscoe, are you sure? Hadn't we better send for a doctor?

(TRENT _is leaning over_ WALES' _body on the floor._)

TRENT. It's no use. He's dead.

CROSBY. Murdered!

TRENT (_rises_). What?

