He continues to press the point thus: "If the Devils now can strike the
minds of men with any poisons of so fine a composition and operation,
that scores of innocent people shall unite, in confessions of a crime,
which we see actually committed, it is a thing prodigious, beyond the
wonders of the former ages; and it threatens no less than a sort of a
dissolution upon the world. Now, by these confessions, it is agreed,
that the Devil has made a dreadful knot of witches in the country, and
by the help of witches has dreadfully increased that knot; that these
witches have driven a trade of commissioning their confederate spirits,
to do all sorts of mischiefs to the neighbors, whereupon there have
ensued such mischievous consequences upon the bodies and estates of the
neighborhood, as could not otherwise be accounted for; yea, that at
prodigious Witch-meetings the wretches have proceeded so far as to
concert and consult the methods of rooting out the Christian religion
from this country, and setting up, instead of it, perhaps a more gross
Diabolism, than ever the world saw before. And yet it will be a thing
little short of miracle, if, in so spread a business as this, the Devil
should not get in some of his juggles, to confound the discovery of all
the rest."

In the last sentence of the foregoing passage, we see an idea, which
Mather expressed in several instances. It amounts to this. Suppose the
Devil does "sometimes" make use of the spectre of an innocent person--he
does it for the purpose of destroying our faith in that kind of
evidence, and leading us to throw it all out, thereby "confounding the
discovery" of those cases in which, as ordinarily, he makes use of the
spectres of his guilty confederates, and, in effect, sheltering "all the
rest," that is, the whole body of those who are the willing and
covenanted subjects of his diabolical kingdom, from detection. He says:
"The witches have not only intimated, but some of them acknowledged,
that they have plotted the representations of innocent persons to cover
and shelter themselves in their witchcrafts."

He further suggests--for no other purpose, it would seem, than to
reconcile us to the use of such evidence, even though, it may, in "rare
and extraordinary" instances, bear against innocent persons, scarcely,
however, to be apprehended, "when matters come before civil
judicature"--that it may be the divine will, that, occasionally, an
innocent person _may be cut off_: "Who of us can exactly state how far
our God may, for our chastisement, permit the Devil to proceed in such
an abuse?" He then alludes to the meeting of Ministers, under his
father's auspices, at Cambridge, on the first of August; quotes with
approval, the result of his "Discourse," then held; and immediately
proceeds: "It is rare and extraordinary, for an honest Naboth to have
his life itself sworn away by two children of Belial, and yet no
infringement hereby made on the Rectoral Righteousness of our eternal
Sovereign, whose judgments are a great deep, and who gives none account
of his matters."--_Page 9._

The amount of all this is, that it is so rare and extraordinary for the
Devil to assume the spectral shape of an innocent person, that it is
best, "when," as his expression is, in another place, "the public safety
makes an exigency," to receive and act upon such evidence, even if it
should lead to the conviction of an innocent person--a thing so seldom
liable to occur, and, indeed, barely possible. The procedure would be
but carrying out the divine "permission," and a fulfilment of "the
Rectoral Righteousness" of Him, whose councils are a great deep, not to
be accounted for to, or by, us.

In summing up what the witches had been doing at Salem Village, during
the preceding Summer, Mather says: "The Devil, exhibiting himself
ordinarily as a small black man, has decoyed a fearful knot of proud,
froward, ignorant, envious and malicious creatures to list themselves in
his horrid service by entering their names in a book, by him tendered
unto them." "That they, each of them, have, their spectres or Devils,
commissioned by them, and representing them, to be the engines of their
malice." He enumerates, as facts, all the statements of the "afflicted"
witnesses and confessing witches, as to the horrible and monstrous
things perpetrated by the spectres of the accused parties; and he
applauds the Court, testifying to the successful and beneficial issue of
its proceedings. "Our honorable Judges have used, as Judges have
heretofore done, the spectral evidence, to introduce their further
enquiries into the lives of the persons accused; and they have,
thereupon, by the wonderful Providence of God, been so strengthened with
other evidences, that some of the Witch-gang have been fairly
executed."--_Pages 41, 43._

The language of Cotton Mather, as applied to those who had suffered, as
witches, "a fearful knot of proud, froward, ignorant, envious and
malicious creatures--a Witch-gang,"--is rather hard, as coming from a
Minister who, as the Reviewer asserts, had officiated in their death
scenes, witnessed their devout and Christian expressions and deportment,
and been their comforter, consoler, counsellor and friend.

The dissatisfaction that pervaded the public mind, about the time of the
last executions at Salem, which Phips describes, was so serious, that
both the Mathers were called in to allay it. The father also, at the
request of the Ministers, wrote a book, entitled, _Cases of Conscience,
concerning Evil Spirits, personating men, Witchcrafts, &c._, the general
drift of which is against spectral evidence. He says: "Spectres are
Devils, in the shape of persons, either living or dead." Speaking of
bewitched persons, he says: "What they affirm, concerning others, is not
to be taken for evidence. Whence had they this supernatural sight? It
must needs be either from Heaven or from Hell. If from Heaven (as
Elisha's servant and Balaam's ass could discern Angels) let their
testimony be received. But if they had this knowledge from Hell, though
there may possibly be truth in what they affirm, they are not legal
witnesses: for the Law of God allows of no revelation from any other
Spirit but himself. _Isa._, viii., 19. It is a sin against God, to make
use of the Devil's help to know that which cannot be otherwise known;
and I testify against it, as a great transgression, which may justly
provoke the Holy One of Israel, to let loose Devils on the whole land.
_Luke_, iv., 38."

After referring to a couple of writers on the subject, the very next
sentence is this: "Although the Devil's accusations may be so far
regarded as to cause an enquiry into the truth of things, _Job_, i., 11,
12, and ii., 5, 6; yet not so as to be an evidence or ground of
conviction."

It appears therefore, that Increase Mather, while writing with much
force and apparent vehemence against spectral evidence, still in reality
countenanced its introduction, as a basis of "enquiry into the truth of
things," preliminary to other evidence. This was, after all, to use the
form of thought of these writers, letting the Devil into the case; and
that was enough, from the nature of things, in the then state of wild
superstition and the blind delusions of the popular mind, to give to
spectral evidence the controlling sway it had in the Salem trials, and
would necessarily have, every where, when introduced at all.

In a Postscript to _Cases of Conscience_, Increase Mather says that he
hears that "some have taken up a notion," that there was something
contradictory between his views and those of his son, set forth in the
_Wonders of the Invisible World_. "Tis strange that such imaginations
should enter into the minds of men." He goes on to say he had read and
approved of his son's book, before it was printed; and falls back, as
both of them always did, when pressed, upon the _Advice_ of the
Ministers, of the fifteenth of June, in which, he says, they concurred.

There can be no manner of doubt that the "strange" opinion did prevail,
at the time, and has ever since, that the father and son did entertain
very different sentiments about the Salem proceedings. The precise form
of that difference is not easily ascertained. The feelings, so natural
and proper, on both sides, belonging to the relation they sustained to
each other, led them to preserve an appearance of harmony, especially in
whatever was committed to the press. Then, again, the views they each
entertained were in themselves so inconsistent, that it was not
difficult to persuade themselves that they were substantially similar.
There was much in the father, for the son to revere: there was much in
the son, for the father to admire. Besides, the habitual style in which
they and the Ministers of that day indulged, of saying and unsaying, on
the same page--putting a proposition and then linking to it a
countervailing one--covered their tracks to each other and to
themselves. This is their apology; and none of them needs it more than
Cotton Mather. He was singularly blind to logical sequence. With
wonderful power over language, he often seems not to appreciate the
import of what he is saying; and to this defect, it is agreeable to
think, much, if not all, that has the aspect of a want of fairness and
even truthfulness, in his writings may be attributed.

As associate Ministers of the same congregation, it was desirable for
the Mathers to avoid being drawn into a conflicting attitude, on any
matter of importance. Drake, however, in his _History of Boston_, (_p.
545_) says that there was supposed, at the formation of the New North
Church, in that place, in 1712, to have been a jealousy between them.
There were, indeed, many points of dissimilarity, as well as of
similarity, in their culture, experience, manners, and ways; and men
conversant with them, at the time, may have noticed a difference in
their judgments and expressions, relating to the witchcraft affair, of
which no knowledge has come to us, except the fact, that it was so
understood at the time.

Cotton Mather brought all his ability to bear in preparing the _Wonders
of the Invisible World_. It is marked throughout by his peculiar genius,
and constructed with great ingenuity and elaboration; but it was "water
spilt on the ground." So far as the end, for which it was designed, is
regarded, it died before it saw the light.


XIII.

THE COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER BROUGHT TO A SUDDEN END. SIR WILLIAM
PHIPS.


When Sir William Phips went to the eastward, it was expected that his
absence would be prolonged to the twelfth of October. We cannot tell
exactly when he returned; probably some days before the twelfth. Writing
on the fourteenth, he says, that before any application was made to him
for the purpose, he had put a stop to the proceedings of the Court. He
probably signified, informally, to the Judges, that they must not meet
on the day to which they had adjourned. Brattle, writing on the eighth,
had not heard any thing of the kind. But the Rev. Samuel Torrey of
Weymouth, who was in full sympathy with the prosecutors, had heard of it
on the seventh, as appears by this entry in Sewall's Diary: "OCT. 7^th,
1692. Mr. Torrey seems to be of opinion, that the Court of Oyer and
Terminer should go on, regulating any thing that may have been amiss,
when certainly found to be so."

Sewall and Stoughton were among the principal friends of Torrey; and he,
probably, had learned from them, Phips's avowed purpose to stop the
proceedings of the Court, in the witchcraft matter. The Court, however,
was allowed to sit, in other cases, as it held a trial in Boston, on the
tenth, in a capital case of the ordinary kind. The purpose of the
Governor gradually became known. Danforth, in a conversation with
Sewall, at Cambridge, on the fifteenth, expressed the opinion that the
witchcraft trials ought not to proceed any further.

It is not unlikely that Phips, while at the eastward, had received some
communication that hastened his return. He describes the condition of
things, as he found it. We know that the lives of twenty people had been
taken away, one of them a Minister of the Gospel. Two Ministers had been
accused, one of them the Pastor of the Old South Church; the name of the
other is not known. A hundred were in prison; about two hundred more
were under accusation, including some men of great estates in Boston,
the mother-in-law of one of the Judges, Corwin, and a member of the
family of Increase Mather, although, as he says, in no way related to
him. A Magistrate, who was a member of the House of Assembly, had fled
for his life; and Phips's trusted naval commander, a man of high
standing in the Church and in society, as well as in the service, after
having been committed to Jail, had escaped to parts unknown. More than
all, the Governor's wife had been cried out upon. We can easily imagine
his state of mind. Sir William Phips was noted for the sudden violence
of his temper. Mather says that he sometimes "showed choler enough."
Hutchinson says that "he was of a benevolent, friendly disposition; at
the same time quick and passionate;" and, in illustration of the latter
qualities, he relates that he got into a fisticuff fight with the
Collector of the Port, on the wharf, handling him severely; and that,
having high words, in the street, with a Captain of the Royal Navy, "the
Governor made use of his cane and broke Short's head." When his Lady
told her story to him, and pictured the whole scene of the "strange
ferment" in the domestic and social circles of Boston and throughout the
country, it was well for the Chief-justice, the Judges, and perhaps his
own Ministers, that they were not within the reach of those "blows,"
with which, as Mather informs us, in the _Life of Phips_, the rough
sailor was wont, when the gusts of passion were prevailing, to "chastise
incivilities," without reference to time or place, rank or station.

But, as was his wont, the storm of wrath soon subsided; his purpose,
however, under the circumstances, as brave as it was wise and just, was,
as the result showed, unalterable. He communicated to the Judges,
personally, that they must sit no more, at Salem or elsewhere, to try
cases of witchcraft; and that no more arrests must be made, on that
charge.

Mather's book, all ready as it was for the press, thus became labor
thrown away. It was not only rendered useless for the purpose designed,
but a most serious difficulty obstructed its publication. Phips forbade
the "printing of any discourses, one way or another;" and the _Wonders_
had incorporated in it some Sermons, impregnated, through and through,
with combustible matter, in Phips's view, likely to kindle an
inextinguishable flame.

All that could be done was to keep still, in the hope that he would
become more malleable. In the meanwhile, public business called him
away, perhaps to Rhode Island or Connecticut, from the eighteenth to the
twenty-seventh of October. In his absence, whether in consequence of
movements he had put in train, or solely from what had become known of
his views, the circumstance occurred which is thus related in Sewall's
Diary--the Legislature was then in Session: "OCT. 26, 1692. A Bill is
sent in about calling a Fast and Convocation of Ministers, that may be
led in the right way, as to the Witchcrafts. The season, and manner of
doing it, is such, that the Court of Oyer and Terminer count themselves
thereby dismissed. 29 nos & 33 yeas to the Bill. Capt. Bradstreet, and
Lieut. True, Wm. Hutchins, and several other interested persons, in the
affirmative."

The course of Nathaniel Saltonstall, of Haverhill, and the action in the
Legislature of the persons here named, entitle the Merrimac towns of
Essex-county to the credit of having made the first public and effectual
resistance to the fanaticism and persecutions of 1692.

The passage of this Bill, in the House of Representatives, shows how the
public mind had been changed, since the June Session. Dudley Bradstreet
was a Magistrate and member from Andover, son of the old Governor, and,
with his wife, had found safety from prosecution by flight; Henry True,
a member from Salisbury, was son-in-law of Mary Bradbury, who had been
condemned to death; Samuel Hutchins, (inadvertently called "Wm.," by
Sewall) was a member from Haverhill, and connected by marriage with a
family, three of whom were tried for their lives. Sewall says there were
"several other" members of the House, interested in like manner. This
shows into what high circles the accusers had struck.

It appears, by the same Diary, that on the twenty-seventh, Cotton Mather
preached the Thursday Lecture, from _James_, i., 4. The day of trial was
then upon him and his fellow-actors; and patience was inculcated as the
duty of the hour.

The Diary relates that at a meeting of the Council, on the
twenty-eighth, in the afternoon, Sewall, "desired to have the advice of
the Governor and Council, as to the sitting of the Court of Oyer and
Terminer, next week; said, should move it no more; great silence
prevailed, as if should say, Do not go."

The entry does not state whether Phips was present; as, however, the
time fixed for his recent brief absence had expired, probably he was in
his seat. The following mishap, described by Sewall, as occurring that
day, perhaps detained the Deputy-governor: "OCT. 28. Lt. Gov^r, coming
over the causey, is, by reason of the high tide, so wet, that is fain to
go to bed, till sends for dry clothes to Dorchester."

The "great silence" was significant of the embarrassment in which they
were placed, and their awe of the "choler" of the Governor.

The Diary gives the following account of the Session the next day, at
which, (as Sewall informs us,) the Lieutenant-governor was not present:
"OCT. 29. Mr. Russel asked, whether the Court of Oyer and Terminer
should sit, expressing some fear of inconvenience by its fall. Governor
said, it must fall."

Thus died the Court of Oyer and Terminer. Its friends cherished, to the
last, the hope that Sir William might be placated, and possibly again
brought under control; but it vanished, when the emphatic and resolute
words, reported by Sewall, were uttered.

The firmness and force of character of the Governor are worthy of all
praise. Indeed, the illiterate and impulsive sailor has placed himself,
in history, far in front of all the honored Judges and learned Divines,
of his day. Not one of them penetrated the whole matter as he did, when
his attention was fully turned to it, and his feelings enlisted, to
decide, courageously and righteously, the question before him. He saw
that no life was safe while the evidence of the "afflicted persons" was
received, "either to the committing or trying" of any persons. He thus
broke through the meshes which had bound Judges and Ministers, the
writers of books and the makers of laws; and swept the whole fabric of
"spectral testimony" away, whether as matter of "enquiry" and
"presumption," or of "conviction." The ship-carpenter of the Kennebec
laid the axe to the root of the tree.

The following extract from a letter of Sir William Phips, just put into
my hands, and for which I am indebted to Mr. Goodell, substantiates the
conclusions to which I have been led.

    "_Governor Phips to the Lords of the Committee of Trade and
    Plantations, 3 April, 1693._

    "MAY IT PLEASE YOUR LORDSHIPS:

    "I have intreated M^r Blathwayte to lay before your Lordships
    several letters, wherein I have given a particular account of my
    stopping a supposed witchcraft, which had proved fatall to many of
    their Maj^ties good subjects, had there not been a speedy end putt
    thereto; for a stop putt to the proceedings against such as were
    accused, hath caused the thing itself to cease."

This shows that, addressing officially his Home Government, he assumed
the responsibility of having "stopped and put a speedy end to the
proceedings;" that he had no great faith in the doctrines then received
touching the reality of witchcraft; and that he was fully convinced
that, if he had allowed the trials to go on, and the inflammation of the
public mind to be kept up by "discourses," the bloody tragedy would have
been prolonged, and "proved fatal to many good" people.

There are two men--neither of them belonging to the class of scholars or
Divines; both of them guided by common sense, good feeling, and a
courageous and resolute spirit--who stand alone, in the scenes of the
witchcraft delusions. NATHANIEL SALTONSTALL, who left the Council and
the Court, the day the Ministers' _Advice_, to go on with the
prosecutions, was received, and never appeared again until that _Advice_
was abandoned and repudiated; and Sir WILLIAM PHIPS, who stamped it out
beneath his feet.

But how with Cotton Mather's Book, the _Wonders of the Invisible World_?
On the eleventh of October, Stoughton and Sewall signed a paper, printed
in the book, [_p. 88_] endorsing its contents, especially as to "matters
of fact and evidence" and the "methods of conviction used in the
proceedings of the Court at Salem." The certificate repeats the form of
words, so often used in connection with the book, that it was written
"at the direction of His Excellency the Governor," without, as in all
cases, specifying who, whether Phips or Stoughton, was the Governor
referred to. As all the Judges were near at hand, and as the certificate
related to the proceedings before them, it is quite observable that only
the two mentioned signed it. As they were present, in the private
conference, with Cotton Mather, at the house of one of them, on the
twenty-second of September, when its preparation for publication was
finally arranged, they could not well avoid signing it. The times were
critical; and the rest of the Judges, knowing the Governor's feelings,
thought best not to appear. Of the three other persons, at that
conference, Hathorne, it is true, was a Judge of that Court, but it is
doubtful whether he often, or ever, took his seat as such; besides, he
was too experienced and cautious a public man, unnecessarily to put his
hand to such a paper, when it was known, as it was probably to him, that
Sir William Phips had forbidden publications of the kind.

There is another curious document, in the _Wonders_--a letter from
Stoughton to Mather, highly applauding the book, in which he
acknowledges his particular obligations to him for writing it, as "more
nearly and highly concerned" than others, considering his place in the
Court, expressing in detail his sense of the great value of the work,
"at this juncture of time," and concluding thus: "I do therefore make it
my particular and earnest Request unto you, that, as soon as may be, you
will commit the same unto the press, accordingly." It is signed, without
any official title of distinction, simply "WILLIAM STOUGHTON," and is
_without date_.

It is singular, if Phips was the person who requested it to be written
and was the "Excellency" who authorized its publication, that it was
left to William Stoughton to "request" its being put to press.

The foregoing examination of dates and facts seems, almost, to compel
the conclusion, to be drawn also from his letter, that Sir William Phips
really had nothing whatever to do with procuring the preparation or
sanctioning the publication of the _Wonders of the Invisible World_.
The same is true as to the request to the Ministers, for their _Advice_,
dated the fifteenth of June. It was "laid before the Judges;" and was,
undoubtedly, a response to an application from them. Having, very
improperly, it must be confessed, given the whole matter of the trials
over to Stoughton, and being engrossed in other affairs, it is quite
likely that he knew but little of what had been going on, until his
return from the eastward, in October. And his frequent and long
absences, leaving Stoughton, so much of the time, with all the functions
and titles of Governor devolved upon him, led to speaking of the latter
as "His Excellency." When bearing this title and acting as Governor, for
the time being, the Chief-justice, with the side Judges--all of them
members of the Council, and in number meeting the requirement in the
Charter for a quorum, seven--may have been considered, as substantially,
"The Governor and Council."

Thinking it more than probable that, in this way, great wrong has been
done to the memory of an honest and noble-hearted man, I have endeavored
to set things in their true light. The perplexities, party
entanglements, personal collisions, and engrossing cares that absorbed
the attention of Sir William Phips, during the brief remainder of his
life, and the little interest he felt in such things, prevented his
noticing the false position in which he had been placed by the
undistinguishing use of titular phrases.

Judge Sewall's Diary contains an entry that, also, sheds light upon the
position of the Mathers. It will be borne in mind, that Elisha Cook was
the colleague of Increase Mather, as Colonial Agents in London. Cook
refused assent to the new Charter, and became the leader of the
anti-Mather party. He was considered an opponent of the witchcraft
prosecutions, although out of the country at the time. "TUESDAY, NOV.
15, 1692. M^r Cook keeps a Day of Thanksgiving for his safe arrival."
* * * [_Many mentioned as there, among them Mr. Willard._] "Mr. Allen
preached from Jacob's going to Bethel, * * * Mr. Mather not there, nor
Mr. Cotton Mather. The good Lord unite us in his fear, and remove our
animosities."

The manner in which Sewall distinguished the two Mathers confirms the
views presented on pages 37, 38.

It may be remarked, that, up to this time, Sewall seems to have been in
full sympathy with Stoughton and Mather. He was, however, beginning to
indulge in conversations that indicate a desire to feel the ground he
was treading. After a while, he became thoroughly convinced of his
error; and there are scattered, in the margins of his Diary, expressions
of much sensibility at the extent to which he had been misled. Over
against an entry, giving an account of his presence at an Examination
before Magistrates, of whom he was one, on the eleventh of April, 1692,
at Salem, is the interjection, thrice repeated, "_Vae, Vae, Vae_." At
the opening of the year 1692, he inserted, at a subsequent period, this
passage: "_Attonitus tamen est, ingens discrimine parvo committi
potuisse Nefas._"[4]


FOOTNOTES:

[4] For the privilege of inspecting and using Judge Sewall's Diary I am
indebted to the kindness of the Massachusetts Historical Society: and I
would also express my thanks, for similar favors and civilities, to the
officers in charge of the Records and Archives in the Massachusetts
State House, the Librarian of Harvard University, the Essex Institute,
and many individuals, not mentioned in the text, especially those
devoted collectors and lovers of our old New England literature, Samuel
G. Drake and John K. Wiggin.


XIV.

COTTON MATHER'S WRITINGS SUBSEQUENT TO THE WITCHCRAFT PROSECUTIONS.


I propose, now, to enquire into the position Cotton Mather occupied, and
the views he expressed, touching the matter, after the witchcraft
prosecutions had ceased and the delusion been dispelled from the minds
of other men.

During the Winter of 1692 and 1693, between one and two hundred
prisoners, including confessing witches, remained in Jail, at Salem,
Ipswich, and other places. A considerable number were in the Boston
Jail. It seems, from the letter to Secretary Allyn of Connecticut, that,
during that time, the Mathers were in communication with them, and
receiving from them the names of persons whose spectres, they declared,
they had seen and suffered from, as employed in the Devil's work. After
all that had happened, and the order of Sir William Phips, forbidding
attempts to renew the excitement, it is wonderful that the Mathers
should continue such practices. In the latter part of the Summer of
1693, they were both concerned in the affair of Margaret Rule; and
Cotton Mather prepared, and put into circulation, an elaborate account
of it, some extracts from which have been presented, and which will be
further noticed, in another connection.

His next work, in the order of time, which I shall consider, is his
_Life of Sir William Phips_, printed in London, in 1697, and afterwards
included in the _Magnalia_, also published in London, a few years
afterwards, constituting the last part of the Second Book. _The Life of
Phips_ is, perhaps, the most elaborate and finished of all Mather's
productions; and "adorned," as his uncle Nathaniel Mather says, in a
commendatory note, "with a very grateful variety of learning." In it,
Sir William, who had died, at London, three years before, is painted in
glowing colors, as one of the greatest of conquerors and rulers,
"dropped, as it were, from the Machine of Heaven;" "for his exterior, he
was one tall, beyond the common lot of men; and thick, as well as tall,
and strong as well as thick. He was, in all respects, exceedingly
robust, and able to conquer such difficulties of diet and of travel, as
would have killed most men alive;" "he was well set, and he was
therewithall of a very comely, though a very manly, countenance." He is
described as of "a most incomparable generosity," "of a forgiving
spirit." His faults are tenderly touched; "upon certain affronts, he has
made sudden returns, that have shewed choler enough; and he has, by
blow, as well as by word, chastised incivilities."

It is remarkable that Mather should have laid himself out, to such an
extent of preparation and to such heights of eulogy, as this work
exhibits. It is dedicated to the Earl of Bellamont, just about to come
over, as Phips's successor. Mather held in his hand a talisman of favor,
influence, and power. In the Elegy which concludes the _Life_, are lines
like these:

    "Phips, our great friend, our wonder, and our glory,
    The terror of our foes, the world's rare story,
    Or but name Phips, more needs not be expressed,
    Both Englands, and next ages, tell the rest."

The writer of this _Life_ had conferred the gift of an immortal name
upon one Governor of New England, and might upon another.

But with all this panegyric, he does not seem to have been careful to be
just to the memory of his hero. The reader is requested, at this point,
to turn back to pages 23, 24, of this article, and examine the
paragraph, quoted from the _Life of Phips_, introducing the return of
_Advice_ from the Ministers. I have shown, in that connection, how
deceptive the expression "arriving to his Government" is. In reporting
the _Advice_ of the Ministers, in the _Life of Phips_, Mather omits the
paragraphs I have placed within brackets [_p. 21, 22_]--the _first_,
_second_ and _eighth_. The omission of these paragraphs renders the
document, as given by Mather, an absolute misrepresentation of the
transaction, and places Phips in the attitude of having disregarded the
advice of the Ministers, in suffering the trials to proceed as they did;
throwing upon his memory a load of infamy, outweighing all the florid
and extravagant eulogies showered upon him, in the _Life_: verifying and
fulfilling the apprehensions he expressed in his letter of the
fourteenth of October, 1692: "I know my enemies are seeking to turn it
all upon me."

The Reviewer says that "Mr. Mather did not profess to quote the whole
_Advice_, but simply made extracts from it." He professed to give what
the Ministers "declared." I submit to every honorable mind, whether what
Mather printed, omitting the _first_, _second_ and _eighth_ Sections,
was a fair statement of what the Ministers "declared."

The paragraphs he selected, appear, on their face, to urge caution and
even delay, in the proceedings. They leave this impression on the
general reader, and have been so regarded from that day to this. The
artifice, by which the responsibility for what followed was shifted,
from the Ministers, upon Phips and the Court, has, in a great measure,
succeeded. I trust that I have shown that the clauses and words that
seem to indicate caution, had very little force, in that direction; but
that, when the disguising veil of an artful phraseology is removed, they
give substantial countenance to the proceedings of the Court,
throughout.

I desire, at this point, to ask the further attention of the reader to
Mather's manner of referring to the _Advice of the Ministers_. In his
_Wonders_, he quotes the _eighth_ and _second_ Articles of it (_Pages
12, 55_), in one instance, ascribing the _Advice_ to "Reverend persons,"
"men of God," "gracious men," and, in the other, characterizing it as
"gracious words." He also, in the same work, quotes the _sixth_ Article,
_omitting the words I have placed in brackets, without any indication of
an omission_. Writing, in 1692, when the delusion was at its height, and
for the purpose of keeping the public mind up to the work of the
prosecutions, he gloried chiefly in the _first_, _second_, and _eighth_
Articles, and brought them alone forward, in full. The others he passed
over, with the exception of the _sixth_, from which he struck out the
central sentence--that having the appearance of endorsing the views of
those opposed to spectral testimony. But, in 1697, when the _Life of
Phips_ was written, circumstances had changed. It was apparent, then, to
all, even those most unwilling to realize the fact, that the whole
transaction of the witchcraft prosecutions in Salem was doomed to
perpetual condemnation; and it became expedient to drop out of sight,
forever, if possible, the _second_ and _eighth_ articles, and reproduce
the _sixth_, _entire_.

Considering the unfair view of the import of the _Advice_, in the _Life
of Phips_, and embodied in the _Magnalia_--a work, which, with all its
defects, inaccuracies, and absurdities, is sure of occupying a
conspicuous place in our Colonial literature--I said: "unfortunately for
the reputation of Cotton Mather, Hutchinson has preserved the _Address
of the Ministers_, entire." Regarding the document published by Mather
in the light of a historical imposture, I expressed satisfaction, that
its exposure was provided in a work, sure of circulation and
preservation, equally, to say the least, with the _Life of Phips_ or the
_Magnalia_. The Reviewer, availing himself of the opportunity, hereupon
pronounces me ignorant of the fact that the "_Advice_, entire," was
published by Increase Mather at the end of his _Cases of Conscience_;
and, in his usual style--not, I think, usual, in the _North American
Review_--speaks thus--it is a specimen of what is strown through the
article: "Mr. Upham should have been familiar enough with the original
sources of information on the subject, to have found this _Advice_ in
print, seventy-four years before Hutchinson's _History_ appeared."

Of course, neither I, nor any one else, can be imagined to suppose that
Hutchinson invented the document. It was pre-existent, and at his hand.
It was not to the purpose to say where he found it. I wonder this
Reviewer did not tell the public, that I had _never seen_, _read_, or
_heard of_ Calef; for, to adopt his habit of reasoning, if I had been
acquainted with that writer, my ignorance would have been enlightened,
as Calef would have informed me that "the whole of the Minister's advice
and answer is printed in _Cases of Conscience_, the last pages."

That only which finds a place in works worthy to endure, and of standard
value, is sure of perpetual preservation. Hutchinson's _History of
Massachusetts_ is a work of this description. Whatever is committed to
its custody will stand the test of time. This cannot be expected of that
class of tracts or books to which _Cases of Conscience_ belongs, copies
of which can hardly be found, and not likely to justify a separate
re-publication. It has, indeed, not many years ago, been reprinted in
England, in a series of _Old Authors_, tacked on to the _Wonders of the
Invisible World_. But few copies have reached this country; and only
persons of peculiar, it may almost be said, eccentric, tastes, would
care to procure it. It will be impossible to awaken an interest in the
general reading public for such works. They are forbidding in their
matter, unintelligible in their style, obscure in their import and
drift, and pervaded by superstitions and absurdities that have happily
passed away, never, it is to be hoped, again to enter the realm of
theology, philosophy, or popular belief; and will perish by the hand of
time, and sink into oblivion. If this present discussion had not arisen,
and the "_Advice_, entire," had not been given by Hutchinson, the
_suppressio veri_, perpetrated by Cotton Mather, would, perhaps, have
become permanent history.

In reference to the _Advice of the Ministers_, the Reviewer, in one part
of his article, seems to complain thus: "Mr. Upham has never seen fit to
print this paper;" in other parts, he assails me from the opposite
direction, and in a manner too serious, in the character of the assault,
to be passed over. In my book, (_ii., 267_) I thus speak of the _Advice
of the Ministers_, referring to it, in a note to p. 367, in similar
terms: "The response of the reverend gentlemen, while urging in general
terms the importance of caution and circumspection in the methods of
examination, decidedly and earnestly recommended that the proceedings
should be vigorously carried on."

It is a summary, in general and brief terms, _in my own language_, of
the _import_ of the whole document, covering both sets of its articles.
Hutchinson condenses it in similar terms, as do Calef and Douglas. I
repeat, and beg it to be marked, that I do _not quote it_, in _whole_ or
_in part_, but only give its import in my own words. I claim the
judgment of the reader, whether I do not give the import of the articles
Mather printed in the _Life of Phips_--those pretending to urge
caution--as fairly as of the articles he omitted, applauding the Court,
and encouraging it to go on.

Now, this writer in the _North American Review_ represents to the
readers of that journal and to the public, that I have _quoted_ the
_Advice of the Ministers_, and, in variety of phrase, rings the charge
of unfair and false _quotation_, against me. He uses this language: "If
it were such a heinous crime for Cotton Mather, in writing the _Life of
Sir William Phips_, to omit three Sections, how will Mr. Upham vindicate
his own omissions, when, writing the history of these very transactions
and bringing the gravest charges against the characters of the persons
concerned, he leaves out seven Sections?" I _quoted_ no Section, and
made no _omissions_; and it is therefore utterly unjustifiable to say
that I _left out_ any thing. I gave the substance of the Sections Cotton
Mather left out, in language nearly identical with that used by
Hutchinson and all others. In the same way, I gave the substance of the
Sections Mather published, in the very sense he always claimed for them.
What I said did not bear the form, nor profess the character, of a
_quotation_.

In the _Wonders of the Invisible World_, written in 1692, when the
prosecutions were in full blast and Mather was glorying in them, and for
the purpose of prolonging them, the only Section he saw fit, in a
particular connection, to quote, was the SECOND. He prefaced it thus:
"They were some of the Gracious Words inserted in the _Advice_, which
many of the neighboring Ministers did this Summer humbly lay before our
Honorable Judges." Let it be noted, by the way, that when he thus
praised the document, its authorship had not been avowed. Let it further
be noted, that it is here let slip that the paper was _laid before the
Judges_, not Phips; showing that it was a response to _them_, not him.
Let it be still further noted, that the Section which he thus cited, in
1692, is one of those which, when the tide had turned, he left out, in
1697.

The Reviewer, referring to Mather's quotation of the second Section of
the _Advice_, in the _Wonders_, says: "he printed it in full, which Mr.
Upham has never done;" and following out the strange misrepresentation,
he says: "Mr. Upham does not print any part of the eighth Section, as
the Ministers adopted it. He suppresses the essential portions, changes
words, and, by interpolation, states that the Ministers 'decidedly,'
'earnestly,' and 'vehemently,' recommended that the 'proceedings' should
be vigorously carried on. He who quotes in this manner needs other
evidence than that produced by Mr. Upham to entitle him to impeach Mr.
Mather's integrity." In another place he says, pursuing the charge of
quoting falsely, as to my using the word "proceedings," "the word is not
to be found in the _Advice_."

The eighth Section recommends "the speedy and vigorous prosecutions of
such as have rendered themselves obnoxious." In a brief reference to the
subject, I use the words "speedily and vigorously," marking them as
quoted, although their form was changed by the structure of the sentence
of my own in which they appear. Beyond this, I have made no
_quotations_, in my book, of the _Advice_--not a Section, nor sentence,
nor clause, nor line, is a quotation, nor pretends to be. Without
characterising what the Reviewer has done, in charging me with
_suppression of essential portions_, _interpolation_, and not _printing_
in full, or correctly, what the Ministers or any body else said, my duty
is discharged, by showing that there is no truth in the charge--no
foundation or apology for it.

The last of the works of Cotton Mather I shall examine, in this scrutiny
of his retrospective opinions and position, relating to the witchcraft
prosecutions, is the _Magnalia_, printed at London, in 1702. He had
become wise enough, at that time, not to commit himself more than he
could help.

The Rev. John Hale, of Beverly, died in May, 1700. He had taken an
active part in the proceedings at Salem, in 1692, having, as he says,
from his youth, been "trained up in the knowledge and belief of most of
the principles" upon which the prosecutions were conducted, and had held
them "with a kind of implicit faith." Towards the close of the Trials,
his view underwent a change; and, after the lapse of five years, he
prepared a treatise on the subject. It is a candid, able, learned, and
every-way commendable performance, adhering to the general belief in
witchcraft, but pointing out the errors in the methods of procedure in
the Trials at Salem, showing that the principles there acted upon were
fallacious. The book was not printed until 1702. Cotton Mather, having
access to Mr. Hale's manuscript, professedly made up from it his account
of the witchcraft transactions of 1692, inserted in the _Magnalia_,
Book VI., Page 79. He adopts the narrative part of the work,
substantially, avoiding much discussion of the topics upon which Mr.
Hale had laid himself out. He cites, indeed, some passages from the
argumentative part, containing marvellous statements, but does not
mention that Mr. Hale labored, throughout, to show that those and other
like matters, which had been introduced at the Trials, as proofs of
spectral agency, were easily resolvable into the visions and vagaries of
a "deluded imagination," "a phantasy in the brain," "phantasma before
the eyes."

Mr. Hale limits the definition of a witch to the following: "Who is to
be esteemed a capital witch among Christians? viz.: Those that being
brought up under the means of the knowledge of the true God, yet, being
in their right mind or free use of their reason, do knowingly and
wittingly depart from the true God, so as to devote themselves unto, and
seek for their help from, another God, or the Devil, as did the Devil's
Priests and Prophets of old, that were magicians."--_Page 127._

As he had refuted, and utterly discarded, the whole system of evidence
connected with spectres of the living or ghosts of the dead, the above
definition rescued all but openly profane, abandoned, and God-defying
people from being prosecuted for witchcraft. Mather transcribes, as a
quotation, what seems to be the foregoing definition, but puts it thus:
"A person that, having the free use of reason, doth knowingly and
willingly seek and obtain of the Devil, or of any other God, besides the
true God Jehovah, an ability to do or know strange things, or things
which he cannot by his own humane abilities arrive unto. This person is
a witch."

The latter part of the definition thus transcribed, has no justification
in Hale's language, but is in conflict with the positions in his book.
Mather says, "the author spends whole Chapters to prove that there yet
is a witch." He omits to state, that he spends twice as many Chapters to
prove that the evidence in the Salem cases was not sufficient for that
purpose. Upon the whole it can hardly be considered a fair transcript of
Mr. Hale's account. He dismisses the subject, once for all, in a curt
and almost disrespectful style--"But thus much for this manuscript."

Whoever examines the manner in which he, in this way, gets rid of the
subject, in the _Magnalia_, must be convinced, I think, that he felt no
satisfaction in Mr. Hale's book, nor in the state of things that made it
necessary for him to give the whole matter the go-by. If the public mind
had retained its fanatical credulity, or if Mather's own share in the
delusion of 1692 had been agreeable in the retrospect, it cannot be
doubted that it would have afforded THE GREAT THEME, of his great book.
All the strange learning, passionate eloquence, and extravagant
painting, of its author, would have been lavished upon it; and we should
have had another separate Book, with a Hebrew, Greek, or Latin motto or
title, which, interpreted, would read _Most Wonderful of Wonders_. In
1692, his language was: "Witchcraft is a business that will not be
shammed." In 1700, it was shoved off upon the memory of Mr. Hale, as a
business not safe for him, Mather, to meddle with, any longer. It was
dropped, as if it burned his fingers.


XV.

HISTORY OF OPINION AS TO COTTON MATHER'S CONNECTION WITH SALEM
WITCHCRAFT. THOMAS BRATTLE. THE PEOPLE OF SALEM VILLAGE. JOHN HALL. JOHN
HIGGINSON. MICHAEL WIGGLESWORTH.


Such passages as the following are found in the article of the _North
American Review_: "These views, respecting Mr. Mather's connection with
the Salem Trials, are to be found in no publication of a date prior to
1831, when Mr. Upham's _Lectures_ were published." "These charges have
been repented by Mr. Quincy, in his _History of Harvard University_, by
Mr. Peabody, in his _Life of Cotton Mather_, by Mr. Bancroft, and by
nearly all historical writers, since that date." "An examination of the
historical text-books, used in our schools, will show when these ideas
originated."

The position taken by the Reviewer, let it be noticed, is, that the idea
of Cotton Mather's taking a leading part in the witchcraft prosecutions
of 1692, "_originated_" with me, in a work printed in 1831; and that I
have given "the cue" to all subsequent writers on the subject. Now what
are the facts?

Cotton Mather himself is a witness that the idea was entertained at the
time. In his Diary, after endeavoring to explain away the admitted fact
that he was the eulogist and champion of the Judges, while the Trials
were pending, he says: "Merely, as far as I can learn, for this reason,
the mad people through the country, under a fascination on their spirits
equal to that which energumens had on their bodies, reviled me as if I
had been the doer of all the hard things that were done in the
prosecution of the witchcraft." He repeats the complaint, over and over
again, in various forms and different writings. Indeed, it could not
have been otherwise, than that such should have been the popular
impression and conviction.

He was, at that time, bringing before the people, most conspicuously,
the _second_ and _eighth_ Articles of the _Ministers' Advice_, urging
on the prosecutions. His deportment and harangue at Witch-hill, at the
execution of Burroughs and Proctor; his confident and eager endorsement,
as related by Sewall, of the sentences of the Court, at the moment when
all others were impressed with silent solemnity, by the spectacle of
five persons, professing their innocency, just launched into eternity;
his efforts to prolong the prosecutions, in preparing the book
containing the trials of the "Malefactors" who had suffered; and his
zeal, on all occasions, to "vindicate the Court" and applaud the Judges;
all conspired in making it the belief of the whole people that he was,
pre-eminently, answerable for the "hard things that were done in the
prosecutions of the witchcraft."

That it was the general opinion, at home and abroad, can be abundantly
proved.

It must be borne in mind, as is explained in my book, that a general
feeling prevailed, immediately, and for some years, after the witchcraft
"judicial murders," that the whole subject was too humble to be thought
of, or ever mentioned; and as nearly the whole community, either by
acting in favor of the proceedings or failing to act against them, had
become more or less responsible for them, there was an almost universal
understanding to avoid crimination or recrimination. Besides, so far as
Cotton Mather was concerned, his professional and social position, great
talents and learning, and capacity with a disposition for usefulness,
joined to the reverence then felt for Ministers prevented his being
assailed even by those who most disapproved his course. Increase Mather
was President of the College and head of the Clergy. The prevalent
impression that _he_ had, to some extent, disapproved of the
proceedings, made men unwilling to wound his feelings by severe
criticisms upon his son; for, whatever differences might be supposed to
exist between them, all well-minded persons respected their natural and
honorable sensitiveness to each other's reputation. Reasons like these
prevented open demonstrations against both of them. Nevertheless, it is
easy to gather sufficient evidence to prove my point.

Thomas Brattle was a Boston merchant of great munificence and eminent
talents and attainments. His name is perpetuated by "Brattle-street
Church," of which he was the chief founder. Dr. John Eliot, in his
_Biographical Dictionary_, speaks of him thus--referring to his letter
on the witchcraft of 1692, dated October 8, of that year: "Mr. Brattle
wrote an account of those transactions, which was too plain and just to
be published in those unhappy times, but has been printed since; and
which cannot be read without feeling sentiments of esteem for a man, who
indulged a freedom of thought becoming a Christian and philosopher. He,
from the beginning, opposed the prejudices of the people, the
proceedings of the Court, and the perverse zeal of those Ministers of
the Gospel, who, by their preaching and conduct, caused such real
distress to the community. They, who called him an infidel, were obliged
to acknowledge that his wisdom shone with uncommon lustre."

His brother, William Brattle, with whom he seems to have been in entire
harmony of opinion, on all subjects, was long an honored instructor and
Fellow of Harvard College, and Minister of the First Church, at
Cambridge. He was celebrated here and in England, for his learning, and
endeared to all men by his virtues. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society
of London. Jeremiah Dummer, as well qualified to pronounce such an
opinion as any man of his time, places him as a preacher above all his
contemporaries, in either Old or New England.

The Brattles were both politically opposed to the Mathers. But, as
matters then stood, in view of the prevailing infatuation--particularly
as the course upon which Phips had determined was not then
known--caution and prudence were deemed necessary; and the letter was
_confidential_. Indeed, all expressions of criticism, on the conduct of
the Government, were required to be so. It is a valuable document,
justifying the reputation the writer had established in life and has
borne ever since. Condemning the methods pursued in the Salem Trials, he
says: after stating that "several men, for understanding, judgment, and
piety, inferior to few, if any, utterly condemn the proceedings" at
Salem, "I shall nominate some of these to you, viz.: the Hon. Simon
Bradstreet, Esq., our late Governor; the Hon. Thomas Danforth, our late
Deputy-governor; the Rev. Mr. Increase Mather; and the Rev. Mr. Samuel
Willard."

Bradstreet was ninety years of age, but in the full possession of his
mental faculties. In this sense, "his eye was not dim, nor his natural
force abated." Thirteen years before, when Governor of the Colony, he
had refused to order to execution a woman who had been convicted of
witchcraft, in a series of trials that had gone through all the Courts,
with concurring verdicts, confirmed at an adjudication by the Board of
Assistants--as President of which body, it had been his official duty to
pass upon her the final sentence of death. Juries, Judges, both branches
of the Legislature, and the people, clamored for her execution; but the
brave old Governor withstood them all, resolutely and inexorably: an
innocent and good woman and the honor of the Colony, at that time, were
saved. Mr. Hale informs us that Bradstreet refused to allow the
sentence to take effect, for these reasons: that "a spectre doing
mischief in her likeness, should not be imputed to her person, as a
ground of guilt; and that one single witness to one fact and another
single witness to another fact" were not to be esteemed "two witnesses
in a matter capital." No Executive Magistrate has left a record more
honorable to his name, than that of Bradstreet, on this occasion. If his
principles had been heeded, not a conviction could have been obtained,
in 1692. It was because of his known opposition, that his two sons were
cried out upon and had to fly for their lives. That Brattle was
justified in naming Danforth, in this connection, the conversation of
that person with Sewall, on the fifteenth of October, proves. It is
understood, by many indications, that, although, in former years,
inclined to the popular delusions of the day, touching witchcraft,
Willard was an opponent of the prosecutions; and Brattle must be
regarded as having had means of judging of Increase Mather's views and
feelings, on the eighth of October.

This singling out of the father, thereby distinguishing him from the
son, must, I think, be conclusive evidence, to every man who candidly
considers the circumstances of the case and the purport of the document,
that Brattle did not consider Cotton Mather entitled to be named in the
honored list.

Brattle further says: "Excepting Mr. Hale, Mr. Noyes, and Mr. Parris,
the Rev. Elders, almost throughout the whole country, are very much
dissatisfied." The word "almost," leaves room for others to be placed in
the same category with Hale, Noyes, and Parris. The Reviewer argues that
because Cotton Mather is not named at all, in either list, therefore he
must be counted in the first!

The father and son were associate Ministers of the same Church; they
shared together a great name, fame, and position; both men of the
highest note, here and abroad, conspicuous before all eyes, standing,
hand in hand, in all the associations and sentiments of the people,
united by domestic ties, similar pursuits, and every form of public
action and observation--why did Brattle, in so marked a manner, separate
them, holding the one up, in an honorable point of view, and passing
over the other, not ever mentioning his name, as the Reviewer observes?

If he really disapproved of the prosecutions at Salem--if, as the
Reviewer positively states, he "denounced" them--is it not unaccountable
that Brattle did not name him with his father?

These questions press with especial force upon the Reviewer, under the
interpretation he crowds upon the passage from Brattle, I am now to
cite. If that interpretation can be allowed, it will, in the face of
all that has come to us, make Brattle out to have had a most exalted
opinion of Cotton Mather, and render it unaccountable indeed that he did
not mention him, in honor, as he did his father and Mr. Willard. The
passage is this: "I cannot but highly applaud, and think it our duty to
be very thankful for, the endeavours of several Elders, whose lips, I
think, should preserve knowledge, and whose counsel should, I think,
have been more regarded, in a case of this nature, than as yet it has
been: in particular, I cannot but think very honorably of the endeavours
of a Rev. person in Boston, whose good affections to his country, in
general, and spiritual relation to three of the Judges, in particular,
has made him very solicitous and industrious in this matter; and I am
fully persuaded, that had his notions and proposals been hearkened to
and followed, when those troubles were in their birth, in an ordinary
way, they would never have grown unto that height which now they have.
He has, as yet, met with little but unkindness, abuse, and reproach,
from many men; but, I trust, that in after times, his wisdom and service
will find a more universal acknowledgment; and if not, his reward is
with the Lord."

The learned Editor of the Fifth Volume of the _Massachusetts Historical
Collections_, First Series, in a note to this passage (_p. 76_), says:
"Supposed to be Mr. Willard." Such has always been the supposition. The
Reviewer has undertaken to make it out that Cotton Mather is the person
referred to by Brattle. These two men were opposed to each other, in the
politics of that period. The course of the Mathers, in connection with
the loss of the old, and the establishment of the new, Charter, gave
rise to much dissatisfaction; and party divisions were quite
acrimonious. The language used by Brattle, applauding the public course
of the person of whom he was speaking, would be utterly inexplicable, if
applied to Mather. The "endeavours, counsels, notions and proposals," to
which he alludes, could not have referred to Mather's plans, which I
have attempted to explain, because described by Brattle as being in "an
ordinary way." "Unkindness, abuse, and reproach" find an explanation in
the fact, that Willard was "cried out upon" and brought into peril of
reputation and life, by the creatures of the prosecution. The
monstrousness of the supposition that Mather was referred to, would
hardly be heightened if it should appear that Brattle supplied Calef
with materials in his controversy with Mather.

The language, throughout, is in conformity with the political relations
between Brattle and Willard. The side the latter had espoused was put
beyond question by the appearing, on the fifteenth of November, at
Elisha Cook's Thanksgiving; and that was the same occupied by Brattle.
But the question is settled by the fact that _three of the Judges_
belonged to Willard's Congregation and Church, whereas only _one_
belonged to the Church of the Mathers. The Reviewer says: "We do not
assert that this inference is not the correct one." But, in spite of
this substantial admission, with that strange propensity to overturn all
the conclusions of history to glorify Cotton Mather, at the expense of
others, and even, in this instance, against his own better judgment, he
labors to make us believe--what he himself does not venture to
"assert"--that the "spiritual relation" in which Mather stood to three
of the Judges, was not, what, in those days and ever since, it has been
understood to mean, that of a Pastor with his flock, but nothing more
than intimate friendship. If this was what Brattle meant, he would have
said at least _four_ of the Judges, for, at that time, Sewall was in
full accord with Mather. They took counsel together. It was at the house
of Sewall that the preparation of the _Wonders of the Invisible World_
was finally arranged with Mather; and he, alone, of all the side Judges,
united with Stoughton, some days after the date of Brattle's letter, in
endorsing and commending that work.

If the expression, "spiritual relations," is divorced from its proper
sense, and made to mean sympathy of opinion or agreement in counsels, it
ill becomes the Reviewer to try to make it out that Mather held that
relation with _any of the Judges_. He represents him, throughout his
article, as at sword's points with the Court. He says that he
"denounced" its course, "as illegal, uncharitable, and cruel." There is,
indeed, not a shadow of foundation for this statement, as to Mather's
relation to the Court; but it absolutely precludes the Reviewer from
such an interpretation as he attempts, of the expression of Brattle.

The Reviewer says: "If Mr. Mather is not alluded to, in this paragraph,
he is omitted altogether from the narrative, except as spiritual adviser
of the persons condemned."

This is an instance of the way in which this writer establishes history.
Without any and against all evidence, in the license of his imagination
alone, he had thrown out the suggestion that Mather attended the
executions, as the ministerial comforter and counsellor of the
sufferers. Then, by a sleight of hand, he transforms this "phantasy" of
his own brain into an unquestionable fact.

If Mr. Mather is not alluded to in the following passage from Brattle's
letter, who is? "I cannot but admire, that any should go with their
distempered friends and relatives to the afflicted children to know what
these distempered friends ail; whether they are not bewitched; who it is
that afflicts them; and the like. It is true, I know no reason why these
afflicted may not be consulted as well as any other, if so be that it
was only their natural and ordinary knowledge that was had recourse to;
but it is not on this notion that these afflicted children are sought
unto; but as they have a supernatural knowledge--a knowledge which they
obtain by their holding correspondence with spectres or evil spirits--as
they themselves grant. This consulting of these afflicted children, as
abovesaid, seems to me a very gross evil, a real abomination, not fit to
be known in New England, and yet is a thing practiced, not only by Tom
and John--I mean the ruder and more ignorant sort--but by many who
profess high, and pass among us for some of the better sort. This is
that which aggravates the evil and makes it heinous and tremendous; and
yet this is not the worst of it, for, as sure as I now write to you,
even some of our civil leaders and spiritual teachers, who, I think,
should punish and preach down such sorcery and wickedness, do yet allow
of, encourage, yea, and practice, this very abomination.

"I know there are several worthy gentlemen, in Salem, who account this
practice as an abomination; have trembled to see the methods of this
nature which others have used; and have declared themselves to think the
practice to be very evil and corrupt; but all avails little with the
abettors of the said practice."

Does not this stern condemnation fall on the head of the "spiritual
teacher," who received constant communications from the spectral world,
fastening the charge of diabolical confederacy upon other persons, in
confidential interviews with confessing witches--not to mention the
Goodwin girls;--whose boast it was, "it may be no man living has had
more people, under preternatural and astonishing circumstances, cast by
the Providence of God into his more particular care than I have had;"
and that he had kept to himself information thus obtained, which, if he
had not suppressed it, would have led to the conviction of "such witches
as ought to die;" who sought to have the exclusive right of receiving
such communications conferred upon him, "by the authority;" who, at that
time, was holding this intercourse with persons pretending to spectral
visions; and, the next year, held such relations with Margaret Rule?

The next evidence in support of the opinion that Cotton Mather was
considered, at the time, as identified with the proceedings at Salem, in
1692, although circumstantial, cannot, I think, but be regarded as quite
conclusive.

Immediately after the prosecutions terminated, measures began to be
developed to remove Mr. Parris from his ministry. The reaction early
took effect where the outrages of the delusion had been most flagrant;
and the injured feelings of the friends of those who had been so cruelly
cut off, and of all who had suffered in their characters and condition,
found expression. A movement was made, directly and personally, upon
Parris, in consequence of his conspicuous lead in the prosecutions;
showing itself, first, in the form of litigation, in the Courts, of
questions of salary and the adjustment of accounts. Soon, it broke out
in the Church; and satisfaction was demanded, by aggrieved brethren, in
the methods appropriate to ecclesiastical action. The charges here made
against him were exclusively in reference to his course, at the
Examinations and Trials, in 1692. The conflict, thus initiated, is one
of the most memorable in our Church History. Parris and his adherents
resisted, for a long time, the rightful and orderly demands of his
opponents for a Mutual Council. At length, many of the Ministers, who
sympathized with the aggrieved brethren, felt it their duty to
interpose, and addressed a letter to Mr. Parris, giving him to
understand that they were of opinion he ought to comply with the demand
for a Council. This letter, dated the fourteenth of June, 1694, was
signed by several of the neighboring Ministers, and by James Allen, of
the First, and Samuel Willard, of the Old South, Churches, in Boston,
_but not by the Mathers_. On the tenth of September, a similar letter
was written to him, also signed by neighboring Ministers, and Mr. Allen,
and Mr. Willard, _but not by the Mathers_.

Not daring to refuse any longer, Parris, professedly yielding to the
demand, consented to a Mutual Council, but avoided it, in this way. Each
party was to select three Churches, to maintain its interests and give
friendly protection to its rights and feelings. The aggrieved brethren
selected the Churches of Rowley, Salisbury and Ipswich. Parris undertook
to object to the Church of Ipswich; and refused to proceed, if it was
invited. Of course, the aggrieved brethren persisted in their right to
name the Churches on their side. Knowing that they had the right so to
do, and that public opinion would sustain them in it, Parris escaped the
dilemma, by calling an _ex parte_ Council; and the Churches invited to
it were those of North Boston, Weymouth, Malden, and Rowley. The first
was that of the Mathers. That Parris was right in relying upon the Rev.
Samuel Torrey of Weymouth, is rendered probable by the circumstance
that, of the names of the fourteen Ministers, including all those known
to have been opposed to the proceedings at Salem, attached to the
recommendation of the _Cases of Conscience_, his is not one; and may be
considered as made certain by the fact recorded by Sewall, that he was
opposed to the discontinuance of the Trials. The Pastor of the Malden
Church was the venerable Michael Wigglesworth, a gentleman of the
highest repute; who had declined the Presidency of Harvard College;
whose son and grandson became Professors in that institution; and whose
descendants still sustain the honor of their name and lineage. From the
tone of his writings, it is quite probable that he favored the
witchcraft proceedings, at the beginning; but the change of mind,
afterwards strongly expressed, had, perhaps, then begun to be
experienced, for he did not respond to the call, as his name does not
appear in the record of the Council. The fact that Parris chiefly
depended upon the Church at North Boston, of which Cotton Mather was
Pastor, to sustain his cause, in a Council, whose whole business was to
pass upon his conduct in witchcraft prosecutions, is quite decisive.
That Church was named by him, from the first to the last, and neither of
the other Boston Churches. It shows that he turned to Cotton Mather,
more than to any other Minister, to be his champion.

It is further decisively proved that the reaction had become strong
among the Ministers, by the unusual steps they took to prevent that
Council being under the sway of such men as Cotton Mather and Torrey,
thereby prolonging the mischief. A meeting of the "Reverend Elders of
the Bay" was held; and Mr. Parris was given to understand that, in their
judgment, the Churches of Messrs. Allen and Willard ought also to be
invited. He bitterly resented this, and saw that it sealed his fate; but
felt the necessity of yielding to it. The addition of those two
Churches, with their Pastors, determined the character and result of the
Council, and gave new strength to the aggrieved brethren, who soon
succeeded in compelling Parris and his friends to agree to submit the
whole matter to the arbitration of three men, mutually chosen, whose
decision should be final.

The umpire selected in behalf of the opponents of Parris was no other
than Elisha Cook, the head of the party arrayed against Mather. Wait
Winthrop appears to have been selected by Parris; and Samuel Sewall was
mutually agreed upon. Two of the three, who thus passed final judgment
against the proceedings at the Salem Trials, sat on the Bench of the
Special Court of Oyer and Terminer. The case of the aggrieved brethren
was presented to the Arbitrators in a document, signed by four men, as
"Attorneys of the people of the Village," each one of whom had been
struck at, in the time of the prosecutions. It _exclusively_ refers to
Mr. Parris's conduct, in the witchcraft prosecutions; to "his believing
the Devil's accusations;" and to his going to the accusing girls, to
know of them "who afflicted" them. For these reasons, and these alone,
they "submit the whole" to the decision of the Arbitrators, concluding
thus: "to determine whether we are, or ought to be, any ways obliged to
honor, respect, and support such an instrument of our miseries." The
Arbitrators decided that they _ought not_; fixed the sum to be paid to
Parris, as a final settlement; and declared the ministerial relation,
between him and the people of the Village, dissolved.

With this official statement of the grounds on which his dismission was
demanded and obtained, before his eyes, as printed by Calef (_p. 63_),
this Reviewer says that Parris remained the Minister of Salem Village,
five years "after the witchcraft excitement;" and further says, "the
immediate cause of his leaving, was his quarrel with the Parish,
concerning thirty cords of wood and the fee of the parsonage." He thus
thinks, by a dash of his pen, to strike out the record of the fact that
the main, in truth, the only, ground on which Parris was dismissed, was
the part he bore in the witchcraft prosecutions. The salary question had
been pending in the Courts; but it was wholly left out of view, by the
party demanding his dismission. It had nothing to do with _dismission_;
was a question of _contract_ and _debt_; and was absorbed in the
"excitement," _which had never ceased_, about the witchcraft
prosecutions. The Arbitrators did not decide those questions, about
salary and the balance of accounts, except as incidental to the other
question, of _dismission_.

The feeling among the inhabitants of Salem Village, that Cotton Mather
was in sympathy with Mr. Parris, during the witchcraft prosecutions, is
demonstrated by the facts I have adduced connected with the controversy
between them and the latter, and most emphatically by their choice of
Elisha Cook, as the Arbitrator, on their part. Surely no persons of that
day, understood the matter better than they did. Indeed, they could not
have been mistaken about it. It remained the settled conviction of that
community.

When the healing ministry of the successor of Parris, Joseph Green, was
brought to a close, by the early death of that good man, in 1715, and
the whole Parish, still feeling the dire effects of the great calamity
of 1692, were mourning their bereavement, expressed in their own
language: "the choicest flower, and greenest olive-tree, in the garden
of our God here, cut down in its prime and flourishing estate," they
passed a vote, earnestly soliciting the Rev. William Brattle of
Cambridge, to visit them. He was always a known opponent of Cotton
Mather. To have selected him to come to them, in their distress and
destitution, indicates the views then prevalent in the Village. He went
to them and guided them by his advice, until they obtained a new
Minister.

The mention of the fact by Mr. Hale, already stated, that Cotton
Mather's book, _Memorable Providences_, was used as an authority by the
Judges at the Salem Trials, shows that the author of that work was
regarded by Hale as, to that extent at least, responsibly connected with
the prosecutions.

I pass over, for the present, the proceedings and writings of Robert
Calef.

After the lapse of a few years, a feeling, which had been slowly, but
steadily, rising among the people, that some general and public
acknowledgment ought to be made by all who had been engaged in the
proceedings of 1692, and especially by the authorities, of the wrongs
committed in that dark day, became too strong to be safely disregarded.
On the seventeenth of December, 1696, Stoughton, then acting as
Governor, issued a Proclamation, ordaining, in his name and that of the
Council and Assembly, a Public Fast, to be kept on the fourteenth of
January, to implore that the anger of God might be turned away, and His
hand, then stretched over the people in manifold judgments, lifted.
After referring to the particular calamities they were suffering and to
the many days that had been spent in solemn addresses to the throne of
mercy, it expresses a fear that something was still wanting to accompany
their supplications, and proceeds to refer, specially, to the witchcraft
tragedy. It was on the occasion of this Fast, that Judge Sewall acted
the part, in the public assembly of the old South Church, for which his
name will ever be held in dear and honored memory.

The public mind was, no doubt, gratified and much relieved, but not
satisfied, by this demonstration. The Proclamation did not, after all,
meet its demands. Upon careful examination and deliberate reflection, it
rather aggravated the prevalent feeling. Written, as was to be supposed,
by Stoughton, it could not represent a reaction in which he took no
part. It spoke of "mistakes on either hand," and used general forms,
"wherein we have done amiss, to do so no more." It endorsed in a new
utterance, the delusion, sheltering the proper agents of the mischief,
by ascribing it all to "Satan and his instruments, through the awful
judgment of God;" and no atonement for the injuries to the good name and
estates of the sufferers, not to speak of the lives that had been cut
off, was suggested. The conviction was only deepened, in all good minds,
that something more ought to be done. Mr. Hale, of Beverly, met the
obligation pressing upon his sense of justice and appealing to him with
especial force, by writing his book, from which the following passages
are extracted: "I would come yet nearer to our own times, and bewail
the errors and mistakes that have been, in the year 1692--by following
such traditions of our fathers, maxims of the common law, and precedents
and principles, which now we may see, weighed in the balance of the
sanctuary, are found too light--Such was the darkness of that day, the
tortures and lamentations of the afflicted, and the power of former
precedents, that we walked in the clouds and could not see our way--I
would humbly propose whether it be not expedient that somewhat more
should be publicly done than yet hath, for clearing the good name and
reputation of some that have suffered upon this account."

The Rev. John Higginson, Senior Pastor of the First Church in Salem,
then eighty-two years of age, in a recommendatory _Epistle to the
Reader_, prefixed to Mr. Hale's book, dated the twenty-third of March,
1698, after stating that, "under the infirmities of a decrepit old age,
he stirred little abroad, and was much disenabled (both in body and
mind) from knowing and judging of occurrents and transactions of that
time," proceeds to say that he was "more willing to accompany" Mr. Hale
"to the press," because he thought his "treatise needful and useful upon
divers accounts;" among others specified by him, is the following: "That
whatever errors or mistakes we fell into, in the dark hour of temptation
that was upon us, may be (upon more light) so discovered, acknowledged,
and disowned by us, as that it may be matter of warning and caution to
those that come after us, that they may not fall into the like.--_1
Cor._, x., 11. _Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum._ I would also
propound, and leave it as an object of consideration, to our honored
Magistrates and Reverend Ministers, whether the equity of that law in
_Leviticus_, Chap. iv., for a sin-offering for the Rulers and for the
Congregation, in the case of sins of ignorance, when they come to be
known, be not obliging, and for direction to us in a Gospel way." The
venerable man concludes by saying that "it shall be the prayer of him
who is daily waiting for his change and looking for the mercy of the
Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life," that the "blessing of Heaven may
go along with this little treatise to attain the good ends thereof."

Judge Sewall, too, and the Jury that had given the verdicts at the
Trials, in 1692, publicly and emphatically acknowledged that they had
been led into error.

All these things afford decisive and affecting evidence of a prevalent
conviction that a great wrong had been committed. The vote passed by the
Church at Salem Village, on the fourteenth of February, 1703--"We are,
through God's mercy to us, convinced that we were, at that dark day,
under the power of those errors which then prevailed in the land." "We
desire that this may be entered in our Church-book," "that so God may
forgive our Sin, and may be atoned for the land; and we humbly pray that
God will not leave us any more to such errors and sins"--affords
striking proof that the right feeling had penetrated the whole
community. On the eighth of July, of that same year, nearly the whole
body of the Clergy of Essex-county addressed a Memorial to the General
Court, in which they say, "There is great reason to fear that innocent
persons then suffered, and that God may have a controversy with the land
upon that account."

Nothing of the kind, however, was ever heard from the Ministers of
Boston and the vicinity. Why did they not join their voices in this
prayer, going up elsewhere, from all concerned, for the divine
forgiveness? We know that most of them felt right. Samuel Willard and
James Allen did; and so did William Brattle, of Cambridge. Their silence
cannot, it seems to me, be accounted for, but by considering the degree
to which they were embarrassed by the relation of the Mathers to the
affair. One brave-hearted old man remonstrated against their failure to
meet the duty of the hour, and addressed his remonstrance to the right
quarter. The Rev. Michael Wigglesworth, a Fellow of Harvard College, and
honored in all the Churches, wrote a letter to Increase Mather, dated
July 22, 1704 [_Mather Papers, 647_], couched in strong and bold terms,
beginning thus:

"REV. AND DEAR S^R. I am right well assured that both yourself, your
son, and the rest of our brethren with you in Boston, have a deep sense
upon your spirits of the awful symptoms of the Divine displeasure that
we lie under at this day." After briefly enumerating the public
calamities of the period, he continues: "I doubt not but you are all
endeavouring to find out and discover to the people the causes of God's
controversy, and how they are to be removed; to help forward this
difficult and necessary work, give me leave to impart some of my serious
and solemn thoughts. I fear (amongst our many other provocations) that
God hath a controversy with us about what was done in the time of the
Witchcraft. I fear that innocent blood hath been shed, and that _many
have had their hands defiled therewith_." After expressing his belief
that the Judges acted conscientiously, and that the persons concerned
were deceived, he proceeds: "Be it then that it was done ignorantly.
Paul, a Pharisee, persecuted the Church of God, shed the blood of God's
Saints, and yet obtained mercy, because he did it in ignorance; but how
doth he bewail it, and shame himself for it, before God and men
afterwards. [_1 Tim., i., 13, 16._] I think, and am verily persuaded,
God expects that we do the like, in order to our obtaining his pardon: I
mean by a Public and Solemn acknowledgment of it and humiliation for it;
and the more particularly and personally it is done by all that have
been actors, the more pleasing it will be to God, and more effectual to
turn away his judgments from the Land, and to prevent his wrath from
falling upon the persons and families of such as have been most
concerned.

"I know this is a _Noli Me tangere_, but what shall we do? Must we pine
away in our iniquities, rather than boldly declare the Counsel of God,
who tells us, [_Isa., i., 15._] 'When you make many prayers, I will not
hear you, your hands are full of blood.'"

He further says that he believes that "the whole country lies under a
curse to this day, and will do, till some effectual course be taken by
our honored Governor and General Court to make amends and reparation" to
the families of such as were condemned "for supposed witchcraft," or
have "been ruined by taking away and making havoc of their estates."
After continuing the argument, disposing of the excuse that the country
was too impoverished to do any thing in that way, he charges his
correspondent to communicate his thoughts to "the Rev. Samuel Willard
and the rest of our brethren in the ministry," that action may be taken,
without delay. He concludes his plain and earnest appeal and
remonstrance, in those words: "I have, with a weak body and trembling
hand, endeavoured to leave my testimony before I leave the world; and
having left it with you (my Rev. Brethren) I hope I shall leave this
life with more peace, when God seeth meet to call me hence."

He died within a year. When the tone of this letter is carefully
considered, and the pressure of its forcible and bold reasoning,
amounting to expostulation, is examined, it can hardly be questioned
that it was addressed to the persons who most needed to be appealed to.
But no effect appears to have been produced by it.

In introducing his report of the Trials, contained in the _Wonders of
the Invisible World_, Cotton Mather, alluding to the "surviving
relations" of those who had been executed, says: "The Lord comfort
them." It was poor consolation he gave them in that book--holding up
their parents, wives, and husbands, as "Malefactors." Neither he nor his
father ever expressed a sentiment in harmony with those uttered by Hale,
Higginson, or Wigglesworth--on the contrary, Cotton Mather, writing a
year after the Salem Tragedy, almost chuckles over it: "In the
whole--the Devil got just nothing--but God got praises. Christ got
subjects, the Holy Spirit got temples, the church got addition, and the
souls of men got everlasting benefits."--_Calef_, 12.

Stoughton remained nearly the whole time, until his death, in May, 1702,
in control of affairs. By his influence over the Government and that of
the Mathers over the Clergy, nothing was done to remove the dark stigma
from the honor of the Province, and no seasonable or adequate reparation
ever made for the Great Wrong.

I am additionally indebted to the kindness of Dr. Moore for the
following extracts from a Sermon to the General Assembly, delivered by
Cotton Mather, in 1709, intitled "_Theopolis Americana_. Pure Gold in
the market place."

"In two or three too Memorable _Days of Temptation_, that have been upon
us, there have been _Errors_ Committed. You are always ready to Declare
unto all the World, 'That you disapprove those Errors.' You are willing
to inform all mankind with your _Declarations_.

"That no man may be Persecuted, because he is Conscienciously not of the
same Religious Opinions, with those that are uppermost.

"And; That Persons are not to be judged Confederates with Evil Spirits,
merely because the Evil Spirits do make Possessed People cry out upon
them.

"Could any thing be Proposed further, by way of Reparation, [Besides the
General Day of Humiliation, which was appointed and observed thro' the
Province, to bewayl the Errors of our Dark time, some years ago:] You
would be willing to hearken to it."

The suggestion thus made, not, it must be confessed, in very urgent
terms, did not, it is probable, produce much impression. The preacher
seemed to rest upon the Proclamation issued by Stoughton, some eleven
years before. Coupling the two errors specified together, was not
calculated to give effect to the recommendation. Public opinion was not,
then, prepared to second such enlightened views as to religious liberty.

It is very noticeable that Mather here must be considered as admitting
that "in the Dark time," persons were judged "Confederates with Evil
Spirits," "merely" because of Spectral Evidence.

All that was said, on this occasion, does not amount to any thing, as an
expression of _personal_ opinion or feeling, relating to points on which
Hale and Higginson uttered their deep sensibility, and Wigglesworth had
addressed to the Mathers and other Ministers, his solemn and searching
appeal. The duty of reparation for the great wrong was thrown off upon
others, than those particularly and prominently responsible.

Nothing has led me to suppose that Cotton Mather was cruel or heartless,
in his natural or habitual disposition. He never had the wisdom or
dignity to acknowledge, as an individual, or _as one of the Clergy_, or
to propose specific reparation for, the fearful mischiefs, sufferings
and horrors growing out of the witchcraft prosecutions. The extent to
which he was at the time, and probably always continued to be, the
victim of baleful superstitions, is his only apology, and we must allow
it just weight.

A striking instance of the occasional ascendency of his better feelings,
and of the singular methods in which he was accustomed to act, is
presented in the following extract from his Diary, at a late period of
his life. We may receive it as an indication that he was not insensible
of his obligation to do good, where, with his participation, so much
evil had been done: "There is a town in this country, namely, Salem,
which has many poor and bad people in it, and such as are especially
scandalous for staying at home on the Lord's day. I wrapped up seven
distinct parcels of money and annexed seven little books about
repentance, and seven of the monitory letter against profane absence
from the house of God. I sent those things with a nameless letter unto
the Minister of that Town, and desired and empowered him to dispense the
charity in his own name, hoping thereby the more to ingratiate his
ministry with the people. Who can tell how far the good Angels of Heaven
cooperate in those proceeding?"


XVI.

HISTORY OF OPINION AS TO COTTON MATHER, CONTINUED. FRANCIS HUTCHINSON.
DANIEL NEAL. ISAAC WATTS. THOMAS HUTCHINSON. WILLIAM BENTLEY. JOHN
ELIOT. JOSIAH QUINCY.


It was the common opinion in England, that the Mathers, particularly the
younger, were pre-eminently responsible for the proceedings at Salem, in
1692. Francis Hutchinson, in the work from which I have quoted, speaks
of the whole system of witchcraft doctrine, as "fantastic notions,"
which are "so far from raising their sickly visions into legal evidence,
that they are grounded upon the very dregs of Pagan and Popish
superstitions, and leave the lives of innocent men naked, without
defence against them;" and in giving a list of books, written for
upholding them, mentions, "Mr. Increase and Mr. Cotton Mather's several
tracts;" and, in his Chapter on Witchcraft in Massachusetts, in 1692,
commends the book of "Mr. Calef, a Merchant in that Plantation."

About the same time, the Rev. Daniel Neal, the celebrated author of the
_History of the Puritans_, wrote a _History of New England_, in which he
gives place to a brief, impartial, and just account of the witchcraft
proceedings, in 1692. He abstains from personal criticisms, but
expresses this general sentiment: "Strange were the mistakes that some
of the wisest and best men of the country committed on this occasion;
which must have been fatal to the whole Province, if God, in his
Providence, had not mercifully interposed." The only sentence that
contains a stricture on Cotton Mather, particularly, is that in which he
thus refers to his statement that a certain confession was _freely_
made. Neal quietly suggests, "whether the act of a man in prison, and
under apprehension of death, may be called free, I leave others to
judge." Dr. Isaac Watts, having read Neal's book, thought it necessary
to write a letter to Cotton Mather, dated February 10, 1720;
(_Massachusetts Historical Collections, I., v., 200_) and, describing a
conversation he had just been having with Neal, says: "There is another
thing, wherein my brother is solicitous lest he should have displeased
you, and that is, the Chapter on Witchcraft, but, as he related matters
of fact, by comparison of several authors, he hopes that you will
forgive that he has not fallen into your sentiments exactly." The
anxiety felt by Neal and Watts, lest the feelings of Mather might be
wounded, shows what they thought of his implication with the affair.
This inference is rendered unavoidable, when we examine Neal's book and
find that he quotes or refers to Calef, all along, without the slightest
question as to his credibility, receiving his statements and fully
recognizing his authority. Indeed, his references to Calef are about ten
to one oftener than to Mather. The attempt of Neal and Watts to smooth
the matter down, by saying that the former had been led to his
conclusions by "a comparison of several authors," could have given
little satisfaction to Mather, as the authors whom he chiefly refers to,
are Calef and Mather; and, comparing them with each other, he followed
Calef.

The impression thus held in England, even by Mather's friends and
correspondents, that he was unpleasantly connected with the Witchcraft
of 1692, has been uniformly experienced, on both sides of the water,
until this Reviewer's attempt to erase it from the minds of men.

Thomas Hutchinson was born in 1711, and brought up in the neighborhood
of the Mathers; finishing his collegiate course and taking his
Bachelor's degree at Harvard College, in 1727, a year before the death
of Cotton Mather. He had opportunities to form a correct judgment about
Salem Witchcraft and the chief actor in the proceedings, greater than
any man of his day; but his close family connection with the Mathers
imposed some restraint upon his expressions; not enough, however, to
justify the statement of the Reviewer that he does not mention the
"agency" of Cotton Mather in that transaction. There are several very
distinct references to Mather's "agency," in Hutchinson's account of the
transactions connected with Salem Witchcraft, some of which I have
cited. I ask to whom does the following passage refer?--_ii., 63._--"One
of the Ministers, who, in the time of it, was fully convinced that the
complaining persons were no impostors, and who vindicated his own
conduct and that of the Court, in a Narrative he published, remarks, not
long after, in his Diary, that many were of opinion that innocent blood
had been shed."

This shows that Hutchinson regarded Cotton Mather's agency in the light
in which I have represented it; that he considered him as wholly
committed to the then prevalent delusion; as acting a part that
identified him with the prosecutions; and that the Narrative he
published was a joint vindication of himself and the Court. Hutchinson
fastens the passage upon Mather, by the reference to the Diary; and
while he says that it contained a statement, that many believed the
persons who suffered innocent, he avoids saying that such was the
opinion of the author of the Diary.

Finally, his taking particular pains to do it, by giving a Note to the
purpose of expressing his confidence in Calef, pronouncing him a "fair
relator"--_ii., 56_--proves that Governor Hutchinson held the opinion
about Mather's "agency," which has always heretofore been ascribed to
him.

William Bentley, D.D., was born in Boston, and for a large part of the
first half of his life resided, as his family had done for a long
period, in the North part of that Town. He was of a turn of mind to
gather all local traditions, and, through all his days, devoted to
antiquarian pursuits. No one of his period paid more attention to the
subject of the witchcraft delusion. For much of our information
concerning it, we are indebted to his _History and Description of
Salem_, printed in 1800--_Massachusetts Historical Collections, I.,
vi._--After relating many of its incidents, he breaks forth in
condemnation of those who, disapproving, at the time, of the
proceedings, did not come out and denounce them. Holding the opinion,
which had come down from the beginning, that Increase Mather disapproved
of the transaction, he indignantly repudiates the idea of giving him any
credit therefor. "Increase Mather did not oppose Cotton Mather"--this is
the utterance of a received, and, to him, unquestioned, opinion that
Cotton Mather approved of, and was a leading agent in, the prosecutions.

The views of Dr. John Eliot, are freely given, to the same effect, in
his _Biographical Dictionary_, as will presently be shown.

The late Josiah Quincy had studied the annals of Massachusetts with the
thoroughness with which he grappled every subject to which he turned his
thoughts. His ancestral associations covered the whole period of its
history; and all the channels of the local traditions of Boston were
open to his enquiring and earnest mind. His _History of Harvard
University_ is a monument that will stand forever. In that work, he
speaks of the agreement of Stoughton's views with those of the Mathers;
and, in connection with the witchcraft delusion, says that both of them
"had an efficient agency in producing and prolonging that excitement."
"The conduct of Increase Mather, in relation to it, was marked with
caution and political skill; but that of his son, Cotton Mather, was
headlong, zealous, and fearless, both as to character and consequences.
In its commencement and progress, his activity is every-where
conspicuous."

The Reviewer represents Mr. Quincy as merely repeating what I had said
in my Lectures. He makes the same reckless assertion in reference to
Bancroft, the late William B. O. Peabody, D.D., and every one else, who
has written upon the subject, since 1831. The idea that Josiah Quincy
"took his cue" from me, is simply preposterous. He does not refer to me,
nor give any indication that he had ever seen my _Lectures_, but cites
Calef, as his authority, over and over again. Dr. Peabody refers to
Calef throughout, and draws upon him freely and with confidence, as
every one else, who has written about the transaction, has probably
done.

It may safely be said, that no historical fact has ever been more
steadily recognized, than the action and, to a great degree, controlling
agency, of Cotton Mather, in supporting and promoting the witchcraft
proceedings of 1692. That it has, all along, been the established
conviction of the public mind, is proved by the chronological series of
names I have produced. Thomas Hutchinson, John Eliot, William Bentley,
and Josiah Quincy, cover the whole period from Cotton Mather's day to
this. They knew, as well as any other men that can be named, the current
opinions, transmitted sentiments, and local and personal annals, of
Boston. They reflect with certainty an assurance, running in an unbroken
course over a century and a half. Their family connections, social
position, conversance with events, and familiar knowledge of what men
thought, believed, and talked about, give to their concurrent and
continuous testimony, a force and weight of authority that are decisive;
and demonstrate that, instead of my having invented and originated the
opinion of Cotton Mather's agency in the matter now under consideration,
I have done no more than to restate what has been believed and uttered
from the beginning.

The writer in the _North American_ says: "Within the last forty years,
there has grown up a fashion, among our historical writers, of defaming
his character and underrating his productions. For a specimen of these
attacks, the reader is referred to a _Supposed Letter from Rev. Cotton
Mather, D.D., with comments on the same by James Savage_." The article
mentioned consists of the "supposed letter," and a very valuable
communication from the late Rev. Samuel Sewall, with some items by Mr.
Savage--[_Massachusetts Historical Collections, IV., ii., 122._] Neither
of these enlightened, faithful, and indefatigable scholars is to be
disposed of in this style. They followed no "fashion;" and their
venerable names are held in honor by all true disciples of antiquarian
and genealogical learning. The author of such works, in this department,
as Mr. Savage has produced, cannot be thus set aside by a magisterial
and supercilious waving of the hand of this Reviewer.


XVII.

THE EFFECT UPON THE POWER OF THE MATHERS, IN THE PUBLIC AFFAIRS OF THE
PROVINCE, OF THEIR CONNECTION WITH WITCHCRAFT.


The Reviewer takes exception to my statement, that the connection of the
Mathers with the witchcraft business, "broke down" their influence in
public affairs. What are the facts? It has been shown, that the
administration of Sir William Phips, at its opening, was under their
control, to an extent never equalled by that of private men over a
Government. The prayers of Cotton Mather were fully answered; and if
wise and cautious counsels had been given, what both father and son had
so coveted, in the political management of the Province, would have been
permanently realized. But, aiming to arm themselves with terrific and
overwhelming strength, by invoking the cooperation of forces from the
spiritual, invisible, and diabolical world, with rash "precipitancy,"
they hurried on the witchcraft prosecutions. The consequence was, that
in six months, the whole machinery on which they had placed their
reliance was prostrate. At the very next election, Elisha Cook was
chosen and Nathaniel Saltonstall rechosen, to the Council; and, ever
after, the Mathers were driven to the wall, in desperate and unavailing
self-defence.

No party or faction could claim the Earl of Bellamont, during his brief
administration, covering but fourteen months. Although the only nobleman
ever sent over as Governor of Massachusetts, more than all others, he
conciliated the general good will. His short term of office and wise
policy prevented any particular advantage to the Mathers from the
dedication to him of the _Life of Phips_. During the entire period,
between 1692 and the arrival of Dudley to the Government, the opponents
of the Mathers were steadily increasing their strength. Opposition to
Increase Mather was soon developed in attempts to remove him from the
Presidency of Harvard College. In 1701, an Order was passed by the
General Court, "that no man should act as President of the College, who
did not reside at Cambridge." This decided the matter. Increase Mather
resigned, on the sixth of September following; and, the same day, the
Rev. Samuel Willard took charge of the College, under the title of
Vice-president, and acted as President, to the acceptance of the people
and with the support of the Government of the Province, to his death, in
1707--all the while allowed to retain the pastoral connection with his
Church, in Boston.

Joseph Dudley arrived from England, on the eleventh of June, 1702, with
his Commission, as Captain-general and Governor of the Province. On the
sixteenth, he made a call upon Cotton Mather, who relates the interview
in his Diary. It seems that Mather made quite a speech to the new
Governor, urging him "to carry an indifferent hand toward all parties,"
and explaining his meaning thus: "By no means, let any people have cause
to say that you take all your measures from the two Mr. Mathers." He
then added: "By the same rule, I may say without offence, by no means
let any people say that you go by no measures in your conduct but Mr.
Byfield's and Mr. Leverett's. This I speak, not from any personal
prejudice against the gentlemen, but from a due consideration of the
disposition of the people, and as a service to your Excellency."

Dudley--whether judging rightly or not is to be determined by taking
into view his position, the then state of parties, and the principles of
human nature--evidently regarded this as a trap. If he had followed the
advice, and kept aloof from Byfield and Leverett, they would have been
placed at a distance from him, and he would necessarily have fallen into
the hands of the Mathers. He may have thought that the only way to avoid
such a result, was for him to explain to those gentlemen his avoidance
of them, by mentioning to them what Mather had said to him, thereby
signifying to them, that, as a matter of policy, he thought it best to
adopt the suggestion and stand aloof from both sides. Whether acting
from this consideration or from resentment, he informed them of it;
whereupon Mather inserted this in his Diary: "The WRETCH went unto those
men and told them that I had advised him to be no ways directed by them,
and inflamed them into implacable rage against me."

After this, the relations between Dudley and the Mathers must have been
sufficiently awkward and uncomfortable; but no particular public
demonstrations appear to have been made, on either side, for some time.

Mr. Willard died on the twelfth of September, 1707; and the great
question again rose as to the proper person to be called to the head of
the College. The extraordinary learning of Cotton Mather undoubtedly
gave him commanding and pre-eminent claims in the public estimation; and
he had reason to think that the favorite object of his ambition was
about to be attained. But he was doomed to bitter disappointment. On the
twenty-eighth of October, the Corporation, through its senior member,
the Rev. James Allen of Boston, communicated to the Governor the vote of
that body, appointing the "Honorable John Leverett" to the Presidency;
and, on the fourteenth of January, 1708, he was publicly inducted to
office. The Mathers could stand it no longer; but, six days after,
addressed, each, a letter to Dudley, couched in the bitterest and most
abusive terms.--[_Massachusetts Historical Society's Collections, I.,
iii., 126._] No explosions of disappointed politicians and defeated
aspirants for office, in our day, surpass these letters. They show how
deeply the writers were stung. They heap maledictions on the Governor,
without any of the restraints of courtesy or propriety. They charge him
with all sorts of malversation in office, bribery, peculation,
extortion, falseness, hypocrisy, and even murder; imputing to him "the
guilt of innocent blood," because, many years before, he had, as
Chief-justice of New York, presided at the Trial of Leisler and Milburn;
and averring that "those men were not only murdered, but barbarously
murdered."

It is observable that some of the heinous crimes charged upon Dudley,
occurred before his arrival as Governor of Massachusetts, in 1702; and
that, in these very letters, they remind him that it was, in part, by
their influence that he was then appointed, and that a letter from
Cotton Mather, in favor of his appointment, was read before "the late
King William." Both the Mathers were remarkable for a lack of vision, in
reference to the logical bearing of what they said. It did not occur to
them, that the fact of their soliciting his appointment closed their
mouths from making charges for public acts well known to them at the
time.

Dudley says that he was assured by the Mathers, on his arrival, that he
had the favor of all good men; and Cotton Mather, in his letter, reminds
him that he signalized his friendly feelings, by giving to the public,
on that occasion, the "portraiture of a good man." It is proved,
therefore, by the evidence on both sides, that, well knowing all about
the Leisler affair and other crimes alleged against him, they were
ready, and most desirous, to secure his favor and friendship; and to
identify themselves with his administration.

In alluding to these letters, Hutchinson (_History, ii., 194_,) says:
"In times when party spirit prevails, what will not a Governor's enemies
believe, however injurious and absurd? At such a time, he was charged
with dispensing _summum jus_ to Leisler and incurring an aggravated
guilt of blood beyond that of a common murderer. The other party, no
doubt, would have charged the failure of justice upon him, if Leisler
had been acquitted."

Dudley replied to both these extraordinary missives, in a letter dated
the third of February, 1708. After rebuking, in stern and dignified
language, the tone and style of their letters, reminding them, by apt
citations from Scripture of the "laws of wise and Christian reproof,"
which they had violated, and showing upon what false foundations their
charges rested, he says: "Can you think it the most proper season to do
me good by your admonitions, when you have taken care to let the world
know you are out of frame and filled with the last prejudice against my
person and Government?" "Every one can see through the pretence, and is
able to account for the spring of these letters, and how they would have
been prevented, without easing any grievances you complain of." He makes
the following proposal: "After all, though I have reason to complain to
heaven and earth of your unchristian rashness, and wrath, and injustice,
I would yet maintain a christian temper towards you. I do, therefore,
now assure you that I shall be ready to give you all the satisfaction
Christianity requires, in those points which are proper for you to seek
to receive it in, when, with a proper temper and spirit, giving me
timely notice, you do see meet to make me a visit for that end; and I
expect the same satisfaction from you." He offers this significant
suggestion: "I desire you will keep your station, and let fifty or sixty
good Ministers, your equals in the Province, have a share in the
Government of the College and advise thereabouts, as well as yourselves,
and I hope all will be well." He concludes by claiming that he is
sustained by the favor of the "Ministers of New England;" and
characterises the issue between him and them thus: "The College must be
disposed against the opinion of all the Ministers in New England, except
yourselves, or the Governor torn in pieces. This is the view I have of
your inclination."

Dudley continued to administer the Government for eight years longer,
until the infirmities of age compelled him to retire. Both Hutchinson
and Doctor John Eliot give us to understand that he conducted the
public affairs with great ability and success, with the general approval
of all classes, and particularly of the Clergy. His statement that he
had the support of all the Ministers of New England, except the Mathers,
was undoubtedly correct. It is certainly true of the Ministers of
Boston. In his Diary, under the year 1709, Cotton Mather says: "The
other Ministers of the Town are this day feasting with our wicked
Governor. I have, by my provoking plainness and freedom, in telling this
Ahab of his wickedness, procured myself to be left out of his
invitations. I rejoiced in my liberty from the temptations wherewith
they were encumbered." He set apart that day for fasting and prayer, the
special interest of which, he says, "was to obtain deliverance and
protection" from his "enemies," whose names, he informs us, he
"mentioned unto the Lord, who had promised to be my shield."

The bitterness with which Mather felt exclusion from power is strikingly
illustrated in a letter addressed by him to Stephen Sewall, published by
me in the Appendix to the edition of my _Lectures_, printed in 1831. I
subjoin a few extracts: "A couple of malignant fellows, a while since,
railing at me in the Bookseller's shop, among other things they said,
'and his friend Noyes has cast him off,' at which they set up a
laughter." "No doubt, you understand, how ridiculously things have been
managed in our late General Assembly; voting and unvoting, the same day;
and, at last, the squirrels perpetually running into the mouth open for
them, though they had cried against it wonderfully. And your neighbor,
Sowgelder, after his indefatigable pains at the castration of all common
honesty, rewarded, before the Court broke up, with being made one of
your brother Justices; which the whole House, as well as the apostate
himself, had in view, all along, as the expected wages of his iniquity."
"If things continue in the present administration, there will shortly be
not so much as a shadow of justice left in the country. Bribery, a crime
capital among the Pagans, is already a peccadillo among us. All officers
are learning it. And, if I should say, Judges will find the way to it,
some will say, there needs not the future tense in the case." "Every
thing is betrayed, and that we, on the top of our house, may complete
all, our very religion, with all the Churches, is at last betrayed--the
treachery carried on with lies, and fallacious representations, and
finished by the rash hands of our Clergy."

That Cotton Mather continued all his subsequent life to experience the
dissatisfaction, and give way to the feelings, of a disappointed man,
is evident from his Diary. I have quoted from it a few passages. The
Reviewer says it "is full of penitential confessions," and seems to
liken him, in this respect, to the Apostle of the Gentiles. Speaking of
my having cited the Diary, as historical evidence, he says: "Such a use
of the confessional, we believe, is not common with historical writers."
I do not remember anything like "penitential confessions," in the
passages from the Diary given in my book. The reader is referred to
them, in Volume II., Page 503. They belong to the year 1724, and are
thus prefaced:

"DARK DISPENSATIONS, BUT LIGHT ARISING IN DARKNESS."

"It may be of some use to me, to observe some very dark dispensations,
wherein the recompense of my poor essays at well-doing, in this life,
seem to look a little discouraging; and then to express the triumph of
my faith over such and all discouragements." "Of the things that look
dark, I may touch of twice seven instances."

The writer, in the _Christian Examiner_, November, 1831, from whom I
took them, omitted two, "on account of their too personal or domestic
character."

I cannot find the slightest trace of a penitential tear on those I have
quoted; and cite now but one of them, as pertinent to the point I am
making: "What has a gracious Lord given me to do for the good of the
country? in applications without number for it, in all its interests,
besides publications of things useful to it, and for it. And, yet, there
is no man whom the country so loads with disrespect, and calumnies, and
manifold expressions of aversion."

This is a specimen of the whole of them--one half recounting what he had
done, the other complaining, sometimes almost scolding, at the poor
requital he had received.

President Leverett died on the third of May, 1724. His death was
lamented by the country; and the most eminent men vied with each other
in doing honor to his memory. The Rev. Benjamin Colman called him "our
master," and pronounced his life as "great and good." "The young men saw
him and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up." Dr. Appleton
declared that he had been "an honored ornament to his country. Verily,
the breach is so wide, that none but an all-sufficient God (with whom is
the residue of the Spirit) can repair or heal it." The late Benjamin
Peirce, in his _History of Harvard University_, says that "his
Presidency was successful and brilliant." He was honored abroad, as well
as at home; and his name is inscribed on the rolls of the Royal Society
of London. Mr. Peirce says: "He had a great and generous soul." His
natural abilities were of a very high order. His attainments were
profound and extensive. He was well acquainted with the learned
languages, with the arts and "sciences, with history, philosophy, law,
divinity, politics." Such, we are told, were "the majesty and marks of
greatness, in his speech, his behaviour, and his very countenance," that
the students of the College were inspired with reverence and affection.
In his earlier and later life, he had been connected with the College,
as Tutor and as President; and in the intermediate period, he had filled
the highest legislative and judicial stations, and been intrusted with
the most important functions connected with the military service. I am
inclined to think, all things considered, a claim, in his behalf, might
be put in for the distinction the Reviewer awards to Cotton Mather, as
"doubtless the most brilliant man of his day in New England."

President Leverett was buried on the sixth of May. Cotton Mather
officiated as one of the Pall-bearers, and then went home, and made the
following entry in his Diary, dated the seventh: "The sudden death of
that unhappy man who sustained the place of President in our College,
will open a door for my doing singular services in the best of
interests. I do not know that the care of the College will now be cast
upon me; though I am told it is what is most generally wished for. If it
should be, I shall be in abundance of distress about it; but, if it
should not, yet I may do many things for the good of the College more
quietly and more hopefully than formerly."

As time wore away, and no choice of President was made, he became more
and more sensible that an influence, hostile to him, was in the
ascendency; and, on the first of July, he writes thus, in his Diary:
"This day being our insipid, ill-contrived anniversary, which we call
Commencement, I chose to spend it at home, in supplications, partly on
the behalf of the College, that it may not be foolishly thrown away, but
that God may bestow such a President upon it, as may prove a rich
blessing unto it and unto all our Churches."

In the meanwhile, he renewed his attendance at the meetings of the
Overseers; having never occupied his seat, in that Body, with the
exception of a single Session, during the whole period of Leverett's
presidency. The Board, at a meeting he attended, on the sixth of August,
1724, passed a vote advising and directing the speedy election of a
President. On the eleventh, the Corporation chose the Rev. Joseph Sewall
of the Old South Church; and Mather records the event in his Diary, as
follows: "I am informed that, yesterday, the six men, who call
themselves the Corporation of the College, met, and, contrary to the
epidemical expectation of the country, chose a modest young man, Sewall,
of whose piety (and little else) every one gives a laudable character."

"I always foretold these two things of the Corporation: First, that, if
it were possible for them to steer clear of me, they will do so.
Secondly, that, if it were possible for them to act foolishly, they will
do so. The perpetual envy with which my essays to serve the kingdom of
God are treated among them, and the dread that Satan has of my beating
up his quarters at the College, led me into the former sentiment; the
marvellous indiscretion, with which the affairs of the College are
managed, led me into the latter."

Mr. Sewall declined the appointment. On the eighteenth of November, the
Rev. Benjamin Colman, of the Brattle-street Church, was chosen. He also
declining, the Rev. Benjamin Wadsworth, of the First Church, was
elected, in June, 1725, and inaugurated on the seventh of July.

It thus appears that Dr. Mather was pointedly passed over; and every
other Minister of Boston successively chosen to that great office.

Of course he took, as Mr. Peirce informs us, no further part in the
management of the College. While he considered, as he expressed it, the
"senselessness" of those entrusted with its affairs, as threatening
"little short of a dissolution of the College," yet he persuaded himself
that he had never desired the office. He had, he says, "unspeakable
cause to admire the compassion of Heaven, in saving him from the
appointment;" and that he had always had a "dread of what the generality
of sober men" thought he desired--"dismal apprehension of the distresses
which a call at Cambridge would bring" upon him.--He was sincere in
those declarations, no doubt; but they show how completely he could
blind himself to the past and even to the actual present. Mr. Peirce
explains why the Corporation were so resolute in withholding their
suffrages from Mather: "His contemporaries appear to have formed a very
correct estimate of his character." "They saw, what posterity sees, that
he was a man of wonderful parts, of immense learning, and of eminent
piety and virtue." "They saw his weakness and eccentricities." "It is
evident that his judgment was not equal to his other faculties; that his
passions, which were naturally strong and violent, were not always under
proper regulation; that he was weak, credulous, enthusiastic, and
superstitious. His conversation is said to have been instructive and
entertaining, in a high degree, though often marred by levity, vanity,
imprudence and puns." For these reasons, he was deemed an unsuitable
person for the Presidency of the College.


XVIII.

COTTON MATHER'S WRITINGS AND CHARACTER.


While compelled--by the attempt of the writer in the _North American
Review_ to reverse the just verdict of history in reference to Cotton
Mather's connection with Salem Witchcraft--to show the unhappy part he
acted and the terrible responsibility he incurred, in bringing forward,
and carrying through its stages, that awful tragedy, and the unworthy
means he used to throw that responsibility, afterwards, on others, I am
not to be misled into a false position, in reference to this
extraordinary man. I endorse the language of Mr. Peirce: "He possessed
great vigor and activity of mind, quickness of apprehension, a lively
imagination, a prodigious memory, uncommon facility in acquiring and
communicating knowledge, with the most indefatigable application and
industry; that he amassed an immense store of information on all
subjects, human and divine." I follow Mr. Peirce still further, in
believing that his natural temperament was pleasant and his sentiments
of a benevolent cast: "that he was an habitual promoter and doer of
good, is evident, as well from his writings as from the various accounts
that have been transmitted respecting him."

If the question is asked, as it naturally will be, how these admissions
can be reconciled with the views and statements respecting him,
contained in this article and in my book on witchcraft, the answer is:
that mankind is not divided into two absolutely distinct and entirely
separated portions--one good and the other evil. The good are liable to,
and the bad are capable of, each receiving much into their own lives and
characters, that belongs to the other. This interfusion universally
occurs. The great errors and the great wrongs imputable to Cotton Mather
do not make it impracticable to discern what was commendable in him.
They may be accounted for without throwing him out of the pale of
humanity or our having to shut our eyes to traits and merits other ways
exhibited.

The extraordinary precocity of his intellect--itself always a peril,
often a life-long misfortune--awakened vanity and subjected him to the
flattery by which it is fed. All ancestral associations and family
influences pampered it. Such a speech as that made to him, at his
graduation, by President Oakes, could not have failed to have inflated
it to exaggerated dimensions. Clerical and political ambition was
natural, all but instinctive, to one, whose father, and both whose
grandfathers, had been powers, in the State as well as Church. The
religious ideas, if they can be so called, in which he had been trained
from childhood, in a form bearing upon him with more weight than upon
any other person in all history, inasmuch, as they constituted the
prominent feature of his father's reading, talk, thoughts, and writings,
gave a rapid and overshadowing growth to credulity and superstition. A
defect in his education, perhaps, in part, a natural defect, left him
without any true logical culture, so that he seems, in his productions
and conduct, not to discern the sequences of statements, the coherence
of propositions, nor the consistency of actions, thereby entangling him
in expressions and declarations that have the aspect of
untruthfulness--his language often actually bearing that character,
without his discerning it. His writings present many instances of this
infirmity. Some have already been incidentally adduced. In his _Life of
Phips_, avowing himself the author of the document known as the _Advice
of the Ministers_, he uses this language: "By Mr. Mather the younger, as
I have been informed." He had, in fact, never been _so informed_. He
knew it by consciousness. Of course he had no thought of deceiving; but
merely followed a habit he had got, of such modes of expression. So,
also, when he sent a present of money and tracts to "poor and bad
people," in Salem, with an anonymous letter to the Minister of the
place, "desiring and empowering him to dispense the charity, _in his own
name_, hoping thereby the _more to ingratiate his ministry with the
people_," he looked only on one side of the proposal, and saw it in no
other light than a benevolent and friendly transaction. It never
occurred to him that he was suggesting a deceptive procedure and drawing
the Minister into a false position and practice.

When, in addition, we consider to what he was exposed by his proclivity
to, and aspirations for, political power, the expedients, schemes,
contrivances, and appliances, in which he thereby became involved in the
then state of things in the Colony, and the connection which leading
Ministers, although not admitted to what are strictly speaking political
offices, had with the course of public affairs--his father, to an extent
never equalled by any other Clergyman, before or since--we begin to
estimate the influences that disastrously swayed the mind of Cotton
Mather.

Vanity, flattery, credulity, want of logical discernment, and the
struggles between political factions, in the unsettled, uncertain,
transition period, between the old and new Charters, are enough to
account for much that was wrong, in one of Mather's temperament and
passions, without questioning his real mental qualities, or, I am
disposed to think, his conscious integrity, or the sincerity of his
religious experiences or professions.

But his chief apology, after all, is to be found in the same sphere in
which his chief offences were committed. Certain topics and notions, in
reference to the invisible, spiritual, and diabolical world, whether of
reality or fancy it matters not, had, all his life long, been the
ordinary diet, the daily bread, of his mind.

It may, perhaps, be said with truth, that the theological imagery and
speculations of that day, particularly as developed in the writings of
the two Mathers, were more adapted to mislead the mind and shroud its
moral sense in darkness, than any system, even of mythology, that ever
existed. It was a mythology. It may be spoken of with freedom, now, as
it has probably passed away, in all enlightened communities in
Christendom. Satan was the great central character, in what was, in
reality, a Pantheon. He was surrounded with hosts of infernal spirits,
disembodied and embodied, invisible demons, and confederate human
agents. He was seen in everything, everywhere. His steps were traced in
extraordinary occurrences and in the ordinary operations of nature. He
was hovering over the heads of all, and lying in wait along every daily
path. The affrighted imagination, in every scene and mode of life, was
conversant with ghosts, apparitions, spectres, devils. This prevalent,
all but universal, exercise of credulous fancy, exalted into the most
imposing dignity of theology and faith, must have had a demoralizing
effect upon the rational condition and faculties of men, and upon all
discrimination and healthfulness of thought. When error, in its most
extravagant forms, had driven the simplicity of the Gospel out of the
Church and the world, it is not to be wondered at that the mind was led
to the most shocking perversions, and the conscience ensnared to the
most indefensible actions.

The superstition of that day was foreshadowed in the ferocious cannibal
of classic mythology--a monster, horrific, hideous in mien, and gigantic
in stature. It involved the same fate. The eye of the intellect was
burned out, the light of reason extinguished--_cui lumen ademptum_.

Having always given himself up to the contemplation of diabolical
imaginations, Cotton Mather was led to take the part he did, in the
witchcraft proceedings; and it cannot be hidden from the light of
history. The greater his talents, the more earnestly he may, in other
matters, have aimed to be useful, the more weighty is the lesson his
course teaches, of the baleful effects of bewildering and darkening
superstition.

There is another, and a special, explanation to be given of the
disingenuousness that appears in his writings. He was a master of
language. He could express, with marvelous facility, any shade of
thought. He could also make language conceal thought. No one ever
handled words with more adroitness. He could mould them to suit his
purposes, at will, and with ease. This faculty was called in requisition
by the special circumstances of his times. It was necessary to
preserve, at least, the appearance of unity among the Churches, while
there was as great a tendency, then, as ever, to diversity of
speculations, touching points of casuistical divinity or ministerial
policy. The talent to express in formulas, sentiments that really
differed, so as to obscure the difference, was needed; and he had it. He
knew how to frame a document that would suit both sides, but, in effect,
answer the purposes of one of them, as in the _Advice of the Ministers_.
He could assert a proposition and connect with it what appeared to be
only a judicious modification or amplification, but which, in reality,
was susceptible of being interpreted as either more or less
corroborating or contradicting it, as occasion might require. This was a
sort of sleight of hand, in the use of words; and was noticed, at the
time, as "legerdemain." He practised it so long that it became a feature
of his style; and he actually, in this way, deceived himself as well as
others. It is a danger to which ingenious and hair-splitting writers are
liable. I am inclined to think that what we cannot but regard as patent
misstatements, were felt by him to be all right, in consequence, as just
intimated, of this acquired habit.

His style is sprightly, and often entertaining. Neal, the author of the
_History of the Puritans_, in a letter to the Rev. Benjamin Colman,
after speaking with commendation of one of Cotton Mather's productions,
says: "It were only to be wished that it had been freed from those puns
and jingles that attend all his writings, before it had been made
public."--_Massachusetts Historical Collections, I., v., 199._--Mr.
Peirce, it has been observed, speaks of his "puns," in conversation. It
is not certain, but that, to a reader now, these very things constitute
a redeeming attraction of his writings and relieve the mind of the
unpleasant effects of his credulity and vanity, pedantic and often
far-fetched references, palpable absurdities, and, sometimes, the
repulsiveness of his topics and matter.

The Reviewer represents me as prejudiced against Cotton Mather. Far from
it. Forty-three years ago, before my attention had been particularly
called to his connection with alleged witchcrafts or with the political
affairs of his times, I eulogized his "learning and liberality," in warm
terms.--_Sermon at the Dedication of the House of Worship of the First
Church, in Salem, Massachusetts, 48._

I do not retract what I then said. Cotton Mather was in advance of his
times, in liberality of feeling, in reference to sectarian and
denominational matters. He was, undoubtedly, a great student, and had
read all that an American scholar could then lay his hands on.
Marvellous stories were told of the rapidity of his reading. He was a
devourer of books. At the same time, I vindicated him, without reserve,
from the charge of pedantry. This I cannot do now. Observation and
reflection have modified my views. He made a display, over all his
pages, of references and quotations from authors then, as now, rarely
read, and of anecdotes, biographical incidents, and critical comments
relating to scholars and eminent persons, of whom others have but little
information, and of many of whom but few have ever heard. This filled
his contemporaries with wonder; led to most extravagant statements, in
funeral discourses, by Benjamin Colman, Joshua Gee, and others; and made
the general impression that has come down to our day. Without detracting
from his learning, which was truly great, it cannot be denied that this
superfluous display of it subjects him, justly to the imputation of
pedantry. It may be affected where, unlike the case of Cotton Mather,
there is, in reality, no very extraordinary amount of learning. It is a
trick of authorship easily practised.

Any one reading Latin with facility, having a good memory, and keeping a
well-arranged scrap-book, needs less than half a dozen such books as the
following, to make a show of learning and to astonish the world by his
references and citations--the six folio volumes of Petavius, on Dogmatic
Theology, and his smaller work, _Rationarium Temporum_, a sort of
compendium or schedule of universal history; and a volume printed, in
the latter half of the seventeenth century, at Amsterdam, compiled by
Limborch, consisting of an extensive collection of letters to and from
the most eminent men of that and the preceding century, such as
Arminius, Vossius, Episcopius, Grotius, and many others, embracing a
vast variety of literary history, criticism, biography, theology,
philosophy, and ecclesiastical matters--I have before me the copy of
this work, owned by that prodigy of learning, Dr. Samuel Parr, who
pronounced it "a precious book;" and it may have contributed much to
give to his productions, that air of rare learning that astonished his
contemporaries. To complete the compendious apparatus, and give the
means of exhibiting any quantity of learning, in fields frequented by
few, the only other book needed is Melchior Adams's _Lives of Literati_,
including all most prominently connected with Divinity, Philosophy, and
the progress of learning and culture, during the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, and down to its date, 1615. I have before me, the copy of
this last work, owned by Richard Mather, and probably brought over with
him, in his perilous voyage, in 1635. It was, successively, in the
libraries of his son, Increase, and his grandson, Cotton Mather. At a
corner of one of the blank leaves, it is noted, apparently in the hand
of Increase Mather: "began Mar. 1, finished April 30, 1676." According
to the popular tradition, Cotton would have read it, in a day or two. It
contains interesting items of all sorts--personal anecdotes, critical
comments, and striking passages of the lives and writings of more than
one hundred and fifty distinguished men, such as Erasmus, Fabricius,
Faustus, Cranmer, Tremellius, Peter Martyr, Beza, and John Knox. Whether
Mather had access to either of the above-named works, except the last,
is uncertain; but, as his library was very extensive, he sparing no
pains nor expense in furnishing it, and these books were severally then
in print and precisely of the kind to attract him and suit his fancy, it
is not unlikely that he had them all. They would have placed in easy
reach, much of the mass of amazing erudition with which he "entertained"
his readers and hearers.

Cotton Mather died on the thirteenth of February, 1728, at the close of
his sixty-fifth year.

Thirty-six years had elapsed since the fatal imbroglio of Salem
witchcraft. He had probably long been convinced that it was vain to
attempt to shake the general conviction, expressed by Calef, that he had
been "the most active and forward of any Minister in the country in
those matters," and acquiesced in the general disposition to let that
matter rest. It must be pleasing to all, to think that his very last
years were freed from the influences that had destroyed the peace of his
life and left such a shade over his name. Having met with nothing but
disaster from attempting to manage the visible as well as the invisible
world, he probably left them both in the hands of Providence; and
experienced, as he had never done, a brief period of tranquillity,
before finally leaving the scene. His aspiration to control the Province
had ceased. The object of his life-long pursuit, the Presidency of the
College, was forever baffled. Nothing but mischief and misery to himself
and others had followed his attempt to lead the great combat against the
Devil and his hosts. It had fired his early zeal and ambition; but that
fire was extinguished. The two ties, which more than all others, had
bound him, by his good affections and his unhappy passions, to what was
going on around him, were severed, nearly at the same time, by the death
of his father, in 1723, and of his great and successful rival, Leverett,
in 1724. Severe domestic trials and bereavements completed the work of
weaning him from the world; and it is stated that, in his very last
years, the resentments of his life were buried and the ties of broken
friendships restored. The pleasantest intercourse took place between him
and Benjamin Colman; men of all parties sought his company and listened
to the conversation, which was always one of his shining gifts; he had
written kindly about Dudley; and his end was as peaceful as his whole
life would have been, but for the malign influences I have endeavored to
describe, leading him to the errors and wrongs which, while faithful
history records them, men must regard with considerate candor, as God
will with infinite mercy.

It is a curious circumstance, that the two great public funerals, in
those early times, of which we have any particular accounts left, were
of the men who, in life, had been so bitterly opposed to each other.
When Leverett was buried, the cavalcade, official bodies, students, and
people, "were fain to proceed near as far as Hastings' before they
returned," so great was the length of the procession: the funeral of
Mather was attended by the greatest concourse that had ever been
witnessed in Boston.


XIX.

ROBERT CALEF'S WRITINGS AND CHARACTER.


I approach the close of this protracted discussion with what has been
purposely reserved. The article in the _North American Review_ rests,
throughout, upon a repudiation of the authority of Robert Calef. Its
writer says, "his faculties appear to us to have been of an inferior
order." "He had a very feeble conception of what credible testimony is."
"If he had not intentionally lied, he had a very imperfect appreciation
of truth." He speaks of "Calef's disqualifications as a witness." He
seeks to discredit him, by suggesting the idea that, in his original
movements against Mather, he was instigated by pre-existing
enmity--"Robert Calef, between whom and Mr. Mather a personal quarrel
existed." "His personal enemy, Calef."

There is no evidence of any difficulty, nor of any thing that can be
called "enmity," between these two persons, prior to their dealings with
each other, in the Margaret Rule case, commencing on the thirteenth of
September, 1693. Mather himself states, in his Diary, that the enmity
between them arose out of Calef's opposition to his, Mather's, views
relating to the "existence and influences of the invisible world." So
far as we have any knowledge, their acquaintance began at the date just
mentioned. The suggestion of pre-existing enmity, therefore, gives an
unfair and unjust impression.

Robert Calef was a native of England, a young man, residing, first in
Roxbury, and afterwards at Boston. He was reputed a person of good
sense; and, from the manner in which Mather alludes to him, in one
instance, of considerable means: he had, probably, been prosperous in
his business, which was that of a merchant. Not a syllable is on record
against his character, outside of his controversy with the Mathers; all
that is known of him, on the contrary, indicates that he was an
honorable and excellent person. He enjoyed the confidence of the people;
and was called to municipal trusts, for which only reliable, discreet,
vigilant, and honest citizens were selected, receiving the thanks of the
Town for his services, as Overseer of the Poor. As he encountered the
madness and violence of the people, when they were led by Cotton Mather,
in the witchcraft delusion, it is a singular circumstance, constituting
an honorable distinction, in which they shared, that, in a later period
of their lives, they stood, shoulder to shoulder, breasting bravely
together, another storm of popular fanaticism, by publicly favoring
inoculation for the small-pox. He offered several of his children to be
treated, at the hands of Dr. Boylston, in 1721. His family continued to
bear up the respectability of the name, and is honorably mentioned in
the municipal records. A vessel, named _London_, was a regular
Packet-ship, between that port and Boston, and probably one of the
largest class then built in America. She was commanded by "Robert
Calef;" and, in the Boston _Evening Post_, of the second of May, 1774,
"Dr. Calef of Ipswich" is mentioned among the passengers just arrived in
her. Under his own, and other names, the descendants of the family of
Calef are probably as numerous and respectable as those of the Mathers;
and on that, as all other higher accounts, there is an equal demand for
justice to their respective ancestors.

It is related by Mather, that a young woman, named Margaret Rule,
belonging to the North part of Boston, "many months after the General
Storm of the late enchantments, was over," "when the country had long
lain pretty quiet," was "seized by the Evil Angels, both as to
molestations and accusations from the Invisible World". On the Lord's
Day, the tenth of September, 1693, "after some hours of previous
disturbance of the public assembly, she fell into odd fits," and had to
be taken out of the congregation and carried home, "where her fits, in a
few hours, grew into a figure that satisfied the spectators of their
being supernatural." He further says, that, "from the 10th of September
to the 18th, she kept an entire fast, and yet, she was to all appearance
as fresh, as lively, as hearty, at the nine days end, as before they
began. In all this time she had a very eager hunger upon her stomach,
yet if any refreshment were brought unto her, her teeth would be set,
and she would be thrown into many miseries. Indeed, once, or twice, or
so, in all this time, her tormentors permitted her to swallow a mouthful
of somewhat that might increase her miseries, whereof a spoonful of rum
was the most considerable."

The affair, of course, was noised abroad. It reached the ears of Robert
Calef. On the thirteenth, after sunset, accompanied by some others, he
went to the house, "drawn," as he says, "by curiosity to see Margaret
Rule, and so much the rather, because it was reported Mr. Mather would
be there, that night." They were taken into the chamber where she was in
bed. They found her of a healthy countenance. She was about seventeen
years of age. Increase and Cotton Mather came in, shortly afterwards,
with others. Altogether, there were between thirty and forty persons in
the room. Calef drew up Minutes of what was said and done. He repeated
his visit, on the evening of the nineteenth. Cotton Mather had been with
Margaret half an hour; and had gone before his arrival. Each night,
Calef made written minutes of what was said and done, the accuracy of
which was affirmed by the signatures of two persons, which they were
ready to confirm with their oaths. He showed them to some of Mather's
particular friends. Whereupon Mather preached about him; sent word that
he should have him arrested for slander; and called him "one of the
worst of liars." Calef wrote him a letter, on the twenty-ninth of
September; and, in reference to the complaints and charges Mather was
making, proposed that they should meet, in either of two places he
mentioned, each accompanied by a friend, at which time he, Calef, would
read to him the minutes he had taken, of what had occurred on the
evenings of the thirteenth and nineteenth. Mather sent a long letter,
not to be delivered, but read to him, in which he agreed to meet him, as
proposed, at one of the places; but, in the mean time, on the complaint
of the Mathers, for scandalous libels upon Cotton Mather, Calef was
brought before "their Majesties Justice, and bound over to answer at
Sessions." Mather, of course, failed to give him the meeting for
conference, as agreed upon. On the twenty-fourth of November, Calef
wrote to him again, referring to his failure to meet him and to the
legal proceedings he had instituted; and, as the time for appearance in
Court was drawing near, he "thought it not amiss to give a summary" of
his views on the "great concern," as to which they were at issue. He
states, at the outset, "that there are witches, is not the doubt." The
Reviewer seizes upon this expression, to convey the idea that Calef was
trying to conciliate Mather, and induce him to desist from the
prosecution. Whoever reads the letter will see how unfair and untrue
this is. Calef keeps to the point, which was not whether there were, or
could be, witches; but whether the methods Mather was attempting, in the
case of Margaret Rule, and which had been used in Salem, the year
before, were legitimate or defensible. He was determined not to suffer
the issue to be shifted.

Upon receiving this letter, Mather, who had probably, upon reflection,
begun to doubt about the expediency of a public prosecution, signified
that he had no desire to press the prosecution; and renewed the proposal
for a conference. Calef "waited on Sessions;" but no one appearing
against him, was dismissed. The affair seemed, at this crisis, to be
tending toward an amicable conclusion. But Mather failed to meet him;
and, on the eleventh of January, 1694, Calef addressed him again,
recapitulating what had occurred, sending him copies of his previous
letters and also of the Minutes he had taken of what occurred on the
evenings of the thirteenth and nineteenth of September, with these
words: "REVEREND SIR: Finding it necessary, on many accounts, I here
present you with the copy of that Paper, which has been so much
misrepresented, to the end, that what shall be found defective or not
fairly represented, if any such shall appear, they may be set right."

This letter concludes in terms which show that, in that stage of the
affair, Calef was disposed to treat Mather with great respect; and that
he sincerely and earnestly desired and trusted that satisfaction might
be given and taken, in the interview he so persistently sought--not
merely in reference to the case of Margaret Rule, but to the general
subject of witchcraft, on which they had different apprehensions: "I
have reason to hope for a satisfactory answer to him, who is one that
reverences your person and office."

This language strikingly illustrates the estimate in which Ministers
were held. Reverence for their office and for them, as a body, pervaded
all classes.

On the fifteenth of January, Mather replied complaining, in general
terms, of the narrative contained in Calef's Minutes, as follows: "I do
scarcely find any _one_ thing, in the whole paper, whether respecting my
father or myself, either fairly or truly represented." "The narrative
contains a number of mistakes and falsehoods which, were they wilful and
designed, might justly be termed great lies." He then goes into a
specification of a few particulars, in which he maintains that the
Minutes are incorrect.

On the eighteenth of January, Calef replied, reminding him that he had
taken scarcely any notice of the general subject of diabolical agency;
but that almost the whole of his letter referred to the Minutes of the
meetings, on the thirteenth and nineteenth of September; and he
maintains their substantial accuracy and shows that some of Mather's
strictures were founded upon an incorrect reading of them. In regard to
Mather's different recollection of some points, he expresses his belief
that if his account, in the Minutes, "be not fully exact, it was as near
as memory could bear away." He notices the fact that he finds in
Mather's letter no objection to what related to matters of greatest
concern. Mather had complained that the Minutes reported certain
statements made by Rule, which had been used to his disadvantage; and
Calef suggests, "What can be expected less from the father of lies, by
whom, you judge, she was possest?"

Appended to Mather's letter, are some documents, signed by several
persons, declaring that they had seen Rule lifted up by an invisible
force from the bed to the top of the room, while a strong person threw
his whole weight across her, and several others were trying with all
their might to hold her down or pull her back. Upon these certificates,
Calef remarks: "Upon the whole, I suppose you expect I should believe
it; and if so, the only advantage gained is, that what has been so long
controverted between Protestants and Papists, whether miracles are
ceased, will hereby seem to be decided for the latter; it being, for
ought I can see, if so, as true a miracle as for iron to swim; and the
Devil can work such miracles."

Calef wrote to him again, on the nineteenth of February, once more
praying that he would so far oblige him, as to give him his views, on
the important subjects, for a right understanding of which he had so
repeatedly sought a conference and written so many letters; and
expressing his earnest desire to be corrected, if in error, to which
end, if Mather would not, he indulged a hope that some others would,
afford him relief and satisfaction. On the sixteenth of April, he wrote
still another letter. In all of them, he touched upon the points at
issue between them, and importuned Mather to communicate his views,
fully, as to one seeking light. On the first of March, he wrote to a
gentleman, an acknowledgment of having received, through his hands,
"after more than a year's waiting," from Cotton Mather, four sheets of
paper, not to be copied, and to be returned in a fortnight. Upon
returning them, with comments, he desires the gentleman to request Mr.
Mather not to send him any more such papers, unless he could be allowed
to copy and use them. It seems that, in answer to a subsequent letter,
Mather sent to him a copy of Richard Baxter's _Certainty of the World of
Spirits_, to which, after some time, Calef found leisure to reply,
expressing his dissent from the views given in that book, and treating
the subject somewhat at large. In this letter, which closes his
correspondence with Mather, he makes his solemn and severe appeal:
"Though there is reason to hope that these diabolical principles have
not so far prevailed (with multitudes of Christians), as that they
ascribe to a witch and a devil the attributes peculiar to the Almighty;
yet how few are willing to be found opposing such a torrent, as knowing
that in so doing they shall be sure to meet with opposition to the
utmost, from the many, both of Magistrates, Ministers, and people; and
the name of Sadducee, atheist, and perhaps witch too, cast upon them,
most liberally, by men of the highest profession in godliness; and, if
not so learned as some of themselves, then accounted only fit to be
trampled on, and their arguments (though both rational and scriptural)
as fit only for contempt. But though this be the deplorable dilemma, yet
some have dared, from time to time, (for the glory of God and the good
and safety of men's lives, etc.) to run all these risks. And, that God
who has said, 'My glory I will not give to another,' is able to protect
those that are found doing their duty herein against all opposers; and,
however otherwise contemptible, can make them useful in his own hand,
who has sometimes chosen the weakest instruments that His power may be
the more illustrious.

"And now, Reverend Sir, if you are conscious to yourself, that you have,
in your principles or practices, been abetting to such grand errors, I
cannot see how it can consist with sincerity, to be so convinced, in
matters so nearly relating to the glory of God and lives of innocents,
and, at the same time, so much to fear disparagement among men, as to
trifle with conscience and dissemble an approving of former sentiments.
You know that word, 'He that honoreth me I will honor, and he that
despiseth me shall be lightly esteemed.' But, if you think that, in
these matters, you have done your duty, and taught the people theirs;
and that the doctrines cited from the above mentioned book [_Baxter's_]
are ungainsayable; I shall conclude in almost his words. He that teaches
such a doctrine, if through ignorance he believes not what he saith, may
be a Christian; but if he believes them, he is in the broad path to
heathenism, devilism, popery, or atheism. It is a solemn caution (_Gal.,
i., 8_): 'But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed.' I hope you will not misconstrue my intentions herein, who am,
Reverend Sir, yours to command, in what I may."

Resolute in his purpose to bring the Ministers, if possible, to meet the
questions he felt it his duty to have considered and settled, and
careful to leave nothing undone that he could do, to this end, he sought
the satisfaction from others, he had tried, in vain, to obtain from
Mather. On the eighteenth of March, 1695, he addressed a letter "To the
Ministers, whether English, French, or Dutch," calling their attention
to "the mysterious doctrines" relating to the "power of the Devil," and
to the subject of Witchcraft. On the twentieth of September, he wrote to
the Rev. Samuel Willard, invoking his attention to the "great concern,"
and his aid in having it fairly discussed. On the twelfth of January,
1696, he addressed "The Ministers in and near Boston," for the same
purpose; and wrote a separate letter to the Rev. Benjamin Wadsworth.

These documents were all composed with great earnestness, frankness, and
ability; and are most creditable to his intelligence, courage, and sense
of public duty. I have given this minute account of his proceedings with
Mather and the Clergy generally, because I am impressed with a
conviction that no instance can be found, in which a great question has
been managed with more caution, deliberation, patience, manly openness
and uprightness, and heroic steadiness and prowess, than this young
merchant displayed, in compelling all concerned to submit to a thorough
investigation and over-hauling of opinions and practices, established by
the authority of great names and prevalent passions and prejudices, and
hedged in by the powers and terrors of Church and State.

It seems to be evident that he must have received aid, in some quarter,
from persons conversant with topics of learning and methods of treating
such subjects, to an extent beyond the reach of a mere man of business.
In the First Volume of the _Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical
Society_, Page 288, a Memorandum, from which I make an extract, is
given, as found in Doctor Belknap's hand-writing, in his copy of Calef's
book, in the collection, from the library of that eminent historian,
presented by his heirs to that institution: "A young man of good sense,
and free from superstition; a merchant in Boston. He was furnished with
materials for his work, by Mr. Brattle of Cambridge, and his brother of
Boston, and other gentlemen, who were opposed to the Salem
proceedings.--E. P."

The fact that Belknap endorsed this statement, gives it sufficient
credibility. Who the "E. P." was, from whom it was derived, is not
known. If it were either of the Ebenezer Pembertons, father or son, no
higher authority could be adduced. But whatever aid Calef received, he
so thoroughly digested and appropriated, as to make him ready to meet
Mather or any, or all, the other Ministers, for conference and debate;
and his title to the authorship of the papers remains complete.

The Ministers did not give him the satisfaction he sought. They were
paralyzed by the influence or the fear of the Mathers. Perhaps they were
shocked, if not indignant, at a layman's daring to make such a movement
against a Minister. It was an instance of the laying of unsanctified
hands on the horns of the altar, such as had not been equalled in
audacity, since the days of Anne Hutchinson, by any but Quakers. Calef,
however, was determined to compel the attention of the world, if he
could not that of the Ministers of Boston, to the subject; and he
prepared, and sent to England, to be printed, a book, containing all
that had passed, and more to the same purpose. It consists of several
parts.

PART I. is _An account of the afflictions of Margaret Rule_, written by
Cotton Mather, under the title of _Another Brand plucked out of the
Burning, or more Wonders of the Invisible World_. In my book, the case
of Margaret Rule is spoken of as having occurred the next "Summer" after
the witchcraft delusion in Salem. This gives the Reviewer a chance to
strike at me, in his usual style, as follows: "The case did not occur in
the Summer; the date is patent to any one who will look for it." Cotton
Mather says that she "first found herself to be formally besieged by the
spectres," on the tenth of September. From the preceding clauses of the
same paragraph, it might be inferred that she had had fits before. He
speaks of those, on the tenth, as "the first I'll mention." The word
"formally," too, almost implies the same. This, however, must be allowed
to be the smallest kind of criticism, although uttered by the Reviewer
in the style of a petulant pedagogue. If Summer is not allowed to borrow
a little of September, it will sometimes not have much to show, in our
climate. The tenth of September is, after all, fairly within the
astronomical Summer.

The Reviewer says it will be "difficult for me to prove" that Margaret
Rule belonged to Mr. Mather's Congregation, before September, 1693.
Mather vindicates his taking such an interest in her case, on the ground
that she was one of his "poor flock." The Reviewer raises a question on
this point; and his controversy is with Mather, not with me. If Rule did
not belong to the Congregation of North Boston, when Mather first
visited her, his language is deceptive, and his apology, for meddling
with the case, founded in falsehood. I make no such charge, and have no
such belief. The Reviewer seems to have been led to place Cotton Mather
in his own light--in fact, to falsify his language--on this point, by
what is said of another Minister's having visited her, to whose flock
she belonged, and whom she called, "Father." This was Increase Mather.
We know he visited her; and it was as proper for him to do so, as for
Cotton. They were associate Ministers of the same Congregation--that to
which the girl belonged--and it was natural that she should have
distinguished the elder, by calling him "Father."

In contradiction of another of my statements, the Reviewer says: "Mr.
Mather did not publish an account of the long-continued fastings, or any
other account of the case of Margaret Rule." He seems to think that
"published" means "printed." It does not necessarily mean, and is not
defined as exclusively meaning, to put to press. To be "published," a
document does not need, now, to be printed. Much less then. Mather wrote
it, as he says, with a view to its being printed, and put it into open
and free circulation. Calef publicly declared that he received it from
"a gentleman, who had it of the author, and communicated it to use, with
his express consent." Mather says, in a prefatory note: "I now lay
before you a very entertaining story," "of one who been prodigiously
handled by the evil Angels." "I do not write it with a design of
throwing it presently into the press, but only to preserve the memory of
such memorable things, the forgetting whereof would neither be pleasing
to God, nor useful to men." The unrestricted circulation of a work of
this kind, with such a design, was _publishing_ it. It was the form in
which almost every thing was published in those days. If Calef had
omitted it, in a book professing to give a true and full account of his
dealings with Mather, in the Margaret Rule case, he would have been
charged with having withheld Mather's carefully prepared view of that
case. Mather himself considered the circulation of his "account," as a
publication, for in speaking of his design of ultimately printing it
himself, he calls it a "farther publication."

PART II. embraces the correspondence between Calef, Mather, and others,
which I have particularly described.

PART III. is a brief account of the Parish troubles, at Salem Village.

PART IV. is a correspondence between Calef and a gentleman, whose name
is not given, on the subject of witchcraft, the latter maintaining the
views then prevalent.

PART V. is _An impartial account of the most memorable matters of fact,
touching the supposed witchcraft in New England_, including the "Report"
of the Trials given by Mather in his _Wonders of the Invisible World_.

The work is prefaced by an _Epistle to the Reader_, couched in plain but
pungent language, in which he says: "It is a great pity that the matters
of fact, and indeed the whole, had not been done by some abler hand,
better accomplished, and with the advantages of both natural and
acquired judgment; but, others not appearing, I have enforced myself to
do what is done. My other occasions will not admit any further scrutiny
therein." A Postscript contains some strictures on the _Life of Sir Wm.
Phips_, then recently printed, "which book," Calef says, "though it bear
not the author's name, yet the style, manner, and matter are such, that,
were there no other demonstration or token to know him by, it were no
witchcraft to determine that Mr. Cotton Mather is the author of it."
The real agency of Sir William Phips, in demolishing, with one stern
blow, the Court of Oyer and Terminer, and treading out the witchcraft
prosecutions, has never, until recently, been known. The Records of the
Council, of that time, were obtained from England, not long since. They,
with the General Court Records, Phips's letter to the Home
Government--copied in this article--and the Diary of Judge Sewall,
reveal to us the action of the brave Governor, and show how much that
generation and subsequent times are indebted to him, for stopping, what,
if he had allowed it to go on, would have come, no man can tell "where
at last."

Calef speaks of Sir William, kindly: "It is not doubted but that he
aimed at the good of the people; and great pity it is that his
Government was so sullied (for want of better information and advice
from those whose duty it was to have given it) by the hobgoblin Monster,
Witchcraft, whereby this country was nightmared and harassed, at such a
rate as is not easily imagined."

Such were the contents, and such the tone, of Calef's book. The course
he pursued, his carefulness to do right and to keep his position
fortified as he advanced, and the deliberate courage with which he
encountered the responsibilities, connected with his movement to rid the
country of a baleful superstition, are worthy of grateful remembrance.

Mather received intelligence that Calef had sent his book to England, to
be printed; and his mind was vehemently exercised in reference to it. He
set apart the tenth of June, 1698, for a private Fast on the occasion;
and he commenced the exercise of the day, by, "first of all, declaring
unto the Lord" that he freely forgave Calef, and praying "the Lord also
to forgive him." He "pleaded with the Lord," saying that the design of
this man was to hurt his "precious opportunities of glorifying" his
"glorious Lord Jesus Christ." He earnestly besought that those
opportunities might not be "damnified" by Calef's book. And he finished
by imploring deliverance from his calumnies. So "I put over my
calumnious adversary into the hands of the righteous God."

On the fifth of November, Calef's book having been received in Boston,
Mather again made it the occasion of Fasting and Praying. His friends
also spent a day of prayer, as he expresses it, "to complain unto God,"
against Calef, he, Mather, meeting with them. On the twenty-fifth of
November, he writes thus, in his Diary: "The Lord hath permitted Satan
to raise an extraordinary Storm upon my father and myself. All the rage
of Satan, against the holy churches of the Lord, falls upon us. First
Calf's and then Colman's, do set the people into a mighty ferment."

The entries in his Diary, at this time, show that he was exasperated, to
the highest degree, against Calef, to whom he applies such terms as, "a
liar," "vile," "infamous," imputing to him diabolical wickedness. He
speaks of him as "a weaver;" and, in a pointed manner calls him _Calf_,
a mode of spelling his name sometimes practised, but then generally
going out of use. The probability is that the vowel _a_, formerly, as in
most words, had its broad sound, so that the pronunciation was scarcely
perceptibly different, when used as a dissyllable or monosyllable. As
the broad sound became disused, to a great extent, about this time, the
name was spoken, as well as spelled, as a dissyllable, the vowel having
its long sound. It was written, _Calef_, and thus printed, in the
title-page of his book; so that Mather's variation of it was
unjustifiable, and an unworthy taunt.

It is unnecessary to say that a fling at a person's previous occupation,
or that of his parents--an attempt to discredit him, in consequence of
his having, at some period of his life, been a mechanic or
manufacturer--or dropping, or altering a letter in his name, does not
amount to much, as an impeachment of his character and credibility, as a
man or an author. Hard words, too, in a heated controversy, are of no
account whatever. In this case, particularly, it was a vain and empty
charge, for Mather to call Calef _a liar_. In the matter of the account,
the latter drew up, of what took place in the chamber of Margaret Rule:
as he sent it to Mather for correction, and as Mather specified some
items which he deemed erroneous, his declaration that all the rest was a
tissue of falsehoods, was utterly futile; and can only be taken as an
unmeaning and ineffectual expression of temper. So far as the
truthfulness of Calef's statements, generally, is regarded, there is no
room left for question.

In his Diary for February, 1700, Mather says, speaking of the "calumnies
that Satan, by his instrument, _Calf_, had cast upon" him and his
father, "the Lord put it into the hearts of a considerable number of our
flock, who are, in their temporal condition, more equal unto our
adversary, to appear in our vindication." A Committee of seven,
including John Goodwin, was appointed for this purpose. They called upon
their Pastors to furnish them with materials; which they both did. The
Committee drew up, as Mather informs us, in his Diary, a "handsome
answer unto the slanders and libels of our slanderous adversary," which
was forthwith printed, with the names of the members of the Committee
signed to it. The pamphlet was entitled, _Some Few Remarks_, &c. Mather
says of it: "The Lord blesses it, for the illumination of his people in
many points of our endeavour to serve them, whereof they had been
ignorant; and there is also set before all the Churches a very laudable
example of a people appearing to vindicate their injured Pastors, when a
storm of persecution is raised against them."

This vindication is mainly devoted to the case of the Goodwin children,
twelve years before, and to a defence of the course of Increase Mather,
in England, in reference to the Old and New Charters. No serious attempt
was made to controvert material points in Calef's book, relating to
Salem Witchcraft. As it would have been perfectly easy, by certificates
without number, to have exposed any error, touching that matter, and as
no attempt of the kind was made, on this or any other occasion, the only
alternative left is to accept Hutchinson's conviction, that "Calef was a
fair relator" of that passage in our history.

His book has, therefore, come down to us, bearing the ineffaceable stamp
of truth.

It was so regarded, at the time, in England, as shown in the manner in
which it was referred to by Francis Hutchinson and Daniel Neal; and in
America, in the way in which Thomas Hutchinson speaks of Calef, and
alludes to matters as stated by him. I present, entire, the judgment of
Dr. John Eliot, as given in his _Biographical Dictionary_. Bearing in
mind that Eliot's work was published in 1806, the reader is left to make
his own comments on the statement, in the _North American Review_, that
I originated, in 1831, the unfavorable estimate of Cotton Mather's
agency in the witchcraft delusion of 1692. It is safe to say that no
higher authority can be cited than that of John Eliot: "CALEF, ROBERT,
merchant, in the town of Boston, rendered himself famous by his book
against Witchcraft, when the people of Massachusetts were under the most
strange kind of delusion. The nature of this crime, so opposite to all
common sense, has been said to exempt the accusers from observing the
rules of common sense. This was evident from the trials of witches, at
Salem, in 1692. Mr. Calef opposed facts, in the simple garb of truth, to
fanciful representations; yet he offended men of the greatest learning
and influence. He was obliged to enter into a controversy, which he
managed with great boldness and address. His letters and defence were
printed, in a volume, in London, in 1700. Dr. Increase Mather was then
President of Harvard College; he ordered the wicked book to be burnt in
the College yard; and the members of the Old North Church published a
defence of their Pastors, the Rev. Increase and Cotton Mather. The
pamphlet, printed on this occasion, has this title-page: _Remarks upon a
scandalous book, against the Government and Ministry of New England,
written by Robert Calef_, &c. Their motto was, _Truth will come off
conqueror_, which proved a satire upon themselves, because Calef
obtained a complete triumph. The Judges of the Court and the Jury
confessed their errors; the people were astonished at their own
delusion; reason and common sense were evidently on Calef's side; and
even the present generation read his book with mingled sentiments of
pleasure and admiration."

Calef's book continues, to this day, the recognized authority on the
subject. Its statements of matters of fact, not disputed nor
specifically denied by the parties affected, living at the time, nor
attempted to be confuted, then, and by them, never can be. The current
of nearly two centuries has borne them beyond all question. No assault
can now reach them. No writings of Mather have ever received more
evidence of public interest or favor. First printed in London, Calef's
volume has gone through four American editions; the last, in 1861,
edited by Samuel P. Fowler, is presented in such eligible type and so
readable a form, as to commend it to favorable notice.

It may be safely said that few publications have produced more immediate
or more lasting effects. It killed off the whole business of Margaret
Rule. Mather abandoned it altogether. In 1694, he said "the forgetting
thereof would neither be pleasing to God nor useful to men." Before
Calef had done with him, he had dropped it forever.

Calef's book put a stop to all such things, in New and Old England. It
struck a blow at the whole system of popular superstition, relating to
the diabolical world, under which it reels to this day. It drove the
Devil out of the preaching, the literature, and the popular sentiments
of the world. The traces of his footsteps, as controlling the affairs of
men and interfering with the Providence of God, are only found in the
dark recesses of ignorance, the vulgar profanities of the low, and a few
flash expressions and thoughtless forms of speech.

No one can appreciate the value of his service. If this one brave man
had not squarely and defiantly met the follies and madness, the
priestcraft and fanaticism, of his day; if they had been allowed to
continue to sway Courts and Juries; if the pulpit and the press had
continued to throw combustibles through society, and, in every way,
inflame the public imaginations and passions, what limit can be assigned
to the disastrous consequences?

Boston Merchants glory in the names, on their proud roll of public
benefactors, of men whose wisdom, patriotism, and munificence have
upheld, adorned, and blessed society; but there is no one of their
number who encountered more danger, showed more moral and intellectual
prowess, or rendered more noble service to his fellow citizens and
fellow men, every where, than ROBERT CALEF.

I again ask attention to the language used in the _North American
Review_, for April, 1869. "These views, respecting Mr. Mather's
connection with the Salem trials, are to be found IN NO PUBLICATION OF A
DATE PRIOR TO 1831, when Mr. Upham's _Lectures_ were published."

Great as may be the power of critical journals, they cannot strike into
non-existence, the recorded and printed sentiments of Brattle, the
Hutchinsons, Neal, Watts, Bentley, Eliot, Quincy, and Calef.


XX.

MISCELLANEOUS REMARKS. CONCLUSION.


There are one or two minor points, where the Reviewer finds occasion to
indulge in his peculiar vein of criticism on my book, which it is
necessary to notice before closing, in order to prevent wrong
impressions being made by his article, touching the truth of history.

A pamphlet, entitled, _Some Miscellany Observations on our present
debates respecting Witchcraft, in a Dialogue between S and B_, has been
referred to. It was published in Philadelphia, in 1692. Its printing was
procured by Hezekiah Usher, a leading citizen of Boston, who, at the
later stages of the prosecution, had been cried out upon, by the
accusing girls, and put under arrest. Its author was understood to be
the Rev. Samuel Willard. The Reviewer claims for its writer precedence
over the Rev. John Wise, of Ipswich, and Robert Pike, of Salisbury, as
having earlier opposed the proceedings. Wise headed a Memorial, in favor
of John Proctor and against the use of spectral evidence, before the
trials that took place on the fifth of August; and Pike's second letter
to Judge Corwin was dated the eighth of August.

The pamphlet attributed to Willard is a spirited and able performance;
but seems to allow the use of spectral evidence, when bearing against
persons of "ill-fame."

Pike concedes all that believers in the general doctrines of witchcraft
demanded, particularly the ground taken in the pamphlet attributed to
Willard, and then proceeds, by the most acute technical logic, based
upon solid common sense, to overturn all the conclusions to which the
Court had been led. It was sent, by special messenger, to a Judge on the
Bench, who was also an associate with Pike at the Council Board of the
Province. Wise's paper was addressed to the Court of Assistants, the
Supreme tribunal of the Province. The _Miscellany Observations_, appear
to have been written after the trials. There is nothing, however,
absolutely to determine the precise date; and they were published
anonymously, in Philadelphia. The right of Wise and Pike to the credit
of having first, by written remonstrance, opposed the proceedings, on
the spot, cannot, I think, be taken away.

The Reviewer charges me, in reference to one point, with not having
thought it necessary to "pore over musty manuscripts, in the obscure
chirography of two centuries ago." So far as my proper subject could be
elucidated by it, I am constrained to claim, that this labor was
encountered, to an extent not often attempted. The files of Courts, and
State, County, Town, and Church records, were very extensively and
thoroughly studied out. So far as the Court papers, belonging to the
witchcraft Examinations and Trials, are regarded, much aid was derived
from _Records of Salem Witchcraft, copied from the original documents_,
printed in 1864, by W. Eliot Woodward. But such difficulty had been
experienced in deciphering them, that the originals were all subjected
to a minute re-examination. The same necessity existed in the use of the
_Annals of Salem_, prepared and published by that most indefatigable
antiquary, the late Rev. Joseph B. Felt, LL.D. In writing a work for
which so little aid could be derived from legislative records or printed
sources, bringing back to life a generation long since departed, and
reproducing a community and transaction so nearly buried in oblivion,
covering a wide field of genealogy, topography and chronology, embracing
an indefinite variety of municipal, parochial, political, social, local,
and family matters, and of things, names, and dates without number, it
was, after all, impossible to avoid feeling that many errors and
oversights might have been committed; and, as my only object was to
construct a true and adequate history, I coveted, and kept myself in a
frame gratefully to receive all corrections and suggestions, with a view
of making the work as perfect as possible, in a reprint. As I was
reasonably confident that the ground under me could stand, at all
important points, any assaults of criticism, made in the ordinary way,
it gave me satisfaction to hear, as I did, in voices of rumor reaching
me from many quarters, that an article was about to appear in the _North
American Review_ that would "demolish" my book. I flattered myself that,
whether it did or not, much valuable information would, at least, be
received, that would enable me to make my book more to my purpose, by
making it more true to history.

After the publication of the article, and before I could extricate
myself from other engagements so far as to look into it, I read, in
editorials, from week to week, in newspapers and journals, that I had
been demolished. Surely, I thought, some great errors have been
discovered, some precious "original sources" opened, some lost records
exhumed, so that now, at last, no matter by whom, the story of Salem
witchcraft can be told. My disappointment may be imagined, when, upon
examining the article, it appeared that only one error had been
discovered in my book, and that I now proceed to acknowledge.

The Reviewer says: "Thomas Brattle, the Treasurer of Harvard College,
(not William Brattle, a merchant of Boston, as Mr. Upham states) wrote,
at the time, an account of Salem Witchcraft." This was not an error of
the press, but wholly my own, as it is in the "copy," sent to the
printers. In finding the interesting relations held by the Rev. William
Brattle with the Salem Village Parish, after the death of Mr. Green, he
being called to act as their patron and guide, and eventually marrying
Green's widow, his name became familiar to my thoughts, and slipped
through my pen. Every one who has gone through the drudgery of
proof-reading knows what ridiculous and, sometimes, frightful, errors
are detected, even in the "last revise." Upon opening the volume, when
it came to me from the binder, I saw this error and immediately informed
my publishers. It is pleasing to think that it cost the Reviewer no
pains to discover it, as the right name stands out in the caption of the
article, which is in capital letters--_Massachusetts Historical
Collections, I., v., 61_--where alone he or I could have seen it.

Mistakes in names and dates--always provoking, often inexplicable--are a
fate to which all are liable. In a friendly, elaborate, and able notice
of my book, in a newspaper of high character, it is stated that Salem
Village, was the home of the family which gave General Rufus Putnam to
"the War of 1812;" and George Burroughs is called "_John_" Burroughs.

It is sometimes as hard to correct an error, as it is easy to fall into
one. In pointing out my inadvertent mistake, the Reviewer unwittingly
reproduces it. His sentence, just quoted, is liable to convey the idea
that William Brattle was "a merchant of Boston." As he has been kind
enough, all through his article, to tell what I ought to have read, and
seen, and done, I venture to suggest that his sentence ought to have
been constructed thus: "Thomas Brattle, a merchant of Boston, (not
William, as Mr. Upham says.)"

A queer fatality seems to have attended this attempt to correct my
error.

A reader of the _North American Review_ cannot fail to have noticed the
manner in which the late Rev. Dr. Peabody, as well as myself, is held up
to ridicule, for having called Cotton Mather, "Dr." when referring to
any thing previous to his having received his Doctorate. Perhaps we were
excusable. By usage, such honorary titles, and indeed all titles, are
applied retrospectively, running back over the life, indefinitely. The
_Encyclopædia Americana_, Eliot's _Biographical Dictionary_, and one of
the last numbers of the _Historic Genealogical Register_, all give that
title to Increase Mather, referring to a period anterior to its having
been conferred upon him. The title was given by the learned editor of
the _Massachusetts Historical Collections_, to Cotton Mather, in the
caption of his letter to Governor Dudley. In the _Mather Papers_,
letters written a score of years before that degree had been conferred
on him, are endorsed "Doctor Cotton Mather." If the high authority of
the _North American Review_ is to establish it, as a literary canon,
that titles are never to be given, except in relation to a period
subsequent to their conferment, writers must, hereafter, be very
careful, when cursorily alluding to anything in the earlier lives of the
Duke of Marlborough, Lord Castlereagh, the Duke of Wellington, Doctor
Franklin, Doctor Channing, or Doctor Priestley, to say, Mr. Churchill,
Mr. Stewart, Mr. Wellesley, Mr. Franklin, Mr. Channing, or Mr.
Priestley.

What renders this making of a great matter out of so trivial a point, by
our Reviewer, amusing, as well as ridiculous, is that he is the first to
break his own rule.

      "'Tis the sport to have the engineer
    Hoist with his own petard."

The critic is caught by his own captions criticism. In the passage,
pointing out the error in the name of Brattle, he calls him, "at the
time" he wrote the account of Salem witchcraft, "the Treasurer of
Harvard College." Brattle held not then, and never had held, that
honorable trust and title, though subsequently appointed to the office.

It is not probable that Cotton Mather will ever find a biographer more
kind and just than the late W. B. O. Peabody, whose mild and pleasant
humor was always kept under the sway of a sweet spirit of candor and
benevolence, and who has presented faithfully all the good points and
services of his subject--_Sparks's American Biography, Vol. VI._ But the
knight errant who has just centered the lists, brandishing his spear
against all who have uttered a lisp against Cotton Mather, goes out of
his way to strike at Doctor Peabody. He inserts, at the foot of one of
his pages, this sneering Note: "Mr. Peabody says; 'Little did the
venerable Doctor think,' etc. The venerable Doctor was twenty-nine years
of age! and was no Doctor at all."

Let us see how the ridicule of the Reviewer can be parried by his own
weapons. Indulging myself, for a moment, in his style, I have, to say
that "this Reviewer has never seen" Worcester's Dictionary, nor
Webster's Dictionary, in neither of which does time or age enter into
the definition of _venerable_. The latter gives the sense as follows:
"Rendered sacred by religious associations, or being consecrated to God
and to his worship; to be regarded with awe, and treated with
reverence." Further: "This Reviewer should have been familiar enough
with the original sources of information on this subject," to have known
that it was common, in those days, to speak and think of such persons as
Cotton Mather, although not old in years, as "venerable." All the
customs, habits, ideas, and sentiments of the people invested them with
character. Their costume and bearing favored it. The place they filled,
and the power they exercised, imparted awe and veneration, whatever
their years. All that age could contribute to command respect was
anticipated and brought, to gather round the young Minister, when hands
were laid upon him, at his ordination, by the title he thenceforth wore,
of "Elder." By his talents, learning, and ambition, Cotton Mather had
become recognized as a "Father in the Church;" and his aspect, as he
stood in the pulpit of "North Boston," fulfilled the idea of
venerableness. And we find that this very term was applied to the
representative centre of a consecrated family, in the "Attestation" to
the _Magnalia_, written by John Higginson, venerable in years, as in all
things else, in some Latin lines of his composure: "_Venerande
Mathere_."

In the popular eye, Cotton Mather concentrated all the sacred memories
of the great "decemvirate," as Higginson called it, of the Mathers, who
had been set apart as Ministers of God; and he was venerable, besides,
in the associations connected with the hallowed traditions of his
maternal grandfather, whose name he bore, John Cotton.

An object is _venerable_, whether it be a person, a building, a
locality, or any thing else, around which associations gather, that
inspire reverence. Age, in itself, suggests the sentiment, if its
natural effect is not marred by unworthiness; so does wisdom. Virtue is
venerable, whatever the age. So are all great traits of character; and
so is every thing that brings to the mind consecrated thoughts and
impressions. There was much in Mather's ancestry, name, and office, to
suggest the term, without any regard whatever to his years. If applied
to him by the people of that day, or by a writer now, in reference to
any period of his life after entering the ministry and being classed
with the Elders of the Church and the land, it was entirely legitimate
and appropriate.

While acknowledging the one error, detected by the Reviewer, I avail
myself of the opportunity to apprise those who have my book of a
probable error, not discovered by him. In Vol. II., p. 208, the name of
"Elizabeth Carey" is given among those for whose arrest Warrants were
issued, on the twenty-eighth of May, 1692. On page 238, the name
"Elizabeth Cary" is again mentioned. The facts are, that Calef, (_p.
95_,) says: "MAY 24TH: Mrs. Carey, of Charlestown, was examined and
committed. Her husband, Mr. Nathaniel Carey, has given account thereof,
as also of her escape, to this effect." He then gives a letter going
into much interesting detail, evidently written by her husband, and
signed "Jonathan Carey." Hutchinson (_History, ii., 49_,) repeats
Calef's account, calling the woman, "Elizabeth, wife of Nathaniel;" and
gives the substance of her husband's letter, without attempting to
explain, or even noticing, the discrepancy as to the name of the
husband. Not knowing what to make of it, I examined the miscellaneous
mass of papers, in the Clerk's office, and found, on a small scrip, the
original Complaint, on which the Warrant was issued. It is the only
paper, relating to the case, in existence, or at least to be found here.
In it, the woman is described as "Elizabeth, the wife of Capt. Nathaniel
Carey of Charlestown, mariner." This seemed to settle it and I let it
pass, without attempting to explain how "Jonathan Carey" came to appear
as the husband of the woman, in the letter signed by that name. I am now
quite convinced that, in this case, I was misled, together with Calef
and Hutchinson, by paying too much regard to "original sources." I am
satisfied that the authority of the letter of "Jonathan Carey," must
stand; that the woman was his wife, "Hannah;" and that the error is in
the original "Complaint," here on file.

The facts, probably, were, that, it being rumored in Charlestown that a
Mrs. Carey was "cried out upon," without its being known which Mrs.
Carey it was, Jonathan, determined to meet the matter at the threshold,
took his wife directly to the spot. He arrived at Salem Village, in the
midst of a great excitement, bringing together a crowd of people, half
crazed under the terrors of the hour. Nobody knew him, which would not
have been so likely to have been the case with his brother, Nathaniel,
who was a more conspicuous character. He could find no one he knew,
except Mr. Hale, who was formerly a Charlestown man, and whom he soon
lost in the confusion of the scene. The accusing girls were on the look
out, and noticing these two strangers, enquired their names, and were
told, _Mr. and Mrs. Carey_. They had been crying out upon _Elizabeth
Carey_, and thinking they had her, informed Thomas Putnam and Benjamin
Hutchinson, two persons perfectly deluded by them, who instantly drew
up the Complaint. In the hurry and horrors of the moment, the error in
the names was not discovered: _Jonathan_ and _Hannah_ were sent
forthwith to prison, from which they broke, and escaped to New York. The
girls, thinking they had got _Mrs. Elizabeth Carey_ in prison, said no
more about it. As Jonathan and his wife were safe, and beyond reach, the
whole matter dropped out of the public mind; and Mrs. Elizabeth remained
undisturbed. This is the only way in which I can account for the strange
incongruity of the statements, as found in the "Complaint," Calef, and
Hutchinson. The letter of Jonathan Carey is decisive of the point that
it was "Hannah," his wife, that was arrested, and escaped. The error in
Calef was not discovered by him, as his book was printed in London; and,
under the general disposition to let the subject pass into oblivion, if
possible, no explanation was ever given.

I cannot let the letter of Jonathan Carey pass, without calling to
notice his statement that, upon reaching New York, they found "His
Excellency, Benjamin Fletcher, Esq., very courteous" to them. Whatever
multiplies pleasant historical reminiscences and bonds of association
between different States, ought to be gathered up and kept fresh in the
minds of all. The fact that when Massachusetts was suffering from a
fiery and bloody, but brief, persecution by its own Government, New York
opened so kind and secure a shelter for those fortunate enough to escape
to it, ought to be forever held in grateful remembrance by the people of
the old Bay State, and constitutes a part of the history of the Empire
State, of which she may well be proud. If the historians and antiquaries
of the latter State can find any traces, in their municipal or other
archives, or in any quarter, of the refuge which the Careys and others
found among them, in 1692, they would be welcome contributions to our
history, and strengthen the bonds of friendly union.

The Reviewer seems to imagine that, by a stroke of his pen, he can, at
any time, make history. Referring to Governor Winthrop, in connection
with the case of Margaret Jones, forty-two years before, he says that he
"presided at her Trial; signed her Death-warrant; and wrote the report
of the case in his journal." The fact that, in his private journal, he
has a paragraph relating to it, hardly justifies the expression "wrote
the report of the case." Where did he, our Reviewer, find authority for
the positive statement that Winthrop "signed the Death-warrant?" We have
no information, I think, as to the use of Death-warrants, as we
understand such documents to be, in those days; and especially are we
ignorant as to the official who drew and signed the Order for the
execution of a capital convict. Sir William Phips, although present,
did not sign the Death-warrant of Bridget Bishop.

The Reviewer expresses, over and over again, his great surprise at the
view given in my book of Cotton Mather's connection with Salem
witchcraft. It is quite noticeable that his language, to this effect,
was echoed through that portion of the Press committed to his
statements. My sentiments were spoken of as "surprising errors." What I
had said was, as I have shown, a mere continuation of an ever-received
opinion; and it was singular that it gave such a widespread simultaneous
shock of "surprise." But that shock went all around. I was surprised at
their surprise; and may be allowed, as well as the Reviewer, to express
and explain that sensation. It was awakened deeply and forcibly by the
whole tenor of his article. He was the first reader of my book, it
having been furnished him by the Publishers before going to the binder.
He wrote an elaborate, extended, and friendly notice of it, in a leading
paper of New York city, kindly calling it "a monument of historical and
antiquarian research;" "a narrative as fascinating as the latest novel;"
and concluding thus: "Mr. Upham deserves the thanks of the many persons
interested in psychological inquiries, for the minute details he has
given of these transactions." Some criticisms were suggested, in
reference to matters of form in the work; _but not one word was said
about Cotton Mather_. The change that has come over the spirit of his
dream is more than surprising.

The reference, in the foregoing citation, to "psychological enquiries,"
suggests to me to allude, before closing, to remarks made by some other
critics. I did not go into the discussion, with any particularity, of
the connection, if any, between the witchcraft developments of 1692 and
modern spiritualism, in any of its forms. A fair and candid writer
observes that "the facts and occurrences," as I state them, involve
difficulties which I "have not solved." There are "depths," he
continues, "in this melancholy episode, which his plummet has not
sounded, by a great deal." This is perfectly true.

With a full conviction that the events and circumstances I was
endeavoring to relate, afforded more material for suggestions, in
reference to the mysteries of our spiritual nature, than any other
chapter in history, I carefully abstained, with the exception of a few
cautionary considerations hinting at the difficulties that encompass the
subject, from attempting to follow facts to conclusions, in that
direction. My sole object was to bring to view, as truthfully,
thoroughly, and minutely, as I could, the phenomena of the case, as bare
historical facts, from which others were left, to make their own
deductions. This was the extent of the service I desired to render, in
aid of such as may attempt to advance the boundaries of the spiritual
department of science. I was content, and careful, to stay my steps.
Feeling that the story I was telling led me along the outer edge of what
is now knowledge--that I was treading the shores of the _ultima Thule_,
of the yet discovered world of truth--I did not venture upon the world
beyond. My only hope was to afford some data to guide the course of
those who may attempt to traverse it. Other hands are to drop the
plummet into its depths, and other voyagers feel their way over its
surface to continents that are waiting, as did this Western Hemisphere,
for ages upon ages, to be revealed. The belief that fields of science
may yet be reached, by exploring the connection between the corporeal
and spiritual spheres of our being, in which explorations the facts
presented in the witchcraft Delusion may be serviceable, suggested one
of the motives that led me to dedicate my volumes to the Professor of
Physiology in Harvard University.

The Reviewer concludes his article by saying that the "History of Salem
witchcraft is as yet unwritten," but, that I must write it; and he tells
me how to write it. He advises a more concise form, although his whole
article consists of complaints because I avoided discussions and
condensed documents, which, if fully gone into and spread out at length,
would have swelled the dimensions of the work, as well as broken the
thread of the narrative. It must be borne in mind, that a reader can
only be held to the line of a subject, by an occasional retrospection
and reiteration of what must be constantly kept in view. The traveler
needs, at certain points and suitable stages, to turn and survey the
ground over which he has passed. A condensation that would strike out
such recapitulations and repetitions, might impair the effect of a work
of any kind, particularly, of one embracing complicated materials.

The Reviewer says that, "by all means, I must give references to
authorities," when I quote. This, as a general thing, is good advice.
But it must be remembered that my work consists of three divisions. The
History of Salem Village constitutes the First. This is drawn, almost
wholly, from papers in the offices of registry, and from judicial files
of the County, to which references would be of little use, and serve
only to cumber and deform the pages. Everything can be verified by
inspection of the originals, and not otherwise. The Second Part is a
cursory, general, abbreviated sketch or survey of the history of
opinions, not designed as an authoritative treatise for special
students, but to prepare the reader for the Third Part, the authorities
for which are, almost wholly, Court files.

As to the remaining suggestion, that I must divide the work into
Chapters, with headings, there is something to be said. When the nature
of an historical work admits of its being invested with a dramatic
interest--and all history is capable, more or less, of having that
attraction--where minute details can fill up the whole outline of
characters, events, and scenes, all bearing the impress of truth and
certainty, real history, being often stranger than fiction, may be, and
ought to be, so written as to bring to bear upon the reader, the charm,
and work the spell, of what is called romance. The same solicitude,
suspense, and sensibilities, which the parties, described, experienced,
can be imparted to the reader; and his feelings and affections keep pace
with the developments of the story, as they arise with the progress of
time and events. Headings to Chapters, in historical works, capable of
this dramatic element, would be as out of place, and as much mar and
defeat the effect, as in a novel.

As for division into Chapters. This was much thought of and desired; but
the nature of the subject presented obstacles that seem insurmountable.
One topic necessarily ran into, or overlapped, another. No chronological
unity, if the work had been thus cut up, could have been preserved; and
much of the ground would have had to be gone over and over again.
Examinations, Trials, Executions were, often, all going on at once.

There is danger of a diminution of the continuous interest of some
works, thus severed into fragments. There are, indeed, animals that will
bear to be chopped up indefinitely, and each parcel retain its life: not
so with others. The most important of all documents have suffered
injury, not to be calculated, in their attractiveness and
impressiveness, by being divided into Chapter and Verse, in many
instances without reference to the unity of topics, or coherence of
passages; dislocating the frame of narratives, and breaking the
structure of sentences. We all know to what a ridiculous extent this
practice was, for a long period, carried in Sermons, which were
"divided" to a degree of artificial and elaborate dissection into
"heads," that tasked to the utmost the ingenuity of the preacher, and
overwhelmed the discernment and memory of the hearer. He, in fact, was
thought the ablest sermonizer, who could stretch the longest string of
divisions, up to the "nineteenthly," and beyond. This fashion has a
prominent place among _The Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the
Clergy and Religion_, by John Eachard, D.D., a work published in London,
near the commencement of the last century--one of the few books, like
Calef's, which have turned the tide, and arrested the follies, of their
times. In bold, free, forcible satire, Eachard's book stands alone.
Founded on great learning, inspired by genuine wit, its style is plain
even to homeliness. It struck at the highest, and was felt and
appreciated by the lowest. It reinforced the pulpit, simplified the
literature, eradicated absurdities of diction and construction, and
removed many of the ecclesiastic abuses, of its day. No work of the kind
ever met with a more enthusiastic reception. I quote from the Eleventh
Edition, printed in 1705: "We must observe, that there is a great
difference in texts. For all texts come not asunder, alike; for
sometimes the words naturally fall asunder; sometimes they drop asunder;
sometimes they melt; sometimes they untwist; and there be some words so
willing to be parted, that they divide themselves, to the great ease and
rejoicing of the Minister. But if they will not easily come in pieces,
then he falls to hacking and hewing, as if he would make all fly into
shivers. The truth of it is, I have known, now and then, some knotty
texts, that have been divided seven or eight times over, before they
could make them split handsomely, according to their mind."

An apology to those critics who have complained of my not dividing my
book into Chapters, is found in the foregoing passage. I tried to do it,
but found it a "knotty" subject, and, like the texts Eachard speaks of,
"would not easily come in pieces." With all my efforts, it could not be
made to "split handsomely."

This, and all other suggestions of criticism, are gratefully received
and respectfully considered. But, after all, it will not be well to
establish any canons, to be, in all cases, implicitly obeyed, by all
writers. Much must be left to individual judgment. Regard must be had to
the nature of subjects. Instead of servile uniformity, variety and
diversity must be encouraged. In this way, only, can we have a free,
natural, living literature.

In passing, I would say, that in meeting the demand made upon me by the
Reviewer, to rewrite the history of Salem witchcraft, I shall avail
myself of the opportunity to correct the single error he has mentioned.
In a re-issue of the work, I shall endeavor to make it as accurate as
possible. Anything that is found to be wrong shall be rectified. The
work, in the different forms in which it was published, is nearly out of
print. When issued again, it will be in a less costly style and more
within the reach of all. From the result of my own continued researches
and the suggestions of others, I feel inclined to the opinion that no
very considerable alterations will be made; and that subsequent
editions, will not impair the authority or value of the work, as
originally published in 1867.

In preparing the statement, now brought to a close, the only object has
been to get at, and present, the real facts of history. Nothing, merely
personal, affecting the writer in the _North American Review_ or myself,
can be considered as of comparative moment. Many of the expressions used
by that writer, as to what I have "seen" or "read" and the like, are, it
must be confessed, rather peculiar; but of very little interest to the
public. Any notice, taken of them, has been incidental, and such as
naturally arose in the treatment of the subject.

In parting with the reader, I venture so far further to tax his
patience, as to ask to take a retrospective glance, together, over the
outlines of the road we have travelled.

In connection with some preliminary observations, the first step in the
argument was to show the relation of the Mathers, father and son, to the
superstitions of their times culminating in the Witchcraft Delusion of
1692, and their share of responsibility therefor. The several successive
stages of the discussion were as follows:--The connection of Cotton
Mather with alleged cases of Witchcraft in the family of John Goodwin of
Boston, in 1688; and said Goodwin's certificates disposed of: Mather's
idea of Witchcraft, as a war waged by the Devil against the Church; and
his use of prayer: The connection between the cases, at Boston in 1688,
and at Salem in 1692: The relation of the Mathers to the Government of
Massachusetts, in 1692: The arrival of Sir William Phips; the impression
made upon him by those whom he first met; his letter to the Government
in England: The circumstances attending the establishment of the Special
Court of Oyer and Terminer, and the precipitance with which it was put
into operation: Its proceedings, conducted by persons in the interest of
the Mathers: Spectral Testimony; and the extent to which it was
authorized by them to be received at the Trials, as affording grounds of
enquiry and matter of presumption: Letter of Cotton Mather to one of the
Judges: The Advice of the Ministers: Cotton Mather's probable plan for
dealing with spectral evidence: His views on that subject, as gathered
from his writings and declarations: The question of his connection with
the Examinations before the Magistrates: His connection with the Trials
and Executions: His Report of five of the Trials: His book entitled _The
Wonders of the Invisible World_; its design; the circumstances attending
its preparation for the press; and the views, feelings, and expectations
of its author, exhibited in extracts from it: Increase Mather's _Cases
of Conscience_: The suppression of the Court of Oyer and Terminer, by
Sir William Phips: Cotton Mather's views subsequent to 1692, as gathered
from his writings.

In traversing the field thus marked out, I submit that it has become
demonstrated that, while Cotton Mather professed concurrence in the
generally-received judgment of certain writers against the reception of
spectral evidence, he approved of the manner in which it had been
received by the Judges, at the Salem Trials, and eulogized them
throughout, from the beginning to the end of the prosecution, and ever
after. He vindicated, as a general principle, the _admission_ of that
species of testimony, on the ground of its being a sufficient basis of
enquiry and presumption, and needing only some additional evidence,--his
own Report and papers on file show how little was required--to justify
conviction and execution. This has been proved, at large, by an
examination of his writings and actions, and is fully admitted by him,
in various forms of language, on several occasions--substantially, in
his statement, that Spectral Testimony was the "chief" ground upon which
"divers" were condemned and executed, and, explicitly, in his letter to
Foster, in which he says that "a very great use is to be made" of it, in
the manner and to the extent just mentioned; and that, when thus used,
the "use for which the Great God intended it," will be made. In the same
passage, he commends the Judge for having admitted it; and declares they
had the divine blessing thereupon, inasmuch as "God strangely sent other
convincing testimony," to corroborate, and thereby render it sufficient
to convict. In his Address to the General Assembly, years afterward, he
fully admits that the Judges, in 1692, whose course he applauded at the
time, allowed persons to be adjudged guilty, "merely because" of
Spectral Testimony.

My main purpose and duty, in preparing this article, have been to
disprove the absolute and unlimited assertions made by the contributor
to the _North American Review_, that Cotton Mather was opposed to the
_admission_ of Spectral Evidence; "denounced it as illegal,
uncharitable, and cruel;" and "ever testified against it, both publicly
and privately;" and that the _Advice of the Ministers_, drawn up by him,
"was _very specific_ in _excluding_ Spectral Testimony."

It has been thought proper, also, to vindicate the truth of history
against the statements of this Reviewer, on some other points; as, for
instance, by showing that the opinion of Cotton Mather's particular
responsibility for the Witchcraft Tragedy, instead of originating with
me, was held at the time, at home and abroad, and has come down, through
an unbroken series of the most accredited writers, to our day; and that
the influence of the Mathers never recovered from the shock given it, by
the catastrophe of 1692.

The apology for the great length of this article is, that the high
authority justly accorded to the _North American Review_, demanded, in
controverting any position taken in its columns, a thorough and patient
investigation, and the production, in full, of the documents belonging
to the question. It has further been necessary, in order to get at the
predominating tendency and import of Cotton Mather's writings, to cite
them, in extended quotations and numerous extracts. To avoid the error
into which the Reviewer has fallen, the peculiarity of Mather's style
must be borne in mind. Opposite drifts of expression appear in different
writings and in different parts of the same writing; and, not
infrequently, the clauses of the same passage have contrary bearings. He
often palters, with himself as well as others, in a double sense.

Quotations, to any amount, from the writings of either of the Mathers,
of passages having the appearance of discountenancing spectral evidence,
can be of no avail in sustaining the positions taken by the Reviewer,
because they are qualified by the admission, that evidence of that sort
might and ought, notwithstanding, to be received as a basis for enquiry
and ground of presumption, and, if supported by other ordinary
testimony, was sufficient for conviction. That other testimony, when
adduced, was, as represented by Mather, clothed with a divine authority;
having, as he says, been supplied by a special Providence, and been
justly regarded, by the "excellent Judges," as "an encouraging presence
of God, strangely sent in." It could, indeed, in the then state of the
public mind, always be readily obtained. No matter how small in quantity
or utterly irrelevant, it was sufficient for conviction coming after the
Spectral Evidence. To minds thus subdued and overwhelmed with "awe,"
trifles light as air were confirmation strong.

It is to be presumed that his warmest admirers would not think of
comparing Cotton Mather with his transatlantic correspondent and
coadjutor, as to force of character, power of mind, or the moral and
religious value of their writings. Yet there were some striking
similarities between them. They were men of undoubted genius and great
learning. They were all their lives awake to whatever was going on
around them. Earnestly interested, and actively engaging, in all
questions of theology and government, they both rushed forthwith and
incontinently to the press, until their publications became too
voluminous and numerous to be patiently read or easily counted. Of
course, what they printed was imbued with the changing aspects of the
questions they handled and open to the imputation of inconsistency, of
which Baxter was generally disregardful and Mather mostly unconscious.

Sir Roger L'Estrange was one of the great wits and satirists of his
age. His style was rough and reckless. A vehement and fierce upholder of
the doctrines of arbitrary government, he was knighted by James the
Second. His controversial writings, having all the attractions of
unscrupulous invective and homely but cutting sarcasm, were much
patronized by the great, and extensively read by the people. All
Nonconformists and Dissenters were the objects of his coarse abuse. He
issued an ingenious pamphlet with this title: "_The Casuist uncased; in
a Dialogue betwixt Richard and Baxter, with a moderator between them,
for quietness sake._" The two disputants range over a variety of
subjects, and are quite vehement against each other; the Moderator
interposing to keep them to the point, preserve order in the debate,
and, as occasion required, reduce them to "quietness." At one stage of
the altercation, he exclaimed: "If an Angel from Heaven, I perceive,
were employed to bring you two to an agreement, he should lose his
labor." Great was the amusement of all classes to find that the language
uttered by the combatants, on each side, was taken from one or another
of writings published by Richard Baxter, during his diversified
controversial life.

If any skilful and painstaking humorist of our day, should feel so
disposed, he might, by wading through the sea of Cotton Mather's
writings, pick up material enough for the purpose; and, by cutting in
halves paragraphs and sentences, entertain us in the same way, by giving
to the public, through the Press, "_A Dialogue betwixt COTTON and
MATHER, with a Moderator between them for quietness sake._"


                                 THE
                        HISTORICAL MAGAZINE;
                                 AND
            Notes and Queries concerning the Antiquities,
                  History and Biography of America.


This Magazine was commenced in January, 1857, for the purpose of
furnishing a medium of intercommunication between Historical Societies,
Authors, and Students of History, and supplying an interesting and
valuable journal--a miscellany of American History. On the first of
July, 1866, it passed into the hands of the undersigned, by whom it is
still conducted, with the support and aid of a large body of intelligent
readers, and the assistance of the foremost historical writers in the
country.

Among the contributors to the past volumes are Hon. Edward Everett, Hon.
George Bancroft, Jared Sparks, LL.D., Hon. Peter Force, Hon. James
Savage, Hon. Robert C. Winthrop, Wm. Gilmore Simms, Esq., Henry R.
Stiles, M.D., Geo. Gibbs, Esq., Hon. John R. Brodhead, J. Carson
Brevoort, Esq., Henry R. Schoolcraft, Esq., Benson J. Lossing, Esq.,
Hon. Henry C. Murphy, Samuel G. Drake, Esq., Sebastian F. Streeter,
Esq., Alfred B. Street, Esq., E. B. O'Callaghan, LL.D., Prof. W. W.
Turner, Buckingham Smith, Esq., Evert A. Duyckinck, Esq., Brantz Mayer,
Esq., Hon. John R. Bartlett, Samuel F. Haven, Esq., Dr. R. W. Gibbs,
John W. Francis, M.D., D. G. Brinton, M.D., George H. Moore, Esq., John
G. Shea, LL.D., Rev. E. H. Gillett, D.D., John Ward Dean, Esq., Henry
O'Reilly, Esq., Rev. Pliny H. White, Hon. E. E. Bourne, and Hon. Thomas
Ewbank.

The eleven volumes already published contain an immense mass of matter
relating to American History and kindred studies, such as cannot be
found collected elsewhere, rendering it a work absolutely necessary in
all libraries. Few historical works now appear that do not acknowledge
indebtedness to it.

The Contents of the Historical Magazine may be generally classed under
the following heads:

I. Original Papers, involving points of research in historical studies,
presenting new facts, or the discussion of Federal and Local topics of
interest, in Essays, by writers versed in American History.

II. The Collection of Original Letters, Correspondence, Diaries, &c.,
hitherto unpublished, of Americans of Eminence.

III. Biographical and Obituary Notices of persons distinguished in the
service of the country, whether in office, political life, literature,
or science.

IV. Accurate reports of the proceedings of the numerous American
Historical, Antiquarian, Geographical, Numismatic, and other kindred
Societies.

V. Notes and Queries of curious and important topics, new and old, with
replies, by a large body of contributors.

VI. Reprints of rare and interesting Tracts, old Poems out of print,
&c., &c.

VII. Miscellany and Anecdotes.

VIII. Carefully prepared and impartial Notices of New Books and
Engravings, especially those relating to the History, Antiquities, or
Biography of America.

IX. Historical and Literary Intelligence, Announcements, &c.

The Historical Magazine is printed on fine quality of paper, similar in
form and size to this sheet, and published in monthly numbers, of
sixty-four pages each, at FIVE DOLLARS A YEAR. Single numbers
SEVENTY-FIVE CENTS.

                                    HENRY B. DAWSON, Morrisania, N. Y.


CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME I, NEW SERIES.


BERGEN, Hon. TUNIS, Bay Side, L. I.

BRINTON, Doctor D. G., Westchester, Pennsylvania, the celebrated
Ethnologist.

BRODHEAD, Hon. J. ROMEYN, the historian of New York.

DAWSON, HENRY B., author of _Battles of the United States_, etc.

DEAN, JOHN WARD, Secretary of the New England Historic-Genealogical
Society.

ELLIS, Rev. GEORGE B., D.D., Charlestown, Massachusetts.

EWBANK, Hon. THOMAS, Vice-president of the American Ethnological
Society.

FORCE, General PETER, Washington, D. C.

GILLETT, Rev. E. H., D.D., the historian of the Presbyterian Church.

KAPP, FRIEDRICH, the biographer of Steuben, De Kalb, etc.

LAWRENCE, EUGENE, Columbia College, New York.

MOORE, GEORGE H., Librarian of New York Historical Society.

NEW YORK CITY, Corporation of.

O'REILLY, HENRY, the veteran printer and telegraphist.

ROCKWELL, Prof. E. F., Davidson College, North Carolina.

SCOTT, BENJAMIN, Chamberlain of the City of London.

SHEA, J. GILMARY, LL.D., historian of the Catholic Missions.

SMITH, Hon. BUCKINGHAM, St. Augustine, Fl.

STONE, WILLIAM L., biographer of Sir William Johnson, etc.

WETMORE, General PROSPER M., New York.


UNPUBLISHED ARTICLES BY

ADAMS, SAMUEL, of Boston.

ALLEN, ETHAN, of Vermont.

ANDERSON, Lieut. THOMAS, of Delaware [His Diary during the Revolutionary
War].

ASHLEY, Doctor JOHN, of Deerfield, Massachusetts.

ASHMUN, Rev. J., Washington, D. C.

BARKER, JACOB, New Orleans.

BEATTY, Captain WILLIAM, of Maryland. [His Diary and Correspondence].

BENSON, EGBERT, on the Constitution of New York.

BURR, AARON, of New York.

CARROLL, CHARLES, of Carrollton.

COLDEN, DAVID C., of New York.

COOPER, J. FENIMORE, of New York.

DEARBORN, General HENRY, of Massachusetts.

DOWNING, EMANUAL, of England.

DRAYTON, WILLIAM H., of South Carolina.

DROWNE, Doctor SOLOMON, of Rhode Island.

FITZHUGH, WILLIAM, of Virginia.

FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN, of Pennsylvania.

GERRY, ELBRIDGE, of Massachusetts.

GREENE, General NATHANIEL, of Rhode Island.

HOOPER, A. M.

HOWELL, DAVID, of New Jersey.

HUMPHREYS, Colonel DAVID, of Connecticut.

HUNTINGTON, General JED., of Connecticut.

JAY, JOHN, of New York.

JEFFERSON, THOMAS, of Virginia.

KENDALL, AMOS, [on the Jackson Cabinet.]

KING, RUFUS, of New York. [On the Constitution of New York.]

LA FAYETTE, General.

LAURENS, HENRY, of South Carolina.

"MASON and DIXON," the Surveyors.

MILLER, General JAMES, of New Hampshire.

MOOERS, General BENJAMIN, of Plattsburg, New York.

MORRIS, ROBERT, of Pennsylvania.

PAGET, Admiral, R.N.

QUITMAN, General, of Mississippi. [Autobiographical letter.]

RANDOLPH, JOHN, of Roanoke, Virginia.

RIKER, Recorder RICHARD, of New York.

RUSH, Doctor BENJAMIN, of Pennsylvania.

TALLMADGE, Major BENJAMIN, of Connecticut.

TOMPKINS, DANIEL D., of New York.

VAN BUREN, MARTIN, of New York.

WASHINGTON, General GEORGE.

WHEELWRIGHT, Rev. JOHN, of Boston. [The celebrated Fast-day Sermon, for
preaching which he was banished from Massachusetts.]

WOLCOTT, OLIVER.


CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME II, NEW SERIES.


1.--ORIGINAL ARTICLES.

Hon. E. E. BOURNE, President of the Maine Historical Society.

Rev. PLINY H. WHITE, President of the Vermont Historical Society.

Hon. J. HAMMOND TRUMBULL, President of the Connecticut Historical
Society.

Hon. THOMAS EWBANK, Vice-president of the American Ethnological Society.

GEORGE HENRY MOORE, Librarian of the New York Historical Society.

Rev. Doctor BALLARD, Secretary of the Maine Historical Society.

S. F. HAVEN, Librarian of the American Antiquarian Society.

H. A. HOLMES, State Librarian, Albany.

E. B. O'CALLAGHAN, LL.D.

J. GILMARY SHEA, LL.D., New York City.

Doctor E. H. DAVIS, the Ethnologist.

Doctor D. G. BRINTON, Westchester, Penn.

J. WINGATE THORNTON, Boston.

Professor GEORGE W. GREENE, of Rhode Island.

Hon. WILLIAM WILLIS, Portland, Me.

W. GILMORE SIMMS, LL.D., of South Carolina.

WILLIAM SWINTON, New York City.

WILLIAM H. WHITMORE, Boston.

Rev. E. H. GILLETT, D.D., Harlem, N. Y.

Professor E. F. ROCKWELL, Davidson College, N. C.

J. R. SIMMS, Fort Plain, N. Y.

JAMES RIKER, Harlem, N. Y.

CHARLES EDWARDS, New York.

Captain E. C. BOYNTON, U.S.A., West Point.

Colonel THOMAS F. DE VOE, "the historical Butcher."

Captain GEORGE HENRY PREBLE, U.S.N.

JOSEPH SABIN, New York.

HENRY O'REILLY, New York.

Doctor JOSEPH COMSTOCK, Liberty Hill, Conn.

J. WILLIAMSON, Belfast, Me.

Rev. A. H. QUINT, D.D., New Bedford, Mass.

RUDOLPHE GARRIGUE, Morrisania, N. Y.

Editors of the _Methodist_, New York.


2.--INEDITED ARTICLES.

SAMUEL L. BOARDMAN, Augusta, Me.

F. W. SEWARD, Assistant Secretary of State of the United States.

THE CORPORATION OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

BUCKINGHAM SMITH, St. Augustine, Fla.

Professor GEORGE W. GREENE.

Hon. JOHN SULLIVAN, Exeter, N. H.

Professor RAU, New York.

E. F. DE LANCEY, New York.


3.--WRITERS OF INEDITED PAPERS.

Captain HENRY SEWALL, of the Revolutionary Army.

SEU-KI-YU, Governor of Fuh-Kien, China.

HARRISON GRAY OTIS.

JEFFERSON DAVIS.

JOHN ADAMS.

General WADE HAMPTON, U.S.A.

The Citizen GENET.

General WASHINGTON.

Colonel DAVID CROCKETT.

General LA FAYETTE.

RUFUS KING.

General WINFIELD SCOTT, U.S.A.

THOMAS JEFFERSON.

Colonel HENRY MURRAY, R.A.

CHARLES V., of Spain.

Colonel DAVID HUMPHREYS, of the Revolutionary Army.

Governor BELCHER, of Massachusetts.

Reverend J. H. LIVINGSTON, D.D.

CHARLES CARROLL, of Carrollton.

SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, President of the Continental Congress.

General WILLIAM HEATH, of the Revolutionary Army.

General M. GIST, of the same.

Colonel BENJAMIN TALLMADGE, of the same.

Doctor B. RUSH.

Governor THOMAS NELSON, of Virginia.

SOLOMON DROWNE, M.D., of the Revolutionary Army.

Lieutenant-governor COLDEN, of New York.

General JOHN SULLIVAN, of the Revolutionary Army.

HENRY CLAY.

WILLIAM J. DUANE.

Colonel RICHARD M. JOHNSON.

JARED SPARKS, LL.D.

Hon. ALEXANDER H. EVERETT.

Major HENRY LEE.

AARON BURR.

JAMES MUNROE.

ETC., ETC., ETC.


CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME III, NEW SERIES.


AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY, Worcester, Mass.

BALLARD, D.D., Rev. EDWARD, Brunswick, Maine. Secretary of the Maine
Historical Society.

BALLARD, FRANK W., New York City.

BARTLETT, Hon. J. RUSSELL, Providence. R. I. Secretary of State of Rhode
Island.

BLEECKER, R. WADE, New York City.

BOARDMAN, SAMUEL L., Augusta, Maine.

BOURNE, Hon. E. E., Kennebunk, Maine. President of the Maine Historical
Society.

BREVOORT, Hon. J. CARSON, Brooklyn. President of the L. I. Historical
Society.

BRODHEAD, J. ROMEYN, LL.D., New York. The historian of New York.

BRINLEY, Hon. GEORGE, Hartford, Conn.

BURNS, C. DEF., New York City.

BUSHNELL, CHARLES J., New York City.

DEAN, JOHN WARD, Boston, Mass. Author of _Life of Nathaniel Ward_, etc.

DE COSTA, Rev. B. F., New York City. The historian of Lake George, etc.

DE VOE, Colonel, THOMAS F., New York City. The historian of the Markets.

DRAKE, SAMUEL G., Boston, Mass. The historian of the Town of Boston,
etc.

DUANE, Colonel WILLIAM, Philadelphia.

DUNSHEE, HENRY W., New York City. The historian of the Dutch School, in
N. Y.

DUYCKINCK, EVERT A., New York City. Author of _Encylo. of Amer.
Literature_, etc.

EWBANK, Hon. THOMAS, New York City. V. P. of The American Ethnological
Society.

FISH, Hon. HAMILTON, New York City. President of the New York Historical
Society.

FRANCIS, LL.D., The late JOHN W., New York.

GIBBS, GEORGE, Washington, D. C. Author of _The Administration of
Washington and Adams_.

GILLETT, D.D., Rev. E. H., Harlem, N. Y. The historian of the
Presbyterian Church.

GODFREY, JOHN E., Bangor, Maine.

