Cicero, treating of the many degrees of human commerce and society,
places matrimony in the first rank. In fact, marriage is not only a
state capable of the highest human felicity, but it is an institution
well calculated to destroy those rank and noxious weeds of the
passions which, by their pestiferous influence, spread misery and
death around the social hemisphere. Marriage is the basis of
community, and the cement of society;--it is, or ought to be, that
state of perfect friendship in which there are, according to
Pythagoras, "two bodies with but one soul." It is in the genial
atmosphere of this noble communion of sentiment and affection that the
virtue of continence comes forth in all its dazzling splendour. Milton
has touched this subject with so chaste and elegant a pen, that the
description, one would think, must confirm the husband in his
happiness, and reclaim the man of profligate and licentious
principles:--

  "Hail, wedded love! mysterious law! true source
  Of human offspring, sole propriety
  In Paradise, of all things common else.
  By thee adultrous lust was driven from men,
  Among the beastial herds to range; by thee,
  Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
  Relations dear, and all the charities
  Of father, son, and brother, first were known.
  Perpetual fountain of domestic sweets,
  Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounc'd,
  Present or past, as saints or patriarchs us'd.
  Here Love his golden shafts employs; here lights
  His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings:
  Reigns here, and revels not in the bought smile
  Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendear'd,
  Casual fruition; nor in court amours,
  Mix'd dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball;
  Or serenade, which the starv'd lover sings
  To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain."

J.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GREAT LORD THURLOW.


Of the eloquence of Lord Thurlow, and of his manner in debate, Mr.
Butler has given a striking account:--"At times Lord Thurlow was
superlatively great. It was the good fortune of the Reminiscent to
hear his celebrated reply to the Duke of Grafton, during the inquiry
into Lord Sandwich's administration of Greenwich Hospital. His Grace's
action and delivery, when he addressed the house, were singularly
dignified and graceful; but his matter was not equal to his manner. He
reproached Lord Thurlow with his plebeian extraction, and his recent
admission into the peerage: particular circumstances caused Lord
Thurlow's reply to make a deep impression on the Reminiscent. His
lordship had spoken too often, and began to be heard with a civil but
visible impatience. Under these circumstances he was attacked in the
manner we have mentioned. He rose from the woolsack, and advanced
slowly to the place from which the chancellor generally addresses the
house; then fixing on the duke the look of Jove when he grasps the
thunder, 'I am amazed,' he said, in a level tone of voice, 'at the
attack the noble duke has made on me. Yes, my lords,' considerably
raising his voice, 'I am amazed at his grace's speech. The noble duke
cannot look before him, behind him, or on either side of him, without
seeing some noble peer who owes his seat in this house to his
successful exertions in the profession to which I belong. Does he not
feel that it is as honourable to owe it to these, as to being the
accident of an accident? To all these noble lords the language of the
noble duke is applicable and as insulting as it is to myself. But I
don't fear to meet it single and alone. No one venerates the peerage
more than I do;--but, my lords, I must say that the peerage solicited
me, not I the peerage;--nay, more, I can say, and will say, that as a
peer of parliament, as speaker of this right honourable house, as
keeper of the great seal, as guardian of his majesty's conscience, as
lord high chancellor of England, nay, even in that character alone in
which the noble duke would think it an affront to be considered--as a
_Man_, I am at this moment as respectable--I beg leave to add, I am at
this time as much respected, as the proudest peer I now look down
upon.' The effect of this speech, both within the walls of parliament
and out of them, was prodigious. It gave Lord Thurlow an ascendancy in
the house which no chancellor had ever possessed: it invested him, in
public opinion, with a character of independence and honour; and this,
though he was ever on the unpopular side in politics, made him always
popular with the people."

The legal talents and acquirements of Lord Thurlow have been the
subject of frequent panegyric; but it may, perhaps, be questioned,
whether in all cases those eulogiums were just. It has been said--but
with what truth it is difficult to form an opinion--that his lordship
was much indebted to Mr. Hargrave, for the learning by which his
judgments were sometimes distinguished, and that Mr. Hargrave received
a handsome remuneration for these services. "As lord chancellor," says
a writer who was personally acquainted with his lordship, "from a
well-placed confidence in Mr. Hargrave, who was indefatigable in his
service, he had occasion to give himself less trouble than any other
man in that high station. An old free-speaking companion of his, well
known at Lincoln's Inn, would sometimes say to me, 'I met the great
law lion this morning going to Westminster; but he was so busily
reading in the coach what his provider had supplied him with, that he
took no notice of me.'"

The ardent zeal with which Lord Thurlow contested the great question
of the regency, led him, if we may credit the narrative of one who was
a party to the debate, to be guilty of an act of great disingenuousness.
Dr. Watson, the Bishop of Llandaff, in the course of a speech, in
which he supported the claims of the Prince of Wales, incidentally
cited a passage from Grotius, with regard to the definition of the
word _right_. "The chancellor, in his reply," says the bishop in his
memoirs, "boldly asserted that he perfectly well remembered the
passage I had quoted from Grotius, and that it solely respected
natural, but was inapplicable to civil, rights. Lord Loughborough, the
first time I saw him after the debate, assured me that before he went
to sleep that night he had looked into Grotius, and was astonished to
find that the chancellor, in contradicting me, had presumed on the
ignorance of the house, and that my quotation was perfectly correct.
What miserable shifts do great men submit to, in supporting their
parties! The Chancellor Thurlow," continues the bishop, "was an able
and upright judge, but as the speaker of the house of lords, he was
domineering and insincere. It was said of him, that in the cabinet he
opposed everything, proposed nothing, and was ready to support
anything. I remember Lord Camden's saying to me one night, when the
chancellor was speaking contrary, as he thought, to his own
conviction, 'There now! I could not do that: he is supporting what he
does not believe a word of.'"

_Roscoe's Lives of Eminent Lawyers--Cabinet Cyclopaedia_.

       *       *       *       *       *


MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.

       *       *       *       *       *


TORCHLIGHT.


It is an interesting circumstance in the habits of the ancient Romans,
that their journeys were pursued very much in the night-time, and by
torchlight. Cicero, in one of his letters, speaks of passing through
the towns of Italy by night, as a serviceable scheme for some
political purpose, either of avoiding too much to publish his motions,
or of evading the necessity (else perhaps not avoidable) of drawing
out the party sentiments of the magistrates in the circumstances of
honour or neglect with which they might choose to receive him. His
words, however, imply that the practice was by no means an uncommon
one. And, indeed, from some passages in writers of the Augustan era,
it would seem that this custom was not confined to people of
distinction, but was familiar to a class of travellers so low in rank
as to be capable of abusing their opportunities of concealment for the
infliction of wanton injury upon the woods and fences which bounded
the margin of the high-road. Under the cloud of night and solitude,
the mischief-loving traveller was often in the habit of applying his
torch to the withered boughs of wood, or to artificial hedges: and
extensive ravages by fire, such as now happen not unfrequently in the
American woods (but generally from carelessness in scattering the
glowing embers of a fire, or even the ashes of a pipe), were then
occasionally the result of mere wantonness of mischief. Ovid
accordingly notices, as one amongst the familiar images of daybreak,
the half-burnt torch of the traveller; and, apparently, from the
position which it holds in his description, where it is ranked with
the most familiar of all circumstances in all countries--that of the
rural labourer going out to his morning tasks it must have been common
indeed:

  "Semiustamque facem vigilatâ nocte viator
  Ponet; et ad solitum rusticus ibit opus."

This occurs in the _Fasti_: elsewhere he notices it for its danger.

  "Ut facibus sepes ardent, cum forte viator
  Vel nimis admovit, vel jam sub luce reliquit."

He, however, we see, good-naturedly ascribes the danger to mere
carelessness, in bringing the torch too near to the hedge, or tossing
it away at daybreak. But Varro, a more matter-of-fact observer, does
not disguise the plain truth--that these disasters were often the
product of pure malicious frolic. For instance, in recommending a
certain kind of quickset fence, he insists upon it as one of its
advantages--that it will not readily ignite under the torch of the
mischievous wayfarer: "Naturale sepimentum," says he, "quod obseri
solet virgultis aut spinis, _praetereuntis lascivi non metuet facem_."
It is not easy to see the origin or advantage of this practice of
nocturnal travelling, (which must have considerably increased the
hazards of a journey,) excepting only in the heats of summer. It is
probable, however, that men of high rank and public station may have
introduced the practice by way of releasing corporate bodies in large
towns from the burdensome ceremonies of public receptions; thus making
a compromise between their own dignity and the convenience of the
provincial public. Once introduced, and the arrangements upon the road
for meeting the wants of travellers once adapted to such a practice,
it would easily become universal. It is, however, very possible that
mere horror of the heats of daytime may have been the original ground
for it. The ancients appear to have shrunk from no hardship as so
trying and insufferable as that of heat. And in relation to that
subject, it is interesting to observe the way in which the ordinary
use of language has accommodated itself to that feeling. Our northern
way of expressing effeminacy, is derived chiefly from the hardships of
cold. He that shrinks from the trials and rough experience of real
life in any department, is described by the contemptuous prefix of
_chimney-corner_, as if shrinking from the cold which he would meet on
coming out into the open air amongst his fellow men. Thus, a
_chimney-corner_ politician for a mere speculator or unpractical
dreamer. But the very same indolent habit of aerial speculation, which
courts no test of real life and practice, is described by the ancients
under the term _umbraticus_, or seeking the cool shade, and shrinking
from the heat. Thus an _umbraticus doctor_ is one who has no practical
solidity in his teaching. The fatigue and hardship of real life, in
short, is represented by the ancients under the uniform image of heat,
and by the moderns under that of cold.

_Blackwood's Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS.

       *       *       *       *       *


"PROGRESS" OF CHARLES II. AND HIS COURT.


The accompanying memorandum relative to Charles II. and his Court, is
copied from an old Family Prayer Book, and from the date of the book,
(?) and appearance of the writing, there is little doubt of its
authenticity.

W.H.

"King Charles the Second, with his Queen Katharine, the Duke of York,
and his Duchess, and Prince Rupert, the Duke of Monmouth, and many
others of the nobility did lodge in Wickomb, the 30th day of
September, in the yeare 1663. They did come into the town about 4 of
the clock the same day. They came from Oxford. The King in his
progress going back again to London. The King did go out of the town
between v and vi of the clock the next morning, and was at his palace
at Whitehall before 9 of the clock in the morning. The Queen did go
out about viii of the clock, and dined at Uxbridge, and then went to
Whitehall. The King was lodged with his Queen at the _Catharine
Wheel_."

       *       *       *       *       *


FAT LIVING.


The vicarage of Wyburn, or Winsburn, Cumberland, is of the following
tempting value: Fifty shilling per annum, a new surplice, a pair of
clogs, and feed on the common for one goose. This favoured church
preferment is in the midst of a wild country, inhabited by shepherds.
The clerk keeps a pot-house opposite the church. The service is once a
fortnight; and when there is no congregation, the Vicar and Moses
regale themselves at the bar.

D.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


BAD ALE.


In the time of the Saxons, it was a custom in the city of Chester,
that any person who brewed bad ale should either be placed in a
ducking-chair, and plunged into a pool of muddy water, or, in lieu of
that punishment, should forfeit four shillings.

D.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANCIENT TRADESMEN.


In _Domesday Book_ we find frequent mention of goldsmiths; and we know
the Anglo-Saxons had their goldsmiths, silversmiths, and coppersmiths.
Bowyers, or makers of cross-bows, are frequently mentioned--as are
carpenters, potters, bakers, and brewers, the last of which were
chiefly women. Both war and agriculture want the smith: hence his
importance among the Saxons. They were free from all other services,
on payment of a penny yearly for their forge. We also meet with
butchers, barbers, embroiderers, saddlers, parchment-makers, and
salt-makers.

D.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


PHYSICIANS' FEES.


In a book called _Levamen Infirmi_, written in 1700, the usual fees to
physicians and surgeons at that time are thus stated:--"To a graduate
in physic, his due is about _10s._, though he commonly expects, or
demands, _20s_. Those that are only licensed physicians, their due is
no more than _6s. 9d._, though they commonly demand _10s_. A surgeon's
journey is _12d._ a mile, be his journey far or near. Ten groats to
set a bone broke, or out of joint; and for letting of blood, _1s_. The
cutting off or amputation of any limb is _5l._, but there is no
settled price for the cure."

D.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


EVIL OMEN.


In the journals of the House of Commons, during the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, appears the following entry:--"This day a black raven came
into the House, which was considered as _malum omen_."

D.P.

       *       *       *       *       *


HENRY VIII. AND QUEEN KATHERINE.


The following letter was sent by Queen Katherine to Henry VIII., after
she was put away by that prince, to make room for Anne Boleyn. It was
written from Kimbolton, in Huntingdonshire, to which place Katherine
repaired after the divorce. It is dated 29th January, 1536. The bull
for the divorce, bearing date 1529, is to be found in the Life of
Henry VIII., written by Lord Herbert of Cherbury, 1649.

J.F.

_Gray's Inn._

"My most dear Lord, King, and Husband,--The houre of my death now
approaching, I cannot choose, but out of the love I beare you, to
advise you of your soule's health, which you ought to prefer before
all considerations of the world or flesh whatsoever. For which yet you
have cast me into many calamities, and yourself into many troubles.
But I forgive you all, and pray God to do soe likewise. For the rest,
I commend unto you Mary, our daughter, beseeching you to be a good
father to her, as I have heretofore desired. I must entreat you also
to respect my maids, and give them in marriage, which is not much,
they being but three, and to all my other servants, a year's pay
besides their due, lest otherwise they should be unprovided for.
Lastly, I make this vow, that mine eyes desire you above all things.
Farewell."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE NATURALIST.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPEED AND DIET OF THE OSTRICH.


In the _Annals of Sporting_ it is observed:--"If we are to place
confidence in traveller's tales, the ostrich is swifter than the
Arabian horse. During the residence of Mr. Adamson at Pador, a French
factory on the south side of the river Niger, he says that two
ostriches, which had been about two years in the factory, afforded him
a sight of a very extraordinary nature. These gigantic birds, though
young, were of nearly the full size. They were (he continues) so tame,
that two little blacks mounted both together on the back of the
larger. No sooner did he feel their weight, than he began to run as
last as possible, and carried them several times round the
village,--and it was impossible to stop him, otherwise than by
obstructing the passage. This sight pleased me so much, that I wished
it to be repeated, and, to try their strength, directed a full-grown
negro to mount the smallest, and two others the larger. This burden
did not seem at all disproportioned to their strength. At first, they
went at a pretty sharp trot; but when they became heated a little,
they expanded their wings, as though to catch the wind, and moved with
such fleetness that they seemed scarcely to touch the ground. Most
people have, at one time or other, seen the partridge run, and
consequently must know that there is no man able to keep up with it;
and it is easy to imagine, that if this bird had a longer step, its
speed would be considerably augmented. The ostrich moves like the
partridge, with this advantage; and I am satisfied that those I am
speaking of would have distanced the fleetest race-horses that were
ever bred in England. It is true, that they would not hold out so long
as a horse; but they would, undoubtedly, be able to go over the space
in less time. I have frequently beheld this sight, which is capable of
giving one an idea of the prodigious strength of the ostrich, and of
showing what use it might be of, had we but the method of breaking and
managing it as we do the horse."

The following interesting particulars, relating to the capability of
the ostrich to digest hard substances, is given by Mr. Fuller, in his
_Tour of the Turkish Empire_:--"An ostrich, belonging to an English
gentleman, arrived at Cairo from Upper Egypt, and afforded us an
opportunity of observing this curious peculiarity in the natural
history of that animal. The persons in charge of him observing his
great propensity for hard substances, mistook, unfortunately, for his
natural and ordinary diet, things that were only the objects of his
luxury; and while they gave him corn only occasionally, administered
every day a certain portion of iron, chiefly in the form of nails, to
which he occasionally added a knife or a razor, which he chanced to
pick up, or a few loose buttons, which he pulled from the coats of his
attendants. This metallic system did not however succeed; the poor
bird drooped gradually, his strength just lasted him to walk with a
stately step into the court of the Consulate, and he died in about an
hour afterwards. On a _post mortem_ examination, at which I was
present, about three pounds of iron were taken from his stomach. A
considerable portion of the hardest parts, such as the blades of the
knives and razor, was dissolved; and it is possible that the whole
might in time have been digested, as the death of the animal was in
part accidental, being immediately occasioned by a sharp
boat-builder's nail, three or four inches long, which he had
swallowed, and which had penetrated quite through the stomach, and
produced mortification."

W.G.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


EFFECTS OF LIGHT AND AIR ON PLANTS.


The importance of light and air to plants is well known. When
unassisted by these agents, plants lose their colour, and are deprived
of many of their properties. Colour is thus evidently produced by the
absorption of carbonic acid gas: and the colouring matter may be
detected by a powerful microscope, lodged in the cellular substance of
the leaf. How this colour is formed, and why it assumes different
tints in different plants, are, however, questions which it is at
present impossible to decide. The secretions of plants depend upon
light, and their flavour and nutritious qualities are materially
altered by their exclusion from it. The importance of this knowledge
to a practical horticulturist is proved by the fact, that sea-kale, so
well known as a wholesome and palatable vegetable, is not eatable in
its original state; and that any part of the cultivated plant, if
accidentally left exposed to the action of the air and light, becomes
tough, and so strong in flavour as to be extremely unpleasant to the
taste. Celery, also, in its native state, is poisonous; and it is only
the parts that are blanched that are perfectly fitted for the table.
Though colour is generally supposed to depend principally on the
plant's being exposed to the light, some portion of colouring matter
appears to be occasionally absorbed by the root. This colouring
substance is, however, never a deep green. Red and yellow, as may be
seen in forced rhubarb, &c., are the most common hues. Succulent
plants are less susceptible of the influence of light than any others.
As they are always natives of hot countries, nature, to prevent the
danger they would be exposed to from excessive evaporation, has
provided them with leaves almost destitute of pores; and the moisture
they absorb by their roots thus remains for the nourishment of the
plant. It is for this reason that cactuses, mesembryanthemums, and
other plants of a similar description, require very little water when
kept in pots. Scarcely any carbon is found in plants grown in the
dark. Many experiments have been tried to show the stimulus afforded
to vegetation by light; trees of the same species and variety have
been planted in the same garden and the same soil, but against walls
with different aspects, and differently situated with regard to shade.
The effect has been, not only a difference in the growth and
appearance of the tree, but also in the size, colour, and flavour of
the fruit which it produced. The contrast between plants grown in
hot-houses with wooden sash frames, and those grown in hot-houses with
iron sash-frames, has been found equally striking; the difference of
light between the two kinds of houses being as seven to twenty-seven,
or, sometimes, as three to twenty-three. Light is required at an early
period of vegetation; but, as its properties are to give strength and
flavour, it must be admitted with caution, as it is sometimes
injurious. Too much light renders the skin of fruits tough, and will
make cucumbers bitter. Bérard of Montpelier found that the ripening of
fruits is merely the turning the acid which they contain into sugar,
by exposure to the light; and that too much light and heat, before
they have attained their proper size, will bring on premature
ripening, and make them insipid.

_Lindley's Lectures, reported in the Gardeners' Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *


PLANTS IN ROOMS.


It is very difficult to make plants grow in rooms. They must
necessarily be deficient in the three important auxiliaries to
vegetable life, light, air, and moisture; the latter of which cannot
be maintained in apartments that are daily occupied. In large towns,
plants cannot thrive even in the open air, as the minute particles of
soot, which are constantly floating about, settle upon their leaves,
and choke up their pores. The gases produced by the combustion of
coal, &c., are also injurious to plants. Sulphurous acid, which
abounds in the atmosphere of London, turns the leaves yellow; and the
want of evaporation and absorption by the leaves prevents the proper
elaboration of the sap, and makes the trees stunted and unproductive.

_Ibid._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE CHLAMYPHORUS.


In our account of _the Nine-banded Armadillo_, at page 57 of the
present volume, we noticed the curious fact of the whole series of
armadillos offering a notable example of one genus being confined to a
particular country, viz. South America; of their standing perfectly
insulated, and exhibiting all the characters of a creation entirely
distinct, and, except as to the general character of mammiferous
quadrupeds, perfectly of its own kind.

The nearest resemblance to the armadillo is, we believe, to be traced
in a very curious little quadruped which is occasionally to be seen in
the district of Cuyo, at the foot of the Andes, on the eastern side.
The first instance of its being brought to Europe was a specimen
preserved in spirit, which was added to the Museum of the Zoological
Society, about four years since, by the Hon. Capt. Percy, R.N. who
received it from Woodbine Parish, Esq. British consul at Buenos Ayres.
It had been previously known only by the figures and description given
by Dr. Harlan, in the Annals of the Lyceum of Natural History of New
York. His specimen was, however, deprived of the skeleton and internal
parts, which are perfect in the specimen, in one of the lower rooms of
the Museum in Bruton-street. It is called the _Chlamyphorus_, and may
be said to unite the habits of the mole with the appearance of the
armadillo. Its upper parts and sides are defended by a coat, or rather
cloak, of mail, of a coriaceous nature, but exceeding in inflexibility
sole-leather of equal thickness. This cloak does not adhere, like that
of the armadillo, to the whole surface, occupying the place of the
skin--but is applied over the skin and fur, forming an additional
covering, which is attached only along the middle of the back and on
the head. The hinder parts of the animal are also protected by it, to
cover which, it is suddenly bent downwards at nearly a right angle.
The tail is short, and is directed forwards along the under surface of
the body. Owing to the rigidity of the case which so nearly encloses
the animal, its motions must be limited almost entirely to those of
mere progression, and even for these, the structure of its fore-feet
is ill suited. The anterior limbs are, indeed, scarcely fitted for any
other purpose than that of burrowing. For this operation, the long and
broad claws with which they are furnished are truly admirably adapted;
and their sharp points and cutting lower edges must materially assist
in clearing through the entangled roots which the animal may encounter
in its subterranean travels. Its teeth resemble those of the sloth
more nearly than any other animal's; and it seems to represent,
beneath the earth, that well-known and singular inhabitant of
trees--for its motions, so far as can be conjectured from its
conformation, must also be executed with extreme slowness.

[Illustration: (The Chlamyphorus.)]

The dimensions of the specimen in the Museum are as follow: length
from tip of nose to root of tail, 5-1/2 inches; ditto tail, 1-1/4 in.;
height at shoulder, 1-3/4 in. A more detailed account of the internal
structure and economy of this extraordinary little animal will be
found in the _Zoological Journal_, vols. ii. and iii.

       *       *       *       *       *


ARROW ROOT.


[Mr. Andrew Mathews, of Lima, has communicated to the _Gardeners'
Magazine_ the following account of the Otaheitan method of preparing
the excellent farinaceous substance termed _Arrow Root_, so
extensively used in this country.]

The root (_Tacca_ pinnatifida _Lin._, the _Pea_ of the natives) grows
in the greatest abundance in all the islands which we visited; viz.,
in Otaheite, Eimeo, Huaheine, Raiatea, and Otaha. Its favourite
situation is on the sides and ridges of the hills which rise directly
from the sea, and which are generally covered with a coarse grass, on
a red sandy loam. The root is round, white, smooth, full of eyes like
a potato, and from 2 to 3 in. in diameter. The flower-stem rises
directly from the root, simple; from 2 to 4 ft. in height, as thick as
a man's finger, bearing its flowers in a loose simple umbel on the
summit; and, when large and full blown, it presents a beautiful and
delicate appearance. The leaf is large, tri-pinnatifid, segments
acute, of a rich shining green: it is subject to great variation in
the size of the segments, some leaves being much more cut, and having
the segments narrower, than others. When a sufficient quantity of the
roots is collected, they are taken to a running stream, or to the
sea-beach, and washed; the outer skin is carefully scraped off at the
same time with a shell; and those who are particular in the
preparation scrape out even the eyes. The root is then reduced to a
pulp, by rubbing it up and down a kind of rasp, made as follows:--A
piece of board, about 3 in. wide, and 12 ft. long, is procured, upon
which some coarse twine, made of the fibres of the cocoa nut husk, is
tightly and regularly wound, and which affords an admirable substitute
for a coarse rasp. The pulp, when prepared, is washed first with salt
or sea water, through a sieve made of the fibrous web which protects
the young frond of the cocoa-nut palm; and the starch, or arrow-root,
being carried through with the water, is received in a wooden trough
made like the small canoes used by the natives. The starch is allowed
to settle for a few days; the water is then strained, or, more
properly, poured off, and the sediment rewashed with fresh (or river)
water. This washing is repeated three times with spring water; after
which the deposit is made into balls of about 7 or 8 in. in diameter,
and in this state dried in the sun for twelve or twenty-four hours.
The balls are then broken, and the powder spread for some days in the
sun to dry; after which it is carefully wrapped in _tapa_ (the native
cloth), and put into baskets, and hung up in the houses. The natural
indolence of the people is so great, and their avarice such, that but
few of them will give the arrow-root sufficient time to dry, if they
have an opportunity of parting with it, which I suspect was the case
with that sent to England some few years back by the missionaries. So
abundant is the root, that several tons might be prepared annually by
proper management: as it is, there is a considerable quantity
prepared; it being not only eaten by the natives and strangers on the
island, but also by the crews of the vessels that touch there.

At present, when the roots are taken up, the only precaution used to
secure a crop the following year is to throw the smaller roots back
into the holes from which they were taken, and to leave them to
chance. I have no doubt that, with proper care and cultivation, any
quantity might be produced. When we visited the island, we purchased
the prepared arrow-root at _2d._ per lb., and a missionary there
informed us, that he would engage to procure any given quantity at
_1-1/2d._ per lb., which is, I believe, much less than it can be
purchased at either in the East or the West Indies. Its quality is
excellent; I should say equal to that of the East Indies, and far
superior to that of Chile, with which I have since my return, had an
opportunity of comparing it.

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF A READER.

       *       *       *       *       *


JULIET'S TOMB.


  "In fair Verona, where we lay our scene."

The traditionary story of _Romeo and Juliet_ is fact. The animosities
of the houses of Montagu and the Capulet are matter of the history of
Verona, where, in olden times, Pliny and Catullus were born. Juliet
was buried in the _soutterain_ of Fermo Maggiore, which belonged to an
order of Franciscan friars, and was founded in 1230. Some years ago
the monastery was burnt down, and the vaults and burying-place reduced
to ruins. At this time the stone sarcophagus, the sepulchre of Juliet,
was removed, and placed where it now is, in the entrance gateway of
the monastery. The upper edge of it was entire when it was first put
here, but has since been mutilated, as is represented in the Cut, for
scraps to carry away as relics. Thus noted Mr. Duppa, a few years
since; but we have other pilgrims and fair pens to establish the
identity.

[Illustration: (_Juliet's Tomb._)]

Lord Byron, in a postscript to one of his letters from Verona, dated
Nov. 7, 1816, says, "I have been over Verona. Of the truth of Juliet's
story, they seem tenacious to a degree, insisting on the fact--giving
a date (1303), and showing a tomb. It is a plain, open, and partly
decayed sarcophagus, with withered leaves in it, in a wild and
desolate conventual garden--once a cemetery, now ruined to the very
graves. The situation struck me as very appropriate to the legend,
being blighted as their love. I have brought away a few pieces of the
granite, to give to my daughter and my nieces."[5]

    [5] Moore's Life of Byron, vol. ii. 4to. p. 50.

Mrs. Maria Callcott writes, in 1829:--"The tomb now shown as that of
Juliet, is an ancient sarcophagus of red granite: it has suffered from
the fire which burnt down the church, where it was originally
placed."[6]

    [6] See a sketch accompanying an Engraving of Verona, in vol.
        xiv. of the _Mirror_, p. 321.

Lastly, the accomplished authoress of _Characteristics of Women_ adds
her testimony, and illustrates the fondness with which the relics of
Juliet are cherished, by noting that she met in Italy a gentleman, who
being then "_dans le genre romantique_," wore a fragment of Juliet's
tomb set in a ring.[7]

    [7] See p. 118 of the present volume.

       *       *       *       *       *


MONASTERIES.


It is a strange error to conceive that English monasteries, before the
dissolution, fed the indigent part of the nation, and gave that
general relief which the poor laws are intended to afford.

_Hallam._

       *       *       *       *       *


PIRACY.


Mr. Hallam makes the following excellent observations upon the
frequency of piracy in the middle ages:--"A pirate, in a well-armed,
quick-sailing vessel, must feel, I suppose, the enjoyments of his
exemption from control more exquisitely than any other free-booter;
and, darting along the bosom of the ocean, under the impartial
radiance of the heavens, may deride the dark concealments and hurried
nights of the forest robber. His occupation is indeed extinguished by
the civilization of later ages, or confined to distant climates. But
in the 13th or 14th centuries, a rich vessel was never secure from
attack; and neither restitution nor punishment of the criminals was to
be obtained from governments, who sometimes feared the plunderer, and
sometimes connived at the offence."

       *       *       *       *       *


GOOD EFFECTS OF SALT.


Salt appears to be a necessary and universal stimulus to animated
beings; and its effects upon the vegetable as well as animal kingdom
have furnished objects of the most interesting inquiry to the
physiologist, the chemist, the physician, and the agriculturist. It
appears to be a natural stimulant to the digestive organs of all
warm-blooded animals, and that they are instinctively led to immense
distances in pursuit of it. This is strikingly exemplified in the
avidity with which animals in a wild state seek the salt-pans of
Africa and America, and in the difficulties they will encounter to
reach them: this cannot arise from accident or caprice, but from a
powerful instinct, which, beyond control, compels them to seek, at all
risks, that which is salubrious. To those who are anxious to gain
further information upon this curious subject, I would recommend the
perusal of a work entitled "_Thoughts on the Laws relating to Salt_,"
by Samuel Parkes, Esq., and a small volume by my late lamented friend
Sir Thomas Bernard, on the "_Case of the Salt Duties, with Proofs and
Illustrations_." We are all sensible of the effect of salt on the
human body; we know how unpalatable fresh meat and vegetables are
without it. During the course of my professional practice, I have had
frequent opportunities of witnessing the evils which have attended an
abstinance from salt. In my examination before a committee of the
House of Commons in 1818, appointed for the purpose of inquiring into
the laws respecting the salt duties, I stated, from my own experience,
the bad effects of a diet of unsalted fish, and the injury which the
poorer classes, in many districts, sustained in their health from an
inability to procure this essential condiment. I had some years ago a
gentleman of rank and fortune under my care, for a deranged state of
the digestive organs, accompanied with extreme emaciation. I found
that, from some cause which he could not explain, he had never eaten
any salt with his meals: I enforced the necessity of his taking it in
moderate quantities, and the recovery of his digestive powers was soon
evinced in the increase of his strength and condition. One of the ill
effects produced by an unsalted diet is the generation of worms. Mr.
Marshall has published the case of a lady who had a natural antipathy
to salt, and was in consequence most dreadfully infested with worms
during the whole of her life.--(_London Medical and Physical Journal_,
vol. xxix. No. 231.) In Ireland, where, from the bad quality of the
food, the lower classes are greatly infested with worms, a draught of
salt and water is a popular and efficacious anthelmintic. Lord
Somerville, in his Address to the Board of Agriculture, gave an
interesting account of the effects of a punishment which formerly
existed in Holland. "The ancient laws of the country ordained men to
be kept on bread alone, unmixed with salt, as the severest punishment
that could be inflicted upon them in their moist climate. The effect
was horrible; these wretched criminals are said to have been devoured
by worms engendered in their own stomachs." The wholesomeness and
digestibility of our bread are undoubtedly much promoted by the
addition of salt which it so universally receives.

_Dr. Paris--quoted in the Doctor._

       *       *       *       *       *


PROGRESS OF THE SCIENCES.

