Prepared by Hanh Vu, capriccio_vn@yahoo.com.  
A web page for Charlotte M Yonge will be found at www.menorot.com/cmyonge.htm


THE CHAPLET OF PEARLS

BY

CHARLOTTE M.YONGE


CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.       THE BRIDAL OF THE WHITE AND BLACK

CHAPTER II.      THE SEPARATION

CHAPTER III.     THE FAMILY COUNCIL

CHAPTER IV.      TITHONUS

CHAPTER V.       THE CONVENT BIRD

CHAPTER VI.      FOULLY COZENED

CHAPTER VII.     THE QUEEN'S PASTORAL

CHAPTER VIII.    'LE BROUILLON'

CHAPTER IX.      THE WEDDING WITH CRIMSON FAVOURS

CHAPTER X.       MONSIEUR'S BALLET

CHAPTER XI.      THE KING'S TRAGEDY

CHAPTER XII.     THE PALACE OF SLAUGHTER

CHAPTER XIII.    THE BRIDEGROOM'S ARRIVAL

CHAPTER XIV.     SWEET HEART

CHAPTER XV.      NOTRE-DAME DE BELLAISE

CHAPTER XVI.     THE HEARTHS AND THICKETS OF THE BOCAGE

CHAPTER XVII.    THE GHOSTS OF THE TEMPLARS

CHAPTER XVIII.   THE MOONBEAM

CHAPTER XIX.     LA RUE DES TROIS FEES

CHAPTER XX.      THE ABBE

CHAPTER XXI.     UNDER THE WALNUT-TREE

CHAPTER XXII.    DEPARTURE

CHAPTER XXIII.   THE EMPTY CRADLE

CHAPTER XXIV.    THE GOOD PRIEST OF NISSARD

CHAPTER XXV.     THE VELVET COACH

CHAPTER XXVI.    THE CHEVALIER'S EXPIATION

CHAPTER XXVII.   THE DYING KING

CHAPTER XXVIII.  THE ORPHANS OF LA SABLERIE

CHAPTER XXIX.    IN THE KING'S NAME

CHAPTER XXX.     CAGED IN THE BLACKBIRD'S NEST

CHAPTER XXXI.    THE DARK POOL OF THE FUTURE

CHAPTER XXXII.   'JAM SATIS'

CHAPTER XXXIII.  THE SCANDAL OF THE SYNOD OF MONTAUBAN

CHAPTER XXXIV.   MADAME LA DUCHESSE

CHAPTER XXXV.    THE ITALIAN PEDLAR

CHAPTER XXXVI.   SPELL AND POTION

CHAPTER XXXVII.  BEATING AGAINST THE BARS

CHAPTER XXXVIII. THE ENEMY IN PRESENCE

CHAPTER XXXIX.   THE PEDLAR'S PREDICTION

CHAPTER XL.      THE SANDS OF OLONNE

CHAPTER XLI.     OUR LADY OF HOPE

CHAPTER XLII.    THE SILVER BULLET

CHAPTER XLIII.   LA BAISER D'EUSTACIE

CHAPTER XLIV.    THE GALIMAFRE


PREFACE


It is the fashion to call every story controversial that deals with
times when controversy or a war of religion was raging; but it
should be remembered that there are some which only attempt to
portray human feelings as affected by the events that such warfare
occasioned.  'Old Mortality' and 'Woodstock' are not controversial
tales, and the 'Chaplet of Pearls' is so quite as little.  It only
aims at drawing certain scenes and certain characters as the
convulsions of the sixteenth century may have affected them, and
is, in fact, like all historical romance, the shaping of the
conceptions that the imagination must necessarily form when
dwelling upon the records of history.  That faculty which might be
called the passive fancy, and might almost be described in Portia's
song, --

                  'It is engendered in the eyes,
              By READING fed - and there it dies,'--

that faculty, I say, has learnt to feed upon character and
incident, and to require that the latter should be effective and
exciting.  Is it not reasonable to seek for this in the days when
such things were not infrequent, and did not imply exceptional
wickedness or misfortune in those engaged in them?  This seems to
me one plea for historical novel, to which I would add the
opportunity that it gives for study of the times and delineation of
characters.  Shakespeare's Henry IV. and Henry V., Scott's Louis
XI., Manzoni's Federigo Borromeo, Bulwer's Harold, James's Philip
Augustus, are all real contributions to our comprehension of the
men themselves, by calling the chronicles and memoirs into action.
True, the picture cannot be exact, and is sometimes distorted--nay,
sometimes praiseworthy efforts at correctness in the detail take
away whatever might have been lifelike in the outline.  Yet,
acknowledging all this, I must still plead for the tales that
presumptuously deal with days gone by, as enabling the young to
realize history vividly--and, what is still more desirable,
requiring an effort of the mind which to read of modern days does
not.  The details of Millais' Inquisition or of his Huguenot may be
in error in spite of all his study and diligence, but they have
brought before us for ever the horrors of the _auto-da-fe_, and the
patient, steadfast heroism of the man who can smile aside his
wife's endeavour to make him tacitly betray his faith to save his
life.  Surely it is well, by pen as by picture, to go back to the
past for figures that will stir the heart like these, even though
the details be as incorrect as those of the revolt of Liege or of
La Ferrette in 'Quentin Durward' and 'Anne of Geierstein.'

Scott, however, willfully carved history to suit the purposes of
his story; and in these days we have come to feel that a story must
earn a certain amount of credibility by being in keeping with
established facts, even if striking events have to be sacrificed,
and that the order of time must be preserved.  In Shakespeare's
days, or even in Scott's, it might have been possible to bring
Henry III. and his _mignons_ to due punishment within the limits of
a tale beginning with the Massacre of St. Bartholomew; but in 1868
the broad outlines of tragedy must be given up to keep within the
bounds of historical verity.

How far this has been done, critics better read than myself must
decide.  I have endeavoured to speak fairly, to the best of my
ability, of such classes of persons as fell in with the course of
the narrative, according to such lights as the memoirs of the time
afford.  The Convent is scarcely a CLASS portrait, but the
condition of it seems to be justified by hints in the Port Royal
memoirs, respecting Maubuisson and others which Mere Angelique
reformed.  The intolerance of the ladies at Montauban is described
in Madame Duplessis-Mornay's life; and if Berenger's education and
opinions are looked on as not sufficiently alien from Roman
Catholicism, a reference to Froude's 'History of Queen Elizabeth'
will show both that the customs of the country clergy, and likewise
that a broad distinction was made by the better informed among the
French between Calvinism and Protestantism or Lutheranism, in which
they included Anglicanism.  The minister Gardon I do not consider
as representing his class.  He is a POSSIBILITY modified to serve
the purposes of the story.

Into historical matters, however, I have only entered so far as my
story became involved with them.  And here I have to apologize for
a few blunders, detected too late for alteration even in the
volumes.  Sir Francis Walsingham was a young rising statesman in
1572, instead of the elderly sage he is represented; his daughter
Frances was a mere infant, and Sir Philip Sidney was not knighted
till much later.  For the rest, I have tried to show the scenes
that shaped themselves before me as carefully as I could; though of
course they must not be a presentiment of the times themselves, but
of my notion of them.

C. M. Yonge

November 14th, 1868


THE CHAPLET OF PEARLS

or

THE WHITE AND BLACK RIBAUMONT


CHAPTER I.  THE BRIDAL OF THE WHITE AND BLACK


           Small was the ring, and small in truth the finger:
         What then?  the faith was large that dropped it down.
                        Aubrey De Vere, INFANT BRIDAL


Setting aside the consideration of the risk, the baby-weddings of
the Middle Ages must have been very pretty sights.

So the Court of France thought the bridal of Henri Beranger
Eustache de Ribaumont and of Marie Eustacie Rosalie de Rebaumont du
Nid-de-Merle, when, amid the festivals that accompanied the
signature of the treaty of Cateau-Cabresis, good-natured King Henri
II. presided merrily at the union of the little pair, whose unite
ages did not reach ten years.

There they stood under the portal of Notre-Dame, the little
bridegroom in a white velvet coat, with puffed sleeves, slashed
with scarlet satin, as were the short, also puffed breeches meeting
his long white knitted silk stockings some way above the knee;
large scarlet rosettes were in his white shoes, a scarlet knot
adorned his little sword, and his velvet cap of the same colour
bore a long white plume, and was encircled by a row of pearls of
priceless value.  They are no other than that garland of pearls
which, after a night of personal combat before the walls of Calais,
Edward III. of England took from his helmet and presented to Sir
Eustache de Ribaumont, a knight of Picardy, bidding him say
everywhere that it was a gift from the King of England to the
bravest of knights.

The precious heirlooms were scarcely held with the respect due to
an ornament so acquired.  The manly garb for the first time assumed
by his sturdy legs, and the possession of the little sword, were
evidently the most interesting parts of the affair to the youthful
husband, who seemed to find in them his only solace for the weary
length of the ceremony.  He was a fine, handsome little fellow,
fair and rosy, with bright blue eyes, and hair like shining flax,
unusually tall and strong-limbed for his age; and as he gave his
hand to his little bride, and walked with her under a canopy up to
kneel at the High Altar, for the marriage blessing and the mass,
they looked like a full-grown couple seen through a diminishing-
glass.

The little bride was perhaps a less beautiful child, but she had a
splendid pair of black eyes, and a sweet little mouth, both set
into the uncomprehending solemnity of baby gravity and contentment
in fine clothes.  In accordance with the vow indicated by her name
of Marie, her dress was white and blue, turquoise forget-me-nots
bound the little lace veil on her dark chestnut hair, the bosom of
her white satin dress was sprinkled with the same azure jewel, and
turquoises bordered every seam of the sweeping skirt with a train
befitting a count's daughter, and meandered in gorgeous
constellations round the hem.  The little thing lisped her own vows
forth without much notion of their sense, and indeed was sometimes
prompted by her bridesmaid cousin, a pretty little girl a year
older, who thrust in her assistance so glibly that the King, as
well as others of the spectators, laughed, and observed that she
would get herself married to the boy instead of her cousin.

There was, however, to be no doubt nor mistake about Beranger and
Eustacie de Ribaumont being man and wife.  Every ceremony,
religious or domestic, that could render a marriage valid, was gone
through with real earnestness, although with infinite gaiety, on
the part of the court.  Much depended on their union, and the
reconcilement of the two branches of the family had long been a
favourite scheme of King Henri II.

Both alike were descended from Anselme de Ribaumont, renowned in
the first Crusade, and from the brave Picard who had received the
pearls; but, in the miserable anarchy of Charles VI.'s reign, the
elder brother had been on the Burgundian side--like most of the
other nobles of Picardy--and had thus been brought into the English
camp, where, regarding Henry V. as lawfully appointed to the
succession, and much admiring him and his brother Nedford, he had
become an ardent supporter of the English claim.  He had married an
English lady, and had received the grant if the castle of Leurre in
Normandy by way of compensation for his ancestral one of Ribaumont
in Picardy, which had been declared to be forfeited by his treason,
and seized by his brother.

This brother had always been an Armagnac, and had risen and thriven
with his party,--before the final peace between France and England
obliged the elder line to submit to Charles VII.  Since that time
there had been a perpetual contention as to the restitution of
Chateau Ribaumont, a strife which under Louis XI. had become an
endless lawsuit; and in the days of dueling had occasioned a good
many insults and private encounters.  The younger branch, or Black
Ribaumonts, had received a grant from Louis XI. of the lands of
Nid-de-Merle, belonging to an unfortunate Angevin noble, who had
fallen under the royal displeasure, and they had enjoyed court
favour up to the present generation, when Henri II., either from
opposition to his father, instinct for honesty, or both, had become
a warm friend to the gay and brilliant young Baron de Ribaumont,
head of the white or elder branch of the family.

The family contention seemed likely to wear out of its own accord,
for the Count de Ribaumont was an elderly and childless man, and
his brother, the Chevalier de Ribaumont, was, according to the
usual lot of French juniors, a bachelor, so that it was expected
that the whole inheritance would centre upon the elder family.
However, to the general surprise, the Chevalier late in life
married, and became the father of a son and daughter; but soon
after calculations were still more thrown out by the birth of a
little daughter in the old age of the Count.

Almost from the hour in which her sex was announced, the King had
promised the Baron de Ribaumont that she should be the wife of his
young son, and that all the possessions of the house should be
settled upon the little couple, engaging to provide for the
Chevalier's disappointed heir in some commandery of a religious
order of knighthood.

The Baron's wife was English.  He had, when on a visit to his
English kindred, entirely turned the head of the lovely Annora
Walwyn, and finding that her father, one of the gravest of Tudor
statesmen, would not hear of her breaking her engagement to the
honest Dorset squire Marmaduke Thistlewood, he had carried her off
by a stolen marriage and _coup de main_, which, as her beauty,
rank, and inheritance were all considerable, had won him great
reputation at the gay court of Henri II.

Infants as the boy and girl were, the King had hurried on their
marriage to secure its taking place in the lifetime of the Count.
The Countess had died soon after the birth of the little girl, and
if the arrangement were to take effect at all, it must be before
she should fall under the guardianship of her uncle, the Chevalier.
Therefore the King had caused her to be brought up from the cottage
in Anjou, where she had been nursed, and in person superintended
the brilliant wedding.  He himself led off the dance with the tiny
bride, conducting her through its mazes with fatherly kindliness
and condescension; but Queen Catherine, who was strongly in the
interests of the Angevin branch, and had always detested the Baron
as her husband's intimate, excused herself from dancing with the
bridegroom.  He therefore fell to the share of the Dauphiness Queen
of Scots, a lovely, bright-eyed, laughing girl, who so completely
fascinated the little fellow, that he convulsed the court by
observing that he should not have objected to be married to some
one like her, instead of a little baby like Eustacie.

Amid all the mirth, it was not only the Chevalier and the Queen who
bore displeased looks.  In truth, both were too great adepts in
court life to let their dissatisfaction appear.  The gloomiest face
was that of him whose triumph it was--the bridegroom's father, the
Baron de Ribaumont.  He had suffered severely from the sickness
that prevailed in St. Quentin, when in the last August the Admiral
de Coligny had been besieged there by the Spaniards, and all agreed
that he had never been the same man since, either in health or in
demeanour.  When he came back from his captivity and found the King
bent on crowning his return by the marriage of the children, he had
hung back, spoken of scruples about such unconscious vows, and had
finally only consented under stress of the personal friendship of
the King, and on condition that he and his wife should at once have
the sole custody of the little bride.  Even then he moved about the
gay scene with so distressed and morose an air that he was
evidently either under the influence of a scruple of conscience or
of a foreboding of evil.

No one doubted that it had been the latter, when, three days later,
Henri II., in the prime of his strength and height of his spirits,
encountered young Des Lorges in the lists, received the splinter of
a lance in his eye, and died two days afterwards.

No sooner were his obsequies over than the Baron de Ribaumont set
off with his wife and the little bridal pair for his castle of
Leurre, in Normandy, nor was he ever seen at court again.


CHAPTER II.  THE SEPARATION


Parted without the least regret,
Except that they had ever met.
    *     *     *     *
Misses, the tale that I relate,
This lesson seems to carry:
Choose not alone a proper mate,
But proper time to marry!
                COWPER, PAIRING TIME ANTICIPATED


'I will have it!'

'Thou shalt not have it!'

'Diane says it is mine.'

'Diane knows nothing about it.'

'Gentlemen always yield to ladies.'

'Wives ought to mind their husbands.'

'Then I will not be thy wife.'

'Thou canst not help it.'

'I will.  I will tell my father what M. le Baron reads and sings,
and then I know he will.'

'And welcome.'

Eustacie put out her lip, and began to cry.

The 'husband and wife,' now eight and seven years old, were in a
large room hung with tapestry, representing the history of Tobit.
A great state bed, curtained with piled velvet, stood on a sort of
_dais_ at the further end; there was a toilet-table adorned with
curiously shaped boxes, and coloured Venetian glasses, and filagree
pouncet-boxes, and with a small mirror whose frame was inlaid with
gold and ivory.  A large coffer, likewise inlaid, stood against the
wall, and near it a cabinet, of Dutch workmanship, a combination of
ebony, ivory, wood, and looking-glass, the centre retreating, and
so arranged that by the help of most ingenious attention to
perspective and reflection, it appeared like the entrance to a
magnificent miniature cinque-cento palace, with steps up to a
vestibule paved in black and white lozenges, and with three endless
corridors diverging from it.  So much for show; for use, this
palace was a bewildering complication of secret drawers and pigeon-
holes, all depending indeed upon one tiny gold key; but unless the
use of that key were well understood, all it led to was certain
outer receptacles of fragrant Spanish gloves, knots of ribbon, and
kerchiefs strewn over with rose leaves and lavender.  However,
Eustacie had secured the key, and was now far beyond these mere
superficial matters.  Her youthful lord had just discovered her
mounted on a chair, her small person decked out with a profusion of
necklaces, jewels, bracelets, chains, and rings; and her fingers,
as well as they could under their stiffening load, were opening the
very penetralia of the cabinet, the inner chamber of the hall,
where lay a case adorned with the Ribaumont arms and containing the
far-famed chaplet of pearls.  It was almost beyond her reach, but
she had risen on tip-toe, and was stretching out her hand for it,
when he, springing behind her on the chair, availed himself of his
superior height and strength to shut the door of this Arcanum and
turn the key.  His mortifying permission to his wife to absent
herself arose from pure love of teasing, but the next moment he
added, still holding his hand on the key--'As to telling what my
father reads, that would be treason.  How shouldst thou know what
it is?'

'Does thou think every one is an infant but thyself?'

'But who told thee that to talk of my father's books would get him
into trouble?' continued the boy, as they still stood together on
the high heavy wooden chair.

She tossed her pretty head, and pretended to pout.

'Was it Diane? I will know.  Didst thou tell Diane?'

Instead of answering, now that his attention to the key was
relaxed, Eustacie made a sudden dart, like a little wild cat, at
the back of the chair and at the key.  They chair over-balanced;
Beranger caught at the front drawer of the cabinet, which, unlocked
by Eustacie, came out in his hand, and chair, children, drawer, and
curiosities all went rolling over together on the floor with a
hubbub that brought all the household together, exclaiming and
scolding.  Madame de Ribaumont's displeasure at the rifling of her
hoards knew no bounds; Eustacie, by way of defence, shrieked 'like
twenty demons;' Beranger, too honourable to accuse her, underwent
the same tempest; and at last both were soundly rapped over the
knuckles with the long handle of Madame's fan, and consigned to two
separate closets, to be dealt with on the return of M. le Baron,
while Madame returned to her embroidery, lamenting the absence of
that dear little Diane, whose late visit at the chateau had been
marked by such unusual tranquility between the children.

Beranger, in his dark closet, comforted himself with the shrewd
suspicion that his father was so employed as not to be expected at
home till supper-time, and that his mother's wrath was by no means
likely to be so enduring as to lead her to make complaints of the
prisoners; and when he heard a trampling of horses in the court, he
anticipated a speedy release and summons to show himself to the
visitors.  He waited long, however, before he heard the pattering
of little feet; then a stool scraped along the floor, the button of
his door was undone, the stool pushed back, and as he emerged,
Eustacie stood before him with her finger to her lip.  'CHUT,
Beranger! It is my father and uncle, and Narcisse, and, oh! so many
_gens d'armes_.  They are come to summon M. le Baron to go with
them to disperse the _preche_ by the Bac de l'Oie.  And oh,
Beranger, is he not there?'

'I do not know.  He went out with his hawk, and I do not think he
could have gone anywhere else.  Did they say so to my mother?'

'Yes; but she never knows.  And oh, Beranger, Narcisse told me--ah,
was it to tease me?--that Diane has told them all they wanted to
know, for that they sent her here on purpose to see if we were not
all Huguenots.

'Very likely, the little viper! Le me pass, Eustacie.  I must go
and tell my father.'

'Thou canst not get out that way; the court is full of men-at-arms.
Hark, there's Narcisse calling me.  He will come after me.'

There was not a moment to lose.  Berenger flew along a corridor,
and down a narrow winding stair, and across the kitchen; then
snatching at the arm of a boy of his own age whom he met at the
door, he gasped out, 'Come and help me catch Follet, Landry!' and
still running across an orchard, he pulled down a couple of apples
from the trees, and bounded into a paddock where a small rough
Breton pony was feeding among the little tawny Norman cows.  The
animal knew his little master, and trotted towards him at his call
of 'Follet, Follet.  Now be a wise Follet, and play me no tricks.
Thou and I, Follet, shall do good service, if thou wilt be steady.'

Follet made his advances, but with a coquettish eye and look, as if
ready to start away at any moment.

'Soh, Follet.  I have no bread for thee, only two apples; but,
Follet, listen.  There's my _beau-pere_ the Count, and the
Chevalier, all spite, and their whole troop of savage _gens
d'armes_, come out to fall upon the poor Huguenots, who are doing
no harm at all, only listening to a long dull sermon.  And I am
much afraid my father is there, for he went out his hawk on his
wrist, and he never does take Ysonde for any real sport, as thou
and I would do, Follet.  He says it is all vanity of vanities.  But
thou know'st, if they caught him at the _preche_ they would call it
heresy and treason, and all sorts of horrors, and any way they
would fall like demons on the poor Huguenots, Jacques and all--
thine own Jacques, Follet.  Come, be a loyal pony, Follet.  Be at
least as good as Eustacie.'

Follet was evidently attentive to this peroration, turning round
his ear in a sensible attitude, and advancing his nose to the
apples.  As Beranger held them out to him, the other boy clutched
his shaggy forelock so effectually that the start back did not
shake him off, and the next moment Beranger was on his back.

'And I, Monsieur, what shall I do?'

'Thou, Landry?  I know.  Speed like a hare, lock the avenue gate,
and hide the key.  That will delay them a long time.  Off now,
Follet.'

Beranger and Follet understood one another far too well to care
about such trifles as saddle and bridle, and off they went through
green grassy balks dividing the fields, or across the stubble,
till, about three miles from the castle, they came to a narrow
valley, dipping so suddenly between the hills that it could hardly
have been suspected by one unaware of its locality, and the sides
were dotted with copsewood, which entirely hid the bottom.
Beranger guided his pony to a winding path that led down the steep
side of the valley, already hearing the cadence of a loud, chanting
voice, throwing out its sounds over the assembly, whence arose
assenting hums over an undercurrent of sobs, as though the
excitable French assembly were strongly affected.

The thicket was so close that Beranger was almost among the
congregation before he could see more than a passing glimpse of a
sea of heads.  Stout, ruddy, Norman peasants, and high white-capped
women, mingled with a few soberly-clad townsfolk, almost all with
the grave, steadfast cast of countenance imparted by unresisted
persecution, stood gathered round the green mound that served as a
natural pulpit for a Calvinist minister, who more the dress of a
burgher, but entirely black.  To Beranger's despair, he was in the
act of inviting his hearers to join with him in singing one of
Marot's psalms; and the boy, eager to lose not a moment, grasped
the skirt of the outermost of the crowd.  The man, an absorbed-
looking stranger, merely said, 'Importune me not, child.'

'Listen!' said Beranger; 'it imports---'

'Peace,' was the stern answer; but a Norman farmer looked round at
that moment, and Beranger exclaimed, 'Stop the singing!  The _gens
d'armes_!' The psalm broke off; the whisper circulated; the words
'from Leurre' were next conveyed from lip to lip, and, as it were
in a moment, the dense human mass had broken up and vanished,
stealing through the numerous paths in the brushwood, or along the
brook, as it descended through tall sedges and bulrushes.  The
valley was soon as lonely as it had been populous; the pulpit
remained a mere mossy bank, more suggestive or fairy dances than of
Calvinist sermons, and no one remained on the scene save Beranger
with his pony, Jacques the groom, a stout farmer, the preacher, and
a tall thin figure in the plainest dark cloth dress that could be
worn by a gentleman, a hawk on his wrist.

'Thou here, my boy!' he exclaimed, as Beranger came to his side;
and as the little fellow replied in a few brief words, he took him
by the hand, and said to the minister, 'Good Master Isaac, let me
present my young son to you, who under Heaven hath been the means
of saving many lives this day.'

Maitre Isaac Gardon, a noted preacher, looked kindly at the boy's
fair face, and said, 'Bless thee, young sir.  As thou hast been
already a chosen instrument to save life, so mayest thou be ever
after a champion of the truth.'

'Monsieur le Baron,' interposed Jacques, 'it were best to look to
yourself.  I already hear sounds upon the wind.'

'And you, good sir?' said the Baron.

'I will see to him,' said the farmer, grasping him as a sort of
property.  'M. le Baron had best keep up the beck.  Out on the moor
there he may fly the hawk, and that will best divert suspicion.'

'Farewell, then,' said the Baron, wringing the minister's hand, and
adding, almost to himself, 'Alas! I am weary of these shifts!' and
weary indeed he seemed, for as the ground became so steep that the
beck danced noisily down its channel, he could not keep up the
needful speed, but paused, gasping for breath, with his hand on his
side.  'Beranger was off his pony in an instant, assuring Follet
that it ought to be proud to be ridden by his father, and exhaling
his own exultant feelings in caresses to the animal as it gallantly
breasted the hill.  The little boy had never been so commended
before!  He loved his father exceedingly; but the Baron, while ever
just towards him, was grave and strict to a degree that the ideas
even of the sixteenth century regarded as severe.  Little Eustacie
with her lovely face, her irrepressible saucy grace and audacious
coaxing, was the only creature to whom he ever showed much
indulgence and tenderness, and even that seemed almost against his
will and conscience.  His son was always under rule, often blamed,
and scarcely ever praised; but it was a hardy vigorous nature, and
respectful love throve under the system that would have crushed or
alienated a different disposition.  It was not till the party had
emerged from the wood upon a stubble field, where a covey of
partridges flew up, and to Beranger's rapturous delight furnished a
victim for Ysonde, that M. de Ribaumont dismounted from the pony,
and walking towards home, called his son to his side, and asked him
how he had learnt the intentions of the Count and the Chevalier.
Beranger explained how Eustacie had come to warn him, and also told
what she had said of Diane de Ribaumont, who had lately, by her
father's request, spent a few weeks at the chateau with her
cousins.

'My son,' said the Baron, 'it is hard to ask of babes caution and
secrecy; but I must know from thee what thy cousin may have heard
of our doings?'

'I cannot tell, father,' replied Beranger; 'we played more than we
talked.  Yet, Monsieur, you will not be angry with Eustacie if I
tell you what she said to me to-day?'

'Assuredly not, my son.'

'She said that her father would take her away if he knew what M. le
Baron read, and what he sung.'

'Thou hast done well to tell me, my son.  Thinkest thou that this
comes from Diane, or from one of the servants?'

'Oh, from Diane, my father; none of the servants would dare to say
such a thing.'

'It is as I suspected then,' said the Baron. 'That child was sent
amongst us as a spy.'  Tell me, Beranger, had she any knowledge of
our intended journey to England?'

'To England!  But no, father, I did not even know it was intended.
To England--to that Walwyn which my mother takes such pains to make
us speak rightly.  Are we then, going?'

'Listen, my son.  Thou hast to-day proved thyself worthy of trust,
and thou shalt hear.  My son, ere yet I knew the truth I was a
reckless disobedient youth, and I bore thy mother from her parents
in England without their consent.  Since, by Heaven's grace, I have
come to a better mind, we have asked and obtained their
forgiveness, and it has long been their desire to see again their
daughter and her son.  Moreover, since the accession of the present
Queen, it has been a land where the light is free to shine forth;
and though I verily believe what Maitre Gardon says, that
persecution is a blessed means of grace, yet it is grievous to
expose one's dearest thereto when they are in no state to count the
cost. Therefore would I thither convey you all, and there amid thy
mother's family would we openly abjure the errors in which we have
been nurture. I have already sent to Paris to obtain from the
Queen-mother the necessary permission to take my family to visit
thy grand-father, and it must now be our endeavour to start
immediately on the receipt of the reply, before the Chevalier's
information can lead to any hindrance or detention of Eustacie.'

'Then Eustacie will go with us, Monsieur?'

'Certainly.  Nothing is more important than that her faith should
be the same as yours!  But discretion, my son: not a word to the
little one.'

'And Landry, father?  I had rather Landry went than Eustacie.  And
Follet, dear father, pray take him.'

After M. de Ribaumont's grave confidence to his son and heir, he
was a little scandalized at the comparative value that the boy's
voice indicated for wife, foster-brother, and pony, and therefore
received it in perfect silence, which silence continued until they
reached the chateau, where the lady met them at the door with a
burst of exclamations.

'Ah, there you are, safe, my dear Baron. I have been in despair.
Here were the Count and his brother come to call on you to join
them in dispersing a meeting of those poor Huguenots and they would
not permit me to send out to call you in!  I verily think they
suspected that you were aware of it.'

M. de Ribaumont made no answer, but sat wearily down and asked for
his little Eustacie.

'Little vixen!' exclaimed the Baroness, 'she is gone; her father
took her away with him.'  And as her husband looked extremely
displeased, she added that Eustacie had been meddling with her
jewel cabinet and had been put in penitence. Her first impulse on
seeing her father had been to cling to him and poor out her
complaints, whereupon he had declared that he should take her away
with him at once, and had in effect caused her pony to be saddled,
and he had ridden away with her to his old tower, leaving his
brother, the Chevalier, to conduct the attack on the Huguenot
conventicle.

'He had no power or right to remove her,' said the Baron.  'How
could you let him do so in my absence?  He had made over her
wardship to me, and has no right to resume it!'

'Well, perhaps I might have insisted on his waiting till your
return; but, you see, the children have never done anything but
quarrel and fight, and always by Eustacie's fault; and if ever they
are to endure each other, it must be by being separated now.'

'Madame,' said the Baron, gravely, 'you have done your utmost to
ruin your son's chances of happiness.'

That same evening arrived the King's passport permitting the Baron
de Ribaumont and his family to pay a visit to his wife's friends in
England. The next morning the Baron was summoned to speak to one of
his farmers, a Huguenot, who had come to inform him that, through
the network of intelligence kept up by the members of the
persecuted faith, it had become known that the Chevalier de
Ribaumont had set off for court that night, and there was little
doubt that his interference would lead to an immediate revocation
of the sanction to the journey, if to no severer measures.  At
best, the Baron knew that if his own absence were permitted, it
would be only on condition of leaving his son in the custody of
either the Queen-mother or the Count.  It had become impossible to
reclaim Eustacie.  Her father would at once have pleaded that she
was being bred up in Huguenot errors.  All that could be done was
to hasten the departure ere the royal mandate could arrive.  A
little Norman sailing vessel was moored two evenings after in a
lonely creek on the coast, and into it stepped M. de Ribaumont,
with his Bible, Marot's Psalter, and Calvin's works, Beranger still
tenderly kissing a lock of Follet's mane, and Madame mourning for
the pearls, which her husband deemed too sacred an heirloom to
carry away to a foreign land.  Poor little Eustacie, with her
cousin Diane, was in the convent of Bellaise in Anjou.  If any one
lamented her absence, it was her father-in-law.


CHAPTER III.  THE FAMILY COUNCIL


He counsels a divorce
       Shakespeare, KING HENRY VIII.


In the spring of the year 1572, a family council was assembled in
Hurst Walwyn Hall.  The scene was a wainscoted oriel chamber closed
off by a screen from the great hall, and fitted on two sides by
presses of books, surmounted the one by a terrestrial, the other by
a celestial globe, the first 'with the addition of the Indies' in
very eccentric geography, the second with enormous stars studding
highly grotesque figures, regarded with great awe by most
beholders.

A solid oaken table stood in the midst, laden with books and
papers, and in a corner, near the open hearth, a carved desk,
bearing on one slope the largest copy of the 'Bishops' Bible'; on
the other, one of the Prayer-book.  The ornaments of the oaken
mantelpiece culminated in a shield bearing a cross _boutonnee_,
i.e. with trefoil terminations.  It was supported between a merman
with a whelk shell and a mermaid with a comb, and another like
Siren curled her tail on the top of the gaping baronial helmet
above the shield, while two more upheld the main weight of the
chimney-piece on either side of the glowing wood-fire.

In the seat of honour was an old gentleman, white-haired, and
feeble of limb, but with noble features and a keen, acute eye.
This was Sir William, Baron of Hurst Walwyn, a valiant knight at
Guingate and Boulogne, a statesman of whom Wolsey had been jealous,
and a ripe scholar who had shared the friendship of More and
Erasmus.  The lady who sat opposite to him was several years
younger, still upright, brisk and active, though her hair was milk-
white; but her eyes were of undimmed azure, and her complexion
still retained a beauteous pink and white.  She was highly
educated, and had been the friend of Margaret Roper and her
sisters, often sharing their walks in the bright Chelsea garden.
Indeed, the musk-rose in her own favourite nook at Hurst Walwyn was
cherished as the gift of Sir Thomas himself.

Near her sat sister, Cecily St. John, a professed nun at Romsey
till her twenty-eight year, when, in the dispersion of convents,
her sister's home had received her.  There had she continued, never
exposed to tests of opinion, but pursuing her quiet course
according to her Benedictine rule, faithfully keeping her vows, and
following the guidance of the chaplain, a college friend of Bishop
Ridley, and rejoicing in the use of the vernacular prayers and
Scriptures.  When Queen Mary had sent for her to consider of the
revival of convents, her views had been found to have so far
diverged from those of the Queen that Lord WalWyn was thankful to
have her safe at home again; and yet she fancied herself firm to
old Romsey doctrine.  She was not learned, like Lady Walwyn, but
her knowledge in all needlework and confectionery was consummate,
so that half the ladies in Dorset and Wilts longed to send their
daughters to be educated at Hurst Walwyn.  Her small figure and
soft cheeks had the gentle contour of a dove's form, nor had she
lost the conventual serenity of expression; indeed it was curious
that, let Lady Walwyn array her as she would, whatever she wore
bore a nunlike air.  Her silken farthingales hung like serge robes,
her ruffs looked like mufflers, her coifs like hoods, even
necklaces seemed rosaries, and her scrupulous neatness enhanced the
pure unearthly air of all belonging to her.

Eager and lively, fair and handsome, sat the Baronne de Ribaumont,
or rather, since the higher title had been laid aside, Dame Annora
Thistlewood.  The health of M. de Ribaumont had been shattered at
St. Quentin, and an inclement night of crossing the Channel had
brought on an attack on the lungs, from which he only rallied
enough to amaze his English friends at finding the gay dissipated
young Frenchman they remembered, infinitely more strict and rigid
than themselves.  He was never able to leave the house again after
his first arrival at Hurst Walwyn, and sank under the cold winds of
the next spring, rejoicing to leave his wife and son, not indeed
among such strict Puritans as he preferred, but at least where the
pure faith could be openly avowed without danger.

Sir Marmaduke Thistlewood, the husband to whom Annora Walwyn had
been destined before M. de Ribaumont had crossed her path, was
about the same time left a widower with one son and daughter, and
as soon as a suitable interval had passed, she became a far happier
wife than she had been in either the Baron's gay or grave days.
Her son had continued under the roof of his grandfather, to whose
charge his father had specially committed him, and thus had been
scarcely separated from his mother, since Combe Manor was not above
three miles across the downs from Hurst Walwyn, and there was
almost daily intercourse between the families.  Lucy Thistlewood
had been brought to Hurst Walwyn to be something between a maid of
honour and a pupil to the ladies there, and her brother Philip, so
soon as he was old enough, daily rode thither to share with
Berenger the instructions of the chaplain, Mr. Adderley, who on the
present occasion formed one of the conclave, sitting a little apart
as not quite familiar, though highly esteemed.

With an elbow on the table, and one hand toying with his long
riding-whip, sat, booted and spurred, the jovial figure of Sir
Marmaduke, who called out, in his hearty voice, 'A good riddance of
an outlandish Papist, say I!  Read the letter, Berenger lad.  No,
no, no!  English it!  I know nothing of your mincing French!  'Tis
the worst fault I know in you, boy, to be half a Frenchman, and
have a French name'--a fault that good Sir Marmaduke did his best
to remedy by always terming his step-son Berenger or Berry
Ribmount, and we will so far follow his example as henceforth to
give the youth the English form of his Christian name.  He was by
this time a tall lad of eighteen, with straight features, honest
deep blue eyes, very fair hair cut short and brushed up to a crest
upon the middle of his head, a complexion of red and white that all
the air of the downs and the sea failed to embrown, and that
peculiar openness and candour of expression which seems so much an
English birthright, that the only trace of his French origin was,
that he betrayed no unbecoming awkwardness in the somewhat
embarrassing position in which he was placed, literally standing,
according to the respectful discipline of the time, as the subject
of discussion, before the circle of his elders.  His colour was
indeed, deepened, but his attitude was easy and graceful, and he
used no stiff rigidity nor restless movements to mask his anxiety.
At Sir Marmaduke's desire, he could not but redden a good deal
more, but with a clear, unhesitating voice, he translated, the
letter that he had received from the Chevalier de Ribaumont, who,
by the Count's death, had become Eustacie's guardian.  It was a
request in the name of Eustacie and her deceased father, that
Monsieur le Baron de Ribaumont--who, it was understood, had
embraced the English heresy--would concur with his spouse in
demanding from his Holiness the Pope a decree annulling the
childish marriage, which could easily be declared void, both on
account of the consanguinity of the parties and the discrepancy of
their faith; and which would leave each of them free to marry
again.

'Nothing can be better,' exclaimed his mother.  'How I have longed
to free him from that little shrew, whose tricks were the plague of
my life!  Now there is nothing between him and a worthy match!'

'We can make an Englishman of him now to the backbone,' added Sir
Marmaduke, 'and it is well that it should be the lady herself who
wants first to be off with it, so that none can say he has played
her a scurvy trick.'

'What say you, Berenger?'  said Lord Walwyn.  'Listen to me, fair
nephew.  You know that all my remnant of hope is fixed upon you,
and that I have looked to setting you in the room of the son of my
own; and I think that under our good Queen you will find it easier
to lead a quiet God-fearing life than in your father's vexed
country, where the Reformed religion lies under persecution.
Natheless, being a born liegeman of the King of France, and heir to
estates in his kingdom, meseemeth that before you are come to years
of discretion it were well that you should visit them, and become
better able to judge for yourself how to deal in this matter when
you shall have attained full age, and may be able to dispose of
them by sale, thus freeing yourself from allegiance to a foreign
prince.  And at the same time you can take measures, in concert
with this young lady, for loosing the wedlock so unhappily
contracted.'

'O sir, sir!' cried Lady Thistlewood, 'send him not to France to be
burnt by the Papists!'

'Peace, daughter,' returned her mother.  'Know you not that there
is friendship between the court party and the Huguenots, and that
the peace is to be sealed by the marriage of the King's sister with
the King of Navarre?  This is the most suitable time at which he
could go.'

'Then, madam,' proceeded the lady, 'he will be running about to all
the preachings on every bleak moor and wet morass he can find,
catching his death with rheums, like his poor father.'

There was a general smile, and Sir Marmaduke laughed outright.

'Nay, dame,' he said, 'have you marked such a greed of sermons in
our Berry that you should fear his so untowardly running after
them?'

'Tilly-vally, Sir Duke,' quoth Dame Annora, with a flirt of her
fan, learnt at the French court.  'Men will run after a preacher in
a marshy bog out of pure forwardness, when they will nod at a godly
homily on a well-stuffed bench between four walls.'

'I shall commit that matter to Mr. Adderley, who is good enough to
accompany him,' said Lord Walwyn, 'and by whose counsel I trust
that he will steer the middle course between the pope and Calvin.'

Mr. Adderley bowed in answer, saying he hoped that he should be
enable to keep his pupil's mind clear between the allurements of
Popery and the errors of the Reformed; but meanwhile Lady
Thistlewood's mind had taken a leap, and she exclaimed,--

'And, son, whatever you do, bring home the chaplet of pearls! I
know they have set their minds upon it.  They wanted me to deck
Eustacie with it on that unlucky bridal-day, but I would not hear
of trusting her with it, and now will it rarely become our Lucy on
your real wedding-day.'

'You travel swiftly, daughter,' said Lord Walwyn.  'Nor have we yet
heard the thoughts of one who ever thinks wisely.  Sister,' he
added, turning to Cecily St. John, 'hold not you with us in this
matter?'

'I scarce comprehend it, my Lord,' was the gentle reply.  'I knew
not that it was possible to dissolve the tie of wedlock.'

'The Pope's decree will suffice,' said Lord Walwyn.

'Yet, sir,' still said the ex-nun, 'methought you had shown me that
the Holly Father exceeded his power in the annulling of vows.'

'Using mine own lessons against me, sweet sister?' said Lord
Walwyn, smiling;  'yet, remember, the contract was rashly made
between two ignorant babes; and, bred up as they have severally
been, it were surely best for them to be set free from vows made
without their true will or knowledge.'

'And yet,' said Cecily, perplexed, 'when I saw my niece here wedded
to Sir Marmaduke, was it not with the words, 'What God hath joined
let no man put asunder'?'

'Good lack! aunt,' cried Lady Thistlewood, 'you would not have that
poor lad wedded to a pert, saucy, ill-tempered little moppet, bred
up that den of iniquity, Queen Catherine's court, where my poor
Baron never trusted me after he fell in with the religion, and had
heard of King Antony's calling me the Swan of England.'

At that moment there was a loud shriek, half-laugh, half-fright,
coming through the window, and Lady Thistlewood, starting up,
exclaimed, 'The child will be drowned!  Box their ears, Berenger,
and bring them in directly.'

Berenger, at her bidding, hurried out of the room into the hall,
and thence down a flight of steps leading into a square walled
garden, with a couple of stone male and female marine divinities
accommodating their fishy extremities as best they might on the
corners of the wall.  The square contained a bowling-green of
exquisitely-kept turf, that looked as if cut out of green velvet,
and was edged on its four sides by a raised broad-paved walk, with
a trimming of flower-beds, where the earliest blossoms were showing
themselves.  In the centre of each side another paved path
intersected the green lawn, and the meeting of these two diameters
was at a circular stone basin, presided over by another merman,
blowing a conch on the top of a pile of rocks.  On the gravelled
margin stood two distressed little damsels of seven and six years
old, remonstrating with all their might against the proceedings of
a roguish-looking boy of fourteen of fifteen, who had perched their
junior--a fat, fair, kitten-like element of mischief, aged about
five--_en croupe_ on the merman, and was about, according to her
delighted request, to make her a bower of water, by extracting the
plug and setting the fountain to play; but as the fountain had been
still all the winter, the plug was hard of extraction, especially
to a young gentleman who stood insecurely, with his feet wide apart
upon pointed and slippery point of rock-work; and Berenger had time
to hurry up, exclaiming, 'Giddy pate! Dolly would Berenger drenched
to the skin.'

'And she has on her best blue, made out of mother's French
farthingale,' cried the discreet Annora.

'Do you know, Dolly, I've orders to box your ears, and send you
in?' added Berenger, as he lifted his half-sister from her perilous
position, speaking, as he did so, without a shade of foreign
accent, though with much more rapid utterance than was usual in
England.  She clung to him without much alarm, and retaliated by an
endeavour to box his ears, while Philip, slowly making his way back
to the mainland, exclaimed, 'Ah there's no chance now!  Here comes
demure Mistress Lucy, and she is the worst mar-sport of all.'

A gentle girl of seventeen was drawing near, her fair delicately-
tinted complexion suiting well with her pale golden hair.  It was a
sweet face, and was well set off by the sky-blue of the
farthingale, which, with her white lace coif and white ruff, gave
her something the air of a speedwell flower, more especially as her
expression seemed to have caught much of Cecily's air of self-
restrained contentment.  She held a basketful of the orange pistils
of crocuses, and at once seeing that some riot had taken place, she
said to the eldest little girl, 'Ah, Nan, you had been safer
gathering saffron with me.'

'Nay, brother Berry came and made all well,' said Annora; 'and he
had been shut up so long in the library that he must have been very
glad to get out.'

'And what came of it?' cried Philip.  'Are you to go and get
yourself unmarried?'

'Unmarried!' burst out the sisters Annora and Elizabeth.

'What, laughed Philip, 'you knew not that this is an ancient
husband, married years before your father and mother?'

'But, why?  said Elizabeth, rather inclined to cry.  'What has poor
Lucy done that you should get yourself unmarried from her?'

There was a laugh from both brothers; but Berenger, seeing Lucy's
blushes, restrained himself, and said. 'Mine was not such good
luck, Bess, but they gave me a little French wife, younger than
Dolly, and saucier still; and as she seems to wish to be quit of
me, why, I shall be rid of her.'

'See there, Dolly,' said Philip, in a warning voice, 'that is the
way you'll be served if you do not mend your ways.'

'But I thought,' said Annora gravely, 'that people were married
once for all, and it could not be undone.'

'So said Aunt Cecily, but my Lord was proving to her out of all law
that a contract between such a couple of babes went for nought,'
said Berenger.

'And shall you, indeed, see Paris, and all the braveries there?'
asked Philip.  'I thought my Lord would never have trusted you out
of his sight.'

'And now it is to be only with Mr. Adderley,' said Berenger; 'but
there will be rare doings to be seen at this royal wedding, and
maybe I shall break a lance there in your honour, Lucy.'

'And you'll bring me a French fan?' cried Bess.

'And me a pouncet-box?' added Annora.

'And me a French puppet dressed Paris fashion?' said Dolly.

'And what shall he bring Lucy?' added Bess.

'I know,' said Annora; 'the pearls that mother is always talking
about!  I heard her say that Lucy should wear them on her wedding-
day.'

'Hush!' interposed Lucy, 'don't you see my father yonder on the
step, beckoning to you?'

The children flew towards Sir Marmaduke, leaving Berenger and Lucy
together.

'Not a word to wish me good speed, Lucy, now I have my wish?' said
Berenger.

'Oh, yes,' said Lucy, 'I am glad you should see all those brave
French gentlemen of whom you used to tell me.'

'Yes, they will be all at court, and the good Admiral is said to be
in high favour.  He will surely remember my father.'

'And shall you see the lady?' asked Lucy, under her breath.

'Eustacie?  Probably; but that will make no change.  I have heard
too much of _l'escadron de la Reine-mere_ to endure the thought of
a wife from thence, were she the Queen of Beauty herself.  And my
mother says that Eustacie would lose all her beauty as she grew up-
-like black-eyed Sue on the down; nor did I ever think her brown
skin and fierce black eyes to compare with you, Lucy.  I could be
well content never to see her more; but,' and here he lowered his
voice to a tone of confidence, 'my father, when near his death,
called me, and told me that he feared my marriage would be a cause
of trouble and temptation to me, and that I must deal with it after
my conscience when I was able to judge in the matter.  Something,
too, he said of the treaty of marriage being a burthen on his soul,
but I know not what he meant.  If ever I saw Eustacie again, I was
to give her his own copy of Clement Marot's Psalter, and to tell
her that he had ever loved and prayed for her as a daughter; and
moreover, my father added,' said Berenger, much moved at the
remembrance it brought across him, 'that if this matter proved a
burthen and perplexity to me, I was to pardon him as one who
repented of it as a thing done ere he had learnt to weigh the whole
world against a soul.'

'Yes, you must see her,' said Lucy.

'Well, what more were you going to say, Lucy?'

'I was only thinking,' said Lucy, as she raised her eyes to him,
'how sorry she will be that she let them write that letter.'

Berenger laughed, pleased with the simplicity of Lucy's admiration,
but with modesty and common sense enough to answer, 'No fear of
that, Lucy, for an heiress, with all the court gallants of France
at her feet.'

'Ah, but you!'

'I am all very well here, when you have never seen anybody but
lubberly Dorset squires that never went to London, nor Oxford, nor
beyond their own furrows,' said Berenger; 'but depend upon it, she
has been bred up to care for all the airs and graces that are all
the fashion at Paris now, and will be as glad to be rid of an
honest man and a Protestant as I shall to be quit of a court puppet
and a Papist.  Shall you have finished my point-cuffs next week,
Lucy?  Depend upon it, no gentleman of them all will wear such
dainty lace of such a fancy as those will be.'

And Lucy smiled, well pleased.

Coming from the companionship of Eustacie to that of gentle Lucy
had been to Berenger a change from perpetual warfareto perfect
supremacy, and his preference to his little sister, as he had been
taught to call her from the first, had been loudly expressed.
Brother and sister they had ever since considered themselves, and
only within the last few months had possibilities been discussed
among the elders of the family, which oozing out in some mysterious
manner, had become felt rather than known among the young people,
yet without altering the habitual terms that existed between them.
Both were so young that love was the merest, vaguest dream to them;
and Lucy, in her quiet faith that Berenger was the most beautiful,
excellent, and accomplished cavalier the earth could afford, was
little troubled about her own future share in him.  She seemed to
be promoted to belong to him just as she had grown up to curl her
hair and wear ruffs and farthingales.  And to Berenger Lucy was a
very pleasant feature in that English home, where he had been far
happier than in the uncertainties of Chateau Leurre, between his
naughty playfellow, his capricious mother, and morose father.  If
in England his lot was to be cast, Lucy was acquiesced in willingly
as a portion of that lot.


CHAPTER IV.  TITHONUS


A youth came riding towards a palace gate,
And from the palace came a child of sin
And took him by the curls and led him in!
Where sat a company with heated eyes.
                Tennyson, A VISION OF SIN


It was in the month of June that Berenger de Ribaumont first came
in sight of Paris.  His grandfather had himself begun by taking him
to London and presenting him to Queen Elizabeth, from whom the
lad's good mien procured him a most favourable reception.  She
willingly promised that on which Lord Walwyn's heart was set,
namely, that his title and rank should be continued to his
grandson; and an ample store of letter of recommendation to Sir
Francis Walsingham, the Ambassador, and all others who could be of
service in the French court, were to do their utmost to provide him
with a favourable reception there.

Then, with Mr. Adderley and four or five servants, he had crossed
the Channel, and had gone first to Chateau Leurre, where he was
rapturously welcomed by the old steward Osbert.  The old man had
trained up his son Landry, Berenger's foster-brother, to become his
valet, and had him taught all the arts of hair-dressing and surgery
that were part of the profession of a gentleman's body-servant; and
the youth, a smart, acuter young Norman, became a valuable addition
to the suite, the guidance of which, through a foreign country,
their young master did not find very easy.  Mr. Adderley thought he
knew French very well, through books, but the language he spoke was
not available, and he soon fell into a state of bewilderment rather
hard on his pupil, who, though a very good boy, and crammed very
full of learning, was still nothing more than a lad of eighteen in
all matters of prudence and discretion.

Lord Walwyn was, as we have seen, one of those whose Church
principles had altered very little and very gradually; and in the
utter diversity of practice that prevailed in the early years of
Queen Elizabeth, his chaplain as well as the rector of the parish
had altered no more than was absolutely enjoined of the old
ceremonial.  If the poor Baron de Ribaumont had ever been well
enough to go to church on a Sunday, he would perhaps have thought
himself still in the realms of what he considered as darkness; but
as he had never openly broken with the Gallic Church, Berenger had
gone at once from mass at Leurre to the Combe Walwyn service.
Therefore when he spent a Sunday at Rouen, and attended a Calvinist
service in the building that the Huguenots were permitted outside
the town, he was much disappointed in it; he thought its very
fervour familiar and irreverent, and felt himself much more at home
in the cathedral into which he strayed in the afternoon.  And, on
the Sunday he was at Leurre, he went, as a part of his old home-
habits, to mass at the old round-arched church, where he and
Eustacie had played each other so many teasing tricks at his
mother's feet, and had received so many admonitory nips and strokes
of her fan.  All he saw there was not congenial to him, but he
liked it vastly better than the Huguenot meeting, and was not
prepared to understand or enter into Mr. Adderley's vexation, when
the tutor assured him that the reverent gestures that came
naturally to him were regarded by the Protestants as idolatry, and
that he would be viewed as a recreants from his faith. All Mr.
Adderley hoped was that no one would hear of it: and in this he
felt himself disappointed, when, in the midst of his lecture, there
walked into the room a little, withered, brown, dark-eyed man, in a
gorgeous dress of green and gold, who doffing a hat with an
umbrageous plume, precipitated himself, as far as he could reach,
towards Berenger's neck, calling him fair cousin and dear baron.
The lad stood taken by surprise for a moment, thinking that
Tithonus must have looked just like this, and skipped like this,
just as he became a grasshopper; then he recollected that this must
be the Chevalier de Ribaumont, and tried to make up for his want of
cordiality.  The old man had, it appeared, come out of Picardy,
where he lived on _soupe maigre_ in a corner of the ancestral
castle, while his son and daughter were at court, the one in
Monsieur's suite, the other in that of the Queen-mother.  He had
come purely to meet his dear young cousin, and render him all the
assistance is his power, conduct him to Paris, and give him
introductions.

Berenger, who had begun to find six Englishmen a troublesome charge
in France, was rather relieved at not being the only French scholar
of the party, and the Chevalier also hinted to him that he spoke
with a dreadful Norman accent that would never be tolerated at
court, even if it were understood by the way.  Moreover, the
Chevalier studied him all over, and talked of Paris tailors and
posture-masters, and, though the pink of politeness, made it
evident that there was immensely too much of him.  'It might be the
custom in England to be so tall; here no one was of anything like
such a height, but the Duke of Guise.  He, in his position, with
his air, could carry it off, but we must adapt ourselves as best we
can.'

And his shrug and look of concern made Berenger for a moment almost
ashamed of that superfluous height of which they were all so proud
at home.  Then he recollected himself, and asked, 'And why should
not I be tall as well as M. de Guise?'

'We shall see, fair cousin,' he answered, with an odd satirical
bow; 'we are as Heaven made us.  All lies in the management and if
you had the advantages of training, PERHAPS you could even turn
your height into a grace.'

'Am I such a great lubber?' wondered Berenger; 'they did not think
so at home.  No; nor did the Queen.  She said I was a proper
stripling!  Well, it matters the less, as I shall not stay long to
need their favour; and I'll show them there is some use in my
inches in the tilt-yard.  But if they think me such a lout, what
would they say to honest Philip?'

The Chevalier seemed willing to take on him the whole management of
his 'fair cousin.'  He inquired into the amount of the rents and
dues which old Osbert had collected and held ready to meet the
young Baron's exigencies; and which would, it seemed, be all needed
to make his dress any way presentable at court.  The pearls, too,
were inquired for, and handed over by Osbert to his young Lord's
keeping, with the significant intimation that they had been
demanded when the young Madame la Baronne went to court; but that
he had buried them in the orchard, and made answer that they were
not in the chateau.  The contract of marriage, which Berenger could
just remember signing, and seeing signed by his father, the King,
and the Count, was not forthcoming; and the Chevalier explained
that it was in the hands of a notary at Paris.  For this Berenger
was not sorry.  His grandfather had desired him to master the
contents, and he thought he had thus escaped a very dry and useless
study.

He did not exactly dislike the old Chevalier de Ribaumont.  The
system on which he had been brought up had not been indulgent, so
that compliments and admiration were an agreeable surprise to him;
and rebuffs and rebukes from his elders had been so common, that
hints, in the delicate dressing of the old knight, came on him
almost like gracious civilities.  There was no love lost between
the Chevalier and the chaplain, that was plain; but how could there
be between an ancient French courtier and a sober English divine?
However, to Mr. Adderley's great relief, no attempts were made on
Berenger's faith, his kinsman even was disposed to promote his
attendance at such Calvinist places of worship as they passed on
the road, and treated him in all things as a mere guest, to be
patronized indeed, but as much an alien as if he had been born in
England.  And yet there was a certain deference to him as head of
the family, and a friendliness of manner that made the boy feel him
a real relation, and all through the journey it came naturally that
he should be the entire manager, and Berenger the paymaster on a
liberal scale.

Thus had the travellers reached the neighbourhood of Paris, when a
jingling of chains and a trampling of horses announced the advance
of riders, and several gentlemen with a troop of servants came in
sight.

All were gaily dressed, with feathered hats, and short Spanish
cloaks jauntily disposed over one shoulder; and their horses were
trapped with bright silvered ornaments.  As they advanced, the
Chevalier exclaimed: 'Ah! It is my son!  I knew he would come to
meet me.'  And, simultaneously, father and son leapt from their
horses, and rushed into each other's arms.  Berenger felt it only
courteous to dismount and exchange embraces with his cousin, but
with a certain sense of repulsion at the cloud of perfume that
seemed to surround the younger Chevalier de Ribaumont; the ear-
rings in his ears; the general air of delicate research about his
riding-dress, and the elaborate attention paid to a small, dark,
sallow face and figure, in which the only tolerable feature was an
intensely black and piercing pair of eyes.

'Cousin, I am enchanted to welcome you.'

'Cousin, I thank you.'

'Allow me to present you.'  And Berenger bowed low in succession
several times in reply to salutations, as his cousin Narcisse named
M. d'O, M. de la Valette, M. de Pibrac, M. l'Abbe de Mericour, who
had done him the honour to accompany him in coming out to meet his
father and M. le Baron.  Then the two cousins remounted, something
was said to the Chevalier of the devoirs of the demoiselles, and
they rode on together bandying news and repartee so fast, that
Berenger felt that his ears had become too much accustomed to the
more deliberate English speech to enter at once into what caused so
much excitement, gesture, and wit.  The royal marriage seemed
doubtful--the Pope refused his sanction; nay, but means would be
found--the King would not be impeded by the Pope; Spanish
influence--nay, the King had thrown himself at the head of the
Reformed--he was bewitched with the grim old Coligny--if order were
not soon taken, the Louvre itself would become a temple.

Then one of the party turned suddenly and said, 'But I forget,
Monsieur is a Huguenot?'

'I am a Protestant of the English Church,' said Berenger, rather
stiffly, in the formula of his day.

'Well, you have come at the right moment, 'Tis all for the sermon
now.  If the little Abbe there wished to sail with a fair wind, he
should throw away his breviary and study his Calvin.'

Berenger's attention was thus attracted to the Abbe de Mericour, a
young man of about twenty, whose dress was darker than that of the
rest, and his hat of a clerical cut, though in other respects he
was equipped with the same point-device elegance.

'Calvin would never give him the rich abbey of Selicy,' said
another; 'the breviary is the safer speculation.'

'Ah! M. de Ribaumont can tell you that abbeys are no such
securities in these days.  Let yonder Admiral get the upper hand,
and we shall see Mericour, the happy cadet of eight brothers and
sisters, turned adrift from their convents.  What a fatherly
spectacle M. le Marquis will present!'

Here the Chevalier beckoned to Berenger, who, riding forward,
learnt that Narcisse had engaged lodgings for him and his suite at
one of the great inns, and Berenger returned his thanks, and a
proposal to the Chevalier to become his guest.  They were by this
time entering the city, where the extreme narrowness and dirt of
the streets contrasted with the grandeur of the palatial courts
that could be partly seen through their archways.  At the hostel
they rode under such an arch, and found themselves in a paved yard
that would have been grand had it been clean.  Privacy had scarcely
been invented, and the party were not at all surprised to find that
the apartment prepared for them was to serve both day and night for
Berenger, the Chevalier, and Mr. Adderley, besides having a
truckle-bed on the floor for Osbert.  Meals were taken in public,
and it was now one o'clock--just dinner-time; so after a hasty
toilette the three gentlemen descended, the rest of the party
having ridden off to their quarters, either as attendants of
Monsieur or to their families.  It was a sumptuous meal, at which a
great number of gentlemen were present, coming in from rooms hired
over shops, &c--all, as it seemed, assembled at Paris for the
marriage festivities; but Berenger began to gather that they were
for the most part adherents of the Guise party, and far from
friendly to the Huguenot interest.  Some of them appeared hardly to
tolerate Mr. Adderley's presence at the table; and Berenger, though
his kinsman's patronage secured civil treatment, felt much out of
his element, confused, unable to take part in the conversation, and
sure that he was where those at home did not wish to see him.

No sooner was the dinner over than he rose and expressed his
intention of delivering his letters of introduction in person to
the English ambassador and to the Admiral de Coligny, whom, as his
father's old friend and the hero of his boyhood, he was most
anxious to see.  The Chevalier demurred to this.  Were it not
better to take measures at once for making himself presentable, and
Narcisse had already supplied him with directions to the
fashionable hair-cutter, &c.  It would be taken amiss if he went to
the Admiral before going to present himself to the King.

'And I cannot see my cousins till I go to court?' asked Berenger.

'Most emphatically No.  Have I not told you that the one is in the
suite of the young Queen, the other in that of the Queen-mother?  I
will myself present you, if only you will give me the honour of
your guidance.'

'With all thanks, Monsieur,' said Berenger; 'my grandfather's
desire was that I should lose no time in going to his friend Sir
Francis Walsingham, and I had best submit myself to his judgment as
to my appearance at court.'

On this point Berenger was resolute, though the Chevalier recurred
to the danger of any proceeding that might be unacceptable at
court.  Berenger, harassed and impatient, repeated that he did not
care about the court, and wished merely to fulfil his purpose and
return, at which his kinsman shook his head and shrugged his
shoulders, and muttered to himself, 'Ah, what does he know!  He
will regret it when too late; but I have done my best.'

Berenger paid little attention to this, but calling Landry Osbert,
and a couple of his men, he bade them take their swords and
bucklers, and escort him in his walk through Paris.  He set off
with a sense of escape, but before he had made many steps, he was
obliged to turn and warn Humfrey and Jack that they were not to
walk swaggering along the streets, with hand on sword, as if every
Frenchman they saw was the natural foe of their master.

Very tall were the houses, very close and extremely filthy the
streets, very miserable the beggars; and yet here and there was to
be seen the open front of a most brilliant shop, and the
thoroughfares were crowded with richly-dressed gallants.  Even the
wider streets gave little space for the career of the gay horsemen
who rode along them, still less for the great, cumbrous, though
gaily-decked coaches, in which ladies appeared glittering with
jewels and fan in hand, with tiny white dogs on their knees.

The persons of whom Berenger inquired the way all uncapped most
respectfully, and replied with much courtesy; but when the hotel of
the English ambassador had been pointed out to him, he hardly
believed it, so foul and squalid was the street, where a large
nail-studded door occupied a wide archway.  Here was a heavy iron
knocker, to which Osbert applied himself.  A little door was at
once opened by a large, powerful John Bull of a porter, whose looks
expanded into friendly welcome when he heard the English tongue of
the visitor.  Inside, the scene was very unlike that without.  The
hotel was built round a paved court, adorned with statues and stone
vases, with yews and cypresses in them, and a grand flight of steps
led up to the grand centre of the house, around which were
collected a number of attendants, wearing the Walsingham colours.
Among these Berenger left his two Englishmen, well content to have
fallen into an English colony.  Landry followed him to announce the
visitor, Berenger waiting to know whether the Ambassador would be
at liberty to see him.

Almost immediately the door was re-opened, and a keen-looking
gentleman, about six-and-thirty years of age, rather short in
stature, but nevertheless very dignified-looking, came forward with
out-stretched hands--'Greet you well, my Lord de Ribaumont.  We
expected your coming.  Welcome, mine honoured friend's grandson.'

And as Berenger bent low in reverent greeting, Sir Francis took his
hand and kissed his brow, saying, 'Come in, my young friend; we are
but sitting over our wine and comfits after dinner.  Have you
dined?'

Berenger explained that he had dined at the inn, where he had taken
lodgings.

'Nay, but that must not be.  My Lord Walwyn's grandson here, and
not my guest!  You do me wrong, sir, in not having ridden hither at
once.'

'Truly, my Lord, I ventured not.  They sent me forth with quite a
company--my tutor and six grooms.'

'Our chaplain will gladly welcome his reverend brother,' said Sir
Francis; and as to the grooms, one of my fellows shall go and bring
them and their horses up.  What!' rather gravely, as Berenger still
hesitated.  'I have letters for you here, which methinks will make
your grandfather's wish clear to you.'

Berenger saw the Ambassador was displeased with his reluctance, and
answered quickly, 'In sooth, my Lord, I would esteem myself only
too happy to be thus honoured, but in sooth----' he repeated
himself, and faltered.

'In sooth, you expected more freedom than in my grave house,' said
Walsingham, displeased.

'Not so, my Lord: it would be all that I could desire; but I have
done hastily.  A kinsman of mine has come up to Paris with me, and
I have made him my guest.  I know not how to break with him--the
Chevalier de Ribaumont.'

'What, the young ruffler in Monsieur's suite?'

'No, my Lord; his father.  He comes on my business.  He is an old
man, and can ill bear the cost, and I could scarce throw him over.'

Berenger spoke with such earnest, bright, open simplicity, and look
so boyish and confiding, that Sir Francis's heart was won, and he
smiled as he said, 'Right, lad, you are a considerate youth.  It
were not well to cast off your kinsman; but when you have read your
letters, you may well plead your grandfather's desires, to say
nothing of a hint from her Grace to have an eye to you.  And for
the rest, you can acquit yourself gracefully to the gentleman, by
asking him to occupy the lodging that you had taken.'

Berenger's face brightened up in a manner that spoke for his
sincerity; and Sir Francis added, 'And where be these lodgings?'

'At the Croix de Lorraine.'

'Ha! Your kinsman has taken you into a nest of Guisards.  But come,
let me present you to my wife and my other guests, then will I give
you your letters, and you shall return and make your excuses to
Monsieur le Chevalier.'

Berenger seemed to himself to be on familiar ground again as his
host thus assumed the direction of him and ushered him into a large
dining-hall, where the table had been forsaken in favour of a
lesser table placed in the ample window, round which sat assembled
some six or eight persons, with fruit, wine, and conserves before
them, a few little dogs at their feet or on their laps, and a lute
lying on the knee of one of the young gentlemen.  Sir Francis
presented the young Lord de Ribaumont, their expected guest, to
Lady Walsingham, from whom he received a cordial welcome, and her
two little daughter, Frances and Elizabeth, and likewise to the
gentleman with the lute, a youth about a year older than Berenger,
and of very striking and prepossessing countenance, who was named
as Mr. Sidney, the son of the Lord Deputy of Ireland.  A couple of
gentlemen who would in these times have been termed _attaches_, a
couple of lady attendants upon Lady Walsingham, and the chaplain
made up the party, which on this day chanced only to include,
besides the household, the young traveller, Sidney.  Berenger was
at once seated, and accepted a welcoming-cup of wine (i.e. a long
slender glass with a beautifully twisted stem), responded to
friendly inquiries about his relatives at home, and acknowledged
the healths that were drunk in honour of their names; after which
Lady Walsingham begged that Mr. Sidney would sing the madrigal he
had before promised: afterwards a glee was sung by Sidney, one of
the gentlemen, and Lady Walsingham; and it was discovered that Mr.
de Ribaumont had a trained ear, and the very voice that was wanting
to the Italian song they were practising.  And so sped a happy
hour, till a booted and spurred messenger came in with letters for
his Excellency, who being thus roused from his dreamy enjoyment of
the music, carried young Ribaumont off with him to his cabinet, and
there made over to him a packet, with good news from home, and
orders that made it clear that he could do no other than accept the
hospitality of the Embassy.  Thus armed with authority, he returned
to the Croix de Lorraine, where Mr. Adderley could not contain his
joy at the change to quarters not only so much more congenial, buts
so much safer; and the Chevalier, after some polite demur,
consented to remain in possession of the rooms, being in fact well
satisfied with the arrangement.

'Let him steep himself up to the lips among the English,' said
Tithonus to his son.  'Thus will he peaceably relinquish to you all
that should have been yours from the first, and at court will only
be looked on as an overgrown English page.'

The change to the Ambassador's made Berenger happy at once.  He was
not French enough in breeding, or even constitution, to feel the
society of the Croix de Lorraine congenial; and, kind as the
Chevalier showed himself, it was with a wonderful sense of relief
that Berenger shook himself free from both his fawning and his
patronizing.  There was a constant sense of not understanding the
old gentleman's aims, whereas in Walsingham's house all was as
clear, easy, and open as at home.

And though Berenger had been educated in the country, it had been
in the same tone as that of his new friends.  He was greatly
approved by Sir Francis as a stripling of parts and modesty.  Mr.
Sidney made him a companion, and the young matron, Lady Walsingham,
treated him as neither lout nor lubber.  Yet he could not be at
ease in his state between curiosity and repulsion towards the wife
who was to be discarded by mutual consent.  The sight of the scenes
of his early childhood had stirred up warmer recollections of the
pretty little playful torment, who through the vista of years
assumed the air of a tricksy elf rather than the little vixen he
used to think her.  His curiosity had been further stimulated by
the sight of his rival, Narcisse, whose effeminate ornaments, small
stature, and seat on horseback filled Sir Marmaduke's pupil with
inquisitive disdain as to the woman who could prefer anything so
unmanly.

Sidney was to be presented at the after-dinner reception at the
Louvre the next day, and Sir Francis proposed to take young
Ribaumont with him.  Berenger coloured, and spoke of his equipment,
and Sidney good-naturedly offered to come and inspect.  That young
gentleman was one of the daintiest in apparel of his day; but he
was amazed that the suit in which Berenger had paid his devoir to
Queen Elizabeth should have been set aside--it was of pearl-grey
velvet, slashed with rose-coloured satin, and in shape and fashion
point-device--unless, as the Ambassador said good-humouredly, 'my
young Lord Ribaumont wished to be one of Monsieur's clique.'  Thus
arrayed, then, and with the chaplet of pearls bound round the small
cap, with a heron-plume that sat jauntily on one side of his fair
curled head, Berenger took his seat beside the hazel-eyed, brown-
haired Sidney, in his white satin and crimson, and with the
Ambassador and his attendants were rolled off in the great state-
coach drawn by eight horses, which had no sinecure in dragging the
ponderous machine through the unsavoury _debris_ of the streets.

Royalty fed in public.  The sumptuous banqueting-room contained a
barrier, partitioning off a space where Charles IX. sat alone at
his table, as a State spectacle.  He was a sallow, unhealthy-
looking youth, with large prominent dark eyes and a melancholy
dreaminess of expression, as if the whole ceremony, not to say the
world itself, were distasteful.  Now and then, as though
endeavouring to cast off the mood, he would call to some gentleman
and exchange a rough jest, generally fortified with a tremendous
oath, that startled Berenger's innocent ears.  He scarcely tasted
what was put on his plate, but drank largely of sherbet, and seemed
to be trying to linger through the space allotted for the ceremony.

Silence was observed, but not so absolute that Walsingham could not
point out to his young companions the notabilities present.  The
lofty figure of Henri, Duke of Guise, towered high above all around
him, and his grand features, proud lip, and stern eye claimed such
natural superiority that Berenger for a moment felt a glow on his
cheek as he remembered his challenge of his right to rival that
splendid stature.  And yet Guise was very little older than
himself; but he walked, a prince of men, among a crowd of
gentlemen, attendants on him rather than on the King.  The elegant
but indolent-looking Duke de Montmorency had a much more attractive
air, and seemed to hold a kind of neutral ground between Guise on
the one hand, and the Reformed, who mustered at the other end of
the apartment.  Almost by intuition, Berenger knew the fine calm
features of the gray-haired Admiral de Coligny before he heard him
so addressed by the King's loud, rough voice.  When the King rose
from table the presentations took place, but as Charles heard the
name of the Baron de Ribaumont, he exclaimed, 'What, Monsieur, are
you presented here by our good sister's representative?'

Walsingham answered for him, alluding to the negotiations for Queen
Elizabeth's marriage with one of the French princes--'Sire, in the
present happy conjuncture, it needs not be a less loyal Frenchman
to have an inheritance in the lands of my royal mistress.'

'What say you, Monsieur?' sharply demanded the King: 'are you come
here to renounce your country, religion--and love, as I have been
told?'

'I hope, Sire, never to be unfaithful where I owe faith,' said
Berenger, heated, startled, and driven to extremity.

'Not ill answered for the English giant,' said Charles aside to an
attendant: then turning eagerly to Sidney, whose transcendent
accomplishments had already become renowned, Charles welcomed him
to court, and began to discuss Ronsard's last sonnet, showing no
small taste and knowledge of poetry.  Greatly attracted by Sidney,
the King detained the whole English party by an invitation to
Walsingham to hear music in the Queen-mother's apartments; and
Berenger, following in the wake of his friends, found himself in a
spacious hall, with a raised gallery at one end for the musicians,
the walls decorated with the glorious paintings collected by
Francois I., Greek and Roman statues clustered at the angles, and
cabinets with gems and antiques disposed at intervals.  Not that
Berenger beheld much of this: he was absolutely dazzled with the
brilliant assembly into which he was admitted.  There moved the
most beautiful women in France, in every lovely-coloured tint that
dress could assume: their bosoms, arms, and hair sparkling with
jewels; their gossamer ruffs surrounding their necks like fairy
wings; their light laugh mingling with the music, as they sat,
stood, or walked in graceful attitudes conversing with one another
or with the cavaliers, whose brilliant velvet and jewels fifty
mixed with their bright array.  These were the sirens he had heard
of, the 'squadron of the Queen-mother,' the dangerous beings
against whom he was to steel himself.  And which of them was the
child he had played with, to whom his vows had been plighted?  It
was like some of the enchanting dreams of romance merely to look at
these fair creatures; and he stood as if gazing into a magic-glass
till Sir Francis Walsingham, looking round for him, said, 'Come,
then, my young friend, you must do your devoirs to the Queens.
Sidney, I see, is as usual in his element; the King has seized upon
him.'

Catherine de Medicis was seated on a large velvet chair, conversing
with the German ambassador.  Never beautiful, she appeared to more
advantage in her mature years than in her girlhood, and there was
all the dignity of a lifetime of rule in demeanour and gestures,
the bearing of her head, and motion of her exquisite hands.  Her
eyes were like her son's, prominent, and gave the sense of seeing
all round at once, and her smile was to the highest degree
engaging.  She received the young Baron de Ribaumont far more
graciously than Charles has done, held out her hand to be kissed,
and observed 'that the young gentleman was like Madame _sa mere_
whom she well remembered as much admired.  Was it true that she was
married in England?'

Berenger bowed assent.

'Ah! You English make good spouses,' she said, with a smile.  'Ever
satisfied with home!  But, your Excellency,' added she, turning to
Walsingham, 'what stones would best please my good sister for the
setting of the jewel my son would send her with his portrait?  He
is all for emeralds, for the hue of hope; but I call it the colour
of jealousy.'

Walsingham made a sign that Berenger had better retreat from
hearing the solemn coquetting carried on by the maiden Queen
through her gravest ambassadors.  He fell back, and remained
watching the brilliant throng, trying in vain to discover the
bright merry eyes and velvet cheek he remembered of old.  Presently
a kind salutation interrupted him, and a gentleman who perceived
him to be a stranger began to try to set him at ease, pointed out
to him the handsome, foppishly-dressed Duke of Anjou, and his ugly,
spiteful little brother of Alengon, then designated as Queen
Elizabeth's future husband, who was saying something to a lady that
made her colour and bite her lips.  'Is that the younger Queen?'
asked Berenger, as his eye fell on a sallow, dark-complexioned,
sad-looking little creature in deep mourning, and with three or
four such stately-looking, black-robed, Spanish-looking duennas
round her as to prove her to be a person of high consequence.

'That?  Oh no; that is Madame Catherine of Navarre, who has resided
here ever since her mother's death, awaiting her brother, our royal
bridegroom.  See, here is the bride, Madame Marguerite, conversing
with M. de Guise.'

Berenger paid but little heed to Marguerite's showy but already
rather coarse beauty, and still asked where was the young Queen
Elizabeth of Austria.  She was unwell, and not in presence.  'Ah!
then,' he said, 'her ladies will not be here.'

'That is not certain.  Are you wishing to see any one of them?'

'I would like to see----' He could not help colouring till his
cheeks rivaled the colour of his sword-knot.  'I want just to know
if she is here.  I know not if she be called Madame or Mademoiselle
de Ribaumont.'

'The fair Ribaumont!  Assuredly; see, she is looking at you.  Shall
I present you?'

A pair of exceedingly brilliant dark eyes were fixed on Berenger
with a sort of haughty curiosity and half-recognition.  The face
was handsome and brilliant, but he felt indignant at not perceiving
a particle of a blush at encountering him, indeed rather a look of
amusement at the deep glow which his fair complexion rendered so
apparent.  He would fain have escaped from so public an interview,
but her eye was upon him, and there was no avoiding the meeting.
As he moved nearer he saw what a beautiful person she was, her rich
primrose-coloured dress setting off her brunette complexion and her
stately presence.  She looked older than he had expected; but this
was a hotbed where every one grew up early, and the expression and
manner made him feel that an old intimacy was here renewed, and
that they were no strangers.

'We need no introduction, cousin,' she said, giving a hand to be
saluted.  'I knew you instantly.  It is the old face of Chateau
Leurre, only gone up so high and become so handsome.'

'Cousins,' thought he.  'Well, it makes things easier! but what
audacity to be so much at her ease, when Lucy would have sunk into
the earth with shame.'  His bow had saved him the necessity of
answering in words, and the lady continued:

'And Madame _votre mere_.  Is she well?  She was very good to me.'

Berenger did not think that kindness to Eustacie had been her chief
perfection, but he answered that she was well and sent her
commendations, which the young lady acknowledged by a magnificent
curtsey.  'And as beautiful as ever?' she asked.

'Quite as beautiful,' he said, 'only somewhat more _embonpoint_.'

'Ah!' she said, smiling graciously, and raising her splendid eyes
to his face, 'I understand better what that famous beauty was now,
and the fairness that caused her to be called the Swan.'

It was so personal that the colour rushed again into his cheek.  No
one had ever so presumed to admire him; and with a degree gratified
and surprised, and sensible more and more of the extreme beauty of
the lady, there was a sort of alarm about him as if this were the
very fascination he had been warned against, and as if she were
casting a net about him, which, wife as she was, it would be
impossible to him to break.

'Nay, Monsieur,' she laughed, 'is a word from one so near too much
for your modesty?  Is it possible that no one has yet told you of
your good mien?  Or do they not appreciate Greek noses and blue
eyes in the land of fat Englishmen?  How have you ever lived _en
province?_  Our  princes are ready to hang themselves at the
thought of being in such banishment, even at court--indeed,
Monsieur has contrived to transfer the noose to M. d'Alengon.  Have
you been at court, cousin?'

'I have been presented to the Queen.'

She then proceeded to ask questions about the chief personages with
a rapid intelligence that surprised him as well as alarmed him, for
he felt more and more in the power of a very clever as well as
beautiful woman, and the attraction she exercised made him long the
more to escape; but she smiled and signed away several cavaliers
who would have gained her attention.  She spoke of Queen Mary of
Scotland, then in the fifth years of her captivity, and asked if he
did not feel bound to her service by having been once her partner.
Did not he remember that dance?

'I have heard my mother speak of it far too often to forget it,'
said Berenger, glowing again for her who could speak of that
occasion without a blush.

'You wish to gloss over your first inconstancy, sir,' she said,
archly; but he was spared from further reply by Philip Sidney's
coming to tell him that the Ambassador was ready to return home.
He took leave with an alacrity that redoubled his courtesy so much
that he desired to be commended to his cousin Diane, whom he had
not seen.

'To Diane?' said the lady, inquiringly.

'To Mademoiselle Diane de Ribaumont,' he corrected himself, ashamed
of his English rusticity.  'I beg pardon if I spoke too familiarly
of her.'

'She should be flattered by M. le Baron's slightest recollection,'
said the lady, with an ironical tone that there was no time to
analyze, and with a mutual gesture of courtesy he followed Sidney
to where Sir Francis awaited them.

'Well, what think you of the French court?' asked Sidney, so soon
as the young men were in private.

'I only know that you may bless your good fortune that you stand in
no danger from a wife from thence.'

'Ha!' cried Sidney, laughing, 'you found your lawful owner.  Why
did you not present me?'

'I was ashamed of her bold visage.'

'What!--was she the beauteous demoiselle I found you gallanting,'
said Philip Sidney, a good deal entertained, 'who was gazing at you
with such visible admiration in her languishing black eyes?'

'The foul fiend seize their impudence!'

'Fie! for shame! thus to speak of your own wife,' said the
mischievous Sidney, 'and the fairest----'

'Go to, Sidney.  Were she fairer than Venus, with a kingdom to her
dower, I would none of a woman without a blush.'

'What, in converse with her wedded husband,' said Sidney.  'Were
not that over-shamefastness?'

'Nay, now, Sidney, in good sooth give me your opinion.  Should she
set her fancy on me, even in this hour, am I bound in honour to
hold by this accursed wedlock--lock, as it may well be called?'

'I know no remedy,' said Sidney, gravely, 'save the two enchanted
founts of love and hate.  They cannot be far away, since it was at
the siege of Paris that Rinaldo and Orlando drank thereof.'

Another question that Berenger would fain have asked Sidney, but
could not for very shame and dread of mockery, was, whether he
himself were so dangerously handsome as the lady had given him to
understand.  With a sense of shame, he caught up the little mirror
in his casket, and could not but allow to himself that the features
he there saw were symmetrical--the eyes azure, the complexion of a
delicate fairness, such as he had not seen equaled, except in those
splendid Lorraine princes; nor could he judge of the further effect
of his open-faced frank simplicity and sweetness of expression--
contemptible, perhaps, to the astute, but most winning to the
world-weary.  He shook his head at the fair reflection, smiled as
he saw the colour rising at his own sensation of being a fool, and
then threw it aside, vexed with himself for being unable not to
feel attracted by the first woman who had shown herself struck by
his personal graces, and yet aware that this was the very thing he
had been warned against, and determined to make all the resistance
in his power to a creature whose very beauty and enchantment gave
him a sense of discomfort.


CHAPTER V.  THE CONVENT BIRD


Young knight, whatever that dost armes professe,
And through long labours huntest after fame,
Beware of fraud, beware of ficklenesse,
In choice and change of thy beloved dame.
                     Spenser, FAERY QUEENE


Berenger' mind was relieved, even while his vanity was mortified,
when the Chevalier and his son came the next day to bring him the
formal letter requesting the Pope's annulment of his marriage.
After he had signed it, it was to be taken to Eustacie, and so soon
as he should attain his twenty-first year he was to dispose of
Chateau Leurre, as well as of his claim to the ancestral castle in
Picardy, to his cousin Narcisse, and thus become entirely free to
transfer his allegiance to the Queen of England.

It was a very good thing--that he well knew; and he had a strong
sense of virtue and obedience, as he formed with his pen the words
in all their fullness, Henri Beranger Eustache, Baron de Ribaumont
et Seigneur de Leurre.  He could not help wondering whether the lady
who looked at him so admiringly really preferred such a mean-looking
little fop as Narcisse, whether she were afraid of his English home
and breeding, or whether all this open coquetry were really the court
manners of ladies towards gentlemen, and he had been an absolute
simpleton to be flattered.  Any way, she would have been a most
undesirable wife, and he was well quit of her; but he did feel a
certain lurking desire that, since the bonds were cut and he was no
longer in danger from her, he might see her again, carry home a
mental inventory of the splendid beauties he had renounced, and
decide what was the motive that actuated her in rejecting his own
handsome self.  Meantime, he proceeded to enjoy the amusements and
advantage of his sojourn at Paris, of which by no means the least was
the society of Philip Sidney, and the charm his brilliant genius
imparted to every pursuit they shared.  Books at the University,
fencing and dancing from the best professors, Italian poetry,
French sonnets, Latin epigrams; nothing came amiss to Sidney, the
flower of English youth: and Berenger had taste, intelligence, and
cultivation enough to enter into all in which Sidney led the way.
The good tutor, after all his miseries on the journey, was delighted
to write to Lord Walwyn, that, far from being a risk and temptation,
this visit was a school in all that was virtuous and comely.

If the good man had any cause of dissatisfaction, it was with the
Calvinistic tendencies of the Ambassador's household.  Walsingham
was always on the Puritanical side of Elizabeth's court, and such
an atmosphere as that of Paris, where the Roman Catholic system was
at that time showing more corruption than it has ever done before
or since in any other place, naturally threw him into sympathy with
the Reformed.  The reaction that half a century later filled the
Gallican Church with saintliness had not set in; her ecclesiastics
were the tools of a wicked and bloodthirsty court, who hated virtue
as much as schism in the men whom they persecuted.  The Huguenots
were for the most part men whose instincts for truth and virtue had
recoiled from the popular system, and thus it was indeed as if
piety and morality were arrayed on one side, and superstition and
debauchery on the other.  Mr. Adderley thus found the tone of the
Ambassador's chaplain that of far more complete fellowship with the
Reformed pastors than he himself was disposed to admit.  There were
a large number of these gathered at Paris; for the lull in
persecution that had followed the battle of Moncontour had given
hopes of a final accommodation between the two parties, and many
had come up to consult with the numerous lay nobility who had
congregated to witness the King of Navarre's wedding.  Among them,
Berenger met his father's old friend Isaac Gardon, who had come to
Paris for the purpose of giving his only surviving son in marriage
to the daughter of a watchmaker to whom he had for many years been
betrothed.  By him the youth, with his innocent face and gracious
respectful manners, was watched with delight, as fulfilling the
fairest hopes of the poor Baron, but the old minister would have
been sorely disappointed had he known how little Berenger felt
inclined towards his party.

The royal one of course Berenger could not love, but the rigid
bareness, and, as he thought, irreverence of the Calvinist, and the
want of all forms, jarred upon one used to a ritual which retained
much of the ancient form.  In the early years of Elizabeth, every
possible diversity prevailed in parish churches, according to the
predilections of rector and squire; from forms scarcely altered
from those of old times, down to the baldest, rudest neglect of all
rites; and Berenger, in his country home, had been used to the
first extreme.  He could not believe that what he heard and saw
among the _Sacrementaires_, as they were called, was what his
father had prized; and he greatly scandalized Sidney, the pupil of
Hubert Languet, by openly expressing his distaste and dismay when
he found their worship viewed by both Walsingham and Sidney as a
model to which the English Protestants ought to be brought.

However, Sidney excused all this as more boyish distaste to sermons
and love of externals, and Berenger himself reflected little on the
subject.  The aspect of the venerable Coligny, his father's friend,
did far more towards making him a Huguenot than any discussion of
doctrine.  The good old Admiral received him affectionately, and
talked to him warmly of his father, and the grave, noble
countenance and kind manner won his heart.  Great projects were on
foot, and were much relished by the young King, for raising an army
and striking a blow at Spain by aiding the Reformed in the
Netherlands; and Coligny was as ardent as a youth in the cause,
hoping at once to aid his brethren, to free the young King from
evil influences, and to strike one good stroke against the old
national enemy.  He talked eagerly to Sidney of alliances with
England, and then lamented over the loss of so promising a youth as
young Ribaumont to the Reformed cause in France. If the marriage
with the heiress could have taken effect, he would have obtained
estates near enough to some of the main Huguenot strongholds to be
very important, and these would now remain under the power of
Narcisse de Ribaumont, a determined ally of the Guise faction.  It
was a pity, but the Admiral could not blame the youth for obeying
the wish of his guardian grandfather; and he owned, with a sigh,
that England was a more peaceful land than his own beloved country.
Berenger was a little nettled at this implication, and began to
talk of joining the French standard in a campaign in their present
home and described the conversation, Walsingham said,--

'The Admiral's favourite project!  He would do wisely not to brag
of it so openly.  The King of Spain has too many in his interest in
this place not to be warned, and to be thus further egged on to
compass the ruin of Coligny.'

'I should have thought.' Said Sidney. 'that nothing could add to
his hatred of the Reformed.'

'Scarcely,' said Walsingham; 'save that it is they who hinder the
Duke of Guise from being a good Frenchman, and a foe to Spain.'

Politics had not developed themselves in Berenger's mind, and he
listened inattentively while Walsingham talked over with Sidney the
state of parties in France, where natural national enmity to Spain was
balanced by the need felt by the Queen-mother of the support of that
great Roman Catholic power against the Huguenots; whom Walsingham
believed her to dread and hate less for their own sake than from the
fear of loss of influence over her son. He believed Charles IX. himself
to have much leaning towards the Reformed, but the late victories has
thrown the whole court entirely into the power of the Guises, the truly
unscrupulous partisans of Rome. They were further inflamed against the
Huguenots by the assassination of the last Duke of Guise, and by the
violences that had been committed by some of the Reformed party, in
especial a massacre of prisoners at _Nerac_.

Sidney exclaimed that the Huguenots had suffered far worse
cruelties.

'That is true,' replied Sir Francis, 'but, my young friend, you
will find, in all matters of reprisals, that a party has no memory
for what it may commit, only for what it may receive.'

The conversation was interrupted by an invitation to the
Ambassador's family and guests to a tilting-match and subsequent
ball at the Louvre.  In the first Berenger did his part with
credit; to the second he went feeling full of that strange
attraction of repulsion.  He knew gentlemen enough in Coligny's
suite for it to be likely that he might remain unperceived among
them, and he knew this would be prudent, but he found himself
unexpectedly near the ranks of ladies, and smile and gesture
absolutely drew him towards his semi-spouse, so that he had no
alternative but to lead her out to dance.

The stately measure was trod in silence as usual, but he felt the
dark eyes studying him all the time.  However, he could bear it
better now that the deed was done, and she had voluntarily made him
less to her than any gallant parading or mincing about the room.

'So you bear the pearls, sir?' she said, as the dance finished.

'The only heirloom I shall take with me,' he said.

'Is a look at them too great a favour to ask from their jealous
guardian?' she asked.

He smiled, half ashamed of his own annoyance at being obliged to
place them in her hands.  He was sure she would try to cajole him
out of them, and by way of asserting his property in them he did
not detach them from the band of his black velvet cap, but gave it
with them into her hand.  She looked at each one, and counted them
wistfully.

'Seventeen!' she said;' and how beautiful!  I never saw them so
near before.  They are so becoming to that fair cheek that I
suppose no offer from my--my uncle, on our behalf, would induce you
to part with them?'

An impulse of open-handed gallantry would have made him answer, 'No
offer from your uncle, but a simple request from you;' but he
thought in time of the absurdity of returning without them, and
merely answered, 'I have no right to yield them, fair lady.  They
are the witness to my forefather's fame and prowess.'

'Yes, sir, and to those of mine also,' she replied. 'And you would
take them over to the enemy from whom that prowess extorted them?'

'The country which honoured and rewarded that prowess!' replied
Berenger.

She looked at him with an interrogative glance of surprise at the
readiness of his answer; then, with half a sigh, said, 'There are
your pearls, sir; I cannot establish our right, though I verily
believe it was the cause of our last quarrel;' and she smiled
archly.

'I believe it was,' he said, gravely; but added, in the moment of
relief at recovering the precious heirloom, 'though it was Diane
who inspired you to seize upon them.'

'Ah! poor Diane! you sometimes recollect her then?  If I remember
right, you used to agree with her better than with your little
spouse, cousin!'

'If I quarrelled with her less, I liked her less,' answered
Berenger--who, since the act of separation, had not been so guarded
in his demeanour, and began to give way to his natural frankness.

'Indeed!  Diane would be less gratified than I ought to be.  And
why, may I ask?'

'Diane was more caressing, but she had no truth.'

'Truth! that was what _feu_ M. le Baron ever talked of; what
Huguenots weary one with.'

'And the only thing worth seeking, the real pearl,' said Berenger,
'without which all else is worthless.'

'Ah!' she said, 'who would have thought that soft, youthful face
could be so severe!  You would never forgive a deceit?'

'Never,' he said, with the crystal hardness of youth; 'or rather I
might forgive; I could never esteem.'

'What a bare, rude world yours must be,' she said, shivering. 'And
no weak ones in it!  Only the strong can dare to be true.'

'Truth is strength!' said Berenger. 'For example: I see yonder a
face without bodily strength, perhaps, but with perfect candour.'

'Ah! some Huguenot girl of Madame Catherine's, no doubt--from the
depths of Languedoc, and dressed like a fright.'

'No, no; the young girl behind the pale, yellow-haired lady.'

'Comment, Monsieur.  Do you not yet know the young Queen?'

'But who is the young demoiselle!--she with the superb black eyes,
and the ruby rose in her black hair?'

'Take care, sir, do you not know I have still a right to be
jealous?' she said, blushing, bridling, and laughing.

But this pull on the cords made him the more resolved; he would not
be turned from his purpose. 'Who is she?' he repeated; 'have I ever
seen her before? I am sure I remember that innocent look of
_espieglerie_.'

'You may see it on any child's face fresh out of the convent; it
does not last a month!' was the still displeased, rather jealous
answer.  'That little thing--I believe they call her Nid-de-Merle--
she has only just been brought from her nunnery to wait on the
young Queen.  Ah! your gaze was perilous, it is bringing on you one
of the jests of Madame Marguerite.'

With laughter and gaiety, a troop of gentlemen descended on M. de
Ribaumont, and told him that Madame Marguerite desired that he
should be presented to her.  The princess was standing by her pale
sister-in-law, Elizabeth of Austria, who looked grave and annoyed
at the mischievous mirth flashing in Marguerite's dark eyes.

'M. de Ribaumont,' said the latter, her very neck heaving with
suppressed fun, 'I see I cannot do you a greater favour than by
giving you Mademoiselle de Nid-de-Merle for your partner.'

Berenger was covered with confusion to find that he had been guilty
of such a fixed stare as to bring all this upon the poor girl. He
feared that his vague sense of recognition had made his gaze more
open than he knew, and he was really and deeply ashamed of this as
his worst act of provincial ill-breeding.

Poor little convent maid, with crimson cheeks, flashing eyes,
panting bosom, and a neck evidently aching with proud dignity and
passion, she received his low bow with a sweeping curtsey, as lofty
as her little person would permit.

His cheeks burnt like fire, and he would have found words to
apologize, but she cut him short by saying, hastily and low, 'Not a
word, Monsieur!  Let us go through it at once.  No one shall make
game of us.'

He hardly durst look at her again; but as he went through his own
elaborate paces he knew that the little creature opposite was
swimming, bending, turning, bounding with the fluttering fierceness
of an angry little bird, and that the superb eyes were casting
flashes on him that seemed to carry him back to days of early
boyhood.

Once he caught a mortified, pleading, wistful glance that made him
feel as if he had inflicted a cruel injury by his thoughtless gaze,
and he resolved to plead the sense of recognition in excuse; but no
sooner was the performance over than she prevented all conversation
by saying, 'Lead me back at once to the Queen, sir; she is about to
retire.'  They were already so near that there was no time to say
anything; he could only hold as lightly as possible the tiny
fingers that he felt burning and quivering in his hand, and then,
after bringing her to the side of the chair of state, he was forced
to release her with the mere whisper of 'Pardon, Mademoiselle;' and
the request was not replied to, save by the additional stateliness
of her curtsey.

It was already late, and the party was breaking up; but his head
and heart were still in a whirl when he found himself seated in the
ambassadorial coach, hearing Lady Walsingham's well-pleased
rehearsal of all the compliments she had received on the
distinguished appearance of both her young guests. Sidney, as the
betrothed of her daughter, was property of her own; but she also
exulted in the praises of the young Lord de Ribaumont, as proving
the excellence of the masters whom she had recommended to remove
the rustic clownishness of which he had been accused.

'Nay,' said Sir Francis; 'whoever called him too clownish for court
spake with design.'

The brief sentence added to Berenger's confused sense of being in a
mist of false play.  Could his kinsman be bent on keeping him from
court?  Could Narcisse be jealous of him?  Mademoiselle de
Ribaumont was evidently inclined to seek him, and her cousin might
easily think her lands safer in his absence. He would have been
willing to hold aloof as much as his uncle and cousin could wish,
save for an angry dislike to being duped and cajoled; and,
moreover, a strong curiosity to hear and see more of that little
passionate bird, fresh from the convent cage.  Her gesture and her
eyes irresistibly carried him back to old times, though whether to
an angry blackbird in the yew-tree alleys at Leurre, or to the
eager face that had warned him to save his father, he could not
remember with any distinctness. At any rate, he was surprised to
find himself thinking so little in comparison about the splendid
beauty and winning manners of his discarded spouse, though he quite
believed that, now her captive was beyond her grasp, she was
disposed to catch at him again, and try to retain him, or, as his
titillated vanity might whisper, his personal graces might make her
regret the family resolution which she had obeyed.


CHAPTER VI.  FOULLY COZENED


I was the more deceived.--HAMLET


The unhappy Charles IX. had a disposition that in good hands might
have achieved great nobleness; and though cruelly bound and trained
to evil, was no sooner allowed to follow its natural bent than it
reached out eagerly towards excellence.  At this moment, it was his
mother's policy to appear to leave the ascendancy to the Huguenot
party, and he was therefore allowed to contract friendships which
deceived the intended victims the more completely, because his
admiration and attachment were spontaneous and sincere.  Philip
Sidney's varied accomplishment and pure lofty character greatly
attracted the young King, who had leant on his arm conversing
during great part of the ball, and the next morning sent a royal
messenger to invite the two young gentlemen to a part at pall-mall
in the Tuileries gardens.

Pall-mall was either croquet or its nearest relative, and was so
much the fashion that games were given in order to keep up
political influence, perhaps, because the freedom of a garden
pastime among groves and bowers afforded opportunities for those
seductive arts on which Queen Catherine placed so much dependence.
The formal gardens, with their squares of level turf and clipped
alleys, afforded excellent scope both for players and spectators,
and numerous games had been set on foot, from all of which,
however, Berenger contrived to exclude himself, in his restless
determination to find out the little Demoiselle de Nid-de-Merle,
or, at least, to discover whether any intercourse in early youth
accounted for his undefined sense of remembrance.

He interrogated the first disengaged person he could find, but it
was only the young Abbe de Mericour, who had been newly brought up
from Dauphine by his elder brother to solicit a benefice, and who
knew nobody.  To him ladies were only bright phantoms such as his
books had taught him to regard like the temptations of St. Anthony,
but whom he actually saw treated with as free admiration by the
ecclesiastic as by the layman.

Suddenly a clamour of voices arose on the other side of the
closely-clipped wall of limes by which the two youths were walking.
There were the clear tones of a young maiden expostulating in
indignant distress, and the bantering, indolent determination of a
male annoyer.

'Hark!' exclaimed Berenger; 'this must be seen to.'

'Have a care,' returned Mericour; 'I have heard that a man needs
look twice are meddling.'

Scarcely hearing, Berenger strode on as he had done at the last
village wake, when he had rescued Cis of the Down from the
impertinence of a Dorchester scrivener.  It was a like case, he
saw, when breaking through the arch of clipped limed he beheld the
little Demoiselle de Nid-de-Merle, driven into a corner and
standing at bay, with glowing cheeks, flashing eyes, and hands
clasped over her breast, while a young man, dressed in the extreme
of foppery, was assuring her that she was the only lady who had not
granted him a token--that he could not allow such _pensionnaire_
airs, and that now he had caught her he would have his revenge, and
win her rose-coloured break-knot.  Another gentleman stood by,
laughing, and keeping guard in the walk that led to the more
frequented part of the gardens.

'Hold!' thundered Berenger.

The assailant had just mastered the poor girl's hand, but she took
advantage of his surprise to wrench it away and gather herself up
as for a spring, but the Abbe in dismay, the attendant in anger,
cried out, 'Stay--it is Monsieur.'

'Monsieur; be he who he may,' exclaimed Berenger, 'no honest man
can see a lady insulted.'

'Are you mad?  It is Monsieur the Duke of Anjou,' said Mericour,
pouncing on his arm.

'Shall we have him to the guardhouse?' added the attendant, coming
up on the other side; but Henri de Valois waved them both back, and
burst into a derisive laugh.  'No, no; do you not see who it is?
Monsieur the English Baron still holds the end of the halter.  His
sale is not yet made.  Come away, D'O, he will soon have enough on
his hands without us.  Farewell, fair lady, another time you will
be free of your jealous giant.'

So saying, the Duke of Anjou strolled off, feigning indifference
and contempt, and scarcely heeding that he had been traversed in
one of the malicious adventures which he delighted to recount in
public before the discomfited victim herself, often with shameful
exaggeration.

The girl clasped her hands over her brow with a gesture of dismay,
and cried, 'Oh! if you have only not touched your sword.'

'Let me have the honour of reconducting you, Mademoiselle,' said
Berenger, offering his hand; but after the first sigh of relief, a
tempestuous access seized her.  She seemed about to dash away his
hand, her bosom swelled with resentment, and with a voice striving
for dignity, though choked with strangled tears, she exclaimed,
'No, indeed!  Had not M. le Baron forsaken me, I had never been
thus treated!' and her eyes flashed through their moisture.

'Eustacie!  You are Eutacie!'

'Whom would you have me to be otherwise?  I have the honour to wish
M. le Baron a good morning.'

'Eustacie!  Stay!  Hear me!  It concerns my honour.  I see it is
you--but whom have I seen?  Who was she?' he cried, half wild with
dismay and confusion.  'Was it Diane?'

'You have seen and danced with Diane de Ribaumont,' answered
Eustacie, still coldly; 'but what of that?  Let me go, Monsieur;
you have cast me off already.'

'I! when all this has been of your own seeking?'

'Mine?' cried Eustacie, panting with the struggle between her
dignity and her passionate tears.  'I meddled not.  I heard that M.
le Baron was gone to a strange land, and had written to break off
old ties.'  Her face was in a flame, and her efforts for composure
absolute pain.

'I!' again exclaimed Berenger.  'The first letter came from your
uncle, declaring that it was your wish!'  And as her face changed
rapidly, 'Then it was not true!  He has not had your consent?'

'What! would I hold to one who despised me--who came here and never
even asked to see this hated spouse!'

I did!  I entreated to see you.  I would not sign the application
till--Oh, there has been treachery!  And have they made you too
sign it!'

When they showed me your name they were welcome to mine.'

Berenger struck his forehead with wrath and perplexity, then cried,
joyfully, 'It will not stand for moment.  So foul a cheat can be at
once exposed. Eutacie, you know--you understand, that it was not
you but Diane whom I saw and detested; and no wonder, when she was
acting such a cruel treason!'

'Oh no, Diane would never so treat me,' cried Eustacie.  'I see how
it was!  You did not know that my father was latterly called
Marquis de Nid-de-Merle, and when they brought me here, they WOULD
call me after him: they said a maid of honour must be Demoiselle,
and my uncle said there was only one way in which I could remain
Madame de Ribaumont! And the name must have deceived you.  Thou
wast always a great dull boy,' she added, with a sudden assumption
of childish intimacy that annihilated the nine years since their
parting.

'Had I seen thee, I had not mistaken for an instant.  This little
face stirred my heart; hers repelled me.  And she deceived me
wittingly, Eustacie, for I asked after her by name.'

'Ah, she wished to spare my embarrassment.  And then her brother
must have dealt with her.'

'I see,' exclaimed Berenger, 'I am to be palmed off thus that thou
mayest be reserved for Narcisse.  Tell me, Eustacie, wast thou
willing?'

'I hate Narcisse!' she cried.  'But oh, I am lingering too long.
Monsieur will make some hateful tale!  I never fell into his way
before, my Queen and Madame la Comtesse are so careful.  Only to-
day, as I was attending her alone, the King came and gave her his
arm, and I had to drop behind.  I must find her; I shall be
missed,' she added, in sudden alarm.  'Oh, what will they say?'

'No blame for being with thy husband,' he answered, clasping her
hand.  'Thou art mine henceforth. I will soon cut our way out of
the web thy treacherous kindred have woven. Meantime---'

'Hush! There are voices,' cried Eustacie in terror, and, guided by
something he could not discern, she fled with the swiftness of a
bird down the alley.  Following, with the utmost speed that might
not bear the appearance of pursuit, he found that on coming to the
turn she had moderated her pace, and was more tranquilly advancing
to a bevy of ladies, who sat perched on the stone steps like great
butterflies sunning themselves, watching the game, and receiving
the attentions of their cavaliers.  He saw her absorbed into the
group, and then began to prowl round it, in the alleys, in a tumult
of amazement and indignation.  He had been shamefully deceived and
cheated, and justice he would have!  He had been deprived of a
thing of his own, and he would assert his right.  He had been made
to injure and disown the creature he was bound to protect, and he
must console her and compensate to her, were it only to redeem his
honour.  He never even thought whether he loved her; he merely felt
furious at the wrong he had suffered and been made to commit, and
hotly bent on recovering what belonged to him.  He might even have
plunged down among the ladies and claimed her as his wife, if the
young Abbe de Mericour, who was two years older than he, and far
less of a boy for his years, had not joined him in his agitated
walk.  He then learnt that all the court knew that the daughter of
the late Marquis de Nid-de-Merle, Comte de Ribaumont, was called by
his chief title, but that her marriage to himself had been forgotten
by some and unknown to others, and thus that the first error between
the cousins had not been wonderful in a stranger, since the Chevalier's
daughter had always been Mdlle. de Ribaumont.  The error once made,
Berenger's distaste to Diane had been so convenient that it had
been carefully encouraged, and the desire to keep him at a distance
from court and throw him into the background was accounted for.
The Abbe was almost as indignant as Berenger, and assured him both
of his sympathy and his discretion.

'I see no need for discretion,' said Berenger.  'I shall claim my
wife in the face of the sun.'

'Take counsel first, I entreat,' exclaimed Mericour.  'The
Ribaumonts have much influence with the Guise family, and now you
have offended Monsieur.'

'Ah! Where are those traitorous kinsmen?' cried Berenger.

'Fortunately all are gone on an expedition with the Queen-mother.
You will have time to think.  I have heard my brother say no one
ever prospered who offended the meanest follower of the house of
Lorraine.'

'I do not want prosperity, I only want my wife.  I hope I shall
never see Paris and its deceivers again.'

'Ah! But is it true that you have applied to have the marriage
annulled at Rome?'

'We were both shamefully deceivers.  That can be nothing.'

'A decree of his Holiness: you a Huguenot; she an heiress.  All is
against you.  My friend, be cautions, exclaimed the young
ecclesiastic, alarmed by his passionate gestures.  'To break forth
now and be accused of brawling in the palace precincts would be
fatal--fatal--most fatal!'

'I am as calm as possible,' returned Berenger.  'I mean to act most
reasonably.  I shall stand before the King and tell him openly how
I have been tamperes with, demanding my wife before the whole
court.'

'Long before you could get so far the ushers would have dragged you
away for brawling, or for maligning an honour-able gentlemen.  You
would have to finish your speech in the Bastille, and it would be
well if even your English friends could get you out alive.'

'Why, what a place is this!' began Berenger; but again Mericour
entreated him to curb himself; and his English education had taught
him to credit the house of Guide with so much mysterious power and
wickedness, that he allowed himself to be silenced, and promised to
take no open measures till he had consulted the Ambassador.

'He could not obtain another glimpse of Eustacie, and the hours
passed tardily till the break up of the party. Charles could
scarcely release Sidney from his side, and only let him go on
condition that he should join the next day in an expedition to the
hunting chateau of Montpipeau, to which the King seemed to look
forward as a great holiday and breathing time.

When at length the two youths did return, Sir Francis Walsingham
was completely surprised by the usually tractable, well-behaved
stripling, whose praises he had been writing to his old friend,
bursting in on him with the outcry, 'Sir, sir, I entreat your
counsel!  I have been foully cozened.'

'Of how much?' said Sir Francis, in a tone of reprobation.

'Of my wife.  Of mine honour.  Sir, your Excellency, I crave
pardon, if I spoke too hotly,' said Berenger, collecting himself;
'but it is enough to drive a man to frenzy.'

'Sit down, my Lord de Ribaumont.  Take breath, and let me know what
is this coil.  What hath thus moved him, Mr. Sidney?'

'It is as he says, sir,' replied Sidney, who had beard all as they
returned; 'he has been greatly wronged.  The Chevalier de Ribaumont
not only writ to propose the separation without the lady's
knowledge, but imposed his own daughter on our friend as the wife
he had not seen since infancy.'

'There, sir,' broke forth Berenger; 'surely if I claim mine own in
the face of day, no man can withhold her from me!'

'Hold!' said Sir Francis. 'What mean this passion, young sir?
Methought you came hither convinced that both the religion and the
habits in which the young lady had been bred up rendered your
infantine contract most unsuitable.  What hath fallen out to make
this change in your mind?'

'That I was cheated, sir.  The lady who palmed herself off on me as
my wife was a mere impostor, the Chevalier's own daughter!'

'That may be; but what known you of this other lady?  Has she been
bred up in faith or manners such as your parents would have your
wife?'

'She is my wife,' reiterated Berenger.  'My faith is plighted to
her.  That is enough for me.'

Sir Francis made a gesture of despair.  'He has seen her, I
suppose,' said he to Sidney.

'Yes truly, sir,' answered Berenger; 'and found that she had been
as greatly deceived as myself.'

'Then mutual consent is wanting,' said the statesman, gravely
musing.

'That is even as I say,' began Berenger, but Walsingham help up his
hand, and desired that he would make his full statement in the
presence of his tutor.  Then sounding a little whistle, the
Ambassador despatched a page to request the attendance of Mr.
Adderley, and recommended young Ribaumont in the meantime to
compose himself.

Used to being under authority as Berenger was, the somewhat severe
tone did much to allay his excitement, and remind him that right
and reason were so entirely on his side, that he had only to be
cool and rational to make them prevail.  He was thus able to give a
collected and coherent account of his discovery that the part of
his wife had been assumed by her cousin Diane, and that the
signature of both the young pair to the application to the Pope had
been obtained on false pretences.  That he had, as Sidney said,
been foully cozened, in both senses of the word, was as clear as
daylight; but he was much angered and disappointed to find that
neither the Ambassador nor his tutor could see that Eustacie's
worthiness was proved by the iniquity of her relation, or that any
one of the weighty reasons for the expediency of dissolving the
marriage was remove.  The whole affair had been in such good train
a little before, that Mr. Adderley was much distressed that it
should thus have been crossed, and thought the new phase of affairs
would be far from acceptable at Combe Walwyn.

'Whatever is just and honourable must be acceptable to my
grandfather,' said Berenger.

'Even so,' said Walsingham; 'but it were well to consider whether
justice and honour require you to overthrow the purpose wherewith
he sent you hither.'

'Surely, sir, justice and require me to fulfil a contract to which
the other party is constant,' said Berenger, feeling very wise and
prudent for calling that wistful, indignant creature the other
party.

'That is also true,' said the Ambassador, 'provided she be
constant; but you own that she signed the requisition for the
dissolution.'

'She did so, but under the same deception as myself, and further
mortified and aggrieved at my seeming faithlessness.'

'So it may easily be represented,' muttered Walsingham.

'How, sir?' cried Berenger, impetuously; 'do you doubt her truth?'

'Heaven forefend,' said Sir Francis, 'that I should discuss any
fair lady's sincerity!  The question is how far you are bound.
Have I understood you that you are veritably wedded, not by a mere
contract of espousal?'

'Berenger could produce no documents, for they had been left at
Chateau Leurre, and on his father's death the Chevalier had claimed
the custody of them; but he remembered enough of the ceremonial to
prove that the wedding had been a veritable one, and that only the
papal intervention could annul it.

Indeed an Englishman, going by English law, would own no power in
the Pope, nor any one on earth, to sever the sacred tie of wedlock;
but French courts of law would probably ignore the mode of
application, and would certainly endeavour to separate between a
Catholic and a heretic.

'I am English, sir, in heart and faith,' said Berenger, earnestly.
'Look upon me as such, and tell me, am I married or single at this
moment?'

'Married assuredly.  More's the pity,' said Sir Francis.

'And no law of God or man divides us without our own consent.'
There was no denying that the mutual consent of the young pair at
their present age was all that was wanting to complete the
inviolability of their marriage contract.

Berenger was indeed only eighteen, and Eustacie more than a year
younger, but there was nothing in their present age to invalidate
their marriage, for persons of their rank were usually wedded quite
as young or younger.  Walsingham was only concerned at his old
friend's disappointment, and at the danger of the young man running
headlong into a connection probably no more suitable than that with
Diane de Ribaumont would have been.  But it was not convenient to
argue against the expediency of a man's loving his own wife; and
when Berenger boldly declared he was not talking of love but of
justice, it was only possible to insist that he should pause and
see where true justice lay.

And thus the much-perplexed Ambassador broke up the conference with
his hot and angry young guest.

'And Mistress Lucy---?' sighed Mr. Adderley, in rather an
_inapropos_ fashion it must be owned; but then he had been fretted
beyond endurance by his pupil striding up and down his room,
reviling Diane, and describing Eustacie, while he was trying to
write these uncomfortable tidings to Lord Walwyn.

'Lucy!  What makes you bring her up to me?' exclaimed Berenger.
'Little Dolly would be as much to the purpose!'

'Only, sir, no resident at Hurst Walwyn could fail to know that has
been planned and desired.'

'Pshaw!' cries Berenger; 'have you not heard that it was a mere
figment, and that I could scarce have wedded Lucy safely, even had
this matter gone as you wish?  This is the luckiest chance that
could have befallen her.'

'That may be,' said Mr. Adderley; 'I wish she may think so--sweet
young lady!'

'I tell you, Mr. Adderley, you should know better!  Lucy has more
sense.  My aunt, whom she follows more than any other creature,
ever silenced the very sport or semblance of love passages between
us even as children, by calling them unseemly in one wedded as I
am.  Brother and sister we have ever been, and have loved as such--
ay, and shall!  I know of late some schemes have crossed my
mother's mind---'

'Yea, and that of others.'

'But they have not ruffled Lucy's quiet nature--trust me! And for
the rest?  What doth she need me in comparison of this poor child?
She--like a bit of her own gray lavender in the shadiest nook of
the walled garden, tranquil there--sure not to be taken there, save
to company with fine linen in some trim scented coffer, whilst this
fresh glowing rosebud has grown up pure and precious in the very
midst of the foulest corruption Christendom can show, and if I
snatch her not from it, I, the innocence and sweetness, what is to
be her fate?  The very pity of a Christian, the honour of a
gentleman, would urge me, even if it were not my most urgent duty!'

'Mr. Adderley argued no more.  When Berenger came to his duty in
the matter he was invincible, and moreover all the more provoking,
because he mentioned it with a sort of fiery sound of relish, and
looked so very boyish all the time.  Poor Mr. Adderley!' feeling as
if his trust were betrayed, loathing the very idea of a French
court lady, saw that his pupil had been allured into a headlong
passion to his own misery, and that of all whose hopes were set on
him, yet preached to by this stripling scholar about duties and
sacred obligations!  Well might he rue the day he ever set foot in
Paris.

Then, to his further annoyance, came a royal messenger to invite
the Baron de Ribaumont to join the expedition to Montpipeau.  Of
course he must go, and his tutor must be left behind, and who could
tell into what mischief he might not be tempted!

Here, however, Sidney gave the poor chaplain some comfort.  He
believed that no ladies were to be of the party, and that the
gentlemen were chiefly of the King's new friends among the
Huguenots, such as Coligny, his son-in-law Teligny, Rochefoucauld,
and the like, among whom the young gentleman could not fall into
any very serious harm, and might very possibly be influenced
against a Roman Catholic wife.  At any rate, he would be out of the
way, and unable to take any dangerous steps.

This same consideration so annoyed Berenger that he would have
declined the invitation, if royal invitations could have been
declined.  And in the morning, before setting out, he dressed
himself point device, and with Osbert behind him marched down to
the Croix de Larraine, to call upon the Chevalier de Ribaumont.  He
had a very fine speech at his tongue's end when he set out, but a
good deal of it had evaporated when he reached the hotel, and
perhaps he was not very sorry not to find the old gentleman within.

On his return, he indited a note to the Chevalier, explaining that
he had now seen his wife, Madame la Baronne de Ribaumont, and had
come to an understanding with her, by which he found that it was
under a mistake that the application to the Pope had been signed,
and that they should, therefore, follow it up with a protest, and
act as if no such letter had been sent.

Berenger showed this letter to Walsingham, who, though much
concerned, could not forbid his sending it.  'Poor lad,' he said to
the tutor; ''tis an excellently writ billet for one so young.  I
would it were in a wiser cause.  But he has fairly the bit between
his teeth, and there is no checking him while he has this show of
right on his side.'

And poor Mr. Adderley could only beseech Mr. Sidney to take care of
him.


CHAPTER VII.  THE QUEEN'S PASTORAL


Either very gravely gay,
Or very gaily grave,--W. M. PRAED


Montpipeau, though in the present day a suburb of Paris, was in the
sixteenth century far enough from the city to form a sylvan
retreat, where Charles IX, could snatch a short respite from the
intrigues of his court, under pretext of enjoying his favourite
sport.  Surrounded with his favoured associates of the Huguenot
party, he seemed to breathe a purer atmosphere, and to yield
himself up to enjoyment greater than perhaps his sad life had ever
known.

He rode among his gentlemen, and the brilliant cavalcade passed
through poplar-shaded roads, clattered through villages, and
threaded their way through bits of forest still left for the royal
chase.  The people thronged out of their houses, and shouted not
only 'Vive le Roy,' but 'Vive l'Amiral,' and more than once the cry
was added, 'Spanish war, or civil war!'  The heart of France was,
if not with the Reformed, at least against Spain and the
Lorrainers, and Sidney perceived, from the conversation of the
gentlemen round him, that the present expedition had been devised
less for the sake of the sport, than to enable the King to take
measures for emancipating himself from the thraldom of his mother,
and engaging the country in a war against Philip II.  Sidney
listened, but Berenger chafed, feeling only that he was being
further carried out of reach of his explanation with his kindred.
And thus they arrived at Montpipeau, a tower, tall and narrow, like
all French designs, but expanded on the ground floor by wooden
buildings capable of containing the numerous train of a royal
hunter, and surrounded by an extent of waste land, without fine
trees, though with covert for deer, boars, and wolves sufficient
for sport to royalty and death to peasantry. Charles seemed to sit
more erect in his saddle, and to drink in joy with every breath of
the thyme-scented breeze, from the moment his horse bounded on the
hollow-sounding turf; and when he leapt to the ground, with the
elastic spring of youth, he held out his hands to Sidney and to
Teligny, crying 'Welcome, my friends.  Here I am indeed a king!'

It was a lovely summer evening, early in August, and Charles bade
the supper to be spread under the elms that shaded a green lawn in
front of the chateau.  Etiquette was here so far relaxed as to
permit the sovereign to dine with his suite, and tables, chairs,
and benches were brought out, drapery festooned in the trees to
keep off sun and wind, the King lay down in the fern and let his
happy dogs fondle him, and as a hers-girl passed along a vista in
the distance, driving her goats before her, Philip Sidney marvelled
whether it was not even thus in Arcadia.

Presently there was a sound of horses trampling, wheels moving, a
party of gaily gilded archers of the guard jingled up, and in their
midst was a coach.  Berenger's heart seemed to leap at once to his
lips, as a glimpse of ruffs, hats, and silks dawned on him through
the windows.

The king rose from his lair among the fern, the Admiral stood
forward, all heads were bared, and from the coach-door alighted the
young Queen; no longer pale, subdued, and indifferent, but with a
face shining with girlish delight, as she held out her hand to the
Admiral.  'Ah! This is well, this is beautiful,' she exclaimed; 'it
is like our happy chases in the Tyrol.  Ah, Sire!' to the King,
'how I thank you for letting me be with you.'

After her Majesty descended her gentleman-usher.  Then came the
lady-in-waiting, Madame de Sauve, the wife of the state secretary
in attendance on Charles, and a triumphant, coquettish beauty, than
a fat, good-humoured Austrian dame, always called Madame la
Comtesse, because her German name was unpronounceable, and without
whom the Queen never stirred, and lastly a little figure, rounded
yet slight, slender yet soft and plump, with a kitten-like
alertness and grace of motion, as she sprang out, collected the
Queen's properties of fan, kerchief, pouncet-box, mantle, &c., and
disappeared in to the chateau, without Berenger's being sure of
anything but that her little black hat had a rose-coloured feather
in it.

The Queen was led to a chair placed under one of the largest trees,
and there Charles presented to her such of his gentlemen as she was
not yet acquainted with, the Baron de Ribaumont among the rest.

'I have heard of M. de Ribaumont,' she said, in a tone that made
the colour mantle in his fair cheek; and with a sign of her hand
she detained him at her side till the King had strolled away with
Madame la Sauve, and no one remained near but her German countess.
Then changing her tone to one of confidence, which the high-bred
homeliness of her Austrian manner rendered inexpressibly engaging,
she said, 'I must apologize, Monsieur, for the giddiness of my
sister-in-law, which I fear caused you some embarrassment.'

'Ah, Madame,' said Berenger, kneeling on one knee as she addressed
him, and his heart bounding with wild, undefined hope, 'I cannot be
grateful enough.  It was that which led to my being undeceived.'

'It was true, then, that you were mistaken?' said the Queen.

'Treacherously deceived, Madame, by those whose interest it is to
keep us apart,' said Berenger, colouring with indignation; 'they
imposed my other cousin on me as my wife, and caused her to think
me cruelly neglectful.'

'I know,' said the Queen.  'Yet Mdlle. de Ribaumont is far more
admired than my little blackbird.'

'That may be, Madame, but not by me.'

'Yet is it true that you came to break off the marriage?'

'Yes, Madame,' said Berenger, honestly, 'but I had not seen her.'

'And now?' said the Queen, smiling.

'I would rather die than give her up,' said Berenger.  'Oh, Madame,
help us of your grace.  Every one is trying to part us, every one
is arguing against us, but she is my own true wedded wife, and if
you will but give her to me, all will be well.'

'I like you, M. de Ribaumont,' said the Queen, looking him full in
the face.  'You are like our own honest Germans at my home, and I
think you mean all you say.  I had much rather my dear little Nid
de Merle were with you than left here, to become like all the
others.  She is a good little _Liegling_,--how do you call it in
French? She has told me all, and truly I would help you with all my
heart, but it is not as if I were the Queen-mother.  You must have
recourse to the King, who loves you well, and at my request
included you in the hunting-party.'

Berenger could only kiss her hand in token of earnest thanks before
the repast was announced, and the King came to lead her to the
table spread beneath the trees.  The whole party supped together,
but Berenger could have only a distant view of his little wife,
looking very demure and grave by the side of the Admiral.

But when the meal was ended, there was a loitering in the woodland
paths, amid healthy openings or glades trimmed into discreet
wildness fit for royal rusticity; the sun set in parting glory on
one horizon, the moon rising in crimson majesty on the other.  A
musician at intervals touched the guitar, and sang Spanish or
Italian airs, whose soft or quaint melody came dreamily through the
trees.  Then it was that with beating heart Berenger stole up to
the maiden as she stood behind the Queen, and ventured to whisper
her name and clasp her hand.

She turned, their eyes met, and she let him lead her apart into the
wood.  It was not like a lover's tryst, it was more like the
continuation of their old childish terms, only that he treated her
as a thing of his own, that he was bound to secure and to guard,
and she received him as her own lawful but tardy protector, to be
treated with perfect reliance but with a certain playful
resentment.

'You will not run away from me now,' he said, making full prize of
her hand and arm.

'Ah! is not she the dearest and best of queens?' and the large eyes
were lifted up to him in such frank seeking of sympathy that he
could see into the depths of their clear darkness.

'It is her doing then.  Though, Eustacie, when I knew the truth,
not flood nor fire should keep me long from you, my heart, my love,
my wife.'

'What! wife in spite of those villainous letter?' she said, trying
to pout.

'Wife for ever, inseparably! Only you must be able to swear that
you knew nothing of the one that brought me here.'

'Poor me!  No, indeed!  There was Celine carried off at fourteen,
Madame de Blanchet a bride at fifteen; all marrying hither and
thither; and I--' she pulled a face irresistibly droll--'I growing
old enough to dress St. Catherine's hair, and wondering where was
M. le Baron.'

'They thought me too young,' said Berenger, 'to take on me the
cares of life.'

'So they were left to me?'

'Cares! What cares have you but finding the Queen's fan?'

'Little you know!' she said, half contemptuous, half mortified.

'Nay, pardon me, _ma mie_.  Who has troubled you?'

'Ah! you would call it nothing to be beset by Narcisse; to be told
one's husband is faithless, till one half believes it; to be looked
at by ugly eyes; to be liable to be teased any day by Monsieur, or
worse, by that mocking ape, M. d'Alecon, and to have nobody who can
or will hinder it.'

She was sobbing by this time, and he exclaimed, 'Ah, would that I
could revenge all!  Never, never shall it be again!  What blessed
grace has guarded you through all?'

'Did I not belong to you?' she said exultingly.  'And had not
Sister Monique, yes, and M. le Baron, striven hard to make me good?
Ah, how kind he was!'

'My father?  Yes, Eustacie, he loved you to the last.  He bade me,
on his deathbed, give you his own Book of Psalms, and tell you he
had always loved and prayed for you.'

'Ah! his Psalms!  I shall love them!  Even at Bellaise, when first
we came there, we used to sing them, but the Mother Abbess went out
visiting, and when she came back she said they were heretical.  And
Soeur Monique would not let me say the texts he taught me, but I
WOULD not forget them.  I say them often in my heart.'

'Then,' he cried joyfully, 'you will willingly embrace my
religion?'

'Be a Huguenot?' she said distastefully.

'I am not precisely a Huguenot; I do not love them,' he answered
hastily; 'but all shall be made clear to you at my home in
England.'

'England!' she said.  'Must we live in England?  Away from every
one?'

'Ah, they will love so much! I shall make you so happy there,' he
answered. 'There you will see what it is to be true and
trustworthy.'

'I had rather live at Chateau Leurre, or my own Nid de Merle,' she
replied.  'There I should see Soeur Monique, and my aunt, the
Abbess, and we would have the peasants to dance in the castle
court.  Oh! if you could but see the orchards at Le Bocage, you
would never want to go away.  And we could come now and then to see
my dear Queen.

'I am glad at least you would not live at court.'

'Oh, no, I have been more unhappy here than ever I knew could be
borne.'

And a very few words from him drew out all that had happened to her
since they parted.  Her father had sent her to Bellaise, a convent
founded by the first of the Angevin branch, which was presided over
by his sister, and where Diane was also educated.  The good sister
Monique had been mistress of the _pensionnaires_, and had evidently
taken much pains to keep her charge innocent and devout.  Diane had
been taken to court about two years before, but Eustacie had
remained at the convent till some three months since, when she had
been appointed maid of honour to the recently-married Queen; and
her uncle had fetched her from Anjou, and had informed her at the
same time that her young husband had turned Englishman and heretic,
and that after a few formalities had been complied with, she would
become the wife of her cousin Narcisse.  Now there was no person
whom she so much dreaded as Narcisse, and when Berenger spoke of
him as a feeble fop, she shuddered as though she knew him to have
something of the tiger.

'Do you remember Benoit?' she said; 'poor Benoit, who came to
Normandy as my _laquais_?  When I went back to Anjou he married a
girl from Leurre, and went to aid his father at the farm.  The poor
fellow had imbibed the Baron's doctrine--he spread it.  It was
reported that there was a nest of Huguenots on the estate.  My
cousin came to break it up with his _gens d'armes_ O Berenger, he
would hear no entreaties, he had no mercy; he let them assemble on
Sunday, that they might be all together.  He fired the house; shot
down those who escaped; if a prisoner were made, gave him up to the
Bishop's Court.  Benoit, my poor good Benoit, who used to lead my
palfrey, was first wounded, then tried, and burnt--burnt in the
PLACE at Lucon!  I heard Narcisse laugh--laugh as he talked of the
cries of the poor creatures in the conventicler.  My own people,
who loved me!  I was but twelve years old, but even then the wretch
would pay me a half-mocking courtesy, as one destined to him; and
the more I disdained him and said I belonged to you, the more both
he and my aunt, the Abbess, smiled, as though they had their bird
in a cage; but they left me in peace till my uncle brought me to
court, and then all began again: and when they said you gave me up,
I had no hope, not even of a convent.  But ah, it is all over now,
and I am so happy!  You are grown so gentle and so beautiful,
Berenger, and so much taller than I ever figured you to myself, and
you look as if you could take me up in your arms, and let no harm
happen to me.'

'Never, never shall it!' said Berenger, felling all manhood,
strength, and love stir within him, and growing many years in heart
in that happy moment.  'My sweet little faithful wife, never fear
again now you are mine.'

Alas! poor children.  They were a good way from the security they
had begun to fancy for themselves.  Early the next morning,
Berenger went in his straightforward way to the King, thanked him,
and requested his sanction for at once producing themselves to the
court as Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne de Ribaumont.

At this Charles swore a great oath, as one in perplexity, and bade
him not go so fast.

'See here,' said he, with the rude expletives only too habitual
with him; 'she is a pretty little girl, and she and her lands are
much better with an honest man like you than with that _pendard_ of
a cousin; but you see he is bent on having her, and he belongs to a
cut-throat crew that halt at nothing.  I would not answer for your
life, if you tempted him so strongly to rid himself of you.'

'My own sword, Sire, can guard my life.'

'Plague upon your sword!  What does the foolish youth think it
would do against half-a-dozen poniards and pistols in a lane black
as hell's mouth?'

The foolish young WAS thinking how could a king so full of fiery
words and strange oaths bear to make such an avowal respecting his
own capital and his own courtiers.  All he could do was to bow and
reply, 'Nevertheless, Sire, at whatever risk, I cannot relinquish
my wife; I would take her at one to the Ambassador's.'

'How, sir!' interrupted Charles, haughtily and angrily, 'if you
forget that you are a French nobleman still, I should remember it!
The Ambassador may protect his own countrymen-none else.'

'I entreat your Majesty's pardon,' said Berenger, anxious to
retract his false step.  'It was your goodness and the gracious
Queen's that made me hope for your sanction.'

'All the sanction Charles de Valois can give is yours, and
welcome,' said the King, hastily.  'The sanction of the King of
France is another matter!  To say the truth, I see no way out of
the affair but an elopement.'
'Sire!' exclaimed the astonished Berenger, whose strictly-
disciplined education had little prepared him for such counsel.

'Look you!  if I made you known as a wedded pair, the Chevalier and
his son would not only assassinate you, but down on me would come
my brother, and my mother, and M. de Guise and all their crew,
veritably for giving the prize out of the mouth of their satellite,
but nominally for disregarding the Pope, favouring a heretical
marriage, and I know not what, but, as things go here, I should
assuredly get the worst of it; and if you made safely off with your
prize, no one could gainsay you--I need know nothing about it--and
lady and lands would be your without dispute.  You might ride off
from the skirts of the forest; I would lead the hunt that way, and
the three days' riding would bring you to Normady, for you had best
cross to England immediately.  When she is one there, owned by your
kindred, Monsieur le cousin may gnash his teeth as he will, he must
make the best of it for the sake of the honour of his house, and
you can safely come back and raise her people and yours to follow
the Oriflamme when it takes the field against Spain.  What! you are
still discontented? Speak out! Plain speaking is a treat not often
reserved for me.'

'Sire, I am most grateful for your kindness, but I should greatly
prefer going straightforward.'

'Peste!  Well is it said that a blundering Englishman goes always
right before him!  There, then!  As your King on the one hand, as
the friend who has brought you and your wife together, sir, it is
my command that you do not compromise me and embroil greater
matters than you can understand by publicly claiming this girl.
Privately I will aid you to the best of my ability; publicly, I
command you, for my sake, if you heed not your own, to be silent!'

Berenger sought out Sidney, who smiled at his surprise.

'Do you not see,' he said, 'that the King is your friend, and would
be very glad to save the lady's lands from the Guisards, but that
he cannot say so; he can only befriend a Huguenot by stealth.'

'I would not be such a king for worlds!'

However, Eustacie was enchanted.  It was like a prince and princess
in Mere Perinne's fairy tales.  Could they go like a shepherd and
shepherdess?  She had no fears-no scruples.  Would she not be with
her husband?  It was the most charming frolic in the world.  So the
King seemed to think it, though he was determined to call it all
the Queen's doing--the first intrigue of her own, making her like
all the rest of us--the Queen's little comedy.  He undertook to
lead the chase as far as possible in the direction of Normandy,
when the young pair might ride on to an inn, meet fresh horses, and
proceed to Chateau Leurre, and thence to England.  He would himself
provide a safe-conduct, which, as Berenger suggested, would
represent them as a young Englishman taking home his young wife.
Eustacie wanted at least to masquerade as an Englishwoman, and
played off all the fragments of the language she had caught as a
child, but Berenger only laughed at her, and said they just fitted
the French bride.  It was very pretty to laugh at Eustacie; she
made such a droll pretence at pouting with her rosebud lips, and
her merry velvety eyes belied them so drolly.

Such was to be the Queen's pastoral; but when Elisabeth found the
responsibility so entirely thrown on her, she began to look grave
and frightened.  It was no doubt much more than she had intended
when she brought about the meeting between the young people, and
the King, who had planned the elopement, seemed still resolved to
make all appear her affair.  She looked all day more like the
grave, spiritless being she was at court than like the bright young
rural queen of the evening before, and she was long in her little
oratory chapel in the evening.  Berenger, who was waiting in the
hall with the other Huguenot gentlemen, thought her devotions
interminable since they delayed all her ladies.  At length,
however, a page came up to him, and said in a low voice, 'The Queen
desires the presence of M. le Baron de Ribaumont.'

He followed the messenger, and found himself in the little chapel,
before a gaily-adorned altar, and numerous little shrines and
niches round.  Sidney would have dreaded a surreptitious attempt to
make him conform, but Berenger had no notion of such perils,--he
only saw that Eustacie was standing by the Queen's chair, and a
kindly-looking Austrian priest, the Queen's confessor, held a book
in his hand.

The Queen came to meet him.  'For my sake,' she said, with all her
sweetness, 'to ease my mind, I should like to see my little
Eustacie made entirely your own ere you go.  Father Meinhard tells
me it is safer that, when the parties were under twelve years old,
the troth should be again exchanged.  No other ceremony is needed.'

'I desire nothing but to have her made indissolubly my own,' said
Berenger, bowing.

'And the King permits,' added Elisabeth.

The King growled out, 'It is your comedy, Madame; I meddle not.'

The Austrian priest had no common language with Berenger but Latin.
He asked a few questions, and on hearing the answers, declared that
the sacrament of marriage had been complete, but that--as was often
done in such cases--he would once more hear the troth-plight of the
young pair.  The brief formula was therefore at once exchanged--the
King, when the Queen looked entreatingly at him, rousing himself to
make the bride over to Berenger.  As soon as the vows had been
made, in the briefest manner, the King broke in boisterously:
'There, you are twice marred, to please Madame there; but hold your
tongues all of you about this scene in the play.'

Then almost pushing Eustacie over to Berenger, he added, 'There she
is! Take your wife, sir; but mind, she was as much yours before as
she is now.'

But for all Berenger had said about 'his wife,' it was only now
that he really FELT her his own, and became husband rather than
lover-man instead of boy.  She was entirely his own now, and he
only desired to be away with her; but some days' delay was
necessary.  A chase on the scale of the one that was to favour
their evasion could not be got up without some notice; and,
moreover, it was necessary to procure money, for neither Sidney nor
Ribaumont had more than enough with them for the needful
liberalities to the King's servants and huntsmen.  Indeed Berenger
had spent all that remained in his purse upon the wares of an
Italian pedlar whom he and Eustacie met in the woods, and whose
gloves 'as sweet as fragrant posies,' fans, scent-boxes, pocket
mirrors, Genoa wire, Venice chains, and other toys, afforded him
the mean of making up the gifts that he wished to carry home to his
sisters; and Eustacie's counsel was merrily given in the choice.
And when the vendor began with a meaning smile to recommend to the
young pair themselves a little silver-netted heart as a love-token,
and it turned out that all Berenger's money was gone, so that it
could not be bought without giving up the scented casket destined
for Lucy, Eustacie turned with her sweetest, proudest smile, and
said, 'No, no; I will not have it; what do we two want with love-
tokens now?'

Sidney had taken the youthful and romantic view of the case, and
considered himself to be taking the best possible bare of is young
friend, by enabling him to deal honourably with so charming a
little wife as Eustacie.  Ambassador and tutor would doubtless be
very angry; but Sidney could judge for himself of the lady, and he
therefore threw himself into her interests, and sent his servant
back to Paris to procure the necessary sum for the journey of
Master Henry Berenger and Mistress Mary, his wife.  Sidney was, on
his return alone to Paris, to explain all to the elders, and pacify
them as best he could; and his servant was already the bearer of a
letter from Berenger that was to be sent at once to England with
Walsingham's dispatches, to prepare Lord Walwyn for the arrival of
the runaways.  The poor boy laboured to be impressively calm and
reasonable in his explanation of the misrepresentation, and of his
strong grounds for assuming his rights, with his persuasion that
his wife would readily join the English church--a consideration
that he knew would greatly smooth the way for her.  Indeed, his own
position was impregnable: nobody could blame him for taking his own
wife to himself, and he was so sure of her charms, that he troubled
himself very little about the impression she might make on his
kindred.  If they loved her, it was all right; if not, he could
take her back to his own castle, and win fame and honour under the
banner of France in the Low Countries.  As the Lucy Thistlewood,
she was far too discreet to feel any disappointment or displeasure;
or if she should, it was her own fault and that of his mother, for
all her life she had known him to be married.  So he finished his
letter with a message that the bells should be ready to ring, and
that when Philip heard three guns fired on the coast, he might
light the big beacon pile above the Combe.

Meantime 'the Queen's Pastoral' was much relished by all the
spectators.  The state of things was only avowed to Charles,
Elisabeth, and Philip Sidney, and even the last did not know of the
renewed troth which the King chose to treat as such a secret; but
no one had any doubt of the mutual relations of M. de Ribaumont and
Mdlle. de Nid de Merle, and their dream of bliss was like a
pastoral for the special diversion of the holiday of Montpipeau.
The transparency of their indifference in company, their meeting
eyes, their trysts with the secrecy of an ostrich, were the
subjects of constant amusement to the elders, more especially as
the shyness, blushes, and caution were much more on the side of the
young husband than on that of the lady.  Fresh from her convent,
simple with childishness and innocence, it was to her only the
natural completion of her life to be altogether Berenger's, and the
brief concealment of their full union added a certain romantic
enchantment, which added to her exultation in her victory over her
cruel kindred.  She had been upon her own mind, poor child, for her
few weeks of court life.  She had been upon her own mind, poor
child, for her few weeks of court life, but not long enough to make
her grow older, though just so long as to make the sense of her
having her own protector with her doubly precious.  He, on the
other hand, though full of happiness, did also feel constantly
deepening on him the sense of the charge and responsibility he had
assumed, hardly knowing how.  The more dear Eustacie became to him,
the more she rested on him and became entirely his, the more his
boyhood and INSOUCIANCE drifted away behind him; and while he could
hardly bear to heave his darling a moment out of his sight, the
less he could endure any remark or jest upon his affection for her.
His home had been a refined one, where Cecile's convent purity
seemed to diffuse an atmosphere of modest reserve such as did not
prevail in the court of the Maiden Queen herself, and the lad of
eighteen had not seem enough of the outer world to have rubbed off
any of that grace. His seniority to his little wife seemed to show
itself chiefly in his being put out of countenance for her, when
she was too innocent and too proud of her secret matronhood to
understand or resent the wit.

Little did he know that this was the ballet-like interlude in a
great and terrible tragedy, whose first act was being played out on
the stage where they schemed and sported, like their own little
drama, which was all the world to them, and noting to the others.
Berenger knew indeed that the Admiral was greatly rejoiced that the
Nid de Merle estates should go into Protestant hands, and that the
old gentleman lost no opportunity of impressing on him that they
were a heavy trust, to be used for the benefit of 'the Religion,'
and for the support of the King in his better mind.  But it may be
feared that he did not give a very attentive ear to all this.  He
did not like to think of those estates; he would gladly have left
them all the Narcisse, so that he might have their lady, and though
quite willing to win his spurs under Charles and Coligny against
the Spaniard, his heart and head were far too full to take in the
web of politics.  Sooth to say, the elopement in prospect seemed to
him infinitely more important than Pope or Spaniard, Guise or
Huguenot, and Coligny observed with a sigh to Teligny that he was a
good boy, but nothing but the merest boy, with eyes open only to
himself.

When Charles undertook to rehearse their escape with them, and the
Queen drove out in a little high-wheeled litter with Mne. la
Comtesse, while Mme. De Sauve and Eustacie were mounted on gay
palfreys with the pommelled side-saddle lately invented by the
Queen-mother, Berenger, as he watched the fearless horsemanship and
graceful bearing of his newly-won wife, had no speculations to
spend on the thoughtful face of the Admiral.  And when at the
outskirts of the wood the King's bewildering hunting-horn--sounding
as it were now here, now there, now low, now high--called every
attendant to hasten to its summons, leaving the young squire and
damsel errant with a long winding high-banked lane before them,
they reckoned the dispersion to be all for their sakes, and did not
note, as did Sidney's clear eye, that when the entire company had
come straggling him, it was the King who came up with Mme. De Sauve
almost the last; and a short space after, as if not to appear to
have been with him, appeared the Admiral and his son-in-law.

Sidney also missed one of the Admiral's most trusted attendants,
and from this and other symptoms he formed his conclusions that the
King had scattered his followers as much for the sake of an
unobserved conference with Coligny as for the convenience of the
lovers, and that letters had been dispatched in consequence of that
meeting.

Those letters were indeed of a kind to change the face of affairs
in France.  Marshal Strozzi, then commanding in the south-west, was
bidden to embark at La Rochelle in the last week of August, to
hasten to the succour of the Prince of Orange against Spain, and
letters were dispatched by Coligny to all the Huguenot partisans
bidding them assemble at Melun on the third of September, when they
would be in the immediate neighbourhood of the court, which was
bound for Fontainebleau.  Was the star of the Guises indeed waning?
Was Charles about to escape from their hands, and commit himself to
an honest, high-minded policy, in which he might have been able to
purify his national Church, and wind back to her those whom her
corruptions had driven to seek truth and morality beyond her pale?

Alas! there was a bright pair of eyes that saw more than Philip
Sidney's, a pair of ears that heard more, a tongue and pen less
faithful to guard a secret.


CHAPTER VIII.  'LE BROUILON'


But never more the same two sister pearls
Ran down the silken thread to kiss each other.--Tennyson


Berenger was obliged to crave permission from the King to spend
some hours in riding with Osbert to the first hostel on their way,
to make arrangements for the relay of horses that was to meet them
there, and for the reception of Veronique, Eustacie's maid, who was
to be sent off very early in the morning on a pillion behind
Osbert, taking with her the articles of dress that would be wanted
to change her mistress from the huntress maid of honour to the
English dame.

It was not long after he had been gone that a sound of wheels and
trampling horses was heard in one of the forest drives.  Charles,
who was amusing himself with shooting at a mark together with
Sidney and Teligny, handed his weapon to an attendant, and came up
with looks of restless anxiety to his Queen, who was placed in her
chair under the tree, with the Admiral and her ladies round her, as
judges of the prize.

'Here is _le brouillon_,' he muttered.  'I thought we had been left
in peace too long.'

Elisabeth, who Brantome says was water, while her husband was fire,
tried to murmur some hopeful suggestion; and poor little Eustacie,
clasping her hands, could scarcely refrain from uttering the cry,
'Oh, it is my uncle!  Do not let him take me!'

The next minute there appeared four horses greatly heated and
jaded, drawing one of the court coaches; and as it stopped at the
castle gate, two ladies became visible within it--the portly form
of Queen Catherine, and on the back seat the graceful figure of
Diane de Ribaumont.

Charles swore a great oath under his breath.  He made a step
forward, but then his glance falling on Eustacie's face, which had
flushed to the rosiest hue of the carnation, he put his finger upon
his lip with a menacing air, and then advanced to greet his mother,
followed by his gentlemen.

'Fear not, my dear child,' said the young Queen, taking Eustacie's
arm as she rose for the same purpose.  'Obey the King, and he will
take care that all goes well.'

The gentle Elisabeth was, however, the least regarded member of the
royal family.  Her mother-in-law had not even waited to greet her,
but had hurried the King into his cabinet, with a precipitation
that made the young Queen's tender heart conclude that some
dreadful disaster had occurred, and before Mademoiselle de
Ribaumont had had time to make her reverence, she exclaimed,
breathlessly, 'Oh, is it ill news?  Not from Vienna?'

'No, no, Madame; reassure yourself,' replied Diane; 'it is merely
that her Majesty, being on the way to Monceaux with Mesdames,
turned out of her road to make a flying visit to your graces, and
endeavour to persuade you to make her party complete.'

Elisabeth looked as if questioning with herself if this would
possibly be the whole explanation.  Monceaux was a castle belonging
to the Queen Dowager at no great distance from Montpipeau, but
there had been no intention of leaving Paris before the wedding,
which was fixed for the seventeenth of August, and the bridegroom
was daily expected.  She asked who was the party at Monceaux, and
was told that Madame de Nemours had gone thither the evening
before, with her son, M. de Guise, to make ready; and that Monsieur
was escorting thither his two sisters, Madame de Lorraine and
Madame Marguerite.  The Queen-mother had set out before them very
early in the morning.

'You must have made great speed,' said Elisabeth; 'it is scarcely
two o'clock.'

'Truly we did, Madame; two of our horses even died upon the road;
but the Queen was anxious to find the King ere he should set off on
one of his long chases.'

Diane, at every spare moment, kept her eyes interrogatively fixed
on her cousin, and evidently expected that the taciturn Queen, to
whom a long conversation, in any language but Spanish, was always a
grievance, would soon dismiss them both; and Eustacie did not know
whether to be thankful or impatient, as Elisabeth, with tardy,
hesitating, mentally-translated speech, inquired into every
circumstance of the death of the poor horses, and then into all the
court gossip, which she was currently supposed neither to hear nor
understand; and then bethought herself that this good Mademoiselle
de Ribaumont could teach her that embroidery stitch she had so long
wished to learn.  Taking her arm, she entered the hall, and
produced her work, so as effectually to prevent any communication
between the cousins; Eustacie, meanwhile her heart clinging to her
friend, felt her eyes filling with tears at the thoughts of how
unkind her morrow's flight would seem without one word of farewell
or of confidence, and was already devising tokens of tenderness to
be left behind for Diane's consolation, when the door of the
cabinet opened, and Catherine sailed down the stairs, with her
peculiar gliding step and sweep of dignity.  The King followed her
with a face of irresolution and distress.  He was evidently under
her displeasure; but she advanced to the young Queen with much
graciousness, and an air of matronly solicitude.

'My daughter,' she said, 'I have just assured the King that I
cannot leave you in these damp forests.  I could not be responsible
for the results of the exposure any longer.  It is for him to make
his own arrangements, but I brought my coach empty on purpose to
transport you and your ladies to Monceaux.

The women may follow with the mails.  You can be ready as soon as
the horses are harnessed.'

Elisabeth was used to passiveness.  She turned one inquiring look
to her husband, but he looked sullen, and, evidently cowed by his
mother, uttered not a word. She could only submit, and Catherine
herself add that there was room for Madame de Sauve and
Mademoiselle de Nid de Merle.  Madame la Comtesse should follow!
It was self-evident that propriety would not admit of the only
demoiselle being left behind among the gentlemen.  Poor Eustacie,
she looked mutely round as if she hoped to escape!  What was the
other unkindness to this?  And ever under the eyes of Diane too,
who followed her to their chamber, when she went to prepare, so
that she could not even leave a token for him where he would have
been most certain to find it. Moments were few; but at the very
last, while the queens were being handed in the carriage, she
caught the eye of Philip Sidney.  He saw the appealing look, and
came near.  She tried to laugh.  'Here is my gage, Monsieur
Sidney,' she said, and held out a rose-coloured knot of ribbon;
then, as he came near enough, she whispered imploringly three of
her few English words--

'Give to HIM.'

'I take the gage as it is meant,' said Sidney, putting a knee to
the ground, and kissing the trembling fingers, ere he handed her
into the carriage.  He smiled and waved his hand as he met her
earnest eyes.  One bow contained a scrap of paper pricked with
needle-holes.  Sidney would not have made out those pricks for the
whole world, even had he been able to do more than hastily secure
the token, before the unhappy King, with a paroxysm of violent
interjections, demanded of him whether the Queen of England, woman
though she were, ever were so beset, and never allowed a moment to
herself; then, without giving time for an answer, he flung away to
his cabinet, and might be heard pacing up and down there in a
tempest of perplexity.  He came forth only to order his horse, and
desire M. de Sauve and a few grooms to be ready instantly to ride
with him.  His face was full of pitiable perplexity--the smallest
obstacle was met with a savage oath; and he was evidently in all
the misery of a weak yet passionate nature, struggling with
impotent violence against a yoke that evidently mastered it.

He flung a word to his guests that he should return ere night, and
they thus perceived that he did not intend their dismissal.

'Poor youth,' said Coligny, mildly, 'he will be another being when
we have him in our camp with the King of Navarre for his
companion.'

And then the Admiral repaired to his chamber to write one of his
many fond letters to the young wife of his old age; while his son-
in-law and Philip Sidney agreed to ride on, so as to met poor young
Ribaumont, and prepare him for the blow that had befallen him
personally, while they anxiously debated what this sudden descent
of the Queen-mother might portend.  Teligny was ready to believe in
any evil intention on her part, but he thought himself certain of
the King's real sentiments, and in truth Charles had never treated
any man with such confidence as this young Huguenot noble, to whom
he had told his opinion of each of his counsellors, and his
complete distrust of all.  That pitying affection which clings to
those who cling to it, as well as a true French loyalty of heart,
made Teligny fully believe that however Catherine might struggle to
regain her ascendancy, and whatever apparent relapses might be
caused by Charles's habitual subjection to her, yet the high
aspirations and strong sense of justice inherent in the King were
asserting themselves as his youth was passing into manhood; and
that the much-desired war would enable him to develop all his
higher qualities.  Sidney listened, partially agreed, talked of
caution, and mused within himself whether violence might not
sometimes be mistaken for vigour.

Ere long, the merry cadence of an old English song fell with a
homelike sound upon Sidney's ear, and in another moment they were
in sight of Berenger, trotting joyously along, with a bouquet of
crimson and white heather-blossoms in his hand, and his bright
young face full of exultation in his arrangements.  He shouted
gaily as he saw them, calling out, 'I thought I should meet you!
but I wondered not to have heard the King's bugle-horn.  Where are
the rest of the hunters?'

'Unfortunately we have had another sort of hunt to-day,' said
Sidney, who had ridden forward to meet him; 'and one that I fear,
will disquiet you greatly.'

'How!  Not her uncle?' exclaimed Berenger.

'No, cheer up, my friend, it was not she who was the object of the
chase; it was this unlucky King,' he added, speaking English, 'who
has been run to earth by his mother.'

'Nay, but what is that to me?' said Berenger, with impatient
superiority to the affairs of the nation.  'How does it touch us?'

Sidney related the abstraction of the young Queen and her ladies,
and then handed over the rose-coloured token, which Berenger took
with vehement ardour; then his features quivered as he read the
needle-pricked words-two that he had playfully insisted on her
speaking and spelling after him in his adopted tongue, then not
vulgarized, but the tenderest in the language, 'Sweet heart.'  That
was all, but to him they conveyed constancy to him and his,
whatever might betide, and an entreaty not to leave her to her
fate.

'My dearest! never!' he muttered; then turning hastily as he put
the precious token into his bosom, he exclaimed, 'Are their women
yet gone?' and being assured that they were not departed when the
two friends had set out, he pushed his horse on at speed, so as to
be able to send a reply by Veronique.  He was barely in time: the
clumsy wagon-like conveyance of the waiting-women stood at the door
of the castle, in course of being packed with the Queen's wardrobe,
amid the janglings of lackeys, and expostulating cries of _femmes
de chambre_, all in the worst possible humour at being crowded up
with their natural enemies, the household of the Queen-mother.

Veronique, a round-faced Angevin girl--who, like her lady, had not
parted with all her rustic simplicity and honesty, and who had been
necessarily taken into their confidence--was standing apart from
the whirl of confusion, holding the leashes of two or three little
dogs that had been confided to her care, that their keepers might
with more ease throw themselves into the _melee_.  Her face lighted
up as she saw the Baron de Ribaumont arrive.

'Ah, sir, Madame will be so happy that I have seen Monsieur once
more,' she exclaimed under her breath, as he approached her.

'Alas! there is not a moment to write,' he said, looking at the
vehicle, already fast filling, 'but give her these flowers; they
were gathered for her; give her ten thousand thanks for her token.
Tell her to hold firm, and that neither king nor queen, bolt nor
bar, shall keep me from her.  Tell her, our watchword is HOPE.'

The sharp eyes of the duenna of the Queen's household, a rigid
Spanish dame, were already searching for stray members of her
flock, and Veronique had to hurry to her place, while Berenger
remained to hatch new plans, each wilder than the last, and torment
himself with guesses whether his project had been discovered.
Indeed, there were moments when he fancied the frustration of his
purpose the special object of Queen Catherine's journey, but he had
the wisdom to keep any such suggestion to himself.

The King came back by supper-time, looking no longer in a state of
indecision, but pale and morose.  He spoke to no one as he entered,
and afterwards took his place at the head of the supper-table in
silence, which he did not break till the meal was nearly over.
Then he said abruptly, 'Gentlemen, our party has been broken up,
and I imagine that after our great hunt tomorrow, no one will have
any objection to return to Paris.  We shall have merrier sport at
Fontainebleau when this most troublesome of weddings is over.'

There was nothing to be done but to bow acquiescence, and the King
again became grimly silent.  After supper he challenged Coligny to
a game of chess, and not a word passed during the protracted
contest, either from the combatants or any other person in the
hall.  It was as if the light had suddenly gone out to others
besides the disappointed and anxious Berenger, and a dull shadow
had fallen on the place only yesterday so lively, joyous, and
hopeful.

Berenger, chained by the etiquette of the royal presence, sat like
a statue, his back against the wall, his arms crossed on his
breast, his eyes fixed, chewing the cud of the memories of his
dream of bliss, or striving to frame the future to his will, and to
decide what was the next reasonable step he could take, or whether
his irrepressible longing to ride straight off to Monceaux, claim
his wife, and take her on horseback behind him, were a mere
impracticable vision.

The King, having been checkmated twice out of three times by the
Admiral, too honest a man not truly to accept his declaration of
not wanting courtly play, pushed away the board, and was attended
by them all to his COUCHER, which was usually made in public; and
the Queen being absent, the gentlemen were required to stand around
him till he was ready to fall asleep.  He did not seem disposed to
talk, but begged Sidney to fetch his lute, and sing to him some
English airs that had taken his fancy much when sung by Sidney and
Berenger together.

Berenger felt as if they would choke him in his present turbid
state of resentful uncertainty; but even as the unhappy young King
spoke, it was with a heavy, restless groan, as he added, 'If you
know any lullaby that will give rest to a wretch tormented beyond
bearing, let us have it.'

'Alas, Sire!' said the Admiral, seeing that no perilous ears
remained in the room; 'there are better and more soothing words
than any mundane melody.'

'_Peste_!  My good father,' said the King, petulantly, 'has not old
Phlipote, my nurse, rocked me to the sound of your Marot's Psalms,
and crooned her texts over me? I tell you I do not want to think.
I want what will drive thought away--to dull---'

'Alas! what dulls slays,' said the Admiral.

'Let it.  Nothing can be worse than the present,' said the wretched
Charles; then, as if wishing to break away from Coligny, he threw
himself round towards Berenger, and said, 'Here; stoop down,
Ribaumont; a word with you.  Your matters have gone up the
mountains, as the Italians say, with mine.  But never fear.  Keep
silence, and you shall have the bird in your hand, only you must be
patient.  Hold! I will make you and Monsieur Sidney gentlemen of my
bed-chamber, which will give you the _entree_ of the Louvre; and if
you cannot get her out of it without an _eclat_, then you must be a
much duller fellow than half my court.  Only that it is not their
own wives that they abstract.

With this Berenger must needs content himself; and the certainty of
the poor King's good-will did enable him to do his part with Sidney
in the songs that endeavoured to soothe the torments of the evil
spirit which had on that day effected a fresh lodgment in that
weak, unwilling heart.

It was not till the memoirs of the secret actors in this tragedy
were brought to light that the key to these doings was discovered.
M. de Sauve, Charles's secretary, had disclosed his proceedings to
his wife; she, flattered by the attentions of the Duke of Anjou,
betrayed them to him; and the Queen-mother, terrified at the change
of policy, and the loss of the power she had enjoyed for so many
years, had hurried to the spot.

Her influence over her son resembled the fascination of a snake:
once within her reach he was unable to resist her; and when in
their _tete-a-tete_ she reproached him with ill-faith towards her,
prophesied the overthrow of the Church, the desertion of his
allies, the ruin of his throne, and finally announced her intention
of hiding her head in her own hereditary estates in Auvergne,
begging, as a last favour, that he would give his brother time to
quit France instead of involving him in his own ruin, the poor
young man's whole soul was in commotion.  His mother knew her
strength, left the poison to work, and withdrew in displeasure to
Monceaux, sure that, as in effect happened, he would not be long in
following her, imploring her not to abandon him, and making an
unconditional surrender of himself, his conscience, and his friends
into her hands.  Duplicity was so entirely the element of the
court, that, even while thus yielding himself, it was as one
checked, but continuing the game; he still continued his connection
with the Huguenots, hoping to succeed in his aims by some future
counter-intrigue; and his real hatred of the court policy, and the
genuine desire to make common cause with them, served his mother's
purpose completely, since his cajolery thus became sincere.  Her
purpose was, probably, not yet formed.  It was power that she
loved, and hoped to secure by the intrigues she had played off all
her life; but she herself was in the hands of an infinitely more
bloodthirsty and zealous faction, who could easily accomplish their
ends by working on the womanly terrors of an unscrupulous mind.


CHAPTER IX.  THE WEDDING WITH CRIMSON FAVOURS


And trust me not at all or all in all.--TENNYSON


So extensive was the Louvre, so widely separated the different
suites of apartments, that Diane and Eustacie had not met after the
pall-mall party till they sat opposite to their several queens in
the coach driving through the woods, the elder cousin curiously
watching the eyes of the younger, so wistfully gazing at the
window, and now and then rapidly winking as though to force back a
rebellious tear.

The cousins had been bred up together in the convent at Bellaise,
and had only been separated by Diane's having been brought to court
two years sooner than Eustacie.  They had always been on very
kindly, affectionate terms; Diane treating her little cousin with
the patronage of an elder sister, and greatly contributing to
shield her from the temptations of the court.  The elder cousin was
so much the more handsome, brilliant, and admired, that no notion
of rivalry had crossed her mind; and Eustacie's inheritance was
regarded by her as reserved for her brother, and the means of
aggradizement an prosperity for herself and her father.  She looked
upon the child as a sort of piece of property of the family, to be
guarded and watched over for her brother; and when she had first
discovered the error that the young baron was making between the
two daughters of the house, it was partly in kindness to Eustacie,
partly to carry out her father's plans, and partly from her own
pleasure in conversing with anything so candid and fresh as
Berenger, that she had maintained the delusion.  Her father
believed himself to have placed Berenger so entirely in the
background, that he would hardly be at court long enough to
discover the imposition; and Diane was not devoid of a strong hope
of winning his affection and bending his will so as to induce him
to become her husband, and become a French courtier for her sake--a
wild dream, but a better castle in the air than she had ever yet
indulged in.

This arrangement was, however, disconcerted by the King's passion
for Sidney's society, which brought young Ribaumont also to court;
and at the time of the mischievous introduction by Madame
Marguerite, Diane had perceived that the mistake would soon be
found out, and that she should no longer be able to amuse herself
with the fresh-coloured, open-faced boy who was unlike all her
former acquaintance; but the magnetism that shows a woman when she
produces an effect had been experienced by her, and she had been
sure that a few efforts more would warm and mould the wax in her
fingers.  That he should prefer a little brown thing, whose beauty
was so inferior to her own, had never crossed her mind; she did not
even know that he was invited to the pall-mall party, and was
greatly taken by surprise when her father sought an interview with
her, accused her of betraying their interests, and told her that
this foolish young fellow declared that he had been mistaken, and
having now discovered his veritable wife, protested against
resigning her.

By that time the whole party were gone to Montpipeau, but that the
Baron was among them was not known at the Louvre until Queen
Catherine, who had always treated Diane as rather a favoured,
quick-witted _protegee_, commanded her attendance, and on her way
let her know that Madame de Sauve had reported that, among all the
follies that were being perpetrated at the hunting-seat, the young
Queen was absolutely throwing the little Nid-de-Merle into the arms
of her Huguenot husband, and that if measures were not promptly
taken all the great estates in the Bocage would be lost to the
young Chevalier, and be carried over to the Huguenot interest.

Still Diane could not believe that it was so much a matter of love
as that the young had begun to relish court favour and to value the
inheritance, and she could quite believe her little cousin had been
flattered by a few attentions that had no meaning in them.  She was
not prepared to find that Eustacie shrank from her, and tried to
avoid a private interview.  In truth, the poor child had received
such injunctions from the Queen, and so stern a warning look from
the King, that she durst not utter a syllable of the evening that
had sealed her lot, and was so happy with her secret, so used to
tell everything to Diane, so longing to talk of her husband, that
she was afraid of betraying herself if once they were alone
together.  Yet Diane, knowing that her father trusted to her to
learn how far things had gone, and piqued at seeing the transparent
little creature, now glowing and smiling with inward bliss, now
pale, pensive, sighing, and anxious, and scorning her as too
childish for the love that she seemed to affect, was resolved on
obtaining confidence from her.

And when the whole female court had sat down to the silk embroidery
in which Catherine de Medicis excelled, Diane seated herself in the
recess of a window and beckoned her cousin to her side, so that it
was not possible to disobey.

'Little one,' she said, 'why have you cast off your poor cousin?
There, sit down'--for Eustacie stood, with her silk in her hand, as
if meaning instantly to return to her former place; and now, her
cheeks in a flame, she answered in an indignant whisper, 'You know,
Diane!  How could you try to keep him from me?'

'Because it was better for thee, my child, than to be pestered with
an adventurer,' she said, smiling, though bitterly.

'My husband!' returned Eustacie proudly.

'Bah!  You know better than that!'  Then, as Eustacie was about to
speak, but checked herself, Diane added, 'Yes, my poor friend, he
has a something engaging about him, and we all would have hindered
you from the pain and embarrassment of a meeting with him.'

Eustacie smiled a little saucy smile, as though infinitely superior
to them all.

'_Pauvre petite_,' said Diane, nettled; 'she actually believes in
his love.'

'I will not hear a word against my husband!' said Eustacie,
stepping back, as if to return to her place, but Diane rose and
laid her hand on hers.  'My dear,' she said, 'we must no part thus.
I only wish to know what touches my darling so nearly.  I thought
she loved and clung to us; why should she have turned from me for
the sake of one who forgot her for half his life?  What can he have
done to master this silly little heart?'

'I cannot tell you, Diane,' said Eustacie, simply; and though she
looked down, the colour on her face was more of a happy glow than a
conscious blush.  'I love him too much; only we understand each
other now, and it is of no use to try to separate us.'

'Ah, poor little thing, so she thinks,' said Diane; and as Eustacie
again smiled as one incapable of being shaken in her conviction,
she added, 'And how do you know that he loves you?'

Diane was startled by the bright eyes that flashed on her and the
bright colour that made Eustacie perfectly beautiful, as she
answered, 'Because I am his wife!  That is enough!'  Then, before
her cousin could speak again, 'But, Diane, I promised not to speak
of it.  I know he would despise me if I broke my word, so I will
not talk to you till I have leave to tell you all, and I am going
back to help Gabrielle de Limeuil with her shepherdess.'

Mademoiselle de Ribaumont felt her attempt most unsatisfactory, but
she knew of old that Eustacie was very determined--all Bellaise
know that to oppose the tiny Baronne was to make her headstrong in
her resolution; and if she suspected that she was coaxed, she only
became more obstinate.  To make any discoveries, Diane must take
the line of most cautious caresses, such as to throw her cousin off
her guard; and this she was forced to confess to her father when he
sought an interview with her on the day of her return to Paris.  He
shook his head.  She must be on the watch, he said, and get quickly
into the silly girl's confidence.  What! had she not found out that
the young villain had been on the point of eloping with her?  If
such a thing as that should succeed, the whole family was lost, and
she was the only person who could prevent it.  He trusted to her.

The Chevalier had evidently come to regard his niece as his son's
lawful property, and the Baron as the troublesome meddler; and
Diane had much the same feeling, enhanced by sore jealousy at
Eustacie's triumph over her, and curiosity as to whether it could
be indeed well founded.  She had an opportunity of judging the same
evening--mere habit always caused Eustacie to keep under her wing,
if she could not be near the Queen, whenever there was a reception,
and to that reception of course Berenger came, armed with his right
as gentleman of the bedchamber.  Eustacie was colouring and
fluttering, as if by the instinct of his presence, even before the
tall fair head became visible, moving forward as well as the crowd
would permit, and seeking about with anxious eyes.  The glances of
the blue and the black eyes met at last, and a satisfied radiance
illuminated each young face; then the young man steered his way
through the throng, but was caught midway by Coligny, and led up to
be presented to a hook-nosed, dark-haired, lively-looking young
man, in a suit of black richly laced with silver.  It was the King
of Navarre, the royal bridegroom, who had entered Paris in state
that afternoon.  Eustacie tried to be proud of the preferment, but
oh! she thought it mistimed, and was gratified to mark certain
wandering of the eye even while the gracious King was speaking.
Then the Admiral said something that brought the girlish rosy flush
up to the very roots of the short curls of flaxen hair, and made
the young King's white teeth flash out in a mirthful, good-natured
laugh, and thereupon the way opened, and Berenger was beside the
two ladies, kissing Eustacie's hand, but merely bowing to Diane.

She was ready to take the initiative.

'My cousins deem me unpardonable,' she said; 'yet I am going to
purchase their pardon.  See this cabinet of porcelain _a le Reine_,
and Italian vases and gems, behind this curtain.  There is all the
siege of Troy, which M. le Baron will not doubt explain to
Mademoiselle, while I shall sit on this cushion, and endure the
siege of St. Quentin from the _bon_ Sieur de Selinville.'

Monsieur de Selinville was the court bore, who had been in every
battle from Pavia to Montcontour, and gave as full memoirs of each
as did Blaise de Monluc, only _viva voce_  instead of in writing.
Diane was rather a favourite of his; she knew her way through all
his adventures.  So soon as she had heard the description of the
King of Navarre's entry into Paris that afternoon, and the old
gentleman's lamentation that his own two nephews were among the
three hundred Huguenot gentleman who had formed the escort, she had
only to observe whether his reminiscences had gone to Italy or to
Flanders in order to be able to put in the appropriate remarks at
each pause, while she listened all the while to the murmurs behind
the curtain.  Yet it was not easy, with all her court breeding, to
appear indifferent, and solely absorbed in hearing of the bad
lodgings that had fallen to the share of the royal troops at
Brescia, when such sounds were reaching her.  It was not so much
the actual words she heard, though these were the phrases--'-mon
ange_, my heart, my love;' those were common, and Diane had lived
in the Queen-mother's squadron long enough to despise those who
uttered them only less than those who believed them.  It was the
full depth of tenderness and earnestness, in the subdued tones of
the voice, that gave her a sense of quiet force and reality beyond
all she had ever known.  She had heard and overheard men pour out
frantic ravings of passion, but never had listened to anything like
the sweet protecting tenderness of voice that seemed to embrace and
shelter its object.  Diane had no doubts now; he had never so
spoken to her; nay, perhaps he had had no such cadences in his
voice before.  It was quite certain that Eustacie was everything to
him, she herself nothing; she who might have had any gallant in the
court at her feet, but had never seen one whom she could believe
in, whose sense of esteem had been first awakened by this stranger
lad who despised her.  Surely he was loving this foolish child
simply as his duty; his belonging, as his right he might struggle
hard for her, and if he gained her, be greatly disappointed; for
how could Eustacie appreciate him, little empty-headed, silly
thing, who would be amused and satisfied by any court flatterer?

However, Diane held out and played her part, caught scraps of the
conversation, and pieced them together, yet avoided all appearance
of inattention to M. de Selinville, and finally dismissed him, and
manoeuvred first Eustacie, and after a safe interval Berenger, out
of the cabinet.  The latter bowed as he bade her good night, and
said, with the most open and cordial of smiles, 'Cousin, I thank
you with all my heart.'

The bright look seemed to her another shaft.  'What happiness!'
said she to herself.  'Can I overthrow it?  Bah! it will crumble of
its own accord, even if I did nothing!  And my father and brother!'

Communication with her father and brother was not always easy to
Diane, for she lived among the Queen-mother's ladies.  Her brother
was quartered in a sort of barrack among the gentlemen of
Monsieur's suite, and the old Chevalier was living in the room
Berenger had taken for him at the Croix de Lorraine, and it was
only on the most public days that they attended at the palace.
Such a day, however, there was on the ensuing Sunday, when Henry of
Navarre and Marguerite of France were to be wedded.  Their
dispensation was come, but, to the great relief of Eustacie, there
was no answer with it to the application for the CASSATION of her
marriage.  In fact, this dispensation had never emanated from the
Pope at all.  Rome would not sanction the union of a daughter of
France with a Huguenot prince; and Charles had forged the document,
probably with his mother's knowledge, in the hope of spreading her
toils more completely round her prey, while he trusted that the
victims might prove too strong for her, and destroy her web, and in
breaking forth might release himself.

Strange was the pageant of that wedding on Sunday, the 17th of
August, 1572.  The outward seeming was magnificent, when all that
was princely in France stood on the splendidly decked platform in
front of Notre-Dame, around the bridegroom in the bright promise of
his kingly endowments, and the bride in her peerless beauty.
Brave, noble-hearted, and devoted were the gallant following of the
one, splendid and highly gifted the attendants of the other; and
their union seemed to promise peace to a long distracted kingdom.

Yet what an abyss lay beneath those trappings!  The bridegroom and
his comrades were as lions in the toils of the hunter, and the lure
that had enticed them thither was the bride, herself so unwilling a
victim that her lips refused to utter the espousal vows, and her
head as force forward by her brother into a sign of consent; while
the favoured lover of her whole lifetime agreed to the sacrifice in
order to purchase the vengeance for which he thirsted, and her
mother, the corrupter of her own children, looked complacently on
at her ready-dug pit of treachery and bloodshed.

Among the many who played unconscious on the surface of that gulf
of destruction, were the young creatures whose chief thought in the
pageant was the glance and smile from the gallery of the Queen's
ladies to the long procession of the English ambassador's train, as
they tried to remember their own marriage there; Berenger with
clear recollection of his father's grave, anxious face, and
Eustacie chiefly remembering her own white satin and turquoise
dress, which indeed she had seen on every great festival-day as the
best raiment of the image of Notre Dame de Bellaise.  She remained
in the choir during mass, but Berenger accompanied the rest of the
Protestants with the bridegroom at their head into the nave, where
Coligny beguiled the time with walking about, looking at the
banners that had been taken from himself and Conde at Montcontour
and Jarnac, saying that he hoped soon to see them taken down and
replaced by Spanish banners.  Berenger had followed because he felt
the need of doing as Walsingham and Sidney thought right, but he
had not been in London long enough to become hardened to the
desecration of churches by frequenting 'Paul's Walk.'  He remained
bareheaded, and stood as near as he could to the choir, listening
to the notes that floated from the priests and acolytes at the high
altar, longing from the time when he and Eustacie should be one in
their prayers, and lost in a reverie, till a grave old nobleman
passing near him reproved him for dallying with the worship of
Rimmon.  But his listening attitude had not passed unobserved by
others besides Huguenot observers.

The wedding was followed by a ball at the Louvre, from which,
however, all the stricter Huguenots absented themselves out of
respect to Sunday, and among them the family and guests of the
English Ambassador, who were in the meantime attending the divine
service that had been postponed on account of the morning's
ceremony.  Neither was the Duke of Guise present at the
entertainment; for though he had some months previously been piqued
and entrapped into a marriage with Catherine of Cleves, yet his
passion for Marguerite was still so strong that he could not bear
to join in the festivities of her wedding with another.  The
absence of so many distinguished persons caused the admission of
many less constantly privileged, and thus it was that Diane there
met both her father and brother, who eagerly drew her into a
window, and demanded what she had to tell them, laughing too at the
simplicity of the youth, who had left for the Chevalier a formal
announcement that he had dispatched his protest to Rome, and
considered himself as free to obtain his wife by any means in his
power.

'Where is _la petite_?' Narcisse demanded.  Behind her Queen, as
usual?'

'The young Queen keeps her room to-night,' returned Diane.  'Nor do
I advise you, brother, to thrust yourself in the way of _la petite
entetee_ just at present.'

'What, is she so besotted with the peach face?  He shall pay for
it!'

'Brother, no duel.  Father, remind him that she would never forgive
him.'

'Fear not, daughter,' said the Chevalier; 'this folly can be ended
by much quieter modes, only you must first give us information.'

'She tells me nothing,' said Diane; 'she is in one of her own
humours--high and mighty.'

'_Peste_! where is your vaunt of winding the little one round your
finger?'

'With time, I said,' replied Diane.  Curiously enough, she had no
compunction in worming secrets from Eustacie and betraying them,
but she could not bear to think of the trap she had set for the
unsuspecting youth, and how ingenuously he had thanked her, little
knowing how she had listened to his inmost secrets.

'Time is everything,' said her father; 'delay will be our ruin.
Your inheritance will slip through your fingers, my son.  The youth
will soon win favour by abjuring his heresy; he will play the same
game with the King as his father did with King Henri.  You will
have nothing but your sword, and for you, my poor girl, there is
nothing but to throw yourself on the kindness of your aunt at
Bellaise, if she can receive the vows of a dowerless maiden.'

'It will never be,' said Narcisse.  'My rapier will soon dispose of
a big rustic like that, who knows just enough of fencing to make
him an easy prey.  What! I verily believe the great of entreaty.
'And yet the fine fellow was willing enough to break the marriage
when he took her for the bride.'

'Nay, my son,' argued the Chevalier, will apparently to spare his
daughter from the sting of mortification, 'as I said, all can be
done without danger of bloodshed on either side, were we but aware
of any renewed project of elopement.  The pretty pair would be
easily waylaid, the girl safely lodged at Bellaise, the boy sent
off to digest his pride in England.'

'Unhurt?' murmured Diane.

Her father checked Narcisse's mockery at her solicitude, as he
added, 'Unhurt? Yes.  He is a liberal-hearted, gracious, fine young
man, whom I should much grieve to harm; but if you know of any plan
of elopement and conceal it, my daughter, then upon you will lie
either the ruin and disgrace of your family, or the death of one or
both of the youths.'

Diane saw that her question had betrayed her knowledge.  She spoke
faintly.  'Something I did overhear, but I know not how to utter a
treason.'

'There is no treason where there is no trust, daughter,' said the
Chevalier, in the tone of a moral sage.  'Speak!'

Diane never disobeyed her father, and faltered, 'Wednesday; it is
for Wednesday.  They mean to leave the palace in the midst of the
masque; there is a market-boat from Leurre to meet them on the
river; his servants will be in it.'

'On Wednesday!'  Father and son looked at each other.

'That shall be remedied,' said Narcisse.

'Child,' added her father, turning kindly to Diane, 'you have saved
our fortunes.  There is put one thing more that you must do.  Make
her obtain the pearls from him.'

'Ah!' sighed Diane, half shocked, half revengeful, as she thought
how he had withheld them from her.

'It is necessary,' said the Chevalier.  'The heirloom of our house
must not be risked.  Secure the pearls, child, and you will have
done good service, and earned the marriage that shall reward you.'

When he was gone, Diane pressed her hands together with a strange
sense of misery.  He, who had shrunk from the memory of little
Diane's untruthfulness, what would he think of the present Diane's
treachery?  Yet it was to save his life and that of her brother--
and for the assertion of her victory over the little robber,
Eustacie.


CHAPTER X.  MONSIEUR'S BALLET.


The Styx had fast bound her
Nine times around her.
         POPE, ODE ON ST.CECILIA'S DAY


Early on Monday morning came a message to Mademoiselle Nid de Merle
that she was to prepare to act the part of a nymph of Paradise in
the King's masque on Wednesday night, and must dress at once to
rehearse her part in the ballet specially designed by Monsieur.

Her first impulse was to hurry to her own Queen, whom she entreated
to find some mode of exempting her.  But Elisabeth, who was still
in bed, looked distressed and frightened, made signs of caution,
and when the weeping girl was on the point of telling her of the
project that would thus be ruined, silenced her by saying, 'Hush!
my poor child, I have but meddled too much already.  Our Lady grant
that I have not done you more harm than good!  Tell me no more.'

'Ah!  Madame, I will be discreet, I will tell you nothing; but if
you would only interfere to spare me from this ballet!  It is
Monsieur's contrivance!  Ah!  Madame, could you but speak to the
King!'

'Impossible, child,' said the Queen.  'Things are not her as they
were at happy Montpipeau.'

And the poor young Queen turned her face in to her pillow, and
wept.

Every one who was not in a dream of bliss like poor little Eustacie
knew that the King had been in so savage a mood ever since his
return that no one durst ask anything from him.  a little while
since, he had laughed at his gentle wife for letting herself, and
Emperor's daughter, be trampled on where his brother Francis's
Queen, from her trumpery, beggarly realm, had held up her head, and
put down _la belle Mere_; he had amused himself with Elisabeth's
pretty little patronage of the young Ribaumonts as a promising
commencement in intriguing like other people; but now he was
absolutely violent at any endeavour to make him withstand his
mother, and had driven his wife back into that cold, listless,
indifferent shell of apathy from which affection and hope had begun
to rouse her.  She knew it would only make it the worse for her
little Nid de Merle for her to interpose when Monsieur had made the
choice.

And Eustacie was more afraid of Monsieur than even of Narcisse, and
her Berenger could not be there to protect her.  However, there was
protection in numbers.  With twelve nymphs, and cavaliers to match,
even the Duke of Anjou could not accomplish the being very
insulting.  Eustacie--light, agile, and fairy-like--gained
considerable credit for ready comprehension and graceful
evolutions.  She had never been so much complimented before, and
was much cheered by praise.  Diane showed herself highly pleased
with her little cousin's success, embraced her, and told her she
was finding her true level at court.  She would be the prettiest of
all the nymphs, who were all small, since fairies rather than
Amazons were wanted in their position.  'And, Eustacie,' she added,
'you should wear the pearls.'

'The pearls!' said Eustacie.  'Ah! but HE always wears them.  I
like to see them on his bonnet--they are hardly whiter than his
forehead.'

'Foolish little thing!' said Diane, 'I shall think little of his
love if he cares to see himself in them more than you.'

The shaft seemed carelessly shot, but Diane knew that it would
work, and so it did.  Eustacie wanted to prove her husband's love,
not to herself, but to her cousin.

He made his way to her in the gardens of the Louvre that evening,
greatly dismayed at the report that had reached him that she was to
figure as a nymph of Elysium.  She would thus be in sight as a
prominent figure the whole evening, even till an hour so late that
the market boat which Osbert had arranged for their escape could
not wait for them without exciting suspicion, and besides, his
delicate English feelings were revolted at the notion of her
forming a part of such a spectacle.  She could not understand his
displeasure.  If they could not go on Wednesday, they could go on
Saturday; and as to her acting, half the noblest ladies in the
court would be in piece, and if English husbands did not like it,
they must be the tyrants she had always heard of.

'To be a gazing-stock---' began Berenger.

'Hush! Monsieur, I will hear no more, or I shall take care how I
put myself in your power.'

'That has been done for you, sweetheart,' he said, smiling with
perhaps a shade too much superiority; 'you are mine entirely now.'

'that is not kind,' she pouted, almost crying--for between
flattery, excitement, and disappointment she was not like herself
that day, and she was too proud to like to be reminded that she was
in any one's power.

'I thought,' said Berenger, with the gentleness that always made
him manly in dealing with her, 'I thought you like to own yourself
mine.'

'Yes, sir, when you are good, and do not try to hector me for what
I cannot avoid.'

Berenger was candid enough to recollect that royal commands did not
brook disobedience, and, being thoroughly enamoured besides of his
little wife, he hastened to make his peace by saying, 'True, _ma
mie_, this cannot be helped.  I was a wretch to find fault.  Think
of it no more.'

'You forgive me?' she said, softened instantly.

'Forgive you?  What for, pretty one?  For my forgetting that you
are still a slave to a hateful Court?'

'Ah! then, if you forgive me, let me wear the pearls.'

'The poor pearls,' said Berenger, taken aback for a moment, 'the
meed of our forefather's valour, to form part of the pageant and
mummery?  But never mind, sweetheart,' for he could not bear to vex
her again: 'you shall have them to-night: only take care of them.
My mother would look back on me if she knew I had let them out of
my care, but you and I are one after all.'

Berenger could not bear to leave his wife near the Duke of Anjou
and Narcisse, and he offered himself to the King as an actor in the
masque, much as he detested all he heard of its subject.  The King
nodded comprehension, and told him it was open to him either to be
a demon in a tight suit of black cloth, with cloven-hoof shoes, a
long tail, and a trident; or one of the Huguenots who were to be
repulsed from Paradise for the edification of the spectators.  As
these last were to wear suits of knightly armour, Berenger much
preferred making one of them in spite of their doom.

The masque was given at the hall of the Hotel de Bourbon, where a
noble gallery accommodated the audience, and left full space
beneath for the actors.  Down the centre of the stage flowed a
stream, broad enough to contain a boat, which was plied by the Abbe
de Mericour--transformed by a gray beard and hair and dismal mask
into Charon.

But so unused to navigation was he, so crazy and ill-trimmed his
craft, that his first performance would have been his submersion in
the Styx had not Berenger, better accustomed to boats than any of
the _dramatis personoe_, caught him by the arms as he was about to
step in, pointed out the perils, weighted the frail vessel, and
given him a lesson in paddling it to and fro, with such a masterly
hand, that, had there been time for a change of dress, the part of
Charon would have been unanimously transferred to him; but the
delay could not be suffered, and poor Mericour, in fear of a
ducking, or worse, of ridicule, balanced himself, pole in hand, in
the midst of the river.  To the right of the river was Elysium--a
circular island revolving on a wheel which was an absolute orrery,
representing in concentric circles the skies, with the sun, moon,
the seven planets, twelve signs, and the fixed stars, all
illuminated with small lamps.  The island itself was covered with
verdure, in which, among bowers woven of gay flowers, reposed
twelve nymphs of Paradise, of whom Eustacie was one.

On the other side of the stream was another wheel, whose grisly
emblems were reminders of Dante's infernal circles, and were
lighted by lurid flames, while little bells were hung round so as
to make a harsh jangling sound, and all of the court who had any
turn for buffoonery were leaping and dancing about as demons
beneath it, and uttering wild shouts.

King Charles and his two brothers stood on the margin of the
Elysian lake.  King Henry, the Prince of Conde, and a selection of
the younger and gayer Huguenots, were the assailants,--storming
Paradise to gain possession of the nymphs.  It was a very illusive
armour that they wore, thin scales of gold or silver as cuirasses
over their satin doublets, and the swords and lances of festive
combat in that court had been of the bluntest foil ever since the
father of these princes had died beneath Montgomery's spear.  And
when the King and his brothers, one of them a puny crooked boy,
were the champions, the battle must needs be the merest show,
though there were lookers-on who thought that, judging by
appearances, the assailants ought to have the best chance of
victory, both literal and allegorical.

However, these three guardian angels had choice allies in the shape
of the infernal company, who, as fast as the Huguenots crossed
swords or shivered lances with their royal opponents, encircled
them with their long black arms, and dragged them struggling away
to Tartarus.  Henry of Navarre yielded himself with a good-will to
the horse-play with which this was performed, resisting just enough
to give his demoniacal captors a good deal of trouble, while
yielding all the time, and taking them by surprise by agile
efforts, that showed that if he were excluded from Paradise it was
only by his own consent, and that he heartily enjoyed the
merriment.  Most of his comrades, in especial the young Count de
Rochefoucauld, entered into the sport with the same heartiness, but
the Prince of Conde submitted to his fate with a gloomy, disgusted
countenance, that added much to the general mirth; and Berenger,
with Eustacie before his eyes, looking pale, distressed, and ill at
ease, was a great deal too much in earnest.  He had so veritable an
impulse to leap forward and snatch her from that giddy revolving
prison, that he struck against the sword of Monsieur with a hearty
good-will.  His silvered lath snapped in his hand, and at that
moment he was seized round the waist, and, when his furious
struggle was felt to be in earnest, he was pulled over on his back,
while yells and shouts of discordant laughter rang round him, as
demons pinioned him hand and foot.

He thought he heard a faint cry from Eustacie, and, with a sudden,
unexpected struggle, started into a sitting posture; but a derisive
voice, that well he knew, cried, 'Ha, the deadly sin of pride!
Monsieur thinks his painted face pleases the ladies.  To the depths
with him--' and therewith one imp pulled him backwards again, while
others danced a war-dance round him, pointing their forks at him;
and the prime tormentor, whom he perfectly recognized, not only
leapt over him, but spurned at his face with a cloven foot, giving
a blow, not of gay French malice, but of malignity. It was too much
for the boy's forbearance.  He struggled free, dashing his
adversaries aside fiercely, and as they again gathered about him,
with the leader shouting, 'Rage, too, rage!  To the prey, imps--'
he clenched his fist, and dealt the foremost foe such a blow in the
chest as to level him at once with the ground.

'Monsieur forgets,' said a voice, friendly yet reproachful, 'that
this is but sport.

It was Henry of Navarre himself who spoke, and bent to give a hand
to the fallen imp.  A flush of shame rushed over Berenger's face,
already red with passion.  He felt that he had done wrong to use
his strength at such a moment, and that, though there had been
spite in is assailant, he had not been therefore justified.  He was
glad to see Narcisse rise lightly to his feet, evidently unhurt,
and, with the frankness with which he had often made it up with
Philip Thistlewood or his other English comrades after a sharp
tussle, he held out his hand, saying, 'Good demon, your pardon.
You roused my spirit, and I forgot myself.'

'Demons forget not,' was the reply.  'At him, imps!'  And a whole
circle of hobgoblins closed upon with their tridents, forks, and
other horrible implements, to drive him back within two tall barred
gates, which, illuminated by red flames, were to form the ghastly
prison of the vanquished.  Perhaps fresh indignities would have
been attempted, had not the King of Navarre thrown himself on his
side, shared with him the brunt of all the grotesque weapons, and
battled them off with infinite spirit and address, shielding him as
it were from their rude insults by his own dexterity and
inviolability, though retreating all the time till the infernal
gates were closed on both.

Then Henry of Navarre, who never forgot a face, held out his hand,
saying, 'Tartarus is no region of good omen for friendships, M. de
Ribaumont, but, for lack of yonder devil's claw, here is mine.  I
like to meet a comrade who can strike a hearty blow, and ask a
hearty pardon.'

'I was too hot, Sire,' confessed Berenger, with one of his
ingenuous blushes, 'but he enraged me.'

'He means mischief.' said Henry.  'Remember, if you are molested
respecting this matter, that you have here a witness that you did
the part of a gentleman.'

Berenger bowed his thanks, and began something about the honour,
but his eye anxiously followed the circuit on which Eustacie was
carried and the glance was quickly remarked.

'How?  Your heart is spinning in that Mahometan paradise, and that
is what put such force into your fists.  Which of the houris is it?
The little one with the wistful eyes, who looked so deadly white,
and shrieked out when the devilry overturned you?  Eh! Monsieur,
you are a happy man.'

'I should be, Sire;' and Berenger was on the point of confiding the
situation of his affairs to this most engaging of princes, when a
fresh supply of prisoners, chased with wild antics and fiendish
yells by the devils, came headlong in on them; and immediately,
completing, as Henry said, the galimatias of mythology, a
pasteboard cloud was propelled on the stage, and disclosed the
deities Mercury and Cupid, who made a complimentary address to the
three princely brothers, inciting them to claim the nymphs whom
their valour had defended, and lead them through the mazes of a
choric celestial dance.

This dance had been the special device of Monsieur and the ballet-
master, and during the last three days the houris had been almost
danced off their legs with rehearsing it morning, noon, and night,
but one at least of them was scarcely in a condition for its
performance.  Eustacie, dizzied at the first minute by the whirl of
her Elysian merry-go-round, had immediately after become conscious
of that which she had been too childish to estimate merely in
prospect, the exposure to universal gaze.  Strange staring eyes,
glaring lights, frightful imps seemed to wheel round her in an
intolerable delirious succession.  Her only refuge was in closing
her eyes, but even this could not long be persevered in, so
necessary a part of the pageant was she; and besides, she had
Berenger to look for, Berenger, whom she had foolishly laughed at
for knowing how dreadful it would be.  But of course the endeavour
to seek for one object with her eyes made the dizziness even more
dreadful; and when, at length, she beheld him dragged down by the
demoniacal creatures, whose horrors were magnified by her confused
senses, and the next moment she was twirled out of sight, her cry
of distracted alarm was irrepressible.  Carried round again and
again, on a wheel that to her was far more like Ixion's than that
of the spheres, she never cleared her perceptions as to where he
was, and only was half-maddened by the fantastic whirl of
incongruous imagery, while she barely sat out Mercury's lengthy
harangue; and when her wheel stood still, and she was released, she
could not stand, and was indebted to Charon and one of her fellow-
nymphs for supporting her to a chair in the back of the scene.
Kind Charon hurried to bring her wine, the lady revived her with
essences, and the ballet-master clamoured for his performers.

Ill or well, royal ballets must be danced.  One long sob, one gaze
round at the refreshing sight of a room no longer in motion, one
wistful look at the gates of Tartarus, and the misery of the
throbbing, aching head must be disregarded.  The ballet-master
touched the white cheeks with rouge, and she stepped forward just
in time, for Monsieur himself was coming angrily forward to learn
the cause of the delay.

Spectators said the windings of that dance were exquisitely
graceful.  It was well that Eustacie's drilling had been so
complete, for she moved through it blindly, senselessly, and when
it was over was led back between the two Demoiselles de Limeuil to
the apartment that served as a green-room, drooping and almost
fainting.  They seated her in a chair, and consulted round her, and
her cousin Narcisse was among the first to approach; but no sooner
had she caught sight of his devilish trim than with a little shriek
she shut her eyes, and flung herself to the other side of the
chair.

'My fair cousin,' he said, opening his black vizard, 'do you not
see me?  I am no demon, remember!  I am your cousin.'

'That makes it no better,' said Eustacie, too much disordered and
confused to be on her guard, and hiding her face with her hands.
'Go, go, I entreat.'

In fact he had already done this, and the ladies added their
counsel; for indeed the poor child could scarcely hold up her head,
but she said, 'I should like to stay, if I could: a little, a
little longer.  Will they not open those dreadful bars?' she added,
presently.

'They are even now opening them,' said Mdlle. de Limeuil.  'Hark!
they are going to fight _en melle_.  Mdlle. de Nid de Merle is
better now?'

'Oh yes; let not detain you.'

Eustacie would have risen, but the two sisters had fluttered back,
impatient to lose nothing of the sports; and her cousin in his grim
disguise stood full before her.  'No haste, cousin,' he said; 'you
are not fit to move.'

'Oh, then go,' said Eustacie, suffering too much not to be
petulant.  'You make me worse.'

'And why? It was not always thus,' began Narcisse, so eager to
seize an opportunity as to have little consideration for her
condition; but she was unable to bear any more, and broke out:
'Yes, it was; I always detested you more than ever, since you
deceived me so cruelly.  Oh, do but leave me!'

'You scorn me, then!  You prefer to me--who have loved you so long-
-that childish new-comer, who was ready enough to cast you off.'

'Prefer!  He is my husband!  It is an insult for any one else to
speak to me thus!' said Eustacie, drawing herself up, and rising to
her feet; but she was forced to hold by the back of her chair, and
Diane and her father appearing at that moment, she tottered towards
the former, and becoming quite passive under the influence of
violent dizziness and headache, made no objection to being half
led, half carried, through galleries that connected the Hotel de
Bourbon with the Louvre.

And thus it was that when Berenger had fought out his part in the
_melle_ of the prisoners released, and had maintained the honours
of the rose-coloured token in his helmet, he found that his lady-
love had been obliged by indisposition to return home; and while he
stood, folding his arms to restrain their strong inclination to
take Narcisse by the throat and demand whether this were another of
his deceptions, a train of fireworks suddenly exploded in the
middle of the Styx--a last surprise, especially contrived by King
Charles, and so effectual that half the ladies were shrieking, and
imagining that they and the whole hall had blown up together.

A long supper, full of revelry, succeeded, and at length Sidney ad
Ribaumont walked home together in the midst of their armed servants
bearing torches.  All the way home Berenger was bitter in
vituperation of the hateful pageant and all its details.

'Yea, truly,' replied Sidney; 'methought that it betokens disease
in the mind of a nation when their festive revelry is thus ghastly,
rendering the most awful secrets made known by our God in order to
warm man from sin into a mere antic laughing-stock.  Laughter
should be moved by what is fair and laughter-worthy--even like such
sports as our own "Midsummer Night's Dream."  I have read that the
bloody temper of Rome fed itself in gladiator shows, and verily,
what we beheld to-night betokens something at once grisly and
light-minded in the mood of this country.'

Sidney thought so the more when on the second ensuing morning the
Admiral de Coligny was shot through both hands by an assassin
generally known to have been posted by the Duke of Guise, yet often
called by the sinister sobriquet of _Le Tueur de Roi_.


CHAPTER XI.  THE KING'S TRAGEDY.


The night is come, no fears disturb
  The sleep of innocence
They trust in kingly faith, and kingly oath.
  They sleep, alas! they sleep
Go to the palace, wouldst thou know
  How hideous night can be;
Eye is not closed in those accursed walls,
  Nor heart is quiet there!
                  --Southey, BARTHOLOMEW'S EVE


'Young gentlemen,' said Sir Francis Walsingham, as he rose from
dinner on the Saturday, 'are you bound for the palace this
evening?'

'I am, so please your Excellency,' returned Berenger.

'I would have you both to understand that you must have a care of
yourselves,' said the Ambassador.  'The Admiral's wound has justly
caused much alarm, and I hear that the Protestants are going
vapouring about in so noisy and incautious a manner, crying out for
justice, that it is but too likely that the party of the Queen-
mother and the Guise will be moved to strong measures.'

'They will never dare lay a finger upon us!' said Sidney.

'In a terror-stricken fray men are no respecters of persons,'
replied Sir Francis.  'This house is, of course, inviolable; and,
whatever the madness of the people, we have stout hearts enough
here to enforce respect thereto; but I cannot answer even for an
Englishman's life beyond its precincts; and you, Ribaumont, whom I
cannot even claim as my Queen's subject--I greatly fear to trust
you beyond its bounds.'

'I cannot help it, sir.  Nay, with the most grateful thanks for all
your goodness to me, I must pray you not to take either alarm or
offence if I return not this night.'

'No more, my friend,' said Walsingham, quickly; 'let me know
nothing of your purposes, but take care of yourself.  I would you
were safe at home again, though the desire may seem inhospitable.
The sooner the better with whatever you have to do.'

'Is the danger so imminent?' asked Sidney.

'I know nothing, Philip.  All I can tell is that, as I have read
that dogs and cattle scent an earthquake in the air, so man and
women seem to breathe a sense of danger in this city.  And to me
the graciousness with which the Huguenots have been of late treated
wears a strangely suspicious air.  Sudden and secret is the blow
like to be, and we cannot be too much on our guard.  Therefore
remember, my young friends both, that your danger or death would
fall heavily on those ye love and honour at home.'

So saying, he left the two youths, unwilling to seek further
confidence, and Berenger held his last consultation with Sidney, to
whom he gave directions for making full explanation to Walsingham
in his absence, and expediting Mr. Adderley's return to England.
Osbert alone was to go to the Louvre with him, after having seen
the five English grooms on board the little decked market-vessel on
the Seine, which was to await the fugitives.  Berenger was to
present himself in the palace as in his ordinary court attendance,
and, contriving to elude notice among the throng who were there
lodged, was to take up his station at the foot of the stairs
leading to the apartments of ladies, whence Eustacie was to descend
at about eleven o'clock, with her maid Veronique.  Landry Osbert
was to join them from the lackey's hall below, where he had a
friend, and the connivance of the porter at the postern opening
towards the Seine had been secured.

Sidney wished much to accompany him to the palace, if his presence
could be any aid or protection, but on consideration it was decided
that his being at the Louvre was likely to attract notice to
Ribaumont's delaying there.  The two young men therefore shook
hands and parted, as youths who trusted that they had begun a
lifelong friendship, with mutual promises to write to one another--
the one, the adventures of his flight; the other, the astonishment
it would excite.  And auguries were exchanged of merry meetings in
London, and of the admiration the lovely little wife would excite
at Queen Elizabeth's court.

Then, with an embrace such as English friends then gave, they
separated at the gate; and Sidney stood watching, as Berenger
walked free and bold down the street, his sword at his side, his
cloak over one shoulder, his feathered cap on one side, showing his
bright curling hair, a sunshiny picture of a victorious bridegroom-
-such a picture as sent Philip Sidney's wits back to Arcadia.

It was not a day of special state, but the palace was greatly
crowded.  The Huguenots were in an excited mood, inclined to rally
round Henry of Navarre, whose royal title made him be looked on as
is a manner their monarch, though his kingdom had been swallowed by
Spain, and he was no more than a French duke distantly related to
royalty in the male line, and more nearly through his grandmother
and bride.  The eight hundred gentlemen he had brought with him
swarmed about his apartments, making their lodging on staircases
and in passages; and to Berenger it seemed as if the King's guards
and Monsieur's gentlemen must have come in in equal numbers to
balance them.  Narcisse was there, and Berenger kept cautiously
amid his Huguenot acquaintance, resolved not to have a quarrel
thrust on him which he could not honourably desert.  It was late
before he could work his way to the young Queen's reception-room,
where he found Eustacie.  She looked almost as white as at the
masque; but there was a graver, less childish expression in her
face than he had ever seen before, and her eyes glanced confidence
when they met his.

Behind the Queen's chair a few words could be spoken.

'_Ma mie,_ art thou well again?  Canst bear this journey now?'

'Quite well, now! quite ready.  Oh that we may never have masques
in England!'

He smiled--'Never such as this!'

'Ah! thou knowest best.  I am glad I am thine already; I am so
silly, thou wouldest never have chosen me!  But thou wilt teach me,
and I will strive to be very good!  And oh! let me but give one
farewell to Diane.'

'It is too hard to deny thee aught to-night, sweetheart, but judge
for thyself.  Think of the perils, and decide.'

Before Eustacie could answer, a rough voice came near, the King
making noisy sport with the Count de Rochefoucauld and others.  He
was louder and ruder than Berenger had ever yet seen him, almost
giving the notion of intoxication; but neither he nor his brother
Henry ever tasted wine, though both had a strange pleasure in being
present at the orgies of their companions: the King, it was
generally said, from love of the self-forgetfulness of excitement--
the Duke of Anjou, because his cool brain there collected men's
secrets to serve afterwards for his spiteful diversion.

Berenger would willingly have escaped notice, but his bright face
and sunny hair always made him conspicuous, and the King suddenly
strode up to him: 'You here, sir?  I thought you would have managed
your affairs so as to be gone long ago!' then before Berenger could
reply, 'However, since here you are, come along with me to my
bedchamber!  We are to have a carouse there to-night that will ring
through all Paris!  Yes, and shake Rochefoucauld out of his bed at
midnight!  You will be one of us, Ribaumont?  I command it!'

And without waiting for reply he turned away with an arm round
Rochefoucauld's neck, and boisterously addressed another of the
company, almost as wildly as if he were in the mood that Scots call
'fey.'

'Royalty seems determined to frustrate our plans,' said Berenger,
as soon as the King was out of hearing.

'But you will not go!  His comrades drink till--oh! two, three in
the morning.  We should never get away.'

'No, I must risk his displeasure.  We shall soon be beyond his
reach.  But at least I may make his invitation a reason for
remaining in the Louvre.  People are departing!  Soon wilt thou be
my own.'

'As soon as the Queen's COUCHER is over!  I have but to change to a
traveling dress.'

'At the foot of the winding stair.  Sweetest be brave!'

'I fear nothing with thee to guard me.  See, the Queen is rising.'

Elizabeth was in effect rising to make her respectful progress to
the rooms of the Queen-mother, to bid her good night; and Eustacie
must follow.  Would Diane be there?  Oh that the command to judge
between her heart and her caution had not been given!  Cruel
kindness!

Diane was there, straight as a poplar, cold as marble, with fixed
eyes.  Eustacie stole up to her, and touched her.  She turned with
a start.  'Cousin, you have been very good to me!'  Diane started
again, as if stung.  You will love me still, whatever you hear?'

'Is this meant for farewell?'  said Diane, grasping her wrist.

'Do not ask me, Diane.  I may not.'

'Where there is no trust there is no treason,' said Diane,
dreamily.  'No, answer me not, little one, there will be time for
that another day.  Where is he?'

'In the _oeil-de-boeuf_, between the King's and Queen's suites of
rooms.  I must go.  There is the Queen going.  Diane, one loving
word.'

'Silly child, you shall have plenty another time,' said Diane,
breaking away.  'Follow thy Queen now!'

Catherine, who sat between her daughters Claude and Marguerite,
looked pre-occupied, and summarily dismissed her daughter-in-law,
Elizabeth, whom Eustacie was obliged to follow to her own state-
room.  There all the forms of the COUCHER were tediously gone
through; every pin had its own ceremony, and even when her Majesty
was safely deposited under her blue satin coverlet the ladies still
stood round till she felt disposed to fall asleep.  Elisabeth was
both a sleepy and a considerate person, so that this was not so
protracted a vigil as was sometimes exacted by the more wakeful
princesses; but Eustacie could not escape from it till it was
already almost midnight, the period for her tryst.

Her heart was very full.  It was not the usual flutter and terror
of an eloping girl.  Eustacie was a fearless little being, and her
conscience had no alarms; her affections were wholly with Berenger,
and her transient glimpses of him had been as of something come out
of a region higher, tenderer, stronger, purer, more trustworthy
than that where she had dwelt.  She was proud of belonging to him.
She had felt upheld by the consciousness through years of waiting,
and now he more than realized her hopes, and she could have wept
for exulting joy.  Yet it was a strange, stealthy break with all
she had to leave behind.  The light to which he belonged seemed
strange, chill, dazzling light, and she shivered at the thought of
it, as if the new world, new ideas, and new requirements could only
be endured with him to shield her and help her on.  And withal,
there seemed to her a shudder over the whole place on that night.
The King's eyes looked wild and startled, the Queen-mother's calm
was strained, the Duchess of Lorraine was evidently in a state of
strong nervous excitement; there were strange sounds, strange
people moving about, a weight on everything, as if they were under
the shadow of a thunder-cloud.  'Could it be only her own fancy?'
she said to herself, because this was to be the great event of her
life, for surely all these great people could not know or heed that
little Eustacie de Ribaumont was to make her escape that night!

The trains of royalty were not sumptuously lodged.  France never
has cared so much for comfort as for display.  The waiting-lady of
the bedchamber slept in the ante-room of her mistress; the others,
however high their rank, were closely herded together up a winding
stair leading to a small passage, with tiny, cell-like recesses,
wherein the demoiselles slept, often with their maids, and then
dressed themselves in the space afforded by the passage.
Eustacie's cell was nearly at the end of the gallery, and
exchanging 'good-nights' with her companions, she proceeded to her
recess, where she expected to find Veronique ready to adjust her
dress.  Veronique, however, was missing; but anxious to lose no
time, she had taken off her delicate white satin farthingale to
change it for an unobtrusive dark woolen kirtle, when, to her
surprise and dismay, a loud creaking, growling sound made itself
heard outside the door at the other end.  Half-a-dozen heads came
out of their cells; half-a-dozen voices asked and answered the
question, 'What is it?'  'They are bolting our door outside.'  But
only Eustacie sped like lightning along the passage, pulled at the
door, and cried, 'Open!  Open, I say!'  No answer, but the other
bolt creaked.

'You mistake, CONCIERGE!  We are never bolted in!  My maid is shut
out.'

No answer, but the step retreated.  Eustacie clasped her hands with
a cry that she could hardly have repressed, but which she regretted
the next moment.

Gabrielle de Limeuil laughed.  'What, Mademoiselle, are you afraid
they will not let us out to-morrow?'

'My maid!' murmured Eustacie, recollecting that she must give a
colour to her distress.

'Ah! perhaps she will summon old Pierre to open for us.'

This suggestion somewhat consoled Eustacie, and she stood intently
listening for Veronique's step, wishing that her companions would
hold their peace; but the adventure amused them, and they discussed
whether it were a blunder of the CONCIERGE, or a piece of prudery
of Madame la Comtesse, or, after all, a precaution.  The palace so
full of strange people, who could say what might happen?  And there
was a talk of a conspiracy of the Huguenots.  At any rate, every
one was too much frightened to go to sleep, and, some sitting on
the floor, some on a chest, some on a bed, the girls huddled
together in Gabrielle de Limeuil's recess, the nearest to the door,
and one after another related horrible tales of blood, murder, and
vengeance--then, alas! Only too frequent occurrences in their
unhappy land--each bringing some frightful contribution from her
own province, each enhancing upon the last-told story, and ever and
anon pausing with bated breath at some fancied sound, or supposed
start of one of the others; then clinging close together, and
renewing the ghastly anecdote, at first in a hushed voice that grew
louder with the interest of the story.  Eustacie alone would not
join the cluster.  Her cloak round her shoulders, she stood with
her back against the door, ready to profit by the slightest
indication outside of a step that might lead to her release, or at
least enable her to communicate with Veronique; longing ardently
that her companions would go to bed, yet unable to avoid listening
with the like dreadful fascination to each of the terrible
histories, which added each moment to the nervous horror of the
whole party.  Only one, a dull and composed girl, felt the
influence of weariness, and dozed with her head in her companion's
lap; but she was awakened by one general shudder and suppressed cry
when the hoarse clang of a bell struck on the ears of the already
terrified, excited maidens.

'The tocsin!  The bell of St. Germain!  Fire!  No, a Huguenot
rising!  Fire!  Oh, let us out!  Let us out!  The window!  Where is
the fire?  Nowhere!  See the lights!  Hark, that was a shot!  It
was in the palace!  A heretic rising!  Ah!  there was to be a
slaughter of the heretics!  I heard it whispered.  Oh, let us out!
Open the door!'

But nobody heard:  nobody opened.  There was one who stood without
word or cry, close to the door--her eyes dilated, her cheek
colourless, her whole person, soul and body alike, concentrated in
that one impulse to spring forward the first moment the bolt should
be drawn.  But still the door remained fast shut!


CHAPTER XII.  THE PALACE OF SLAUGHTER


A human shambles with blood-reeking floor.
            MISS SWANWICK, Esch. Agamemnon


The door was opened at last, but not till full daylight.  It found
Eustacie as ready to rush forth, past all resistance, as she had
been the night before, and she was already in the doorway when her
maid Veronique, her face swollen with weeping, caught her by the
hands and implored her to turn back and listen.

And words about a rising of the Huguenots, a general destruction,
corpses lying in the court, were already passing between the other
maidens and the CONCIERGE.  Eustacie turned upon her servant:
'Veronique, what means it?  Where is he?'

'Alas!  alas!  Ah!  Mademoiselle, do but lie down!  Woe is me!  I
saw it all!  Lie down, and I will tell you.'

'Tell!  I will not move till you have told me where my husband is,'
said Eustacie, gazing with eyes that seemed to Veronique turned to
stone.

'Ah!  my lady--my dear lady!  I was on the turn of the stairs, and
saw all.  The traitor--the Chevalier Narcisse--came on him, cloaked
like you--and--shot him dead--with, oh, such cruel words of
mockery!  Oh!  woe the day!  Stay, stay, dear lady, the place is
all blood--they are slaying them all--all the Huguenots!  Will no
one stop her?--Mademoiselle--ma'm'selle!--'

For Eustacie no sooner gathered the sense of Veronique's words than
she darted suddenly forwards, and was in a few seconds more at the
foot of the stairs.  There, indeed, lay a pool of dark gore, and
almost in it Berenger's black velvet cap, with the heron plume.
Eustacie, with a low cry, snatched it up, continued her headlong
course along the corridor, swiftly as a bird, Veronique following,
and vainly shrieking to her to stop.  Diane, appearing at the other
end of the gallery, saw but for a moment the little figure, with
the cloak gathered round her neck, and floating behind her,
understood Veronique's cry and joined in the chase across hall and
gallery, where more stains were to be seen, even down to the marble
stairs, every step slippery with blood.  Others there were who saw
and stood aghast, not understanding the apparition that flitted on
so swiftly, never pausing till at the great door at the foot of the
stairs she encountered a gigantic Scottish archer, armed to the
teeth.  She touched his arm, and standing with folder arms, looked
up and said, 'Good soldier, kill me!  I am a Huguenots!'

'Stop her! bring her back!' cried Diane from behind.  'It is Mdlle.
De Nil-de-Merle!'

'No, no!  My husband is Huguenot!  I am a Huguenot!  Let them kill
me, I say!'--struggling with Diane, who had now come up with her,
and was trying to draw her back.

'Puir lassie!' muttered the stout Scotsman to himself, 'this
fearsome night has driven her demented.'

But, like a true sentinel, he moved neither hand nor foot to
interfere, as shaking herself loose from Diane, she was springing
down the steps into the court, when at that moment the young Abbe
de Mericour was seen advancing, pale, breathless, horrorstruck, and
to him Diane shrieked to arrest the headlong course.  He obeyed,
seeing the wild distraction of the white face and widely glaring
eyes, took her by both hands, and held her in a firm grasp, saying,
'Alas, lady, you cannot go out.  It is no sight for any one.'

'They are killing the Protestants,' she said; 'I am one!  Let me
find them and die.'

A strong effort to free herself ensued, but it was so suddenly
succeeded by a swoon that the Abbe could scarcely save her from
dropping on the steps.  Diane begged him to carry her in, since
they were in full view of men-at-arms in the court, and, frightful
to say, of some of the ladies of the palace, who, in the frenzy of
that dreadful time, had actually come down to examine the half-
stripped corpses of the men with whom they had jested not twelve
hours before.

'Ah! it is no wonder,' said the youthful Abbe, as he tenderly
lifted the inanimate figure.  'This has been a night of horrors.
I was coming in haste to know whether the King knows of this
frightful plot of M. de Guise, and the bloody work that is passing
in Paris.'

'The King!' exclaimed Diane.  'M. l'Abbe, do you know where he is
now?  In the balcony overlooking the river, taking aim at the
fugitives!  Take care!  Even your _soutane_ would not save you if
M. d'O and his crew heard you.  But I must pray you to aid me with
this poor child!  I dread that her wild cries should be heard.'

The Abbe, struck dumb with horror, silently obeyed Mdlle. De
Ribaumont, and brought the still insensible Eustacie to the
chamber, now deserted by all the young ladies.  He laid her on her
bed, and finding he could do no more, left her to her cousin and
her maid.

The poor child had been unwell and feverish ever since the masque,
and the suspense of these few days with the tension of that
horrible night had prostrated her.  She only awoke from her swoon
to turn her head from the light and refuse to be spoken to.

'But, Eustacie, child, listen; this is all in vain--he lives,' said
Diane.

'Weary me not with falsehoods,' faintly said Eustacie.

'No! no! no!  They meant to hinder your flight, but---'

'They knew of it?' cried Eustacie, sitting up suddenly.  'Then you
told them.  Go--go; let me never see you more!  You have been his
death!'

'Listen!  I am sure he lives!  What! would they injure one whom my
father loved?  I heard my father say he would not have him hurt.
Depend upon it, he is safe on his way to England.'

Eustacie gave a short but frightful hysterical laugh, and pointed
to Veronique.  'She saw it,' she said; 'ask her.'

'Saw what?' said Diane, turning fiercely on Veronique.  'What vile
deceit have you half killed your lady with?'

'Alas!  Mademoiselle, I did but tell her what I had seen,' sighed
Veronique, trembling.

'Tell me!' said Diane, passionately.

'Yes, everything,' said Eustacie, sitting up.

'Ah!  Mademoiselle, it will make you ill again.'

'I WILL be ill--I WILL die!  Heaven's slaying is better than man's.
Tell her how you saw Narcisse.'

'False girl!' burst out Diane.

'No, no,' cried Veronique.  'Oh, pardon me, Mademoiselle, I could
not help it.'

In spite of her reluctance, she was forced to tell that she had
found herself locked out of her mistress's room, and after losing
much time in searching for the CONCIERGE, learnt that the ladies
were locked up by order of the Queen-mother, and was strongly
advised not to be running about the passages.  After a time,
however, while sitting with the CONCIERGE'S wife, she heard such
frightful whispers from men with white badges, who were admitted
one by one by the porter, and all led silently to a small lower
room, that she resolved on seeking out the Baron's servant, and
sending him to warn his master, while she would take up her station
at her lady's door.  She found Osbert, and with him was ascending a
narrow spiral leading from the offices--she, unfortunately, the
foremost.  As she came to the top, a scuffle was going on--four men
had thrown themselves upon one, and a torch distinctly showed her
the younger Chevalier holding a pistol to the cheek of the fallen
man, and she heard the worlds, _'Le baiser d'Eustacie!  Jet e
barbouillerai ce chien de visage,'_ and at the same moment the
pistol was discharged.  She sprang back, oversetting, as she
believed, Osbert, and fled shrieking to the room of the CONCIERGE,
who shut her in till morning.

'And how--how,' stammered Diane, 'should you know it was the
Baron?'

Eustacie, with a death-like look, showed for a moment what even in
her swoon she had held clenched to her bosom, the velvet cap soaked
with blood.

'Besides,' added Veronique, resolved to defend her assertion, 'whom
else would the words suit?  Besides, are not all the heretic
gentlemen dead?  Why, as I sat there in the porter's room, I heard
M. d'O call each one of them by name, one after the other, into the
court, and there the white-sleeves cut them down or pistolled them
like sheep for the slaughter.  They lie all out there on the
terrace like so many carcases at market ready for winter salting.'

'All slain?' said Eustacie, dreamily.

'All, except those that the King called into his own _garde robe_.'

'Then, I slew him!' Eustacie sank back.

'I tell you, child,' said Diane, almost angrily, 'he lives.  Not a
hair of his head was to be hurt!  The girl deceives you.'

But Eustacie had again become insensible, and awoke delirious,
entreating to have the door opened, and fancying herself still on
the revolving elysium, 'Oh, demons, have pity!' was her cry.

Diane's soothings were like speaking to the winds; and at last she
saw the necessity of calling in further aid; but afraid of the
scandal that the poor girl's raving accusations might create, she
would not send for the Huguenots surgeon, Ambroise Pare, whom the
King had carefully secured in his own apartments, but employed one
of the barber valets of the Queen-mother's household.  Poor
Eustacie was well pleased to see her blood flowing, and sank back
on her pillow murmuring that she had confessed her husband's faith,
and would soon be one with him, and Diane feared for a moment lest
the swoon should indeed be death.

The bleeding was so far effectual that it diminished the fever, and
Eustacie became rational again when she had dozed and wakened, but
she was little able or willing to speak, and would not so much as
listen to Diane's asseverations that Veronique had made a frightful
error, and that the Baron would prove to be alive.  Whether it were
that the admission that Diane had known of the project for
preventing the elopement that invalidated her words, or whether the
sufferer's instinct made her believe Veronique's testimony rather
than her cousin's assurances, it was all 'cramming words into her
ear against the stomach of her sense,' and she turned away from
them with a piteous, petulant hopelessness: 'Could they not even
let her alone to die in peace!'

Diane was almost angered at this little silly child being in such
an agony of sorrow--she, who could never have known how to love
him.  And after all this persistent grief was willfully thrown
away.  For Diane spoke in perfect sincerity when she taxed
Veronique with an injurious, barbarous mistake.  She knew her
father's strong aversion to violence, and the real predilection
that Berenger's good mien, respectful manners, and liberal usage
had won from him, and she believed he had much rather the youth
lived, provided he were inoffensive.  No doubt a little force had
been necessary to kidnap one so tall, active, and determined, and
Veronique had made up her horrible tale after the usual custom of
waiting-maids.

Nothing else SHOULD be true.  Did she think otherwise, she should
be even more frantic than Eustacie!  Why, it would be her own
doing!  She had betrayed the day of the escape--she had held aloof
from warning.  There was pleasure in securing Nid-de-Merle for her
brother, pleasure in balking the foolish child who had won the
heart that disregarded her.  Nay, there might have been even
pleasure in the destruction of the scorner of her charms--the foe
of her house--there might have been pride in receiving Queen
Catherine's dexterous hint that she had been an apt pupil, if the
young Baron had only been something different--something less fair,
gracious, bright, and pure.  One bright angel seemed to have
flitted across her path, and nothing should induce her to believe
she had destroyed him.

The stripped corpses of the murdered Huguenots of the palace had
been laid in a line on the terrace, and the ladies who had laughed
with them the night before went to inspect them in death.  A few
remnants of Soeur Monique's influence would have withheld Diane,
but that a frenzy of suspense was growing on her.  She must see for
herself.  If it were so, she must secure a fragment of the shining
flaxen hair, if only as a token that anything so pure and bright
had walked the earth.

She went on the horrible quest, shrinking where others stared.  For
it was a pitiless time, and the squadron of the Queen-mother were
as lost to womanhood as the fishwomen of two centuries later.  But
Diane saw no corpse at once so tall, so young, and so fair, though
blond Normans and blue-blooded Franks, lads scarce sixteen and
stalwart warriors, lay in one melancholy rank.  She at least bore
away the certainly that the English Ribaumont was not there; and if
not, he MUST be safe!  She could obtain no further certainty, for
she knew that she must not expect to see either her father or
brother.  There was a panic throughout the city.  All Paris
imagined that the Huguenots were on the point of rising and slaying
all the Catholics, and, with the savagery of alarmed cowardice, the
citizens and the mob were assisting the armed bands of the Dukes of
Anjou and Guise to complete the slaughter, dragging their lodgers
from their hiding-places, and denouncing all whom they suspected of
reluctance to mass and confession.  But on the Monday, Diane was
able to send an urgent message to her father that he must come to
speak with her, for Mdlle. De Nid-de-Merle was extremely ill.  She
would meet him in the garden after morning mass.

There accordingly, when she stepped forth pale, rigid, but stately,
with her large fan in her hand to serve as a parasol, she met both
him and her brother.  She was for a moment sorry, for she had much
power over her father, while she was afraid of her brother's
sarcastic tongue and eye; she knew he never scrupled to sting her
wherever she was most sensitive, and she would have been able to
extract much more from her father in his absence.  France has never
been without a tendency to produce the tiger-monkey, or ferocious
fop; and the GENUS was in its full ascendancy under the sons of
Catherine de Medicis, when the dregs of Francois the First's
PSEUDO-chivalry were not extinct--when horrible, retaliating civil
wars of extermination had made life cheap; nefarious persecutions
had hardened the heart and steeled the eye, and the licentiousness
promoted by the shifty Queen as one of her instruments of
government had darkened the whole understanding.  The most hateful
heights of perfidy, effeminacy, and hypocrisy were not reached till
poor Charles IX., who only committed crimes on compulsion, was in
his grave, and Henry III. on the throne; but Narcisse de Ribaumont
was one of the choice companions of the latter, and after the night
and day of murder now stood before his sister with scented hair and
handkerchief--the last, laced, delicately held by a hand in an
embroidered glove--emerald pendants in his ears, a moustache
twisted into sharp points and turned up like an eternal sardonic
smile, and he led a little white poodle by a rose-coloured ribbon.

'Well, sister,' he said, as he went, through the motions of kissing
her hand, and she embraced her father; 'so you don't know how to
deal with megrims and transports?'

'Father,' said Diane, not vouchsafing any attention, 'unless you
can send her some assurance of his life, I will not answer for the
consequences.'

Narcisse laughed: 'Take her this dog, with my compliments.  That is
the way to deal with such a child as that.'

'You do not know what you say, brother,' answered Diane with
dignity.  'It goes deeper than that.'

'The deeper it goes, child,' said the elder Chevalier, 'the better
it is that she should be undeceived as soon as possible.  She will
recover, and be amenable the sooner.'

'Then he lives, father?' exclaimed Diane.  'He lives, though she is
not to hear it--say----'

'What know I?' said the old man, evasively.  'On a night of
confusion many mischances are sure to occur!  Lurking in the palace
at the very moment when there was a search for the conspirators, it
would have been a miracle had the poor young man escaped.'

Diane turned still whiter.  'Then,' she said, 'that was why you
made Monsieur put Eustacie into the ballet, that they might not go
on Wednesday!'

'It was well hinted by you, daughter.  We could not have
effectually stopped them on Wednesday without making a scandal.'

'Once more,' said Diane, gasping, though still resolute; 'is not
the story told by Eustacie's woman false--that she saw him--
pistolled--by you, brother?'

'_Peste_!' cried Narcisse.  'Was the prying wench there?  I thought
the little one might be satisfied that he had neighbour's fare.  No
matter; what is done for one's _beaux yeux_ is easily pardoned--and
if not, why, I have her all the same!'

'Nevertheless, daughter,' said the Chevalier, gravely, 'the woman
must be silenced.  Either she must be sent home, or taught so to
swear to having been mistaken, that _la petite_ may acquit your
brother!  But what now, my daughter?'

'She is livid!'  exclaimed Narcisse, with his sneer.  'What, sir,
did not you know she was smitten with the peach on the top of a
pole?'

'Enough, brother,' said Diane, recovering herself enough to speak
hoarsely, but with hard dignity.  'You have slain--you need not
insult, one whom you have lost the power of understanding!'

'Shallow schoolboys certainly form no part of my study, save to
kick them down-stairs when they grow impudent,' said Narcisse,
coolly.  'It is only women who think what is long must be grand.'

'Come, children, no disputes,' said the Chevalier.  'Of course we
regret that so fine a youth mixed himself up with the enemies of
the kingdom, like the stork among the sparrows.  Both Diane and I
are sorry for the necessity; but remember, child, that when he was
interfering between your brother and his just right of inheritance
and destined wife, he could not but draw such a fate on himself.
Now all is smooth, the estates will be united in their true head,
and you--you too, my child, will be provided for as suits your
name.  All that is needed is to soothe the little one, so as to
hinder her from making an outcry--and silence the maid; my child
will do her best for her father's sake, and that of her family.'

Diane was less demonstrative than most of her countrywomen.  She
had had time to recollect the uselessness of giving vent to her
indignant anguish, and her brother's derisive look held her back.
The family tactics, from force of habit, recurred to her; she made
no further objection to her father's commands; but when her father
and brother parted with her, she tottered into the now empty
chapel, threw herself down, with her burning forehead on the stone
step, and so lay for hours.  It was not in prayer.  It was because
it was the only place where she could be alone.  To her, heaven
above and earth below seemed alike full of despair, darkness, and
cruel habitations, and she lay like one sick with misery and
repugnance to the life and world that lay before her--the hard world
that had quenched that one fair light and mocked her pity.  It was
a misery of solitude, and yet no thought crossed her of going to
weep and sympathize with the other sufferer.  No; rivalry and
jealousy came in there!  Eustacie viewed herself as his wife, and
the very thought that she had been deliberately preferred and had
enjoyed her triumph hardened Diane's heart against her.  Nay, the
open violence and abandonment of her grief seemed to the more
restrained and concentrated nature of her elder a sign of
shallowness and want of durability; and in a certain contemptuous
envy at her professing a right to mourn, Diane never even
reconsidered her own resolution to play out her father's game,
consign Eustacie to her husband's murdered, and leave her to
console herself with bridal splendours and a choice of admirers
from all the court.

However, for the present Diane would rather stay away as much as
possible from the sick-bed of the poor girl; and when an
approaching step forced her to rouse herself and hurry away by the
other door of the chapel, she did indeed mount to the ladies' bed-
chamber, but only to beckon Veronique out of hearing and ask for
her mistress.

Just the same still, only sleeping to have feverish dreams of the
revolving wheel or the demons grappling her husband, refusing all
food but a little drink, and lying silent except for a few moans,
heedless who spoke or looked at her.

Diane explained that in that case it was needless to come to her,
but added, with the _vraisemblance_ of falsehood in which she had
graduated in Catherine's school, 'Veronique, as I told you, you
were mistaken.'

'Ah, Mademoiselle, if M. le Baron lives, she will be cured at
once.'

'Silly girl,' said Diane, giving relief to her pent-up feeling by
asperity of manner, 'how could he live when you and your intrigues
got him into the palace on such a night?  Dead he is, OF COURSE;
but it was your own treacherous, mischievous fancy that laid it on
my brother.  He was far away with M. de Guise at the attack on the
Admiral.  It was some of Monsieur's grooms you saw.  You remember
she had brought him into a scrape with Monsieur, and it was sure to
be remembered.  And look you, if you repeat the other tale, and do
not drive it out of her head, you need not look to be long with
her--no, nor at home.  My father will have no one there to cause a
scandal by an evil tongue.'

That threat convinced Veronique that she had been right; but she,
too, had learnt lessons at the Louvre, and she was too diplomatic
not to ask pardon for her blunder, promise to contradict it when
her mistress could listen, and express her satisfaction that it was
not the Chevalier Narcisse--for such things were not pleasant, as
she justly observed, in families.

About noon on the Tuesday the Louvre was unusually tranquil.  All
the world had gone forth to a procession to Notre Dame, headed by
the King and all the royal family, to offer thanksgiving for the
deliverance of the country from the atrocious conspiracy of the
Huguenots.  Eustacie's chamber was freed from the bustle of all the
maids of honour arraying themselves, and adjusting curls, feathers,
ruffs and jewels; and such relief as she was capable of
experiencing she felt in the quiet.

Veronique hoped she would sleep, and watched like a dragon to guard
against any disturbance, springing out with upraised finger when a
soft gliding step and rustling of brocade was heard.  'Does she
sleep?' said a low voice; and Veronique, in the pale thin face with
tear-swollen eyes and light yellow hair, recognized the young
Queen.  'My good girl,' said Elisabeth, with almost a beseeching
gesture, 'let me see her.  I do not know when again I may be able.'

Veronique stood aside, with the lowest possible of curtseys, just
as her mistress with a feeble, weary voice murmured, 'Oh, make them
let me alone!'

'My poor, poor child,' said the Queen, bending over Eustacie, while
her brimming eyes let the tears fall fast, 'I will not disturb you
long, but I could not help it.'

'Her Majesty!' exclaimed Eustacie, opening wide her eyes in
amazement.

'My dear, suffer me here a little moment,' said the meek Elisabeth,
seating herself so as to bring her face near to Eustacie's; 'I
could not rest till I had seen how it was with you and wept with
you.'

'Ah, Madame, you can weep,' said Eustacie slowly, looking at the
Queen's heavy tearful eyes almost with wonder; 'but I do not weep
because I am dying, and that is better.'

'My dear, my dear, do not so speak!' exclaimed the gentle but
rather dull Queen.

'Is it wrong?  Nay, so much the better--then I shall be with HIM,'
said Eustacie in the same feeble dreamy manner, as if she did not
understand herself, but a little roused by seeing she had shocked
her visitor.  'I would not be wicked.  He was all bright goodness
and truth:  but his does not seem to be goodness that brings to
heaven, and I do not want to be in the heaven of these cruel false
men--I think it would go round and round.'  She shut her eyes as if
to steady herself, and that moment seemed to give her more self-
recollection, for looking at the weeping, troubled visitor, she
exclaimed, with more energy, 'Oh!  Madame, it must be a dreadful
fancy!  Good men like him cannot be shut into those fiery gates
with the torturing devils.'

'Heaven forbid!' exclaimed the Queen.  'My poor, poor child, grieve
not yourself thus.  At my home, my Austrian home, we do not speak
in this dreadful way.  My father loves and honours his loyal
Protestants, and he trusts that the good God accepts their holy
lives in His unseen Church, even though outwardly they are separate
from us.  My German confessor ever said so.  Oh! Child, it would be
too frightful if we deemed that all those souls as well as bodies
perished in these frightful days.  Myself, I believe that they have
their reward for their truth and constancy.'

Eustacie caught the Queen's hand, and fondled it with delight, as
though those words had veritably opened the gates of heaven to her
husband.  The Queen went on in her slow gentle manner, the very
tone of which was inexpressibly soothing and sympathetic: 'Yes, and
all will be clear there.  No more violence.  At home our good men
think so, and the King will think the same when these cruel
counselors will leave him to himself; and I pray, I pray day and
night, that God will not lay this sin to his account, but open his
eyes to repent.  Forgive him, Eustacie, and pray for him too.'

'The King would have saved my husband, Madame,' returned Eustacie.
'He bade him to his room.  It was I, unhappy I, who detained him,
lest our flight should have been hindered.'

The Queen in her turn kissed Eustacie's forehead with eager
gratitude.  'Oh, little one, you have brought a drop of comfort to
a heavy heart.  Alas!  I could sometimes feel you to be a happier
wife than I, with your perfect trust in the brave pure-spirited
youth, unwarped by these wicked cruel advisers.  I loved to look at
his open brow; it was so like our bravest German Junkers.  And,
child, we thought, both of us, to have brought about your
happiness; but, ah!  it has but caused all this misery.'

'No, no, dearest Queen,' said Eustacie, 'this month with all its
woe has been joy--life!  Oh!  I had rather lie here and die for his
loss than be as I was before he came.  And NOW--now, you have given
him to me for all eternity--if but I am fit to be with him!'

Eustacie had revived so much during the interview that the Queen
could not believe her to be in a dying state; but she continued
very ill, the low fever still hanging about her, and the faintness
continual.  The close room, the turmoil of its many inhabitants,
and the impossibility of quiet also harassed her greatly, and
Elisabeth had little or no power of making any other arrangements
for her in the palace.  Ladies when ill were taken home, and this
poor child had no home.  The other maids of honour were a gentler,
simpler set than Catherine's squadron, and were far from unkind;
but between them and her, who had so lately been the brightest
child of them all, there now lay that great gulf.  _'Ich habe
gelebt und geliebet.'_   That the little blackbird, as they used to
call her, should have been on the verge of running away with her
own husband was a half understood, amusing mystery discussed in
exaggerating prattle.  This was hushed, indeed, in the presence of
that crushed, prostrate, silent sorrow; but there was still an
utter incapacity of true sympathy, that made the very presence of
so many oppressive, even when they were not in murmurs discussing
the ghastly tidings of massacres in other cities, and the fate of
acquaintances.

On that same day, the Queen sent for Diane to consult her about the
sufferer.  Elisabeth longed to place her in her own cabinet and
attend on her herself; but she was afraid to do this, as the
unhappy King was in such a frenzied mood, and so constantly excited
by his brother and Guise, that it was possible that some half-
delirious complaint from poor Eustacie might lead to serious
consequences.  Indeed, Elisabeth, though in no state to bear
agitation, was absorbed in her endeavour to prevent him from adding
blood to blood, and a few days later actually saved the lives  of
the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, by throwing herself before
him half-dressed, and tearing his weapon from his hand.  Her only
hope was that if she should give him a son, her influence for mercy
would revive with his joy.  Meantime she was powerless, and she
could only devise the sending the poor little sufferer to a
convent, where the nuns might tend her till she was restored to
health and composure.  Diane acquiesced, but proposed sending for
her father, and he was accordingly summoned.  Diane saw him first
alone, and both agreed that he had better take Eustacie to
Bellaise, where her aunt would take good care of her, and in a few
months she would no doubt be weary enough of the country to be in
raptures to return to Paris on any terms.

Yet even as Diane said this, a sort of longing for the solitude of
the woods of Nid-de-Merle came over her, a recollection of the good
Sister Monique, at whose knee she had breathed somewhat of the free
pure air that her murdered cousin had brought with him; a sense
that there she could pour forth her sorrow.  She offered herself at
once to go with Eustacie.

'No, no, my daughter,' said the Chevalier, 'that is unnecessary.
There is pleasanter employment for you.  I told you that your
position was secured.  Here is a brilliant offer--M. de
Selinville,'

_'Le bonhomme de Selinville!'_  exclaimed Diane, feeling rather as
if the compensation were like the little dog offered to Eustacie.

'Know ye not that his two heretic nephews perished the other night.
He is now the head of his name, the Marquis, the only one left of
his house.'

'He begins early,' said Diane.

