15. Can we be thus bold with the kings of this world?  And yet I
am not surprised that we dare not thus speak to a king, for it is
only reasonable that men should be afraid of him, or even to the
great lords who are his representatives.  The world is now come
to such a state, that men's lives ought to be longer than they
are if we are to learn all the new customs and ceremonies of good
breeding, and yet spend any time in the service of God.  I bless
myself at the sight of what is going on.  The fact is, I did not
know how I was to live when I came into this house.
Any negligence in being much more ceremonious with people than
they deserve is not taken as a jest; on the contrary, they look
upon it as an insult deliberately offered; so that it becomes
necessary for you to satisfy them of your good intentions, if
there happens, as I have said, to have been any negligence; and
even then, God grant they may believe you.

16. I repeat it,--I certainly did not know how to live; for my
poor soul was worn out.  It is told to employ all its thoughts
always on God, and that it is necessary to do so if it would
avoid many dangers.  On the other hand, it finds it will not do
to fail in any one point of the world's law, under the penalty of
affronting those who look upon these things as touching their
honour.  I was worn out in unceasingly giving satisfaction to
people; for, though I tried my utmost, I could not help failing
in many ways in matters which, as I have said, are not slightly
thought of in the world.

17. Is it true that in religious houses no explanations are
necessary, for it is only reasonable we should be excused these
observances?  Well, that is not so; for there are people who say
that monasteries ought to be courts in politeness and
instruction.  I certainly cannot understand it.  I thought that
perhaps some saint may have said that they ought to be courts to
teach those who wish to be the courtiers of heaven, and that
these people misunderstood their meaning; for if a man be careful
to please God continually, and to hate the world, as he ought to
do, I do not see how he can be equally careful to please those
who live in the world in these matters which are continually
changing.  If they could be learnt once for all, it might be
borne with: but as to the way of addressing letters, there ought
to be a professor's chair founded, from which lectures should be
given, so to speak, teaching us how to do it; for the paper
should on one occasion be left blank in one corner, and on
another in another corner; and a man must be addressed as the
illustrious who was not hitherto addressed as the magnificent.

18. I know not where this will stop: I am not yet fifty, and yet
I have seen so many changes during my life, that I do not know
how to live.  What will they do who are only just born, and who
may live many years?  Certainly I am sorry for those spiritual
people who, for certain holy purposes, are obliged to live in the
world; the cross they have to carry is a dreadful one.  If they
could all agree together, and make themselves ignorant, and be
willing to be considered so in these sciences, they would set
themselves free from much trouble.  But what folly am I about!
from speaking of the greatness of God I am come to speak of the
meanness of the world!  Since our Lord has given me the grace to
quit it, I wish to leave it altogether.   Let them settle these
matters who maintain these follies with so much labour.
God grant that in the next life, where there is no changing, we
may not have to pay for them!  Amen.


1. The Saint, having interrupted her account of her interior life
in order to give the history of the foundation of the monastery
of St. Joseph, Avila,--the first house of the Reformed
Carmelites,--here resumes that account broken off at the end of §
10 of ch. xxxii.

2. Ephes. i. 14: "Pignus hæreditatis nostræ."

3. St. John iii. 34: "Non enim ad mensuram dat Deus spiritum."

4. Ch. xxviii. §§ 1-5.

5. See ch. xl. § 24; Way of Perfection, ch. vii. § 1; but
ch. iv. of the previous editions.

6. See ch. xx. § 14.

7. See ch. xxx. § 19.

8. See ch. xxx. §§ 18, 25.


Chapter XXXVIII.


Certain Heavenly Secrets, Visions, and Revelations.  The Effects
of Them in Her Soul.


1. One night I was so unwell that I thought I might be excused
making my prayer; so I took my rosary, that I might employ myself
in vocal prayer, trying not to be recollected in my
understanding, though outwardly I was recollected, being in my
oratory.  These little precautions are of no use when our Lord
will have it otherwise.  I remained there but a few moments thus,
when I was rapt in spirit with such violence that I could make no
resistance whatever.  It seemed to me that I was taken up to
heaven; and the first persons I saw there were my father and my
mother.  I saw other things also; but the time was no longer than
that in which the Ave Maria might be said, and I was amazed at
it, looking on it all as too great a grace for me.  But as to the
shortness of the time, it might have been longer, only it was all
done in a very short space.

2. I was afraid it might be an illusion; but as I did not think
so, I knew not what to do, because I was very much ashamed to go
to my confessor about it.  It was not, as it seemed to me,
because I was humble, but because I thought he would laugh at me,
and say: Oh, what a St. Paul!--she sees the things of heaven; or
a St. Jerome.  And because these glorious Saints had had such
visions, I was so much the more afraid, and did nothing but cry;
for I did not think it possible for me to see what they saw.
At last, though I felt it exceedingly, I went to my confessor;
for I never dared to keep secret anything of this kind, however
much it distressed me to speak of them, owing to the great fear I
had of being deceived.  When my confessor saw how much I was
suffering, he consoled me greatly, and gave me plenty of good
reasons why I should have no fear.

3. It happened, also, as time went on, and it happens now from
time to time, that our Lord showed me still greater secrets.
The soul, even if it would, has neither the means not the power
to see more than what He shows it; and so, each time, I saw
nothing more than what our Lord was pleased to let me see.
But such was the vision, that the least part of it was enough to
make my soul amazed, and to raise it so high that it esteems and
counts as nothing all the things of this life.  I wish I could
describe, in some measure, the smallest portion of what I saw;
but when I think of doing it, I find it impossible; for the mere
difference alone between the light we have here below, and that
which is seen in a vision,--both being light,--is so great, that
there is no comparison between them; the brightness of the sun
itself seems to be something exceedingly loathsome.  In a word,
the imagination, however strong it may be, can neither conceive
nor picture to itself this light, nor any one of the things which
our Lord showed me in a joy so supreme that it cannot be
described; for then all the senses exult so deeply and so sweetly
that no description is possible; and so it is better to say
nothing more.

4. I was in this state once for more than an hour, our Lord
showing me wonderful things.  He seemed as if He would not leave
me.  He said to me, "See, My daughter, what they lose who are
against Me; do not fail to tell them of it."  Ah, my Lord, how
little good my words will do them, who are made blind by their
own conduct, if Thy Majesty will not give them light!  Some, to
whom Thou hast given it, there are, who have profited by the
knowledge of Thy greatness; but as they see it revealed to one so
wicked and base as I am, I look upon it as a great thing if there
should be any found to believe me.  Blessed be Thy name, and
blessed be Thy compassion; for I can trace, at least in my own
soul, a visible improvement.  Afterwards I wished I had continued
in that trance for ever, and that I had not returned to
consciousness, because of an abiding sense of contempt for
everything here below; all seemed to be filth; and I see how
meanly we employ ourselves who are detained on earth.

5. When I was staying with that lady of whom I have been
speaking, [1] it happened to me once when I was suffering from my
heart,--for, as I have said, [2] I suffered greatly at one time,
though not so much now,--that she, being a person of great
charity, brought out her jewels set in gold, and precious stones
of great price, and particularly a diamond, which she valued very
much.  She thought this might amuse me; but I laughed to myself,
and was very sorry to see what men made much of; for I thought of
what our Lord had laid up for us, and considered how impossible
it was for me, even if I made the effort, to have any
appreciation whatever of such things, provided our Lord did not
permit me to forget what He was keeping for us.

6. A soul in this state attains to a certain freedom, which is so
complete that none can understand it who does not possess it.
It is a real and true detachment, independent of our efforts; God
effects it all Himself; for His Majesty reveals the truth in such
a way, that it remains so deeply impressed on our souls as to
make it clear that we of ourselves could not thus acquire it in
so short a time.

7. The fear of death, also, was now very slight in me, who had
always been in great dread of it; now it seems to me that death
is a very light thing for one who serves God, because the soul is
in a moment delivered thereby out of its prison, and at rest.
This elevation of the spirit, and the vision of things so high,
in these trances seem to me to have a great likeness to the
flight of the soul from the body, in that it finds itself in a
moment in the possession of these good things.  We put aside the
agonies of its dissolution, of which no great account is to be
made; for they who love God in truth, and are utterly detached
from the things of this life, must die with the
greater sweetness.

8. It seems to me, also, that the rapture was a great help to
recognise our true home, and to see that we are pilgrims
here; [3] it is a great thing to see what is going on there and
to know where we have to live; for if a person has to go and
settle in another country, it is a great help to him, in
undergoing the fatigues of his journey, that he has discovered it
to be a country where he may live in the most perfect peace.
Moreover, it makes it easy for us to think of the things of
heaven, and to have our conversation there. [4]  It is a great
gain, because the mere looking up to heaven makes the soul
recollected; for as our Lord has been pleased to reveal heaven in
some degree, my soul dwells upon it in thought; and it happens
occasionally that they who are about me, and with whom I find
consolation, are those whom I know to be living in heaven, and
that I look upon them only as really alive; while those who are
on earth are so dead, that the whole world seems unable to
furnish me with companions, particularly when these impetuosities
of love are upon me. Everything seems a dream, and what I see
with the bodily eyes an illusion.  What I have seen with the eyes
of the soul is that which my soul desires; and as it finds itself
far away from those things, that is death.

9. In a word, it is a very great mercy which our Lord gives to
that soul to which He grants the like visions, for they help it
in much, and also in carrying a heavy cross, since nothing
satisfies it, and everything is against it; and if our Lord did
not now and then suffer these visions to be forgotten, though
they recur again and again to the memory, I know not how life
could be borne.  May He be blessed and praised for ever and ever!
I implore His Majesty by that Blood which His Son shed for me,
now that, of His good pleasure, I know something of these great
blessings, and begin to have the fruition of them, that it may
not be with me as it was with Lucifer, who by his own fault
forfeited it all.  I beseech Thee, for Thine own sake, not to
suffer this; for I am at times in great fear, though at others,
and most frequently, the mercy of God reassures me, for He who
has delivered me from so many sins will not withdraw His hand
from under me, and let me be lost.  I pray you, my father, to beg
this grace for me always.

10. The mercies, then, hitherto described, are not, in my
opinion, so great as those which I am now going to speak of, on
many accounts, because of the great blessings they have brought
with them, and because of the great fortitude which my soul
derived from them; and yet every one separately considered is so
great, that there is nothing to be compared with them.

11. One day--it was the eve of Pentecost--I went after Mass to a
very lonely spot, where I used to pray very often, and began to
read about the feast in the book of a Carthusian; [5] and reading
of the marks by which beginners, proficients, and the perfect may
know that they have the Holy Ghost, it seemed to me, when I had
read of these three states, that by the goodness of God, so far
as I could understand, the Holy Ghost was with me.  I praised God
for it; and calling to mind how on another occasion, when I read
this, I was very deficient,--for I saw most distinctly at that
time how deficient I was then from what I saw I was now,--I
recognised herein the great mercy of our Lord to me, and so began
to consider the place which my sins had earned for me in hell,
and praised God exceedingly, because it seemed as if I did not
know my own soul again, so great a change had come over it.

12. While thinking of these things, my soul was carried away with
extreme violence, and I knew not why.  It seemed as if it would
have gone forth out of the body, for it could not contain itself,
nor was it able to hope for so great a good.  The impetuosity was
so excessive that I had no power left, and, as I think, different
from what I had been used to.  I knew not what ailed my soul, nor
what it desired, for it was so changed.  I leaned for support,
for I could not sit, because my natural strength had
utterly failed.

13. Then I saw over my head a dove, very different from those we
usually see, for it had not the same plumage, but wings formed of
small shells shining brightly.  It was larger than an ordinary
dove; I thought I heard the rustling of its wings.  It hovered
above me during the space of an Ave Maria.  But such was the
state of my soul, that in losing itself it lost also the sight of
the dove.  My spirit grew calm with such a guest; and yet, as I
think, a grace so wonderful might have disturbed and frightened
it; and as it began to rejoice in the vision, it was delivered
from all fear, and with the joy came peace, my soul continuing
entranced.  The joy of this rapture was exceedingly great; and
for the rest of that festal time I was so amazed and bewildered
that I did not know what I was doing, nor how I could have
received so great a grace.  I neither heard nor saw anything, so
to speak, because of my great inward joy.  From that day forth I
perceived in myself a very great progress in the highest love of
God, together with a great increase in the strength of my
virtues.  May He be blessed and praised for ever!  Amen.

14. On another occasion I saw that very dove above the head of
one of the Dominican fathers; but it seemed to me that the rays
and brightness of the wings were far greater.  I understood by
this that he was to draw souls unto God.

15. At another time I saw our Lady putting a cope of exceeding
whiteness on that Licentiate of the same Order, of whom I have
made mention more than once. [6]  She told me that she gave him
that cope in consideration of the service he had rendered her by
helping to found this house, [7] that it was a sign that she
would preserve his soul pure for the future, and that he should
not fall into mortal sin.  I hold it for certain that so it came
to pass, for he died within a few years; his death and the rest
of his life were so penitential, his whole life and death so
holy, that, so far as anything can be known, there cannot be a
doubt on the subject.  One of the friars present at his death
told me that, before he breathed his last, he said to him that
St. Thomas was with him. [8]  He died in great joy, longing to
depart out of this land of exile.

16. Since then he has appeared to me more than once in
exceedingly great glory, and told me certain things.  He was so
given to prayer, that when he was dying, and would have
interrupted it if he could because of his great weakness, he was
not able to do so; for he was often in a trance.  He wrote to me
not long before he died, and asked me what he was to do; for as
soon as he had said Mass he fell into a trance which lasted a
long time, and which he could not hinder.  At last God gave him
the reward of the many services of his whole life.

17. I had certain visions, too, of the great graces which our
Lord bestowed upon that rector of the Society of Jesus, of whom I
have spoken already more than once; [9] but I will not say
anything of them now, lest I should be too tedious.  It was his
lot once to be in great trouble, to suffer great persecution and
distress.  One day, when I was hearing Mass, I saw Christ on the
Cross at the elevation of the Host.  He spoke certain words to
me, which I was to repeat to that father for his comfort,
together with others, which were to warn him beforehand of what
was coming, and to remind him of what He had suffered on his
behalf, and that he must prepare for suffering.  This gave him
great consolation and courage; and everything came to pass
afterwards as our Lord had told me.

18. I have seen great things of members of the Order to which
this father belongs, which is the Society of Jesus, and of the
whole Order itself; I have occasionally seen them in heaven with
white banners in their hands, and I have had other most wonderful
visions, as I am saying, about them, and therefore have a great
veneration for this Order; for I have had a great deal to do with
those who are of it, and I see that their lives are conformed to
that which our Lord gave me to understand about them.

19. One night, when I was in prayer, our Lord spoke to me certain
words, whereby He made me remember the great wickedness of my
past life.  They filled me with shame and distress; for though
they were not spoken with severity, they caused a feeling and a
painfulness which were too much for me: and we feel that we make
greater progress in the knowledge of ourselves when we hear one
of these words, than we can make by a meditation of many days on
our own misery, because these words impress the truth upon us at
the same time in such a way that we cannot resist it.  He set
before me the former inclinations of my will to vanities, and
told me to make much of the desire I now had that my will, which
had been so ill employed, should be fixed on Him, and that He
would accept it.

20. On other occasions He told me to remember how I used to think
it an honourable thing to go against His honour; and, again, to
remember my debt to Him, for when I was most rebellious He was
bestowing His graces upon me.  If I am doing anything wrong--and
my wrong-doings are many--His Majesty makes me see it in such a
way that I am utterly confounded; and as I do so often, that
happens often also.  I have been found fault with by my
confessors occasionally; and on betaking myself to prayer for
consolation, have received a real reprimand.

21. To return to what I was speaking of.  When our Lord made me
remember my wicked life, I wept; for as I considered that I had
then never done any good, I thought He might be about to bestow
upon me some special grace; because most frequently, when I
receive any particular mercy from our Lord, it is when I have
been previously greatly humiliated, in order that I may the more
clearly see how far I am from deserving it.  I think our Lord
must do it for that end.

22. Almost immediately after this I was so raised up in spirit
that I thought myself to be, as it were, out of the body; at
least, I did not know that I was living in it. [10]  I had a
vision of the most Sacred Humanity in exceeding glory, greater
than I had ever seen It in before.  I beheld It in a wonderful
and clear way in the bosom of the Father.  I cannot tell how it
was, for I saw myself, without seeing, as it seemed to me, in the
presence of God.  My amazement was such that I remained, as I
believe, some days before I could recover myself.  I had
continually before me, as present, the Majesty of the Son of God,
though not so distinctly as in the vision.  I understood this
well enough; but the vision remained so impressed on my
imagination, that I could not get rid of it for some time, though
it had lasted but a moment; it is a great comfort to me, and also
a great blessing.

23. I have had this vision on three other occasions, and it is, I
think, the highest vision of all the visions which our Lord in
His mercy showed me.  The fruits of it are the very greatest, for
it seems to purify the soul in a wonderful way, and destroy, as
it were utterly, altogether the strength of our sensual nature.
It is a grand flame of fire, which seems to burn up and
annihilate all the desires of this life.  For though now--glory
be to God!--I had no desire after vanities, I saw clearly in the
vision how all things are vanity, and how hollow are all the
dignities of earth; it was a great lesson, teaching me to raise
up my desires to the Truth alone.  It impresses on the soul a
sense of the presence of God such as I cannot in any way
describe, only it is very different from that which it is in our
own power to acquire on earth.  It fills the soul with profound
astonishment at its own daring, and at any one else being able to
dare to offend His most awful Majesty.

24. I must have spoken now and then of the effects of
visions, [11] and of other matters of the same kind, and I have
already said that the blessings they bring with them are of
various degrees; but those of this vision are the highest of all.
When I went to Communion once I called to mind the exceeding
great majesty of Him I had seen, and considered that it was He
who is present in the most Holy Sacrament, and very often our
Lord was pleased to show Himself to me in the Host; the very
hairs on my head stood, [12] and I thought I should come
to nothing.

25. O my Lord! ah, if Thou didst not throw a veil over Thy
greatness, who would dare, being so foul and miserable, to come
in contact with Thy great Majesty?  Blessed be Thou, O Lord; may
the angels and all creation praise Thee, who orderest all things
according to the measure of our weakness, so that, when we have
the fruition of Thy sovereign mercies, Thy great power may not
terrify us, so that we dare not, being a frail and miserable
race, persevere in that fruition!

26. It might happen to us as it did to the labourer--I know it to
be a certain fact--who found a treasure beyond his expectations,
which were mean.  When he saw himself in possession of it, he was
seized with melancholy, which by degrees brought him to his grave
through simple distress and anxiety of mind, because he did not
know what to do with his treasure.  If he had not found it all at
once, and if others had given him portions of it by degrees,
maintaining him thereby, he might have been more happy than he
had been in his poverty, nor would it have cost him his life.

27. O Thou Treasure of the poor! how marvellously Thou sustainest
souls, showing to them, not all at once, but by little and
little, the abundance of Thy riches!  When I behold Thy great
Majesty hidden beneath that which is so slight as the Host is, I
am filled with wonder, ever since that vision, at Thy great
wisdom; and I know not how it is that our Lord gives me the
strength and courage necessary to draw near to him, were it not
that He who has had such compassion on me, and still has, gives
me strength, nor would it be possible for me to be silent, or
refrain from making known marvels so great.

28. What must be the thoughts of a wretched person such as I am,
full of abominations, and who has spent her life with so little
fear of God, when she draws near to our Lord's great Majesty, at
the moment He is pleased to show Himself to my soul?  How can I
open my mouth, that has uttered so many words against Him, to
receive that most glorious Body, purity and compassion itself?
The love that is visible in His most beautiful Face, sweet and
tender, pains and distresses the soul, because it has not served
Him, more than all the terrors of His Majesty.  What should have
been my thoughts, then, on those two occasions when I saw what I
have described?  Truly, O my Lord and my joy, I am going to say
that in some way, in these great afflictions of my soul, I have
done something in Thy service.  Ah!  I know not what I am saying,
for I am writing this as if the words were not mine, [13] because
I am troubled, and in some measure beside myself, when I call
these things to remembrance.  If these thoughts were really mine,
I might well say that I had done something for Thee, O my Lord;
but as I can have no good thought if Thou givest it not, no
thanks are due to me; I am the debtor, O Lord, and it is Thou who
art the offended One.

29. Once, when I was going to Communion, I saw with the eyes of
the soul, more distinctly than with those of the body, two devils
of most hideous shape; their horns seemed to encompass the throat
of the poor priest; and I beheld my Lord, in that great majesty
of which I have spoken, [14] held in the hands of that priest, in
the Host he was about to give me.  It was plain that those hands
were those of a sinner, and I felt that the soul of that priest
was in mortal sin.  What must it be, O my Lord, to look upon Thy
beauty amid shapes so hideous!  The two devils were so frightened
and cowed in Thy presence, that they seemed as if they would have
willingly run away, hadst Thou but given them leave.  So troubled
was I by the vision, that I knew not how I could go to Communion.
I was also in great fear, for I thought, if the vision was from
God, that His Majesty would not have allowed me to see the evil
state of that soul. [15]

30. Our Lord Himself told me to pray for that priest; that He had
allowed this in order that I might understand the power of the
words of consecration, and how God failed not to be present,
however wicked the priest might be who uttered them; and that I
might see His great goodness in that He left Himself in the very
hands of His enemy, for my good and for the good of all.
I understood clearly how the priests are under greater
obligations to be holy than other persons; and what a horrible
thing it is to receive this most Holy Sacrament unworthily, and
how great is the devil's dominion over a soul in mortal sin.
It did me a great service, and made me fully understand what I
owe to God.  May He be blessed for evermore!

31. At another time I had a vision of a different kind, which
frightened me very much.  I was in a place where a certain person
died, who as I understood had led a very bad life, and that for
many years.  But he had been ill for two years, and in some
respects seemed to have reformed.  He died without confession;
nevertheless, I did not think he would be damned.  When the body
had been wrapped in the winding-sheet, I saw it laid hold of by a
multitude of devils, who seemed to toss it to and fro, and also
to treat it with great cruelty.  I was terrified at the sight,
for they dragged it about with great hooks.  But when I saw it
carried to the grave with all the respect and ceremoniousness
common to all, I began to think of the goodness of God, who would
not allow that person to be dishonoured, but would have the fact
of his being His enemy concealed.

32. I was almost out of my senses at the sight.  During the whole
of the funeral service, I did not see one of the evil spirits.
Afterwards, when the body was about to be laid in the grave, so
great a multitude of them was therein waiting to receive it, that
I was beside myself at the sight, and it required no slight
courage on my part not to betray my distress. I thought of the
treatment which that soul would receive, when the devils had such
power over the wretched body.  Would to God that all who live in
mortal sin might see what I then saw,--it was a fearful sight; it
would go, I believe, a great way towards making them lead
better lives.

33. All this made me know more of what I owe to God, and of the
evils from which He has delivered me.  I was in great terror.
I spoke of it to my confessor, and I thought it might be an
illusion of Satan, in order to take away my good opinion of that
person, who yet was not accounted a very good Christian.
The truth is, that, whether it was an illusion or not, it makes
me afraid whenever I think of it.

34. Now that I have begun to speak of the visions I had
concerning the dead, I will mention some matters which our Lord
was pleased to reveal to me in relation to certain souls.  I will
confine myself to a few for the sake of brevity, and because they
are not necessary; I mean that they are not for our profit.
They told me that one who had been our Provincial--he was then of
another province--was dead.  He was a man of great virtue, with
whom I had had a great deal to do, and to whom I was under many
obligations for certain kindnesses shown me.  When I heard that
he was dead, I was exceedingly troubled, because I trembled for
his salvation, seeing that he had been superior for twenty years.
That is what I dread very much; for the cure of souls seems to me
to be full of danger.  I went to an oratory in great distress,
and gave up to him all the good I had ever done in my whole
life,--it was little enough,--and prayed our Lord that His merits
might fill up what was wanting, in order that this soul might be
delivered up from purgatory.

35. While I was thus praying to our Lord as well as I could, he
seemed to me to rise up from the depths of the earth on my right
hand, and I saw him ascend to heaven in exceeding great joy.
He was a very old man then, but I saw him as if he were only
thirty years old, and I thought even younger, and there was a
brightness in his face.  This vision passed away very quickly;
but I was so exceedingly comforted by it, that I could never
again mourn his death, although many persons were distressed at
it, for he was very much beloved.  So greatly comforted was my
soul, that nothing disturbed it, neither could I doubt the truth
of the vision; I mean that it was no illusion.

36. I had this vision about a fortnight after he was dead;
nevertheless, I did not omit to obtain prayers for him and I
prayed myself, only I could not pray with the same earnestness
that I should have done if I had not seen that vision.  For when
our Lord showed him thus to me, it seemed to me afterwards, when
I prayed for him to His Majesty,--and I could not help it,--that
I was like one who gave alms to a rich man.  Later on I heard an
account of the death he died in our Lord--he was far away from
here; it was one of such great edification, that he left all
wondering to see how recollected, how penitent, and how humble he
was when he died.

37. A nun, who was a great servant of God, died in this house.
On the next day one of the sisters was reciting the lesson in the
Office of the Dead, which was said in choir for that nun's soul,
and I was standing myself to assist her in singing the versicle,
when, in the middle of the lesson, I saw the departed nun as I
believe, in a vision; her soul seemed to rise on my right hand
like the soul of the Provincial, and ascend to heaven.
This vision was not imaginary, like the preceding, but like those
others of which I have spoken before; [16] it is not less
certain, however, than the other visions I had.

38. Another nun died in this same house of mine, she was about
eighteen or twenty years of age, and had always been sickly.
She was a great servant of God, attentive in choir, and a person
of great virtue.  I certainly thought that she would not go to
purgatory, on account of her exceeding merits, because the
infirmities under which she had laboured were many.  While I was
saying the Office, before she was buried,--she had been dead
about four hours,--I saw her rise in the same place and ascend
to heaven.

39. I was once in one of the colleges of the Society of Jesus,
and in one of those great sufferings which, as I have said, [17]
I occasionally had, and still have, both in soul and body, and
then so grievously that I was not able, as it seemed to me, to
have even one good thought.  The night before, one of the
brothers of that house had died in it; and I, as well as I could,
was commending his soul to God, and hearing the Mass which
another father of that Society was saying for him when I became
recollected at once, and saw him go up to heaven in great glory,
and our Lord with him.  I understood that His Majesty went with
him by way of special grace.

40. Another brother of our Order, a good friar, was very ill; and
when I was at Mass, I became recollected and saw him dead,
entering into heaven without going through purgatory.  He died,
as I afterwards learned, at the very time of my vision.  I was
amazed that he had not gone to purgatory.  I understood that,
having become a friar and carefully kept the rule, the Bulls of
the Order had been of use to him, so that he did not pass into
purgatory.  I do not know why I came to have this revealed to me;
I think it must be because I was to learn that it is not enough
for a man to be a friar in his habit--I mean, to wear the
habit--to attain to that state of high perfection which that of a
friar is.

41. I will speak no more of these things, because as I have just
said, [18] there is no necessity for it, though our Lord has been
so gracious to me as to show me much.  But in all the visions I
had, I saw no souls escape purgatory except this Carmelite
father, the holy friar Peter of Alcantara, and that Dominican
father of whom I spoke before. [19]  It pleased our Lord to let
me see the degree of glory to which some souls have been raised,
showing them to me in the places they occupy.  There is a great
difference between one place and another.


1. Ch. xxxiv.  Doña Luisa de la Cerda, at Toledo.

2. Ch. iv. § 6.

3. 1 St. Peter ii. 11: "Advenas et peregrinos."

4. Philipp. iii. 20: "Nostra autem conversatio in coelis est."

5. The Life of Christ, by Ludolf of Saxony.

6. F. Pedro Ibañez.  See ch. xxxiii. § 5, ch. xxxvi. § 23.
"This father died Prior of Trianos," is written on the margin of
the MS. by F. Bañes (De la Fuente).

7. St. Joseph, Avila, where St. Teresa was living at this time.

8. See below, § 41.

9. F. Gaspar de Salazar: see ch. xxxiii. § 9, ch. xxxiv. § 2.
It appears from the 179th letter of the Saint (lett. 20,
vol. i. of the Doblado edition) that F. Salazar was reported to
his Provincial, F. Juan Suarez, as having desire to quit the
Society for the Carmelite Order.

10. 2 Cor. xii. 2: "Sive in corpore nescio, sive extra
corpus nescio."

11. See ch. xxviii.

12. Job iv. 15: "Inhorruerunt pili carnis meæ."

13. The biographers of the Saint say that she often found, on
returning from an ecstasy, certain passages written, but not by
herself; this seems to be alluded to here (De la Fuente).

14. § 22.

15. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel,
bk. ii. ch. xxvi. vol. i. p. 183.

16. See ch. xxvii.

17. Ch. xxx. § 9.

18. § 34.

19. § 15.  Fr. Pedro Ibañez.


Chapter XXXIX.


Other Graces Bestowed on the Saint.  The Promises of Our Lord
to Her.  Divine Locutions and Visions.


1. I was once importuning our Lord exceedingly to restore the
sight of a person who had claims upon me, and who was almost
wholly blind.  I was very sorry for him, and afraid our Lord
would not hear me because of my sins.  He appeared to me as at
other times, and began to show the wound in His left hand; with
the other He drew out the great nail that was in it, and it
seemed to me that, in drawing the nail, He tore the flesh.
The greatness of the pain was manifest, and I was very much
distressed thereat.  He said to me, that He who had borne that
for my sake would still more readily grant what I asked Him, and
that I was not to have any doubts about it.  He promised me there
was nothing I should ask that He would not grant; that He knew I
should ask nothing that was not for His glory, and that He would
grant me what I was now praying for.  Even during the time when I
did not serve Him, I should find, if I considered it, I had asked
nothing that He had not granted in an ampler manner than I had
known how to ask; how much more amply still would He grant what I
asked for, now that He knew I loved Him!  I was not to doubt.
I do not think that eight days passed before our Lord restored
that person to sight.  My confessor knew it forthwith.  It might
be that it was not owing to my prayer; but, as I had had the
vision, I have a certain conviction that it was a grace accorded
to me.  I gave thanks to His Majesty.

2. Again, a person was exceedingly ill of a most painful disease;
but, as I do not know what it was, I do not describe it by its
name here.  What he had gone through for two months was beyond
all endurance; and his pain was so great that he tore his own
flesh.  My confessor, the rector of whom I have spoken, [1] went
to see him; he was very sorry for him, and told me that I must
anyhow go myself and visit him; he was one whom I might visit,
for he was my kinsman.  I went, and was moved to such a tender
compassion for him that I began, with the utmost importunity, to
ask our Lord to restore him to health.  Herein I saw clearly how
gracious our Lord was to me, so far as I could judge; for
immediately, the next day, he was completely rid of that pain.

