   "6. That the military shall not be called out, uncalled for.

   "7. That the parish beadle, for the time being, be authorized
   to stand no nonsense.

   "8. That his Majesty's mail be permitted to pass on the night
   in question.

   "9. That all animosities be buried in oblivion, at the Parish
   expense.

   "10. That the ashes of old bon-fires be never raked up.

   "     (Signed)
                 {WAGSTAFF, High Constable.
                 {WIGSBY."

       *       *       *       *       *


Our next quotations are two comico-serio Ballads:--


FRENCH AND ENGLISH.

    "Good Heaven! why even the little children in France speak
    French!" ADDISON.


        I.

  Never go to France
  Unless you know the lingo,
  If you do, like me,
  You will repent by jingo,
  Staring like a fool
  And silent as a mummy,
  There I stood alone,
  A nation with a dummy.

        II.

  Chaises stand for chairs,
  They christen letters _Billies,_
  They call their mothers _mares,_
  And all their daughters _fillies;_
  Strange it was to hear,
  I'll tell you what's a good 'un,
  They call their leather _queer_,
  And half their shoes are wooden.

        III.

  Signs I had to make
  For every little notion,
  Limbs all going like
  A telegraph in motion.
  For wine I reel'd about,
  To show my meaning fully,
  And made a pair of horns.
  To ask for "beef and bully."

        IV.

  Moo! I cried for milk;
  I got my sweet things snugger,
  When I kissed Jeannette,
  'Twas understood for sugar.
  If I wanted bread.
  My jaws I set a-going,
  And asked for new-laid eggs
  By clapping hands and crowing.

        V.

  If I wished a ride,
  I'll tell you how I got it:
  On my stick astride,
  I made believe to trot it;
  Then their cash was strange,
  It bored me every minute,
  Now here's a _hog_ to change,
  How many _sows_ are in it.

        VI.

  Never go to France
  Unless you know the lingo;
  If you do, like me,
  You will repent, by jingo;
  Staring like a fool,
  And silent as a mummy,
  There I stood alone,
  A nation with a dummy.


THE DUEL.

A SERIOUS BALLAD.

    "Like the two Kings of Brentford smelling at one nosegay."


  In Brentford town, of old renown,
    There lived a Mister Bray.
  Who fell in love with Lucy Bell,
    And so did Mr. Clay.

  To see her ride from Hammersmith,
    By all it was allowed,
  Such fair outsides are seldom seen,
    Such Angels on a Cloud.

  Said Mr. Bray to Mr. Clay,
    You choose to rival me,
  And court Miss Bell, but there your court
    No thoroughfare shall be.

  Unless you now give up your suit,
    You may repent your love
  I who have shot a pigeon match,
    Can shoot a turtle dove.

  So pray before you woo her more,
    Consider what you do;
  If you pop aught to Lucy Bell--
    I'll pop it into you.

  Said Mr. Clay to Mr. Bray.
    Your threats I quite explode;
  One who has been a volunteer
    Knows how to prime and load.

  And so I say to you unless
    Your passion quiet keeps,
  I who have shot and hit bulls' eyes
    May chance to hit a sheep's.

  Now gold is oft for silver changed,
    And that for copper red;
  But these two went away to give
    Each other change for lead.

  But first they sought a friend a-piece,
    This pleasant thought to give--
  When they were dead, they thus should have
    Two seconds still to live.

  To measure out the ground not long
    The seconds then forbore,
  And having taken one rash step,
    They took a dozen more.

  They next prepared each pistol-pan
    Against the deadly strife,
  By putting in the prime of death
    Against the prime of life.

  Now all was ready for the foes,
    But when they took their stands.
  Fear made them tremble so they found
    They both were shaking hands.

  Said Mr. C. to Mr. B.,
    Here one of us may fall,
  And like St. Paul's Cathedral now,
    Be doom'd to have a ball.

  I do confess I did attach
    Misconduct to your name;
  If I withdraw the charge, will then
    Your ramrod do the same?

  Said Mr. B. I do agree--
    But think of Honour's Courts!
  If We go off without a shot,
    There will be strange reports

  But look, the morning now is bright,
    Though cloudy it begun;
  Why can't we aim above, as if
    We had call'd out the sun?

  So up into the harmless air
    Their bullets they did send;
  And may all other duels have
    That upshot in the end.

       *       *       *       *       *


We next quote brief illustrations of the Cuts on the opposite page. It
may be observed that the articles themselves have but little _esprit_,
and that, unlike most occasions, the wit lies in the wood.


First is a Sonnet accompanying the cut "Infantry at Mess."

    "Sweets to the sweet--farewell."--_Hamlet._


  Time was I liked a cheesecake well enough;
  All human children have a sweetish tooth--
  I used to revel in a pie or puff,
  Or tart--we all are _tarters_ in our youth;
  To meet with jam or jelly was good luck,
  All candies most complacently I cramped.
  A stick of liquorice was good to suck,
  And sugar was as often liked as lumped;
  On treacle's "linked sweetness long drawn out,"
  Or honey, I could feast like any fly,
  I thrilled when lollipops were hawk'd about,
  How pleased to compass hardbake or bull's eye,
  How charmed if fortune in my power cast,
  Elecampane--but that campaign is past.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Picking his way," belongs to a day (April 17) in a "Scrape Book,"
with the motto of "Luck's all:"

    "17th. Had my eye pick'd out by a pavior, who was _axing_ his
    way, he didn't care where. Sent home in a hackney-chariot that
    upset. Paid Jarvis a sovereign for a shilling. My luck all
    over!"

       *       *       *       *       *


The Schoolmaster's Motto, accompanying "Palmam qui meruit ferat!" is
too long for extract.

       *       *       *       *       *


The chief fun of the countryman and his Pigs lies in the cut.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUTS FROM HOOD'S COMIC ANNUAL.

[Illustration: INFANTRY AT MESS.] [Illustration: PICKING YOUR WAY.]
[Illustration: PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT.] [Illustration: 'I DO PERCEIVE
HERE A DIVIDED DUTY.']

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


BUNYAN'S PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.[5]

    [5] Abridged from the paper on Southey's Life of Bunyan, in
    the last Quarterly Review.


Of the first appearance of this celebrated parable, Mr. Southey's
diligence has preserved the following notices:--

    "'It is not known in what year the Pilgrim's Progress was
    first published, no copy of the first edition having as yet
    been discovered; the second is in the British Museum; it is
    "with additions," and its date is 1678; but as the book is
    known to have been written during Bunyan's imprisonment, which
    terminated in 1672, it was probably published before his
    release, or at latest immediately after it. The earliest with
    which Mr. Major has been able to supply me, either by means of
    his own diligent inquiries, or the kindness of his friends, is
    that "eighth e-di-ti-on" so humorously introduced by Gay, and
    printed--not for Ni-cho-las Bod-ding-ton, but for Nathanael
    Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultrey, near the Church, 1682;
    for whom also the ninth was published in 1684, and the tenth
    in 1685. All these no doubt were large impressions.'

    "When the astonishing success of the Pilgrim's Progress had
    raised a swarm of imitators, the author himself, according to
    the frequent fashion of the world, was accused of plagiarism,
    to which he made an indignant reply, in what he considered as
    verses, prefixed to his 'Holy War.'

      'Some say the Pilgrim's Progress is not mine,
      Insinuating as if I would shine
      In name and fame by the worth of another,
      Like some made rich by robbing of their brother;
      Or that so fond I am of being Sire,
      I'll father bastards; or if need require,
      I'll tell a lye in print, to get applause.
      I scorn it; John such dirt-heap never was
      Since God converted him. Let this suffice
      To shew why I my Pilgrim patronize.

      It came from mine own heart, so to my head,
      And thence into my fingers trickled:
      Then to my pen, from whence immediately
      On paper I did dribble it daintily.'--p. lxxxix."

Mr. Southey has carefully examined this charge of supposed imitation,
in which so much rests upon the very simplicity of the conception of
the story, and has successfully shown that the tinker of Elstow could
not have profited by one or two allegories in the French and Flemish
languages--works which he could have had hardly a chance to meet with;
which, if thrown in his way, he could not have read; and, finally,
which, if he had read them, could scarcely have supplied him with a
single hint. Mr. Southey, however, has not mentioned a work in
English, of Bunyan's own time, and from which, certainly, the general
notion of his allegory might have been taken. The work we allude to is
now before us, entitled, 'The Parable of the Pilgrim, written to a
friend by Symon Patrick, D.D., Dean of Peterborough;' the same learned
person, well known by his theological writings, and successively
Bishop of Chichester and Ely. This worthy man's inscription is dated
the 14th of December, 1672; and Mr. Southey's widest conjecture will
hardly allow an earlier date for Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 1672
being the very year in which he was enlarged from prison. The language
of Dr. Patrick, in addressing his friend, excludes the possibility of
his having borrowed from John Bunyan's celebrated work. He apologizes
for sending to his acquaintance one in the old fashioned dress of a
pilgrim; and says he found among the works of a late writer, Baker's
Sancta Sophia, a short discourse, under the name of a Parable of a
Pilgrim; 'which was so agreeable to the portion of fancy he was
endowed with, that he presently thought that a work of this nature
would be very grateful to his friends also. It appears that the
Parable of a Pilgrim, so sketched by Dr. Patrick, remained for some
years in the possession of the private friend for whom it was drawn
up, until, it being supposed by others that the work might be of
general utility, it was at length published in 1678.--Before that year
the first edition of the Pilgrim's Progress had unquestionably made
its appearance; but we equally acquit the Dean of Peterborough and the
tinker of Elstow from copying a thought or idea from each other. If
Dr. Patrick had seen the Pilgrim's Progress he would, probably, in the
pride of academic learning, have scorned to adopt it as a model; but,
at all events, as a man of worth, he would never have denied the
obligation if he had incurred one. John Bunyan, on his part, would in
all likelihood have scorned, 'with his very heels,' to borrow anything
from a dean; and we are satisfied that he would have cut his hand off
rather than written the introductory verses we have quoted, had not
his Pilgrim been entirely his own.

Indeed, whosoever will take the trouble of comparing the two works
which, turning upon nearly the same allegory, and bearing very similar
titles, came into existence at or about the very same time, will
plainly see their total dissimilarity. Bunyan's is a close and
continued allegory, in which the metaphorical fiction is sustained
with all the minuteness of a real story. In Dr. Patrick's the same
plan is generally announced as arising from the earnest longing of a
traveller, whom he calls Philotheus or Theophilus, whose desires are
fixed on journeying to Jerusalem as a pilgrim. After much distressing
uncertainty, caused by the contentions of pretended guides, who
recommend different routes, he is at length recommended to a safe and
intelligent one. Theophilus hastens to put himself under his pilotage,
and the good man gives forth his instructions for the way, and in
abundant detail, so that all the dangers of error and indifferent
company may be securely avoided; but in all this, very little care is
taken even to preserve the appearance of the allegory: in a word, you
have, almost in plain terms, the moral and religious precepts
necessary to be observed in the actual course of a moral and religious
life. The pilgrim, indeed, sets out upon his journey, but it is only
in order again to meet with his guide, who launches further into whole
chapters of instructions, with scarcely a reply from the passive
pupil. It is needless to point out the extreme difference between this
strain of continued didactics, rather encumbered than enlivened by a
starting metaphor, which, generally quite lost sight of, the author
recollects every now and then, as if by accident--and the thoroughly
life-like manner in which John Bunyan puts the adventures of his
pilgrim before us. Two circumstances alone strike us as trenching
somewhat on the manner of him of Elstow: the one is where the guide
awakens some sluggish pilgrims, whom he finds sleeping by the way;[6]
the other is where their way is crossed by two horsemen, who insist
upon assuming the office of guide. 'The one is a pleasing talker,
excellent company by reason of his pleasant humour, and of a carriage
very pleasant and inviting; but they observed he had a sword by his
side, and a pair of pistols before him, together with another
instrument hanging at his belt, which was formed for pulling out of
eyes.'[7] The pilgrims suspected this well-armed cavalier to be one of
that brood who will force others into their own path, and then put out
their eyes in case they should forsake it. They have not got rid of
their dangerous companion, by whom the Romish church is indicated,
when they are accosted by a man of a quite different shape and humour,
'more sad and melancholy, more rude, and of a heavier wit also, who
crossed their way on the right-hand.' He also (representing,
doubtless, the Presbyterians or Sectaries) pressed them with eagerness
to accept his guidance, and did little less than menace them with
total destruction if they should reject it. A dagger and a
pocket-pistol, though less openly and ostentatiously disposed than the
arms of the first cavalier, seem ready for the same purposes; and he,
therefore, is repulsed, as well as his neighbour. These are the only
passages in which the church dignitary might be thought to have caught
for a moment the spirit of the tinker of Bedford. Through the rest of
his parable, which fills a well-sized quarto volume, the dean no doubt
evinces considerable learning, but, compared to Bunyan, may rank with
the dullest of all possible doctors; 'a worthy neighbour, indeed, and
a marvellous good bowler--but for Alexander, you see how 'tis.' Yet
Dr. Patrick had the applause of his own time. The first edition of his
Parable appeared, as has been mentioned, in 1678; and the _sixth_,
which now lies before us, is dated 1687.[8]

    [6] Parable of the Pilgrim, chapter xxx.

    [7] Ibidem, chapter xxxiv.

    [8] The Poet Laureate may, perhaps, like to hear that Dr.
    Patrick introduces into his parable a very tolerable edition
    of that legend of the roasted fowls recalled to life by St.
    James of Compostella, of which he himself has recently given
    us so lively and amusing a metrical version.

Mr. Southey introduces the following just eulogium on our classic of
the common people:

    "Bunyan was confident in his own powers of expression; he
    says--

                         --thine only way
      Before them all, is to say out thy say
      In thine own native language, which no man
      Now useth, nor with ease dissemble can.

    And he might well be confident in it. His is a homespun style,
    not a manufactured one; and what a difference is there between
    its homeliness, and the flippant vulgarity of the Roger
    L'Estrange and Tom Brown school! If it is not a well of
    English undefiled to which the poet as well as the philologist
    must repair, if they would drink of the living waters, it is a
    clear stream of current English--the vernacular speech of his
    age, sometimes indeed in its rusticity and coarseness, but
    always in its plainness and its strength. To this natural
    style Bunyan is in some degree beholden for his general
    popularity;--his language is every where level to the must
    ignorant reader, and to the meanest capacity: there is a
    homely reality about it; a nursery tale is not more
    intelligible, in its manner of narration, to a child. Another
    cause of his popularity is, that he taxes the imagination as
    little as the understanding. The vividness of his own, which,
    as his history shows, sometimes could not distinguish ideal
    impressions from actual ones, occasioned this. He saw the
    things of which he was writing as distinctly with his mind's
    eye as if they were indeed passing before him in a dream. And
    the reader perhaps sees them more satisfactorily to himself,
    because the outline only of the picture is presented to him;
    and the author having made no attempt to fill up the details,
    every reader supplies them according to the measure and scope
    of his own intellectual and imaginative powers."

Mr. Southey, observing with what general accuracy this apostle of the
people writes the English language, notwithstanding all the
disadvantages under which his youth must have been passed, pauses to
notice one gross and repeated error. 'The vulgarism alluded to,' says
the laureate, 'consists in the almost uniform use of _a_ for
_have_--never marked as a contraction, e.g. might _a_ made me take
heed--like to _a_ been smothered.' Under favour, however, this is a
sin against orthography rather than grammar: the tinker of Elstow only
spelt according to the pronunciation of the verb _to have_, then
common in his class; and the same form appears a hundred times in
Shakspeare. We must not here omit to mention the skill with which Mr.
Southey has restored much of Bunyan's masculine and idiomatic English,
which had been gradually dropped out of successive impressions by
careless, or unfaithful, or what is as bad, conceited correctors of
the press.

The speedy popularity of the Pilgrim's Progress had the natural effect
of inducing Bunyan again to indulge the vein of allegory in which his
warm imagination and clear and forcible expression had procured him
such success. Under this impression, he produced the second part of
his Pilgrim's Progress; and well says Mr. Southey, that none but those
who have acquired the ill habit of always reading critically, can feel
it as a clog upon the first. The first part is, indeed, one of those
delightfully simple and captivating tales which, as soon as finished,
we are not unwilling to begin again. Even the adult becomes himself
like the child who cannot be satisfied with the repetition of a
favourite tale, but harasses the story-telling aunt or nurse, to know
more of the incidents and characters. In this respect Bunyan has
contrived a contrast, which, far from exhausting his subject, opens
new sources of attraction, and adds to the original impression. The
pilgrimage of Christiana, her friend Mercy, and her children, commands
sympathy at least as powerful as that of Christian himself, and it
materially adds to the interest which we have taken in the progress of
the husband, to trace the effects produced by similar events in the
case of women and children.

    "There is a pleasure," says the learned editor, "in travelling
    with another companion the same ground--a pleasure of
    reminiscence, neither inferior in kind nor degree to that
    which is derived from a first impression. The characters are
    judiciously marked: that of Mercy, particularly, is sketched
    with an admirable grace and simplicity; nor do we read of any
    with equal interest, excepting that of Ruth in Scripture, so
    beautifully, on all occasions, does the Mercy of John Bunyan
    unfold modest humility regarding her own merits, and tender
    veneration for the matron Christiana."

    "The distinctions between the first and second part of the
    Pilgrim's Progress are such as circumstances render
    appropriate; and as John Bunyan's strong mother wit enabled
    him to seize upon correctly. Christian, for example, a man,
    and a bold one, is represented as enduring his fatigues,
    trials, and combats, by his own stout courage, under the
    blessing of heaven: but to express that species of inspired
    heroism by which women are supported in the path of duty,
    notwithstanding the natural feebleness and timidity of their
    nature, Christiana and Mercy obtain from the interpreter their
    guide, called Great-heart, by whose strength and valour their
    lack of both is supplied, and the dangers and distresses of
    the way repelled and overcome.

    "The author hints, at the end of the second part, as if 'it
    might be his lot to go this way again;' nor was his mind that
    light species of soil which could be exhausted by two crops.
    But he left to another and very inferior hand the task of
    composing a third part, containing the adventures of one
    Tender Conscience, far unworthy to be bound up, as it
    sometimes is, with John Bunyan's matchless parable."

       *       *       *       *       *

'Tis necessary a writing critic should understand how to write. And
though every writer is not bound to show himself in the capacity of
critic, every writing critic is bound to show himself capable of being
a writer.

_Shaftesbury Criticism_

       *       *       *       *       *


NOTES OF A READER.


LACONICS.

(_From Maxwell. By Theodore Hook_.)


_Professional People_.

None of our fellow-creatures enjoy life more than the successful
member of one of the learned professions. There is, it is true,
constant toil; but there are constant excitement, activity, and
enthusiasm; at least, where there is not enthusiasm in a profession,
success will never come--and as to the affairs of the world in
general, the divine, the lawyer, and the medical man, are more
conversant and mixed up with them, than any other human
beings--cabinet ministers themselves, not excepted.

The divine, by the sacred nature of his calling, and the higher
character of his duties, is, perhaps, farther removed from an
immediate contact with society; his labours are of a more exalted
order, and the results of those labours not open to ordinary
observation; but the lawyer in full practice knows the designs and
devices of half our acquaintance; it is true, professional decorum
seals his lips, but _he_ has them all before him in his "mind's
eye,"--all their litigations and littlenesses,--all their cuttings,
and carvings, and contrivings. He knows why a family, who hate the
French with all the fervour of British prejudice, visits Paris, and
remains there for a year or two; he can give a good reason why a man
who delights in a well preserved property in a sporting country, with
a house well built and beautifully situated, consents to "_spare it_,"
at a reduced price, to a man for whom he cares nothing upon earth: and
looks at the world fully alive to the motives, and perfectly aware of
the circumstances, of three-fourths of the unconscious actors by whom
he is surrounded.

The eminent medical man stands, if not upon higher ground, at least in
a more interesting position. As he mingles with the gay assembly, or
visits the crowded ball, he knows the latent ills, the hidden, yet
incurable disorders of the laughing throng by which he is encircled;
he sees premature death lurking under the hectic flush on the cheek of
the lovely Fanny, and trembles for the fate of the kind-hearted Emily,
as he beholds her mirthfully joining in the mazy dance. He, too, by
witnessing the frequently recurring scenes of death, beholds the
genuine sorrow of the bereaved wife, or the devoted husband--and can,
by the constant unpremeditated exhibitions of fondness and feeling,
appreciate the affection which exists in such and such places, and
understand, with an almost magical power, the value of the links by
which society is held together.


_Middle Life_.

There is more healthful exercise for the mind in the uneven paths of
middling life, than there is on the Macadamized road of fortune. Were
the year all summer, how tiresome would be the green leaves and the
bright sunshine--as, indeed, those will admit, who have lived in
climates where vegetation is always at work.


_Unwelcome Truth_.

Plain speaking was Mousetrap's distinctive characteristic; his
conversation abounded in blunt truisms, founded upon a course of
thinking somewhat peculiar to himself, but which, when tried by the
test of human vice and human folly, proved very frequently to be a
great deal more accurate than agreeable.


_Stockbrokers_.

"I know some of them brokering boys are worth a million on Monday, and
threepence on Thursday--all in high feather one week, and poor
waddling creturs the next."


_Mercantile Life_.

A dark hole of a counting-house, with a couple of clerk chaps, cocked
up upon long-legged stools, writing out letters--a smoky
fireplace--two or three files, stuck full of dirty papers, hanging
against the wall--an almanack, and a high-railed desk, with a slit in
a panel, with "bills for acceptance" painted over it. They are the
chaps "wot" makes time-bargains--they speculate for thousands, having
nothing in the world--and then at the wind-up of a week or two, pay
each other what they call the difference: that is to say, the change
between what they cannot get, and what they have not got.


_The Secret Spring_.

There are with all great affairs smaller affairs connected, so that in
the watch-work of society, the most skilful artist is sometimes
puzzled to fix upon the very little wheel by which the greater wheels
are worked.


"_Bad Company_."

The subject under discussion was the great advantages likely to arise
from the establishment of the North Shields Sawdust Consolidation
Company, in which Apperton told Maxwell there were still seventy-four
shares to be purchased: they were hundred pound shares, and were
actually down at eighty-nine, would be at fifteen premium on the
following Saturday, and must eventually rise to two hundred and
thirty, for reasons which he gave in the most plausible manner, and
which were in themselves perfectly satisfactory, as he said, to the
"meanest capacity;" a saying with which it might have been perfectly
safe to agree.


_Love_.

What does Sterne say? That love is no more made by talking of it, than
a black pudding would be. Habit, association, assimilation of tastes,
communion of thought, kindness without pretension, solicitude without
effort, a tacit agreement and a silent sympathy; these are the
excitements and stimulants of the only sort of love that is worth
thinking of.


_Brighton_.

