
Dry kilns as in use to-day are divided into two classes: The "pipe" or
"moist-air" kiln, in which natural draft is relied upon for
circulation and, the "blower" or "hot blast" kiln, in which the
circulation is produced by fans or blowers. Both classes have their
adherents and either one will produce satisfactory results if properly
operated.


                   The "Blower" or "Hot Blast" Kiln

The blower kiln in its various types has been in use so long that it
is hardly necessary to give to it a lengthy introduction. These kilns
at their inauguration were a wonderful improvement over the old style
"bake-oven" or "sweat box" kiln then employed, both on account of the
improved quality of the material and the rapidity at which it was
dried.

These blower kilns have undergone steady improvement, not only in the
apparatus and equipment, but also in their general design, method of
introducing air, and provision for controlling the temperature and
humidity. With this type of kiln the circulation is always under
absolute control and can be adjusted to suit the conditions, which
necessarily vary with the conditions of the material to be dried and
the quantity to be put through the kiln.

In either the blower or moist-air type of dry kiln, however, it is
absolutely essential, in order to secure satisfactory results, both as
to rapidity in drying and good quality of stock, that the kiln be so
designed that the temperature and humidity, together with circulation,
are always under convenient control. Any dry kiln in which this has
not been carefully considered will not give the desired results.

In the old style blower kiln, while the circulation and temperature
was very largely under the operator's control, it was next to
impossible to produce conditions in the receiving end of the kiln so
that the humidity could be kept at the proper point. In fact, this was
one reason why the natural draft, or so-called moist-air kiln was
developed.

The advent of the moist-air kiln served as an education to kiln
designers and manufacturers, in that it has shown conclusively the
value of a proper degree of humidity in the receiving end of any
progressive dry kiln, and it has been of special benefit also in that
it gave the manufacturers of blower kilns an idea as to how to improve
the design of their type of kiln to overcome the difficulty referred
to in the old style blower kilns. This has now been remedied, and in a
decidedly simple manner, as is usually the case with all things that
possess merit.

It was found that by returning from one third to one half of the moist
air _after_ having passed through the kiln back to the fan room and by
mixing it with the fresh and more or less dry air going into the
drying room, that the humidity could be kept under convenient control.

The amount of air that can be returned from a kiln of this class
depends upon three things: (1) The condition of the material when
entering the drying room; (2) the rapidity with which the material is
to be dried; and (3) the condition of the outside atmosphere. In the
winter season it will be found that a larger proportion of air may be
returned to the drying room than in summer, as the air during the
winter season contains considerably less moisture and as a consequence
is much drier. This is rather a fortunate coincidence, as, when the
kiln is being operated in this manner, it will be much more economical
in its steam consumption.

In the summer season, when the outside atmosphere is saturated to a
much greater extent, it will be found that it is not possible to
return as great a quantity of air to the drying room, although there
have been instances of kilns of this class, which in operation have
had all the air returned and found to give satisfactory results. This
is an unusual condition, however, and can only be accounted for by
some special or peculiar condition surrounding the installation.

In some instances, the desired amount of humidity in a blower type of
kiln is obtained by the addition of a steam spray in the receiving end
of the kiln, much in the same manner as that used in the moist-air
kilns. This method is not as economical as returning the
moisture-laden air from the drying room as explained in the preceding
paragraph.

With the positive circulation that may be obtained in a blower kiln,
and with the conditions of temperature and humidity under convenient
control, this type of kiln has the elements most necessary to produce
satisfactory drying in the quickest possible elapsed time.

It must not be inferred from this, however, that this class of dry
kiln may be installed and satisfactory results obtained regardless of
how it is handled. A great deal of the success of any dry kiln--or any
other apparatus, for that matter--depends upon intelligent operation.


                  Operation of the "Blower" Dry Kiln

It is essential that the operator be supplied with proper facilities
to keep a record of the material as it is placed into the drying room,
and when it is taken out. An accurate record should be kept of the
temperature every two or three hours, for the different thicknesses
and species of lumber, that he may have some reliable data to guide
him in future cases.

Any man possessing ordinary intelligence can operate dry kilns and
secure satisfactory results, providing he will use good judgment and
follow the basic instructions as outlined below:

     1. When cold and before putting into operation, heat the
     apparatus slowly until all pipes are hot, then start the fan
     or blower, gradually bringing it up to its required speed.

     2. See that _all_ steam supply valves are kept wide open,
     unless you desire to lengthen the time required to dry the
     material.

     3. When using exhaust steam, the valve from the header
     (which is a separate drip, independent of the trap
     connection) must be kept wide open, but must be closed when
     live steam is used on that part of the heater.

     4. The engines as supplied by the manufacturers are
     constructed to operate the fan or blower at a proper speed
     with its throttle valve wide open, and with not less than 80
     pounds pressure of steam.

     5. If the return steam trap does not discharge regularly, it
     is important that it be opened and thoroughly cleaned and
     the valve seat re-ground.

     6. As good air circulation is as essential as the proper
     degree of heat, and as the volume of air and its contact
     with the material to be dried depends upon the volume
     delivered by the fan or blower, it is necessary to maintain
     a regular and uniform speed of the engine.

     7. Atmospheric openings must always be maintained in the fan
     or heater room for fresh air supply.

     8. Successful drying cannot be accomplished without ample
     and free circulation of air at all times.

If the above instructions are fully carried out, and good judgment
used in the handling and operation of the blower kiln, no difficulties
should be encountered in successfully drying the materials at hand.


                  The "Pipe" or "Moist-air" Dry Kiln

While in the blower class of dry kiln, the circulation is obtained by
forced draft with the aid of fans or blowers, in the Moist-air kilns
(see Fig. 31); the circulation is obtained by natural draft only,
aided by the manipulation of dampers installed at the receiving end of
the drying room, which lead to vertical flues through a stack to the
outside atmosphere.

The heat in these kilns is obtained by condensing steam in coils of
pipe, which are placed underneath the material to be dried. As the
degree of heat required, and steam pressure govern the amount of
radiation, there are several types of radiating coils. In Fig. 32 will
be seen the Single Row Heating Coils for live or high pressure steam,
which are used when the low temperature is required. Figure 33 shows
the Double (or 2) Row Heating Coils for live or high pressure steam.
This apparatus is used when a medium temperature is required. In Fig.
34 will be seen the Vertical Type Heating Coils which is recommended
where exhaust or low-pressure steam is to be used, or may be used with
live or high-pressure steam when high temperatures are desired.

    [Illustration: Fig. 31. Section through a typical Moist-air
    Dry Kiln.]

These heating coils are usually installed in sections, which permit
any degree of heat from the minimum to the maximum to be maintained by
the elimination of, or the addition of, any number of heating
sections. This gives a dry kiln for the drying of green softwoods, or
by shutting off a portion of the radiating coils--thus reducing the
temperature--a dry kiln for drying hardwoods, that will not stand the
maximum degree of heat.

    [Illustration: Fig. 32. Single Pipe Heating Apparatus for Dry
    Kilns, arranged for the Use of Live Steam. For Low
    Temperatures.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 33. Double Pipe Heating Apparatus for Dry
    Kilns, arranged for the Use of Live Steam. For Medium
    Temperatures.]

In the Moist-air or Natural Draft type of dry kiln, any degree of
humidity, from clear and dry to a dense fog may be obtained; this is
in fact, the main and most important feature of this type of dry kiln,
and the most essential one in the drying of hardwoods.

It is not generally understood that the length of a kiln has any
effect upon the quantity of material that may be put through it, but
it is a fact nevertheless that long kilns are much more effective, and
produce a better quality of stock in less time than kilns of shorter
length.

Experience has proven that a kiln from 80 to 125 feet in length will
produce the best results, and it should be the practice, where
possible, to keep them within these figures. The reason for this is
that in a long kiln there is a greater drop in temperature between the
discharge end and the green or receiving end of the kiln.

It is very essential that the conditions in the receiving end of the
kiln, as far as the temperature and humidity are concerned, must go
hand in hand.

It has also been found that in a long kiln the desired conditions may
be obtained with higher temperatures than with a shorter kiln;
consequently higher temperatures may be carried in the discharge end
of the kiln, thereby securing greater rapidity in drying. It is not
unusual to find that a temperature of 200 degrees Fahrenheit is
carried in the discharge end of a long dry kiln with safety, without
in any way injuring the quality of the material, although, it would be
better not to exceed 180 degrees in the discharge end, and about 120
degrees in the receiving or green end in order to be on the safe side.


                 Operation of the "Moist-air" Dry Kiln

To obtain the best results these kilns should be kept in continuous
operation when once started, that is, they should be operated
continuously day and night. When not in operation at night or on
Sundays, and the kiln is used to season green stock direct from the
saw, the large doors at both ends of the kiln should be opened wide,
or the material to be dried will "sap stain."

    [Illustration: Fig. 34. Vertical Pipe Heating Apparatus for
    Dry Kilns; may be used in Connection with either Live or
    Exhaust Steam for High or Low Temperatures.]

It is highly important that the operator attending any drying
apparatus keep a minute and accurate record of the condition of the
material as it is placed into the drying room, and its final condition
when taken out.

Records of the temperature and humidity should be taken frequently and
at stated periods for the different thicknesses and species of
material, in order that he may have reliable data to guide him in
future operations.

The following facts should be taken into consideration when operating
the Moist-air dry kiln:

     1. Before any material has been placed in the drying room,
     the steam should be turned into the heating or radiating
     coils, gradually warming them, and bringing the temperature
     in the kiln up to the desired degree.

     2. Care should be exercised that there is sufficient
     humidity in the receiving or loading end of the kiln, in
     order to guard against checking, case-hardening, etc.
     Therefore it is essential that the steam spray at the
     receiving or loading end of the kiln be properly
     manipulated.

     3. As the temperature depends principally upon the pressure
     of steam carried in the boilers, maintain a steam pressure
     of not less than 80 pounds at all times; it may range as
     high as 100 pounds. The higher the temperature with its
     relatively high humidity the more rapidly the drying will be
     accomplished.

     4. Since air circulation is as essential as the proper
     degree of heat, and as its contact with the material to be
     dried depends upon its free circulation, it is necessary
     that the dampers for its admittance into, and its exit from,
     the drying room be efficiently and properly operated.
     Successful drying cannot be accomplished without ample and
     free circulation of air at all times during the drying
     process.

If the above basic principles are carefully noted and followed out,
and good common sense used in the handling and operation of the kiln
apparatus, no serious difficulties should arise against the successful
drying of the materials at hand.


                        Choice of Drying Method

At this point naturally arises the question: Which of the two classes
of dry kilns, the "Moist-air" or "Blower" kiln is the better adapted
for my particular needs?

This must be determined entirely by the species of wood to be dried,
its condition when it goes into the kiln, and what kind of finished
product is to be manufactured from it.

Almost any species of hardwood which has been subjected to
air-seasoning for three months or more may be dried rapidly and in the
best possible condition for glue-jointing and fine finishing with a
"Blower" kiln, but green hardwood, direct from the saw, can only be
successfully dried (if at all) in a "Moist-air" kiln.

Most furniture factories have considerable bent stock which must of
necessity be thoroughly steamed before bending. By steaming, the
initial process of the Moist-air kiln has been consummated. Hence, the
Blower kiln is better adapted to the drying of such stock than the
Moist-air kiln would be, as the stock has been thoroughly soaked by
the preliminary steaming, and all that is required is sufficient heat
to volatilize the moisture, and a strong circulation of air to remove
it as it comes to the surface.

The Moist-air kiln is better adapted to the drying of tight cooperage
stock, while the Blower kiln is almost universally used throughout the
slack cooperage industry for the drying of its products.

For the drying of heavy timbers, planks, blocks, carriage stock, etc.,
and for all species of hardwood thicker than one inch, the Moist-air
kiln is undoubtedly the best.

Both types of kilns are equally well adapted to the drying of 1-inch
green Norway and white pine, elm, hemlock, and such woods as are used
in the manufacture of flooring, ceiling, siding, shingles, hoops, tub
and pail stock, etc.

The selection of one or the other for such work is largely matter of
personal opinion.


                       Kilns of Different Types

All dry kilns as in use to-day are divided as to method of drying into
two classes:

    The "Pipe" or "Moist-air" kiln;
    The "Blower" or "Hot Blast" kiln;

both of which have been fully explained in a previous article.

The above two classes are again subdivided into five different types
of dry kilns as follows:

    The "Progressive" kiln;
    The "Apartment" kiln;
    The "Pocket" kiln;
    The "Tower" kiln;
    The "Box" kiln.


                      The "Progressive" Dry Kiln

Dry kilns constructed so that the material goes in at one end and is
taken out at the opposite end are called Progressive dry kilns, from
the fact that the material gradually progresses through the kiln from
one stage to another while drying (see Fig. 31).

In the operation of the Progressive kiln, the material is first
subjected to a sweating or steaming process at the receiving or
loading end of the kiln with a low temperature and a relative high
humidity. It then gradually progresses through the kiln into higher
temperatures and lower humidities, as well as changes of air
circulation, until it reaches the final stage at the discharge end of
the kiln.

Progressive kilns, in order to produce the most satisfactory results,
especially in the drying of hardwoods or heavy softwood timbers,
should be not less than 100 feet in length (see Fig. 35).

In placing this type of kiln in operation, the following instructions
should be carefully followed:

When steam has been turned into the heating coils, and the kiln is
fairly warm, place the first car of material to be dried in the drying
room--preferably in the morning--about 25 feet from the kiln door on
the receiving or loading end of the kiln, blocking the wheels so that
it will remain stationary.

    [Illustration: Fig. 35. Exterior View of Four Progressive Dry
    Kilns, each 140 Feet long by 18 Feet wide. Cross-wise piling,
    fire-proof construction.]

Five hours later, or about noon, run in the second car and stop it
about five feet from the first one placed in the drying room. Five
hours later, or in the evening push car number two up against the
first car; then run in car number three, stopping it about five feet
from car number two.

On the morning of the second day, push car number three against the
others, and then move them all forward about 25 feet, and then run in
car number four, stopping it about five feet from the car in advance
of it. Five hours later, or about noon, run in car number five and
stop it about five feet from car number four. In the evening or about
five hours later, push these cars against the ones ahead, and run in
loaded car number six, stopping it about five feet from the preceding
car.

On the morning of the third day, move all the cars forward about six
feet; then run in loaded car number seven stop it about four feet from
the car preceding it. Five hours later or about noon push this car
against those in advance of it, and run in loaded car number eight
moving all cars forward about six feet, and continue in this manner
until the full complement of cars have been placed in the kiln. When
the kiln has been filled, remove car number one and push all the
remaining cars forward and run in the next loaded car, and continue in
this manner as long as the kiln is in operation.

As the temperature depends principally upon the pressure of steam,
maintain a steam pressure of not less than 80 pounds at all times; it
may range up to as high as 100 pounds. The higher the temperature with
a relatively higher humidity the more rapidly the drying will be
accomplished.

If the above instructions are carried out, the temperatures,
humidities, and air circulation properly manipulated, there should be
complete success in the handling of this type of dry kiln.

The Progressive type of dry kiln is adapted to such lines of
manufacture that have large quantities of material to kiln-dry where
the species to be dried is of a similiar nature or texture, and does
not vary to any great extent in its thickness, such, for instance, as:

    Oak flooring plants;
    Maple flooring plants;
    Cooperage plants;
    Large box plants;
    Furniture factories; etc.

In the selection of this kind of dry kiln, consideration should be
given to the question of ground space of sufficient length or
dimension to accommodate a kiln of proper length for successful
drying.


                       The "Apartment" Dry Kiln

The Apartment system of dry kilns are primarily designed for the
drying of different kinds or sizes of material at the same time, a
separate room or apartment being devoted to each species or size when
the quantity is sufficient (see Fig. 36).

These kilns are sometimes built single or in batteries of two or more,
generally not exceeding 40 or 50 feet in length with doors and
platforms at both ends the same as the Progressive kilns; but in
operation each kiln is entirely filled at one loading and then closed,
and the entire contents dried at one time, then emptied and again
recharged.

Any number of apartments may be built, and each apartment may be
arranged to handle any number of cars, generally about three or four,
or they may be so constructed that the material is piled directly upon
the floor of the drying room.

    [Illustration: Fig. 36. Exterior View of Six Apartment Dry
    Kilns, each 10 Feet wide by 52 Feet long, End-wise Piling.
    They are entirely of fire-proof construction and equipped
    with double doors (Hussey asbestos outside and canvas
    inside), and are also equipped with humidity and air control
    dampers, which may be operated from the outside without
    opening the kiln doors, which is a very good feature.]

When cars are used, it is well to have a transfer car at each end of
the kilns, and stub tracks for holding cars of dry material, and for
the loading of the unseasoned stock, as in this manner the kilns may
be kept in full operation at all times.

In this type of dry kiln the material receives the same treatment and
process that it would in a Progressive kiln. The advantages of
Apartment kilns is manifest where certain conditions require the
drying of numerous kinds as well as thicknesses of material at one and
the same time. This method permits of several short drying rooms or
apartments so that it is not necessary to mix hardwoods and softwoods,
or thick and thin material in the same kiln room.

In these small kilns the circulation is under perfect control, so that
the efficiency is equal to that of the more extensive plants, and will
readily appeal to manufacturers whose output calls for the prompt and
constant seasoning of a large variety of small stock, rather than a
large volume of material of uniform size and grade.

Apartment kilns are recommended for industries where conditions
require numerous kinds and thicknesses of material to be dried, such
as:

    Furniture factories;
    Piano factories;
    Interior woodwork mills;
    Planing mills; etc.


                         The "Pocket" Dry Kiln

"Pocket" dry kilns (see Fig. 37) are generally built in batteries of
several pockets. They have the tracks level and the lumber goes in and
out at the same end. Each drying room is entirely filled at one time,
the material is dried and then removed and the kiln again recharged.

The length of "Pocket" kilns ranges generally from 14 feet to about 32
feet.

The interior equipment for this type of dry kiln is arranged very
similiar to that used in the Apartment kiln. The heating or radiating
coils and steam spray jets extend the whole length of the drying room,
and are arranged for the use of either live or exhaust steam, as
desired.

Inasmuch as Pocket kilns have doors at one end only, this feature
eliminates a certain amount of door exposure, which conduces towards
economy in operation.

In operating Pocket kilns, woods of different texture and thickness
should be separated and placed in different drying rooms, and each
kiln adjusted and operated to accommodate the peculiarities of the
species and thickness of the material to be dried.

    [Illustration: Fig. 37. Exterior View of Five Pocket Dry
    Kilns, built in Two Batteries with the Front of each Set
    facing the other, and a Transfer System between. They are
    also equipped with the asbestos doors.]

Naturally, the more complex the conditions of manufacturing wood
products in any industry, the more difficult will be the proper
drying of same. Pocket kilns, are, therefore, recommended for
factories having several different kinds and thicknesses of material
to dry in small quantities of each, such as:

    Planing mills;
    Chair factories;
    Furniture factories;
    Sash and door factories; etc.


                         The "Tower" Dry Kiln

The so-called "Tower" dry kiln (see Fig. 38) is designed for the rapid
drying of small stuff in quantities. Although the general form of
construction and the capacity of the individual bins or drying rooms
may vary, the same essential method of operation is common to all.
That is, the material itself, such as wooden novelties, loose staves,
and heading for tubs, kits, and pails, for box stuff, kindling wood,
etc., is dumped directly into the drying rooms from above, or through
the roof, in such quantities as effectually to fill the bin, from
which it is finally removed when dry, through the doors at the bottom.

These dry kilns are usually operated as "Blower" kilns, the heating
apparatus is generally located in a separate room or building adjacent
to the main structure or drying rooms, and arranged so that the hot
air discharged through the inlet duct (see illustration) is thoroughly
distributed beneath a lattice floor upon which rests the material to
be dried. Through this floor the air passes directly upward, between
and around the stock, and finally returns to the fan or heating room.

This return air duct is so arranged that by means of dampers, leading
from each drying room, the air may be returned in any quantity to the
fan room where it is mixed with fresh air and again used. This is one
of the main features of economy of the blower system of drying, as by
the employment of this return air system, considerable saving may be
made in the amount of steam required for drying.

    [Illustration: Fig. 38. Exterior and Sectional View of a
    Battery of Tower Dry Kilns. This is a "Blower" or "Hot Blast"
    type, and shows the arrangement of the fan blower, engine,
    etc. This type of dry kin is used principally for the
    seasoning of small, loose material.]

The lattice floors in this type of dry kiln are built on an incline,
which arrangement materially lessens the cost, and increases the
convenience with which the dried stock may be removed from the bins or
drying rooms.

In operation, the material is conveyed in cars or trucks on an
overhead trestle--which is inclosed--from which the material to be
dried is dumped directly into the drying rooms or bins, through
hoppers arranged for that purpose thereby creating considerable saving
in the handling of the material to be dried into the kiln. The entire
arrangement thus secures the maximum capacity, with a minimum amount
of floor space, with the least expense. Of course, the higher these
kilns are built, the less relative cost for a given result in the
amount of material dried.

In some instances, these kilns are built less in height and up against
an embankment so that teamloads of material may be run directly onto
the roof of the kilns, and dumped through the hoppers into the drying
rooms or bins, thus again reducing to a minimum the cost of this
handling.

The return air duct plays an important part in both of these methods
of filling, permitting the air to become saturated to the maximum
desired, and utilizing much of the heat contained therein, which would
otherwise escape to the atmosphere.

The "Tower" kiln is especially adapted to factories of the following
class:

    Sawmills;
    Novelty factories;
    Woodenware factories;
    Tub and pail factories; etc.


                          The "Box" Dry Kiln

The "Box" kiln shown in Figure 39 is an exterior view of a kiln of
this type which is 20 feet wide, 19 feet deep, and 14 feet high, which
is the size generally used when the space will permit.

Box kilns are used mostly where only a small quantity of material is
to be dried. They are not equipped with trucks or cars, the material
to be dried being piled upon a raised platform inside the drying
room. This arrangement, therefore, makes them of less cost than the
other types of dry kilns.

They are particularly adapted to any and all species and size of
lumber to be dried in very small quantities.

    [Illustration: Fig. 39. Exterior view of the Box Dry Kiln.
    This particular kiln is 20 feet wide, 19 feet deep and 14
    feet high. Box kilns are used mostly where only a small
    amount of kiln-dried lumber of various sizes is required.
    They are not equipped with trucks or cars, and therefore cost
    less to construct than any other type of dry kiln.]

In these small kilns the circulation is under perfect control, so that
the efficiency is equal to that of the more extensive plants.

These special kilns will readily appeal to manufacturers, whose output
calls for the prompt and constant seasoning of a large variety of
small stock, rather than a large volume material of uniform size and
grade.


                             SECTION XIII

                         DRY KILN SPECIALTIES

                    KILN CARS AND METHOD OF LOADING


Within recent years, the edge-wise piling of lumber (see Figs. 40 and
41), upon kiln cars has met with considerable favor on account of its
many advantages over the older method of flat piling. It has been
proven that lumber stacked edge-wise dries more uniformly and rapidly,
and with practically no warping or twisting of the material, and that
it is finally discharged from the dry kiln in a much better and
brighter condition. This method of piling also considerably increases
the holding and consequent drying capacities of the dry kiln by reason
of the increased carrying capacities of the kiln cars, and the shorter
period of time required for drying the material.

    [Illustration: Fig. 40. Car Loaded with Lumber on its Edges
    by the Automatic Stacker, to go into the Dry Kiln cross-wise.
    Equipped with two edge piling kiln trucks.]

In Figures 42 and 43 are shown different views of the automatic lumber
stacker for edge-wise piling of lumber on kiln cars. Many users of
automatic stackers report that the grade of their lumber is raised to
such an extent that the system would be profitable for this reason
alone, not taking into consideration the added saving in time and
labor, which to anyone's mind should be the most important item.

    [Illustration: Fig. 41. Car Loaded with Lumber on its Edges
    by the Automatic Stacker, to go into the Dry Kiln end-wise.
    The bunks on which the lumber rests are channel steel. The
    end sockets are malleable iron and made for I-beam stakes.]

In operation, the lumber is carried to these automatic stackers on
transfer chains or chain conveyors, and passes on to the stacker
table. When the table is covered with boards, the "lumber" lever is
pulled by the operator, which raises a stop, preventing any more
lumber leaving the chain conveyor. The "table" lever then operates the
friction drive and raises the table filled with the boards to a
vertical position. As the table goes up, it raises the latches, which
fall into place behind the piling strips that had been previously laid
on the table. When the table returns to the lower position, a new set
of piling strips are put in place on the table, and the stream of
boards which has been accumulating on the conveyor chain are again
permitted to flow onto the table. As each layer of lumber is added,
the kiln car is forced out against a strong tension. When the car is
loaded, binders are put on over the stakes by means of a powerful
lever arrangement.

    [Illustration: Fig. 42. The above illustration shows the
    construction of the Automatic Lumber Stacker for edge piling
    of lumber to go into the dry kiln end-wise.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 43. The above illustration shows the
    construction of the Automatic Lumber Stacker for edge piling
    of lumber to go into the dry kiln cross-wise.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 44. The above illustration shows a
    battery of Three Automatic Lumber Stackers.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 45. The above illustration shows another
    battery of Three Automatic Lumber Stackers.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 46. Cars Loaded with Lumber on its Edges
    by the Automatic Lumber Stackers.]

After leaving the dry kilns, the loaded car is transferred to the
unstacker (see Fig. 47). Here it is placed on the unstacker car which,
by means of a tension device, holds the load of lumber tight against
the vertical frame of the unstacker. The frame of the unstacker is
triangular and has a series of chains. Each chain has two special
links with projecting lugs. The chains all travel in unison. The lug
links engage a layer of boards, sliding the entire layer vertically,
and the boards, one at a time, fall over the top of the unstacker
frame onto the inclined table, and from there onto conveyor chains
from which they may be delivered to any point desired, depending upon
the length and direction of the chain conveyor.

With these unstackers one man can easily unload a kiln car in twenty
minutes or less.

    [Illustration: Fig. 47. The Lumber Unstacker Car, used for
    unloading cars of Lumber loaded by the Automatic Stacker.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 48. The Lumber Unstacker Car and
    Unstacker, used for unloading Lumber loaded by the Automatic
    Stacker.]

The experience of many users prove that these edge stacking machines
are not alike. This is important, because there is one feature of edge
stacking that must not be overlooked. Unless each layer of boards is
forced into place by power and held under a strong pressure, much
slack will accumulate in an entire load, and the subsequent handling
of the kiln cars, and the effect of the kiln-drying will loosen up the
load until there is a tendency for the layers to telescope. And unless
the boards are held in place rigidly and with strong pressure they
will have a tendency to warp.

    [Illustration: Fig. 49. The above illustration shows method
    of loading kiln cars with veneer on its edges by the use of
    the Tilting Platform.]

A kiln car of edge-stacked lumber, properly piled, is made up of
alternate solid sheets of lumber and vertical open-air spaces, so that
the hot air and vapors rise naturally and freely through the lumber,
drying both sides of the board evenly. The distribution of the heat
and moisture being even and uniform, the drying process is naturally
quickened, and there is no opportunity or tendency for the lumber to
warp.

In Figure 49 will be seen a method of loading kiln cars with veneer on
edge by the use of a tilting platform. On the right of the
illustration is seen a partially loaded kiln car tilted to an angle of
45 degrees, to facilitate the placing of the veneer on the car. At
the left is a completely loaded car ready to enter the dry kiln.

Gum, poplar, and pine veneers are satisfactorily dried in this manner
in from 8 to 24 hours.

In Figure 50 will be seen method of piling lumber on the flat,
"cross-wise" of the dry kiln when same has three tracks.

    [Illustration: Fig. 50. Method of Loading lumber on its Flat,
    cross-wise of the Dry Kiln when same has Three Tracks.]

In Figure 51 will be seen another method of piling lumber on the flat,
"cross-wise" of the dry kiln when same has three tracks.

In Figure 52 will be seen method of piling lumber on the flat,
"end-wise" of the dry kiln when same has two tracks.

In Figure 53 will be seen another method of piling lumber on the flat,
"end-wise" of the dry kiln when same has two tracks.

In Figure 54 will be seen method of piling slack or tight barrel
staves "cross-wise" of the kiln when same has three tracks.

In Figure 55 will be seen another method of piling slack or tight
barrel staves "cross-wise" of the dry kiln when same has three tracks.

In Figure 56 will be seen method of piling small tub or pail staves
"cross-wise" of the dry kiln when same has two tracks.

In Figure 57 will be seen method of piling bundled staves "cross-wise"
of the dry kiln when same has two tracks.

    [Illustration: Fig. 51. Method of loading Lumber on its Flat,
    cross-wise of the Dry Kiln when same has Three Tracks.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 52. Method of loading Lumber on its Flat,
    end-wise of the Dry Kiln by the Use of the Single-sill or
    Dolly Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 53. Method of loading Lumber on its Flat,
    end-wise of the Dry Kiln by the Use of the Double-sill
    Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 54. Method of loading Kiln Car with Tight
    or Slack Barrel Staves cross-wise of Dry Kiln.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 55. Method of loading Kiln Car with Tight
    or Slack Barrel Staves cross-wise of Dry Kiln.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 56. Method of loading Kiln Car with Tub
    or Pail Staves cross-wise of Dry Kiln.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 57. Method of loading Kiln Car with
    Bundled Staves cross-wise of Dry Kiln.]

In Figure 58 will be seen method of piling shingles "cross-wise" of
dry kiln when same has three tracks.

In Figure 59 will be seen another method of piling shingles
"cross-wise" of the dry kiln when same has three tracks.

    [Illustration: Fig. 58. Method of loading Kiln Car with
    Shingles cross-wise of Dry Kiln.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 59. Method of loading Kiln Car with
    Shingles cross-wise of Dry Kiln.]

In Figure 60 will be seen method of piling shingles "end-wise" of the
dry kiln when same has two tracks.

In Figure 61 will be seen a kiln car designed for handling short tub
or pail staves through a dry kiln.

    [Illustration: Fig. 60. Car loaded with 100,000 Shingles.
    Equipped with four long end-wise piling trucks and to go into
    dry kiln end-wise.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 61. Kiln Car designed for handling Short
    Tub or Pail Staves through a Dry Kiln.]

In Figure 62 will be seen a kiln car designed for short piece stock
through a dry kiln.

In Figure 63 will be seen a type of truck designed for the handling of
stave bolts about a stave mill or through a steam box.

In Figure 64 will be seen another type of truck designed for the
handling of stave bolts about a stave mill or through a steam box.

In Figure 65 will be seen another type of truck designed for the
handling of stave bolts about a stave mill or through a steam box.

In Figure 66 will be seen another type of truck designed for the
handling of stave bolts about a stave mill or through a steam box.

In Figure 67 will be seen another type of truck designed for the
handling of stave bolts about a stave mill or through a steam box.

In Figure 68 will be seen another type of truck designed for the
handling of stave bolts about a stave mill or through a steam box.

In Figure 69 will be seen the Regular 3-rail Transfer Car designed for
the handling of 2-rail kiln cars which have been loaded "end-wise."

In Figure 70 will be seen another type of Regular 3-rail Transfer Car
designed for the handling of 2-rail kiln cars which have been loaded
"end-wise."

In Figure 71 will be seen a Specially-designed 4-rail Transfer Car for
2-rail kiln cars which have been built to accommodate extra long
material to be dried.

In Figure 72 will be seen the Regular 2-rail Transfer Car designed for
the handling of 3-rail kiln cars which have been loaded "cross-wise."

In Figure 73 will be seen another type of Regular 2-rail Transfer Car
designed for the handling of 3-rail kiln cars which have been loaded
"cross-wise."

In Figure 74 will be seen the Regular 2-rail Underslung type of
Transfer Car designed for the handling of 3-rail kiln cars which have
been loaded "cross-wise." Two important features in the construction
of this transfer car make it extremely easy in its operation. It has
extra large wheels, diameter 13-1/2 inches, and being underslung, the
top of its rails are no higher than the other types of transfer cars.
Note the relative size of the wheels in the illustration, yet the car
is only about 10 inches in height.

    [Illustration: Fig. 62. Kiln Car Designed for handling Short
    Piece Stock through a Dry Kiln.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 63. A Stave Bolt Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 64. A Stave Bolt Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 65. A Stave Bolt Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 66. A Stave Bolt Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 67. A Stave Bolt Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 68. A Stave Bolt Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 69. A Regular 3-Rail Transfer Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 70. A Regular 3-Rail Transfer Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 71. A Special 4-Rail Transfer Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 72. A Regular 2-Rail Transfer Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 73. A Regular 2-Rail Transfer Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 74. A Regular 2-Rail Underslung Transfer
    Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 75. A Regular 3-Rail Underslung Transfer
    Truck.]

In Figure 75 will be seen the Regular 3-rail Underslung type of
Transfer Car designed for the handling of 2-rail kiln cars which have
been loaded "end-wise." This car also has the important features of
large diameter wheels and low rail construction, which make it very
easy in its operation.

    [Illustration: Fig. 76. A Special 2-Rail Flexible Transfer
    Truck.]

In Figure 76 will be seen the Special 2-rail Flexible type of Transfer
Car designed for the handling of 3-rail kiln cars which have been
loaded "cross-wise." This car is equipped with double the usual number
of wheels, and by making each set of trucks a separate unit (the front
and rear trucks being bolted to a steel beam with malleable iron
connection), a slight up-and-down movement is permitted, which enables
this transfer car to adjust itself to any unevenness in the track,
which is a very good feature.

In Figure 77 will be seen the Regular Transfer Car designed for the
handling of stave bolt trucks.

In Figure 78 will be seen another type of Regular Transfer Car
designed for the handling of stave bolt trucks.

In Figure 79 will be seen a Special Transfer Car designed for the
handling of stave bolt trucks.

    [Illustration: Fig. 77. A Regular Transfer Car for handling
    Stave Bolt Trucks.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 78. A Regular Transfer Car for handling
    Stave Bolt Trucks.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 79. A Special Transfer Car for handling
    Stave Bolt Trucks.]

In Figure 80 will be seen the Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck designed
for edge piling "cross-wise" of the dry kiln.

In Figure 81 will be seen another type of Regular Channel-iron Kiln
Truck designed for edge piling "cross-wise" of the dry kiln.

    [Illustration: Fig. 80. A Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 81. A Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck.]

In Figure 82 will be seen the Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck designed
for flat piling "end-wise" of the dry kiln.

    [Illustration: Fig. 82. A Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 83. A Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 84. A Regular Single-sill or Dolly Kiln
    Truck.]

In Figure 83 will be seen the Regular Channel-iron Kiln Truck with
I-Beam cross-pieces designed for flat piling "end-wise" of the dry
kiln.

In Figure 84 will be seen the Regular Small Dolly Kiln Truck designed
for flat piling "end-wise" of the dry kiln.


                     Different Types of Kiln Doors

In Figure 85 will be seen the Asbestos-lined Door. The construction of
this kiln door is such that it has no tendency to warp or twist. The
framework is solid and the body is made of thin slats placed so that
the slat on either side covers the open space of the other with
asbestos roofing fabric in between. This makes a comparatively light
and inexpensive door, and one that absolutely holds the heat. These
doors may be built either swinging, hoisting, or sliding.

    [Illustration: Fig. 85. An Asbestos-lined Kiln Door of the
    Hinge Type.]

In Figure 86 will be seen the Twin Carrier type of door hangers with
doors loaded and rolling clear of the opening.

    [Illustration: Fig. 86. Twin Carrier with Kiln Door loaded
    and rolling clear of Opening.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 87. Twin Carriers for Kiln Doors 18 to 35
    Feet wide.]

In Figure 87 will be seen the Twin Carrier for doors 18 to 35 feet
wide, idle on a section of the track.

In Figure 88 will be seen another type of carrier for kiln doors.

In Figure 89 will be seen the preceding type of kiln door carrier in
operation.

In Figure 90 will be seen another type of carrier for kiln doors.

In Figure 91 will be seen kiln doors seated, wood construction,
showing 3-1/2" × 5-3/4" inch-track timbers and trusses, supported on
4-inch by 6-inch jamb posts. "T" rail track, top and side, inclined
shelves on which the kiln door rests. Track timber not trussed on
openings under 12 feet wide.

    [Illustration: Fig. 88. Kiln Door Carrier engaged to Door
    Ready for lifting.]

In Figure 92 will be seen kiln doors seated, fire-proof construction,
showing 12-inch, channel, steel lintels, 2" × 2" steel angle mullions,
track brackets bolted to the steel lintels and "T" rail track. No
track timbers or trusses used.

    [Illustration: Fig. 89. Kiln Door Carrier shown on Doors of
    Wood Construction.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 90. Kiln Door Construction with Door
    Carrier out of Sight.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 91. Kiln Door Construction. Doors Seated.
    Wood Construction.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 92. Kiln Door Construction. Doors Seated.
    Fire-proof Construction.]


                              SECTION XIV

                   HELPFUL APPLIANCES IN KILN-DRYING


                         The Humidity Diagram

    [Illustration: Fig. 93. The United States Forest Service
    Humidity Diagram for determination of Absolute Humidities.
    Dew Points and Vapor Pressures; also Relative Humidities by
    means of Wet and Dry-Bulb Thermometer, for any temperatures
    and change in temperature.]

Some simple means of determining humidities and changes in humidity
brought about by changes in temperature in the dry kiln without the
use of tables is almost a necessity. To meet this requirement the
United States Forestry Service has devised the Humidity Diagram shown
in Figure 93. It differs in several respects from the hydrodeiks now
in use.

The purpose of the humidity diagram is to enable the dry-kiln operator
to determine quickly the humidity conditions and vapor pressure, as
well as the changes which take place with changes of temperature. The
diagram above is adapted to the direct solution of problems of this
character without recourse to tables or mathematical calculations.

The humidity diagram consists of two distinct sets of curves on the
same sheet. One set, the convex curves, is for the determination of
relative humidity of wet-and-dry-bulb hygrometer or psychrometer; the
other, the concave curves, is derived from the vapor pressures and
shows the amount of moisture per cubic foot at relative humidities and
temperatures when read at the dew-point. The latter curves, therefore,
are independent of all variables affecting the wet-bulb readings. They
are proportional to vapor pressures, not to density, and, therefore,
may be followed from one temperature to another with correctness. The
short dashes show the correction (increase or decrease) which is
necessary in the relative humidity, read from the convex curves, with
an increase or decrease from the normal barometric pressure of 30
inches, for which the curves have been plotted. This correction,
except for very low temperatures, is so small that it may usually be
disregarded.

The ordinates, or vertical distances, are relative humidity expressed
in per cent of saturation, from 0 per cent at the bottom to 100 per
cent at the top. The abscissae, or horizontal distances, are
temperatures in degrees Fahrenheit from 30 degrees below zero, at the
left, to 220 degrees above, at the right.


                            Examples of Use

The application of the humidity diagram can best be understood by
sample problems. These problems also show the wide range of conditions
to which the diagram will apply.

     EXAMPLE 1. To find the relative humidity by use of
     wet-and-dry-bulb hygrometer or psychrometer:

     Place the instrument in a strong circulation of air, or wave
     it to and fro. Read the temperature of the dry bulb and the
     wet, and subtract. Find on the horizontal line the
     temperature shown by the dry-bulb thermometer. Follow the
     vertical line from this point till it intersects with the
     convex curve marked with the difference between the wet and
     dry readings. The horizontal line passing through this
     intersection will give the relative humidity.

     Example: Dry bulb 70°, wet bulb 62°, difference 8°. Find 70°
     on the horizontal line of temperature. Follow up the
     vertical line from 70° until it intersects with the convex
     curve marked 8°. The horizontal line passing through this
     intersection shows the relative humidity to be 64 per cent.

     EXAMPLE 2. To find how much water per cubic foot is
     contained in the air:

     Find the relative humidity as in example 1. Then the nearest
     concave curve gives the weight of water in grains per cubic
     foot when the air is cooled to the dew-point. Using the same
     quantities as in example 1, this will be slightly more than
     5 grains.

     EXAMPLE 3. To find the amount of water required to saturate
     air at a given temperature:

     Find on the top line (100 per cent humidity) the given
     temperature; the concave curve intersecting at or near this
     point gives the number of grains per cubic foot.
     (Interpolate, if great accuracy is desired.)

     EXAMPLE 4. To find the dew-point:

     Obtain the relative humidity as in example 1. Then follow up
     parallel to the nearest concave curve until the top
     horizontal (indicating 100 per cent relative humidity) is
     reached. The temperature on this horizontal line at the
     point reached will be the dew-point.

     Example: Dry bulb 70°, wet bulb 62°. On the vertical line
     for 70° find the intersection with the hygrometer (convex)
     curve for 8°. This will be found at nearly 64 per cent
     relative humidity. Then follow up parallel with the vapor
     pressure (concave) curve marked 5 grains to its intersection
     at the top of the chart with the 100 per cent humidity line.
     This gives the dew-point as 57°.

     EXAMPLE 5. To find the change in the relative humidity
     produced by a change in temperature:

     Example: The air at 70° Fahr. is found to contain 64 per
     cent humidity; what will be its relative humidity if heated
     to 150° Fahr.? Starting from the intersection of the
     designated humidity and temperature coordinates, follow the
     vapor-pressure curve (concave) until it intersects the 150°
     temperature ordinate. The horizontal line then reads 6 per
     cent relative humidity. The same operation applies to
     reductions in temperature. In the above example what is the
     humidity at 60°? Following parallel to the same curve in the
     opposite direction until it intersects the 60° ordinate
     gives 90 per cent; at 57° it becomes 100 per cent, reaching
     the dew-point.

     EXAMPLE 6. To find the amount of condensation produced by
     lowering the temperature:

     Example: At 150° the wet bulb reads 132°. How much water
     would be condensed if the temperature were lowered to 70°?
     The intersection of the hygrometer curve for 18° (150°-132°)
     with temperature line for 150° shows a relative humidity of
     60 per cent. The vapor-pressure curve (concave) followed up
     to the 100 per cent relative humidity line shows 45 grains
     per cubic foot at the dew-point, which corresponds to a
     temperature of 130°. At 70° it is seen that the air can
     contain but 8 grains per cubic foot (saturation).
     Consequently, there will be condensed 45 minus 8, or 37
     grains per cubic foot of space measured at the dew-point.

     EXAMPLE 7. To find the amount of water required to produce
     saturation by a given rise in temperature:

     Example: Take the values given in example 5. The air at the
     dew-point contains slightly over 5 grains per cubic foot. At
     150° it is capable of containing 73 grains per cubic foot.
     Consequently, 73-5=68 grains of water which can be
     evaporated per cubic foot of space at the dew-point when the
     temperature is raised to 150°. But the latent heat necessary
     to produce evaporation must be supplied in addition to the
     heat required to raise the air to 150°.

     EXAMPLE 8. To find the amount of water evaporated during a
     given change of temperature and humidity:

     Example: At 70° suppose the humidity is found to be 64 per
     cent and at 150° it is found to be 60 per cent. How much
     water has been evaporated per cubic foot of space? At 70°
     temperature and 64 per cent humidity there are 5 grains of
     water present per cubic foot at the dew-point (example 2).
     At 150° and 60 per cent humidity there are 45 grains
     present. Therefore, 45-5=40 grains of water which have been
     evaporated per cubic foot of space, figuring all volumes at
     the dew-point.

     EXAMPLE 9. To correct readings of the hygrometer for changes
     in barometric pressure:

     A change of pressure affects the reading of the wet bulb.
     The chart applies at a barometric pressure of 30 inches,
     and, except for great accuracy, no correction is generally
     necessary.

     Find the relative humidity as usual. Then look for the
     nearest barometer line (indicated by dashes). At the end of
     each barometer line will be found a fraction which
     represents the proportion of the relative humidity already
     found, which must be added or subtracted for a change in
     barometric pressure. If the barometer reading is less than
     30 inches, add; if greater than 30 inches, subtract. The
     figures given are for a change of 1 inch; for other changes
     use proportional amounts. Thus, for a change of 2 inches use
     twice the indicated ratio; for half an inch use half, and so
     on.

     Example: Dry bulb 67°, wet bulb 51°, barometer 28 inches.
     The relative humidity is found, by the method given in
     example 1, to equal 30 per cent. The barometric line--gives
     a value of 3/100H for each inch of change. Since the
     barometer is 2 inches below 30, multiply 3/100H by 2, giving
     6/100H. The correction will, therefore, be 6/100 of 30,
     which equals 1.8. Since the barometer is below 30, this is
     to be added, giving a corrected relative humidity of 31.8
     per cent.

     This has nothing to do with the vapor pressure (concave)
     curves, which are independent of barometric pressure, and
     consequently does not affect the solution of the previous
     problems.

     EXAMPLE 10. At what temperature must the condenser be
     maintained to produce a given humidity?

     Example: Suppose the temperature in the drying room is to be
     kept at 150° Fahr., and a humidity of 80 per cent is
     desired. If the humidity is in excess of 80 per cent the air
     must be cooled to the dew-point corresponding to this
     condition (see example 4), which in this case is 141.5°.

     Hence, if the condenser cools the air to this dew point the
     required condition is obtained when the air is again heated
     to the initial temperature.

     EXAMPLE 11. Determination of relative humidity by the
     dew-point:

     The quantity of moisture present and relative humidity for
     any given temperature may be determined directly and
     accurately by finding the dew-point and applying the concave
     (vapor-pressure) curves. This does away with the necessity
     for the empirical convex curves and wet-and-dry-bulb
     readings. To find the dew-point some form of apparatus,
     consisting essentially of a thin glass vessel containing a
     thermometer and a volatile liquid, such as ether, may be
     used. The vessel is gradually cooled through the evaporation
     of the liquid, accelerated by forcing air through a tube
     until a haze or dimness, due to condensation from the
     surrounding air, first appears upon the brighter outer
     surface of the glass. The temperature at which the haze
     first appears is the dew-point. Several trials should be
     made for this temperature determination, using the average
     temperature at which the haze appears and disappears.

     To determine the relative humidity of the surrounding air by
     means of the dew-point thus determined, find the concave
     curve intersecting the top horizontal (100 per cent
     relative humidity) line nearest the dew-point temperature.
     Follow parallel with this curve till it intersects the
     vertical line representing the temperature of the
     surrounding air. The horizontal line passing through this
     intersection will give the relative humidity.

     Example: Temperature of surrounding air is 80; dew-point is
     61; relative humidity is 53 per cent.

     The dew-point determination is, however, not as convenient
     to make as the wet-and-dry-bulb hygrometer readings.
     Therefore, the hygrometer (convex) curves are ordinarily
     more useful in determining relative humidities.


                             The Hygrodeik

In Figure 94 will be seen the Hygrodeik. This instrument is used to
determine the amount of moisture in the atmosphere. It is a very
useful instrument, as the readings may be taken direct with accuracy.

To find the relative humidity in the atmosphere, swing the index hand
to the left of the chart, and adjust the sliding pointer to that
degree of the wet-bulb thermometer scale at which the mercury stands.
Then swing the index hand to the right until the sliding pointer
intersects the curved line, which extends downwards to the left from
the degree of the dry-bulb thermometer scale, indicated by the top of
the mercury column in the dry-bulb tube.

At that intersection, the index hand will point to the relative
humidity on scale at bottom of chart (for example see Fig. 94). Should
the temperature indicated by the wet-bulb thermometer be 60 degrees,
and that of the dry-bulb 70 degrees, the index hand will indicate
humidity 55 degrees, when the pointer rests on the intersecting line
of 60 degrees and 80 degrees.


                       The Recording Hygrometer

In Figure 95 is shown the Recording Hygrometer complete with wet and
dry bulbs, two connecting tubes and two recording pens and special
moistening device for supplying water to the wet bulb.

This equipment is designed particularly for use in connection with dry
rooms and dry kilns and is arranged so that the recording instrument
and the water supply bottle may be installed outside of the dry kiln
or drying room, while the wet and dry bulbs are both installed inside
the room or kiln at the point where it is desired to measure the
humidity. This instrument records on a weekly chart the humidity for
each hour of the day, during the entire week.

    [Illustration: Fig. 94. The Hygrodeik.]


                      The Registering Hygrometer

In Figure 96 is shown the Registering Hygrometer, which consists of
two especially constructed thermometers. The special feature of the
thermometers permits placing the instrument in the dry kiln without
entering the drying room, through a small opening, where it is left
for about 20 minutes.

    [Illustration: Fig. 95. The Recording Hygrometer, Complete
    with Wet and Dry Bulbs. This instrument records on a weekly
    chart the humidity for each hour of the day, during the
    entire week.]

The temperature of both the dry and wet bulbs are automatically
recorded, and the outside temperature will not affect the thermometers
when removed from the kiln. From these recorded temperatures, as shown
when the instrument is removed from the kiln, the humidity can be
easily determined from a simple form of chart which is furnished free
by the makers with each instrument.


                       The Recording Thermometer

    [Illustration: Fig. 96. The Registering Hygrometer.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 97. The Recording Thermometer.]

In Figure 97 is shown the Recording Thermometer for observing and
recording the temperatures within a dry kiln, and thus obtaining a
check upon its operation. This instrument is constructed to record
automatically, upon a circular chart, the temperatures prevailing
within the drying room at all times of the day and night, and serves
not only as a means of keeping an accurate record of the operation of
the dry kiln, but as a valuable check upon the attendant in charge of
the drying process.

    [Illustration: Fig. 98. The Registering Thermometer.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 99. The Recording Steam-Pressure Gauge.]


                      The Registering Thermometer

In Figure 98 is shown the Registering Thermometer, which is a less
expensive instrument than that shown in Figure 97, but by its use the
maximum and minimum temperatures in the drying room during a given
period can be determined.


                       The Recording Steam Gauge

In Figure 99 is shown the Recording Steam Pressure Gauge, which is
used for accurately recording the steam pressures kept in the boilers.
This instrument may be mounted near the boilers, or may be located at
any distance necessary, giving a true and accurate record of the
fluctuations of the steam pressure that may take place within the
boilers, and is a check upon both the day and night boiler firemen.


                       The Troemroid Scalometer

In Figure 100 is shown the Troemroid Scalometer. This instrument is a
special scale of extreme accuracy, fitted with agate bearings with
screw adjustment for balancing. The beam is graduated from 0 to 2
ounces, divided into 100 parts, each division representing 1-50th of
an ounce; and by using the pointer attached to the beam weight, the
1-100th part of an ounce can be weighed.

    [Illustration: Fig. 100. The Troemroid Scalometer.]

The percentage table No. II has a range from one half of 1 per cent to
30 per cent and is designed for use where extremely fine results are
needed, or where a very small amount of moisture is present. Table
No. III ranges from 30 per cent up to 90 per cent. These instruments
are in three models as described below.

     MODEL A. (One cylinder) ranges from 1/2 of 1 per cent to 30
     per cent and is to be used for testing moisture contents in
     kiln-dried and air-dried lumber.

     MODEL B. (Two cylinders) ranges from 1/2 of 1 per cent up to
     90 per cent and is to be used for testing the moisture
     contents of kiln-dried, air-dried, and green lumber.

     MODEL C. (One cylinder) ranges from 30 per cent to 90 per
     cent and is applicable to green lumber only.

=Test Samples.=--The green boards and all other boards intended for
testing should be selected from boards of fair average quality. If
air-dried, select one about half way up the height of the pile of
lumber. If kiln-dried, two thirds the height of the kiln car. Do not
remove the kiln car from the kiln until after the test. Three of four
test pieces should be cut from near the middle of the cross-wise
section of the board, and 1/8 to 3/16 inch thick. Remove the
superfluous sawdust and splinters. When the test pieces are placed on
the scale pan, be sure their weight is less than two ounces and more
than 1-3/4 ounces. If necessary, use two or more broken pieces. It is
better if the test pieces can be cut off on a fine band saw.

=Weighing.=--Set the base of the scale on a level surface and accurately
balance the scale beam. Put the test pieces on the scale pan and note
their weight on the lower edge of the beam. Set the indicator point on
the horizontal bar at a number corresponding to this weight, which may
be found on the cylinder at the top of the table.

Dry the test pieces on the Electric Heater (Fig. 101) 30 to 40
minutes, or on the engine cylinder two or three hours. Weigh them at
once and note the weight. Then turn the cylinder up and at the left of
it under the small pointer find the number corresponding to this
weight. The percentage of moisture lost is found directly under
pointer on the horizontal bar first mentioned. The lower portion on
the cylinder Table No. II is an extension of the upper portion, and
is manipulated in the same manner except that the bottom line of
figures is used for the first weight, and the right side of cylinder
for second weight. Turn the cylinder down instead of up when using it.


                        Examples (Test Pieces)

     MODEL A. Table No. II, Kiln-dried or Air-dried Lumber:

     If first weight is 90-1/2 and the second weight is 87, the
     cylinder table will show the board from which the test
     pieces were taken had a moisture content of 3.8 per cent.

     MODEL B. Tables No. II and III, Air-dried (also Green and
     Kiln-dried) Lumber.

     If the first weight on lower cylinder is 97 and the second
     weight is 76, the table will show 21.6 per cent of moisture.

     MODEL C. Table III, Green Lumber:

     If the first weight is 94 and the second weight is 51, the
     table shows 45.8 per cent of moisture.


                 Keep Records of the Moisture Content

=Saw Mills.=--Should test and mark each pile of lumber when first piled
in the yard, and later when sold it should be again tested and the two
records given to the purchaser.

=Factories.=--Should test and mark the lumber when first received, and
if piled in the yard to be kiln-dried later, it should be tested
before going into the dry kiln, and again before being removed, and
these records placed on file for future reference.

Kiln-dried lumber piled in storage rooms (without any heat) will
absorb 7 to 9 per cent of moisture, and even when so stored should be
tested for moisture before being manufactured into the finished
product.

Never work lumber through the factory that has more than 5 or 6 per
cent of moisture or less than 3 per cent.

Dry storage rooms should be provided with heating coils and properly
ventilated.

Oak or any other species of wood that shows 25 or 30 per cent of
moisture when going into the dry kiln, will take longer to dry than it
would if it contained 15 to 20 per cent, therefore the importance of
testing before putting into the kiln as well as when taking it out.


                          The Electric Heater

In Figure 101 is shown the Electric Heater. This heater is especially
designed to dry quickly the test pieces for use in connection with the
Scalometer (see Fig. 100) without charring them. It may be attached to
any electric light socket of 110 volts direct or alternating current.
A metal rack is provided to hold the test pieces vertically on edge.

    [Illustration: Fig. 101. The Electric Heater.]

Turn the test pieces over once or twice while drying.

It will require from 20 minutes to one hour to remove all the moisture
from the test pieces when placed on this heater, depending on whether
they are cut from green, air-dried, or kiln-dried boards.

Test pieces cut from softwoods will dry quicker than those cut from
hardwoods.

When the test pieces fail to show any further loss in weight, they are
then free from all moisture content.


                             BIBLIOGRAPHY


AMERICAN BLOWER COMPANY, Detroit, Mich.

IMRE, JAMES E., "The Kiln-drying of Gum," The United States
Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Forestry.

NATIONAL DRY KILN COMPANY, Indianapolis, Ind.

PRICHARD, REUBEN P., "The Structure of the Common Woods,"
The United States Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Forestry,
Bulletin No. 3.

ROTH, FILIBERT, "Timber," The United States Dept. of Agriculture,
Division of Forestry, Bulletin No. 10.

STANDARD DRY KILN COMPANY, Indianapolis, Ind.

STURTEVANT COMPANY, B. F., Boston, Mass.

TIEMAN, H. D., "The Effects of Moisture upon the Strength and
Stiffness of Wood," The United States Dept. of Agriculture,
Division of Forestry, Bulletin No. 70.

TIEMAN, H. D., "Principles of Kiln-drying Lumber," The United
States Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Forestry.

TIEMAN, H. D., "The Theory of Drying and its Application, etc.,"
The United States Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Forestry,
Bulletin No. 509.

THE UNITED STATES DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE, DIVISION OF FORESTRY,
"Check List of the Forest Trees of the United States."

THE UNITED STATES DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE, DIVISION OF
FORESTRY, Bulletin No. 37.

VON SCHRENK, HERMAN, "Seasoning of Timbers," The United
States Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Forestry, Bulletin
No. 41.

WAGNER, J. B., "Cooperage," 1910.


                               GLOSSARY


=Abnormal.= Differing from the usual structure.

=Acuminate.= Tapering at the end.

=Adhesion.= The union of members of different floral whorls.

=Air-seasoning.= The drying of wood in the open air.

=Albumen.=  A name applied to the food store laid up outside the
embryo in many seeds; also nitrogenous organic matter found in plants.

=Alburnam.= Sapwood.

=Angiosperms.= Those plants which bear their seeds within a
pericarp.

=Annual rings.= The layers of wood which are added annually to
the tree.

=Apartment kiln.= A drying arrangement of one or more rooms
with openings at each end.

=Arborescent.= A tree in size and habit of growth.


=Baffle plate.= An obstruction to deflect air or other currents.

=Bastard cut.= Tangential cut. Wood of inferior cut.

=Berry.= A fruit whose entire pericarp is succulent.

=Blower kiln.= A drying arrangement in which the air is blown
through heating coils into the drying room.

=Box kiln.= A small square heating room with openings in one end
only.

=Brittleness.= Aptness to break; not tough; fragility.

=Burrow.= A shelter; insect's hole in the wood.


=Calorie.=  Unit of heat; amount of heat which raises the
temperature.

=Calyx.= The outer whorl of floral envelopes.

=Capillary.= A tube or vessel extremely fine or minute.

=Case-harden.= A condition in which the pores of the wood are
closed and the outer surface dry, while the inner portion is
still wet or unseasoned.

=Cavity.= A hollow place; a hollow.

=Cell.= One of the minute, elementary structures comprising the
greater part of plant tissue.

=Cellulose.= A primary cell-wall substance.

=Checks.= The small chinks or cracks caused by the rupture of the
wood fibres.

=Cleft.= Opening made by splitting; divided.

=Coarse-grained.= Wood is coarse-grained when the annual rings
are wide or far apart.

=Cohesion.= The union of members of the same floral whorl.

=Contorted.= Twisted together.

=Corolla.= The inner whorl of floral envelopes.

=Cotyledon.= One of the parts of the embryo performing in part the
function of a leaf, but usually serving as a storehouse of food
for the developing plant.

=Crossers.= Narrow wooden strips used to separate the material on
kiln cars.

=Cross-grained.= Wood is cross-grained when its fibres are spiral
or twisted.


=Dapple.= An exaggerated form of mottle.

=Deciduous.= Not persistent; applied to leaves that fall in autumn
and to calyx and corolla when they fall off before the fruit
develops.

=Definite.= Limited or defined.

=Dew-point.= The point at which water is deposited from moisture-laden
air.

=Dicotyledon.= A plant whose embryo has two opposite cotyledons.

=Diffuse.= Widely spreading.

=Disk.= A circular, flat, thin piece or section of the tree.

=Duramen.= Heartwood.


=Embryo.= Applied in botany to the tiny plant within the seed.

=Enchinate.= Beset with prickles.

=Expansion.= An enlargement across the grain or lengthwise of the
wood.


=Fibres.= The thread-like portion of the tissue of wood.

=Fibre-saturation point.= The amount of moisture wood will imbibe,
usually 25 to 30 per cent of its dry-wood weight.

=Figure.= The broad and deep medullary rays as in oak showing
when the timber is cut into boards.

=Filament.= The stalk which supports the anther.

=Fine-grained.= Wood is fine-grained when the annual rings are
close together or narrow.


=Germination.= The sprouting of a seed.

=Girdling.= To make a groove around and through the bark of a
tree, thus killing it.

=Glands.= A secreting surface or structure; a protuberance having
the appearance of such an organ.

=Glaucous.= Covered or whitened with a bloom.

=Grain.= Direction or arrangement of the fibres in wood.

=Grubs.= The larvae of wood-destroying insects.

=Gymnosperms.= Plants bearing naked seeds; without an ovary.


=Habitat.= The geographical range of a plant.

=Heartwood.= The central portion of tree.

=Hollow-horning.= Internal checking.

=Honeycombing.= Internal checking.

=Hot-blast kiln.= A drying arrangement in which the air is blown
through heating coils into the drying room.

=Humidity.= Damp, moist.

=Hygroscopicity.= The property of readily imbibing moisture from
the atmosphere.


=Indefinite.= Applied to petals or other organs when too numerous
to be conveniently counted.

=Indigenous.= Native to the country.

=Involute.= A form of vernation in which the leaf is rolled inward
from its edges.


=Kiln-drying.= Drying or seasoning of wood by artificial heat in an
inclosed room.


=Leaflet.= A single division of a compound leaf.

=Limb.= The spreading portion of the tree.

=Lumen.= Internal space in the spring- and summer-wood fibres.


=Median.= Situated in the middle.

=Medulla.= The pith.

=Medullary rays.= Rays of fundamental tissue which connect the
pith with the bark.

=Membranous.= Thin and rather soft, more or less translucent.

=Midrib.= The central or main rib of a leaf.

=Moist-air kiln.= A drying arrangement in which the heat is taken
from radiating coils located inside the drying room.

=Mottle.= Figure transverse of the fibres, probably caused by the
action of wind upon the tree.


=Non-porous.= Without pores.


=Oblong.= Considerably longer than broad, with flowing outline.

=Obtuse.= Blunt, rounded.

=Oval.= Broadly elliptical.

=Ovary.= The part of the pistil that contains the ovules.


=Parted.= Cleft nearly, but not quite to the base or midrib.

=Parenchyma.= Short cells constituting the pith and pulp of the
tree.

=Pericarp.= The walls of the ripened ovary, the part of the fruit
that encloses the seeds.

=Permeable.= Capable of being penetrated.

=Petal.= One of the leaves of the corolla.

=Pinholes.= Small holes in the wood caused by worms or insects.

=Pistil.= The modified leaf or leaves which bear the ovules; usually
consisting of ovary, style and stigma.

=Plastic.= Elastic, easily bent.

=Pocket kilns.= Small drying rooms with openings on one end only
and in which the material to be dried is piled directly on the
floor.

=Pollen.= The fertilizing powder produced by the anther.

=Pores.= Minute orifices in wood.

=Porous.= Containing pores.

=Preliminary steaming.= Subjecting wood to a steaming process
before drying or seasoning.

=Progressive kiln.= A drying arrangement with openings at both
ends, and in which the material enters at one end and is discharged
at the other.


=Rick.= A pile or stack of lumber.

=Rift.= To split; cleft.

=Ring shake.= A large check or crack in the wood following an
annual ring.

=Roe.= A peculiar figure caused by the contortion of the woody
fibres, and takes a wavy line parallel to them.


=Sapwood.= The outer portions of the tree next to the bark;
alburnam.

=Saturate.= To cause to become completely penetrated or soaked.

=Season checks.= Small openings in the ends of the wood caused
by the process of drying.

=Seasoning.= The process by which wood is dried or seasoned.

=Seedholes.= Minute holes in wood caused by wood-destroying
worms or insects.

=Shake.= A large check or crack in wood caused by the action of
the wind on the tree.

=Shrinkage.= A lessening or contraction of the wood substance.

=Skidways.= Material set on an incline for transporting lumber or
logs.

=Species.= In science, a group of existing things, associated according
to properties.

=Spermatophyta.= Seed-bearing plants.

=Spring-wood.= Wood that is formed in the spring of the year.

=Stamen.= The pollen-bearing organ of the flower, usually consisting
of filament and anther.

=Stigma.= That part of the pistil which receives the pollen.

=Style.= That part of the pistil which connects the ovary with the
stigma.


=Taproot.= The main root or downward continuation of the plant
axis.

=Temporary checks.= Checks or cracks that subsequently close.

=Tissue.= One of the elementary fibres composing wood.

=Thunder shake.= A rupture of the fibres of the tree across the
grain, which in some woods does not always break them.

=Tornado shake.= (See Thunder shake.)

=Tracheids.= The tissues of the tree which consist of vertical cells
or vessels closed at one end.


=Warping.= Turning or twisting out of shape.

=Wind shake.= (See Thunder shake.)

=Working.= The shrinking and swelling occasioned in wood.

=Wormholes.= Small holes in wood caused by wood-destroying
worms.


=Vernation.= The arrangement of the leaves in the bud.

=Whorl.= An arrangement of organs in a circle about a central axis.


                         INDEX OF LATIN NAMES


Abies amabalis, 21
Abies balsamea, 20
Abies concolor, 20
Abies grandis, 20
Abies magnifica, 21
Abies nobilis, 21
Acer macrophyllum, 69
Acer negundo, 69
Acer Pennsylvanicum, 70
Acer rubrum, 69
Acer saccharinum, 69
Acer saccharum, 68
Acer spicatum, 69
Æsculus flava, 45
Æsculus glabra, 45
Æsculus octandra, 45
Ailanthus glandulosa, 37
Asimina triloba, 76


Betula lenta, 41
Betula lutea, 42
Betula nigra, 43
Betula papyrifera, 43
Betula populifolia, 42
Betula rubra, 43
Buxus sempervirens, 77


Carpinus Caroliana, 44
Castanea Americana, 48
Castanea chrysophylla, 49
Castanea dentata, 48
Castanea pumila, 48
Castanea vesca, 48
Castanea vulgaris, 48
Catalpa bignonioides, 46
Catalpa speciosa, 46
Celtis occidentalis, 62
Chamæcyparis Lawsonia, 18
Chamæcyparis thyoides, 17
Cladrastis lutea, 85
Cornus florida, 49
Cupressus nootkatensis, 18


Diospyros Virginia, 77


Evonymus atropurpureus, 82


Fagus ferruginea, 40
Fraxinus Americana, 37
Fraxinus Caroliniana, 39
Fraxinus nigra, 38
Fraxinus Oregana, 38
Fraxinus Pennsylvanica, 38
Fraxinus pubescens, 38
Fraxinus quadrangulata, 38
Fraxinus sambucifolia, 38
Fraxinus viridis, 38


Gleditschia triacanthos, 66
Gymnocladus dioicus, 49


Hicoria alba, 64
Hicoria glabra, 64
Hicoria minima, 64
Hicoria ovata, 64
Hicoria pecan, 64


Ilex monticolo, 65
Ilex opaca, 64


Juglans cinerea, 45
Juglans nigra, 82
Juniperus communis, 19
Juniperus Virginiana, 18


Larix Americana, 22
Larix laricina, 22
Larix occidentalis, 22
Libocedrus decurrens, 18
Liquidamber styraciflua, 54
Liriodendron tulipfera, 81


Maclura aurantiaca, 76
Magnolia acuminata, 67
Magnolia glauca, 67
Magnolia tripetala, 67
Morus rubra, 70


Nyssa aquatica, 60
Nyssa sylvatica, 62


Ostrya Virginiana, 65
Oxydendrum arboreum, 80


Picea alba, 28
Picea canadensis, 28
Picea engelmanni, 28
Picea mariana, 27
Picea nigra, 27
Picea rubens, 28
Picea sitchensis, 28
Pinus banksiana, 27
Pinus cubensis, 26
Pinus divaricata, 27
Pinus enchinata, 26
Pinus flexilis, 24
Pinus inops, 27
Pinus Jeffreyi, 25
Pinus Lambertiana, 24
Pinus monticolo, 24
Pinus Murryana, 27
Pinus palustris, 24
Pinus ponderosa, 25
Pinus resinosa, 25
Pinus rigida, 26
Pinus strobus, 23
Pinus tæda, 25
Pinus Virginiana, 27
Platanus occidentalis, 80
Platanus racemosa, 81
Populus alba, 79
Populus angulata, 77
Populus balsamifera, 79
Populus fremontii, 78
Populus grandidentata, 79
Populus heteropylla, 78
Populus monilifera, 77
Populus nigra italica, 79
Populus tremuloides, 79
Populus trichocarpa, 78
Populus Wislizeni, 78
Prunus Pennsylvanica, 47
Prunus serotina, 47
Pseudotsuga douglasii, 29
Pseudotsuga taxifolia, 29
Pyrus coronaria, 49


Quercus acuminata, 73
Quercus alba, 71
Quercus aquatica, 73
Quercus bicolor, 72
Quercus chrysolepis, 76
Quercus coccinea, 75
Quercus digitata, 75
Quercus durandii, 71
Quercus falcata, 75
Quercus garryana, 71
Quercus ilicijolia, 74
Quercus imbricaria, 75
Quercus lobata, 72
Quercus lyrata, 73
Quercus macrocarpa, 72
Quercus marilandica, 75
Quercus Michauxii, 74
Quercus minor, 74
Quercus nigra, 75
Quercus obtusiloda, 74
Quercus palustris, 73
Quercus phellos, 72
Quercus platanoides, 72
Quercus prinoides, 74
Quercus prinus, 73
Quercus pumila, 74
Quercus rubra, 74
Quercus tinctoria, 74
Quercus velutina, 74
Quercus virens, 75


Rhamnus Caroliniana, 45
Robinia pseudacacia, 66
Robinia viscosa, 66


Salix alba, 83
Salix amygdaloides, 84
Salix babylonica, 84
Salix bebbiana, 84
Salix discolor, 84
Salix fluviatilis, 84
Salix fragilis, 84
Salix lucida, 84
Salix nigra, 83
Salix rostrata, 84
Salix vitellina, 83
Sassafras sassafras, 80
Sequoia sempervirens, 19


Taxodium distinchum, 19
Taxus brevifolia, 30
Thuya gigantea, 17
Thuya occidentalis, 17
Tilia Americana, 39
Tilia heterophylla, 39
Tilia pubescens, 39
Tsuga canadensis, 21
Tsuga mertensiana, 21


Ulmus alata, 51
Ulmus Americana, 50
Ulmus crassifolia, 51
Ulmus fulva, 51
Ulmus pubescens, 51
Ulmus racemosa, 50
Umbellularia Californica, 65


                                 INDEX


Abele, Tree, 79

Absorption of water by dry wood, 124

Acacia, 66

Acacia, false, 66

Acacia, three-thorned, 66

According to species, different kiln drying, 170

Advantages in seasoning, 128

Advantages of kiln-drying over air-drying, 156

Affect drying, properties of wood that, 156

Ailanthus, 37

Air circulation, 173

Air-drying, advantages of kiln-drying over, 156

Alaska cedar, 18

Alaska cypress, 18

Alcoholic liquids, stave and heads of barrels containing, 112

Almond-leaf willow, 84

Ambrosia or timber beetles, 99

American box, 49

American elm, 50

American larch, 22

American linden, 39

American oak, 71

American red pine, 25

Anatomical structure, 14

Annual ring, the yearly or, 10

Apartment dry kiln, 198

Apple, crab, 49

Apple, custard, 76

Apple, wild, 49

Appliances in kiln-drying, helpful, 237

Arborvitæ, 17

Ash, 37

Ash, black, 38

Ash, blue, 38

Ash, Carolina, 39

Ash, green, 38

Ash, ground, 38

Ash, hoop, 38

Ash-leaved maple, 69

Ash, Oregon, 38

Ash, red, 38

Ash, white, 37

Aspen, 39, 79

Aspen, large-toothed, 78

Aspen-leaved birch, 42

Aspen, quaking, 79

Atmospheric pressure, drying at, 146


Bald Cypress, 19

Ball tree, button, 80

Balm of gilead, 79

Balm of gilead fir, 20

Balsam, 20, 79

Balsam fir, 20

Bark and pith, 8

Bark on, round timber with, 106

Barrels containing alcoholic liquids, staves and heads of, 112

Barren oak, 75

Bar willow, sand, 84

Basket oak, 74

Basswood, 39

Basswood, small-leaved, 39

Basswood, white, 39

Bastard pine, 26

Bastard spruce, 29

Bay poplar, 60

Bay, sweet, 67

Bear oak, 74

Beaver wood, 67

Bebb willow, 84

Bee tree, 39

Beech, 40

Beech, blue, 44

Beech, red, 40

Beech, water, 44, 80

Beech, white, 40

Berry, sugar, 62

Beetles, ambrosia or timber, 99

Big bud hickory, 64

Bilsted, 54

Birch, 41

Birch, aspen-leaved, 42

Birch, black, 41

Birch, canoe, 43

Birch, cherry, 41

Birch, gray, 42

Birch, mahogany, 41

Birch, old field, 42

Birch, paper, 43

Birch, red, 42

Birch, river, 43

Birch, silver, 42

Birch, sweet, 41

Birch, white, 42, 43

Birch, wintergreen, 41

Birch, yellow, 42

Bird cherry, 47

Bitternut hickory, 64

Black ash, 38

Black birch, 41

Black cherry, 47

Black cottonwood, 78

Black cypress, 19

Black gum, 62

Black hickory, 64

Black jack, 75

Black larch, 22

Black locust, 66

Black nut hickory, 64

Black oak, 74

Black pine, 25, 27

Black spruce, 27

Black walnut, 44, 82

Black willow, 83

Blower dry kiln, operation of, 186

Blower or hot blast dry kiln, 185

Blue ash, 38

Blue beech, 44

Blue poplar, 81

Blue willow, 83

Bois d'Arc, 45, 76

Bolts, stave, heading and shingle, 109

Borers, flat-headed, 103

Borers, powder post, 105

Borers, round-headed, 101

Box, American, 49

Box elder, 69

Box dry kiln, 204

Broad-leaved maple, 69

Broad-leaved trees, 31

Broad-leaved trees, list of most important, 37

Broad-leaved trees, wood of, 31

Brown hickory, 64

Brown locust, 66

Buckeye, 45

Buckeye, fetid, 45

Buckeye, Ohio, 45

Buckeye, sweet, 45

Buckthorne, 45

Bud hickory, big, 64

Bull nut hickory, 64

Bull pine, 25

Bur oak, 72

Burning bush, 82

Bush, burning, 82

Bush, juniper, 18

Butternut, 45

Button ball tree, 80

Button wood, 80


California Redwood, 19

California white pine, 25

Canadian pine, 25

Canary wood, 81

Canoe birch, 43

Canoe cedar, 17

Carolina ash, 39

Carolina pine, 26

Carolina poplar, 77

Cars, method of loading kiln, 206

Catalpa, 46

Cedar, 17

Cedar, Alaska, 18

Cedar, canoe, 17

Cedar, elm, 51

Cedar, ground, 19

Cedar, incense, 18

Cedar of the West, red, 17

Cedar, Oregon, 18

Cedar, pencil, 18

Cedar, Port Orford, 18

Cedar, red, 18, 19

Cedar, white, 17, 18

Cedar, yellow, 18

Changes rendering drying difficult, 140

Characteristics and properties of wood, 1

Checking and splitting, prevention of, 129

Cherry, 47

Cherry birch, 41

Cherry, bird, 47

Cherry, black, 47

Cherry, Indian, 45

Cherry, red, 47

Cherry, rum, 47

Cherry, wild, 47

Cherry, wild red, 47

Chestnut, 48

Chestnut, horse, 45, 65

Chestnut oak, 73

Chestnut oak, rock, 73

Chestnut oak, scrub, 74

Chinquapin, 48, 49

Chinquapin oak, 73, 74

Chinquapin oak, dwarf, 74

Choice of drying method, 195

Circassian walnut, 60

Circulation, air, 173

Clammy locust, 66

Classes of trees, 5

Cliff elm, 50

Coast redwood, 19

Coffee nut, 49

Coffee tree, 49

Color and odor of wood, 89

Color, odor, weight, and figure in wood, grain, 86

Composition of sap, 116

Conditions and species, temperature depends on, 171

Conditions favorable for insect injury, 106

Conditions governing the drying of wood, 156

Conditions of success in kiln-drying, 169

Coniferous trees, 8

Coniferous trees, wood of, 8

Coniferous woods, list of important, 17

Containing alcoholic liquids, staves and heads of barrels, 112

Cooperage stock and wooden truss hoops, dry, 112

Cork elm, 50

Cotton gum, 60

Cottonwood, 49, 77, 78

Cottonwood, black, 78

Cottonwood, swamp, 78

Cow oak, 74

Crab apple, 49

Crab, fragrant, 49

Crack willow, 84

Crude products, 106

Cuban pine, 26

Cucumber tree, 49, 67

Cup oak, mossy, 72

Cup oak, over-, 72, 73

Custard apple, 76

Cypress, 19

Cypress, Alaska, 18

Cypress, bald, 19

Cypress, black, 19

Cypress, Lawson's, 18

Cypress, pecky, 19

Cypress, red, 19

Cypress, white, 19


D'Arc, Bois, 45, 76

Deal, yellow, 23

Demands upon soil and moisture of red gum, 56

Depends on conditions and species, temperature, 171

Description of the forest service kiln, theory and, 161

Diagram, the uses of the humidity, 237

Difference between seasoned and unseasoned wood, 121

Different grains of wood, 86

Different kiln-drying according to species, 170

Different species, weight of kiln-dried wood of, 95

Different types, kilns of, 196

Different types of dry kilns, 185

Different types of kiln doors, 231

Difficult, changes rendering drying, 140

Difficulties of drying wood, 138

Distribution of water in wood, 114

Distribution of water in wood, local, 114

Distribution of water in wood seasonal, 115

Dogwood, 49

Doors, different types of kiln, 231

Douglas spruce, 29

Downy linden, 39

Downy poplar, 78

Dry cooperage stock and wooden truss hoops, 112

Drying according to species, different kiln, 170

Drying, advantages of kiln-drying over air, 156

Drying at atmospheric pressure, 146

Drying by superheated steam, 150

Drying, conditions of success in kiln, 169

Drying difficult, changes rendering, 140

Drying gum, kiln, 180

Drying, helpful appliances in kiln, 237

Drying, kiln, 164, 177

Drying, losses due to improper kiln, 141

Drying method, choice of, 185

Drying, methods of kiln, 145

Drying, objects of kiln, 168

Drying of green red gum, kiln, 183

Drying of wood, kiln, 156

Drying of wood, physical conditions governing the, 156

Drying, physical properties that influence, 125

Drying, properties of wood that effect, 141

Drying, theory of kiln, 157

Drying, underlying principles of kiln, 166

Drying under pressure and vacuum, 146

Drying, unsolved problems in kiln, 143

Drying wood, difficulties of, 138

Drying 100 lb. of green wood in the kiln, pounds of water lost, 179

Dry kiln, apartment, 198

Dry kiln, box, 204

Dry kiln, operation of the blower, 186

Dry kiln, operation of the moist-air, 192

Dry kiln, moist-air or pipe, 188

Dry kiln, pocket, 200

Dry kiln, progressive, 196

Dry kiln, requirements in a satisfactory, 160

Dry kilns, different types of, 185

Dry kiln specialties, 206

Dry kilns, types of, 185

Dry kiln, tower, 202

Dry wood, absorption of water by, 124

Duck oak, 73

Due to improper kiln-drying, losses, 141

Dwarf chinquapin oak, 74


Effects of Moisture on Wood, 117

Elder, box, 69

Electric heater, the, 250

Elimination of stain and mildew, 136

Elm, 50

Elm, American, 50

Elm, cedar, 51

Elm, cliff, 50

Elm, cork, 50

Elm, hickory, 50

Elm, moose, 51

Elm, red, 51

Elm, rock, 50

Elm, slippery, 51

Elm, water, 50

Elm, winged, 51

Elm, white, 50

Enemies of wood, 98

Evaporation of water, manner of, 123

Evaporation, rapidity of, 124

Expansion of wood, 135


Factories, Scalometer in, 249

False acacia, 66

Favorable for insect injury, conditions, 106

Fetid buckeye, 45

Fibre saturation point in wood, 118

Field birch, old, 42

Field pine, old, 25, 26

Figure in wood, 96

Figure in wood, grain, color, odor, weight, and, 86

Final steaming of gum, 182

Fir, 20

Fir, balm of gilead, 20

Fir balsam, 20

Fir, noble, 21

Fir, red, 21, 29

Fir tree, 20

Fir, white, 20, 21

Fir, yellow, 29

Flat-headed borers, 103

Forest service kiln, theory and description of, 161

Form of the red gum, 55

Fragrant crab, 49


Gauge, the Recording Steam, 246

Georgia pine, 24

Gilead, balm of, 79

Gilead fir, balm of, 20

Ginger pine, 18

Glaucous willow, 84

Governing the drying of wood, physical conditions, 156

Grain, color, odor, weight, and figure in wood, 86

Grains of wood, different, 86

Gray birch, 42

Gray pine, 27

Green ash, 38

Green red gum, kiln-drying, 183

Green wood in the kiln, pounds of water lost in drying 100 lbs., 179

Ground ash, 38

Ground cedar, 19

Growth red gum, second, 59

Gum, 52

Gum, black, 62

Gum, cotton, 60

Gum, demands upon soil and moisture of red, 56

Gum, final steaming of, 182

Gum, form of red, 55

Gum, kiln-drying, 180

Gum, kiln-drying of green red, 183

Gum, method of piling, 180

Gum, preliminary steaming of, 182

Gum, range of red, 55

Gum, range of tupelo, 61

Gum, red, 54, 79

Gum, reproduction of red, 57

Gum, second-growth red, 59

Gum, sour, 62, 80

Gum, sweet, 54, 80

Gum, tolerance of the red, 56

Gum, tupelo, 60

Gum, uses of tupelo, 61


Hackberry, 62

Hacmatac, 22

Hard maple, 68

Hard pine, 26

Hard pines, 24

Hard pine, southern, 24

Hardwoods, 37

Hazel pine, 54, 60

Headed borers, flat, 103

Headed borers, round, 101

Heading, stave and shingle bolts, 109

Heads and staves of barrels containing alcoholic liquids, 112

Heart hickory, white, 64

Heartwood, sap and, 8

Heater, the electric, 250

Helpful appliances in kiln-drying, 237

Hemlock, 21

Hemlock spruce, 21

Hickory, 63

Hickory, big bud, 64

Hickory, bitternut, 64

Hickory, black, 64

Hickory, black nut, 64

Hickory, brown, 64

Hickory, bull nut, 64

Hickory elm, 50

Hickory, mockernut, 64

Hickory, pignut, 64

Hickory, poplar, 81

Hickory, scalybark, 64

Hickory, shagbark, 64

Hickory, shellbark, 64

Hickory, swamp, 64

Hickory, switchbud, 64

Hickory, white heart, 64

Holly, 64, 65

Holly, mountain, 65

Honey locust, 66

Honey shucks, 66

Hoop ash, 38

Hoops, dry cooperage stock and wooden truss, 112

Hop hornbeam, 65

Hornbeam, 44

Hornbeam, hop, 65

Horse chestnut, 45, 65

Hot blast or blower kiln, 185

Humidity, 174

Humidity diagram, uses of the, 237

How to prevent insect injury, 107

How wood is seasoned, 145

Hygrodeik, the, 242

Hygrometer, the recording, 242

Hygrometer, the registering, 244


Illinois Nut, 64

Important broad-leaved trees, list of most, 37

Important coniferous woods, list of, 17

Impregnation methods, 151

Improper kiln-drying, losses due to, 141

Incense cedar, 18

Indian bean, 46

Indian cherry, 45

Influence drying, physical properties that, 125

Injury, conditions favorable for insect, 106

Injury from insects, how to prevent, 107

Insect injury, conditions favorable for, 106

Insects, how to prevent injury from, 107

Iron oak, 74

Ironwood, 44, 65


Jack, Black, 75

Jack oak, 75

Jack pine, 27

Jersey pine, 27

Juniper, 18

Juniper bush, 18

Juniper, red, 18

Juniper, savin, 18


Keep Records of the Moisture Content, 249

Kiln, apartment dry, 198

Kiln, blower or hot blast, 185

Kiln, box dry, 204

Kiln cars and method of loading, 206

Kiln doors, different types, 231

Kiln-dried wood of different species, weight of, 95

Kiln-drying, 164, 177

Kiln-drying according to species, different, 170

Kiln-drying, conditions of success in, 169

Kiln-drying gum, 180

Kiln-drying, helpful appliances in, 237

Kiln-drying, losses due to improper, 141

Kiln-drying, objects of, 168

Kiln-drying of green red gum, 183

Kiln-drying of wood, 156

Kiln-drying of wood, 156

Kiln-drying over air-drying, advantages of, 156

Kiln-drying, theory of, 157

Kiln-drying, underlying principles of, 166

Kiln-drying, unsolved problems in, 143

Kiln, operation of the blower dry, 186

Kiln, operation of the moist-air dry, 192

Kiln, pipe or moist-air dry, 188

Kiln, pocket dry, 200

Kiln, progressive dry, 196

Kiln, requirements in a satisfactory dry, 160

Kilns, different types of dry, 185

Kilns of different types, 196

Kiln specialties, dry, 206

Kiln, theory and description of the forest service, 161

Kilns, types of dry, 185

Kiln, tower dry, 202


Land Spruce, Tide, 28

Larch, 22

Larch, American, 22

Larch, black, 22

Larch, western, 22

Large-toothed aspen, 79

Laurel, 65

Laurel oak, 75

Lawson's cypress, 18

Leaf pine, long-, 24

Leaf pine, short-, 26

Leaf willow, long, 84

Leaved basswood, small, 39

Leaved birch, aspen, 42

Leaved maple, ash, 69

Leaved maple, broad, 69

Leaved maple, silver, 69

Leaved trees, broad, 31

Leaved trees, list of most important broad, 37

Leaved trees, wood of broad, 31

Leverwood, 65

Life, tree of, 17

Lime tree, 39

Lin, 39

Linden, 39

Linden, American, 39

Linden, downy, 39

Liquidamber, 54

Liquids, staves and heads of barrels containing alcoholic, 112

List of important coniferous trees, 17

List of most important broad-leaved trees, 37

Live oak, 75, 76

Loading, kiln cars and method of, 206

Loblolly pine, 25

Local distribution of water in wood, 114

Locust, 66

Locust, black, 66

Locust, brown, 66

Locust, clammy, 66

Locust, honey, 66

Locust, sweet, 66

Locust, yellow, 66

Lodge-pole pine, 27

Lombardy poplar, 79

Long-leaf pine, 24

Long-leaf willow, 84

Long-straw pine, 24

Losses due to improper kiln-drying, 141

Lost in kiln-drying 100 lb. green wood in the kiln, pounds of water, 179


Magnolia, 67

Magnolia, small, 67

Magnolia, swamp, 67

Mahogany, birch, 41

Mahogany, white, 45

Manner of evaporation of water, 123

Maple, 67

Maple, ash-leaved, 69

Maple, broad-leaved, 69

Maple, hard, 68

Maple, mountain, 69

Maple, Oregon, 69

Maple, red, 69

Maple, rock, 68

Maple, silver, 69

Maple, silver-leaved, 69

Maple, soft, 69

Maple, striped, 70

Maple, sugar, 68

Maple, swamp, 69

Maple, water, 69

Maple, white, 69

Maul oak, 75, 76

Meadow pine, 26

Method, choice of drying, 195

Method of loading kiln cars, 206

Method of piling gum, 180

Methods, impregnation, 151

Methods of drying, 154

Mildew, elimination of stain and, 136

Minute structure, 34

Mockernut hickory, 64

Moist-air dry kiln, operation of, 192

Moist-air or pipe kiln, the, 188

Moisture content, keep records of the, 249

Moisture, demands upon soil and, 56

Moisture on wood, effects of, 117

Moose elm, 51

Moose-wood, 70

Mossy-cup oak, 72

Most important broad-leaved trees list of, 37

Mountain holly, 65

Mountain maple, 69

Mulberry, 70

Mulberry, red, 70

Myrtle, 65, 70


Nettle Tree, 62

Noble fir, 21

Norway pine, 25

Nut, coffee, 49

Nut hickory, black, 64

Nut hickory, bull, 64

Nut, Illinois, 64

Nyssa, 60


Oak, 70

Oak, American, 71

Oak, barren, 75

Oak, basket, 74

Oak, bear, 74

Oak, black, 74

Oak, bur, 72

Oak, chestnut, 73

Oak, chinquapin, 73, 74

Oak, cow, 74

Oak, duck, 73

Oak, dwarf chinquapin, 74

Oak, iron, 74

Oak, jack, 75

Oak, laurel, 75

Oak, live, 75, 76

Oak, maul, 75, 76

Oak, mossy-cup, 72

Oak, over-cup, 72, 73

Oak, peach, 72

Oak, pin, 73

Oak, possum, 73

Oak, post, 74

Oak, punk, 73

Oak, red, 74, 75

Oak, rock, 73

Oak, rock chestnut, 73

Oak, scarlet, 75

Oak, scrub, 74

Oak, scrub chestnut, 74

Oak, shingle, 75

Oak, Spanish, 75

Oak, swamp post, 73

Oak, swamp Spanish, 73

Oak, swamp white, 72, 73

Oak, water, 73

Oak, western white, 71

Oak, white, 71, 72

Oak, willow, 72

Oak, yellow, 73, 74

Oak, Valparaiso, 76

Objects of kiln-drying, 168

Odor and color of wood, 89

Odor, weight, and figure in wood, grain, color, 86

Ohio buckeye, 45

Old field birch, 42

Old field pine, 25, 26

Operation of the blower kiln, 186

Operation of the moist-air kiln, 192

Orange, osage, 76

Oregon ash, 38

Oregon cedar, 18

Oregon maple, 69

Oregon pine, 29

Orford cedar, Port, 18

Osage orange, 76

Out-of-door seasoning, 154

Over-cup oak, 72, 73


Papaw, 76

Paper birch, 43

Peach oak, 72

Pecan, 64

Pecky cypress, 19

Pencil cedar, 18

Pepperidge, 60

Perch willow, 84

Persimmon, 77

Peruche, 21

Physical conditions governing the drying of wood, 156

Physical properties that influence drying, 125

Pignut hickory, 64

Piling gum, methods of, 180

Pine, American red, 25

Pine, bastard, 26

Pine, black, 25, 27

Pine, bull, 25

Pine, California white, 25

Pine, Canadian, 25

Pine, Carolina, 26

Pine, Cuban, 26

Pine, Georgia, 24

Pine, ginger, 18

Pine, gray, 27

Pine, hard, 26

Pine, hazel, 54, 60

Pine, jack, 27

Pine, Jersey, 27

Pine, loblolly, 25

Pine, lodge-pole, 27

Pine, long-leaf, 24

Pine, long-straw, 24

Pine, meadow, 26

Pine, Norway, 25

Pine, old field, 25, 26

Pine, Oregon, 29

Pine, pitch, 26

Pine, Puget Sound, 29

Pine, pumpkin, 23, 24

Pine, red, 29

Pine, rosemary, 25

Pine, sap, 25

Pine, scrub, 27

Pines, hard, 24

Pine, short-leaf, 26

Pine, short-straw, 25

Pine, slash, 25, 26

Pine, soft, 23, 24

Pine, southern, 24

Pine, southern hard, 24

Pine, spruce, 26

Pine, sugar, 24

Pine, swamp, 26

Pine, torch, 26

Pine, Weymouth, 23

Pine, western, 25

Pine, western white, 25

Pine, western yellow, 25

Pine, white, 23, 24

Pine, yellow, 24, 25, 26

Pin oak, 73

Pipe or moist-air kiln, 188

Pitch pine, 26

Pith and bark, 8

Plane tree, 80

Pocket dry kiln, the, 200

Point in wood, the fibre saturation, 118

Pole pine, lodge, 27

Poplar, 67, 77, 79, 81

Poplar, bay, 60

Poplar, blue, 81

Poplar, Carolina, 77

Poplar, downy, 78

Poplar, hickory, 81

Poplar, Lombardy, 79

Poplar, swamp, 60

Poplar, white, 79, 81

Poplar, yellow, 81

Port Orford cedar, 18

Possum oak, 73

Post borers, powder, 105

Post oak, 74

Post oak, swamp, 73

Pounds of water lost in drying 100 lb. green wood in the kiln, 179

Powder post borers, 105

Preliminary steaming of gum, 182

Preliminary treatments, 151

Pressure and vacuum, drying under, 146

Pressure, drying at atmospheric, 146

Prevent injury from insects, how to, 107

Prevention of checking and splitting, 129

Principles of kiln-drying, underlying, 166

Problems in kiln-drying, unsolved, 143

Products, crude, 106

Products in the rough, seasoned, 112

Products in the rough, unseasoned, 109

Progressive dry kiln, the, 196

Properties, characteristics and, 1

Properties of wood, 4

Properties of wood that affect drying, 141

Properties that influence drying, physical, 125

Puget Sound pine, 29

Pumpkin pine, 23, 24

Punk oak, 73

Pussy willow, 84


Quaking Aspen, 79


Range of Red Gum, 55

Range of tupelo gum, 61

Rapidity of evaporation, 124

Recording hygrometer, the, 242

Recording steam gauge, the, 246

Recording thermometer, the, 245

Records of the moisture content, keep, 249

Red ash, 38

Red beech, 40

Red birch, 43

Red cedar, 18, 19

Red cedar of the West, 17

Red cherry, 47

Red cherry, wild, 47

Red cypress, 19

Red elm, 51

Red fir, 21, 29

Red gum, 54, 79

Red gum, demands upon soil and moisture of, 56

Red gum, form of the, 55

Red gum, kiln-drying of green, 183

Red gum, range of, 55

Red gum, reproduction of, 57

Red gum, second-growth, 59

Red gum, tolerance of, 56

Red juniper, 18

Red maple, 69

Red mulberry, 70

Red oak, 74, 75

Red pine, 29

Red pine, American, 25

Red spruce, 28

Redwood, 19, 27

Redwood, California, 19

Redwood, Coast, 19

Registering hygrometer, the, 244

Registering thermometer, the, 246

Rendering drying difficult, changes, 140

Reproduction of red gum, 57

Requirements in a satisfactory dry kiln, 160

Ring, the annual or yearly, 10

River birch, 43

Rock chestnut oak, 73

Rock elm, 50

Rock maple, 68

Rock oak, 73

Rosemary pine, 25

Rough, seasoned products in the, 112

Rough, unseasoned products in the, 109

Round-headed borers, 101

Round timber with bark on, 106

Rum cherry, 47


Samples for Scalometer Test, 248

Sand bar willow, 84

Sap and heartwood, 8

Sap, composition of, 116

Saplings, 108

Sap pine, 25

Sassafras, 80

Satin walnut, 54

Satisfactory dry kiln, requirements in a, 160

Saturation point in wood, fibre, 118

Sawmills, scalometer in, 249

Savin juniper, 18

Scalometer in factories, 249

Scalometer in sawmills, 249

Scalometer, test samples for, 248

Scalometer, the troemroid, 247

Scalometer, weighing with, 248

Scalybark hickory, 64

Scarlet oak, 75

Scrub chestnut oak, 74

Scrub oak, 74

Scrub pine, 27

Seasonal distribution of water in wood, 115

Seasoned and unseasoned wood, difference between, 121

Seasoned, how wood is, 145

Seasoned products in the rough, 112

Seasoning, advantages in, 128

Seasoning is, what, 119

Seasoning, out-of-door, 154

Second-growth red gum, 59

Sequoia, 19

Service kiln, theory and description of forest, 161

Shagbark hickory, 64

Shellbark hickory, 64

Shingle, heading and stave bolts, 109

Shingle oak, 75

Shining willow, 84

Short-leaf pine, 26

Short-straw pine, 25

Shrinkage of wood, 130

Shucks, honey, 66

Sitka spruce, 28

Silver birch, 42

Silver-leaved maple, 69

Silver maple, 69

Slash pine, 25, 26

Slippery elm, 51

Small-leaved basswood, 39

Small magnolia, 67

Soft maple, 69

Soft pine, 23, 24

Soil and moisture, demands upon, 56

Sorrel-tree, 80

Sound pine, Puget, 29

Sour gum, 62, 80

Sourwood, 80

Southern hard pine, 24

Southern pine, 24

Spanish oak, 75

Spanish oak, swamp, 73

Specialties, dry-kiln, 206

Species, different kiln-drying according to, 170

Species, temperature depends upon condition and, 171

Species, weight of kiln-dried wood of different, 95

Spindle tree, 82

Splitting, prevention of checking and, 129

Spring and summer-wood, 12

Spruce, 27

Spruce, bastard, 29

Spruce, black, 27

Spruce, Douglas, 29

Spruce, hemlock, 21

Spruce pine, 26

Spruce, red, 28

Spruce, Sitka, 28

Spruce, tide-land, 28

Spruce, white, 28

Stain and mildew, elimination of, 136

Stave, heading and shingle bolts, 109

Staves and heads of barrels containing alcoholic liquids, 112

Steam, drying by superheated, 150

Steam gauge, the recording, 246

Steaming of gum, preliminary, 182

Steaming of gum, final, 182

Stock and wooden truss hoops, dry cooperage, 112

Straw pine, long, 24

Straw pine, short, 25

Striped maple, 70

Structure, anatomical, 14

Structure, minute, 34

Structure of wood, 4

Stump tree, 49

Success in kiln-drying, conditions of, 169

Sugar berry, 62

Sugar maple, 68

Sugar pine, 24

Summerwood, spring and, 12

Superheated steam, drying by, 150

Swamp cottonwood, 78

Swamp hickory, 64

Swamp magnolia, 67

Swamp maple, 69

Swamp pine, 26

Swamp poplar, 60

Swamp post oak, 73

Swamp Spanish oak, 73

Swamp white oak, 72, 73

Sweet bay, 67

Sweet buckeye, 45

Sweet birch, 41

Sweet gum, 54, 80

Sweet locust, 66

Switchbud hickory, 64

Sycamore, 80, 81


Tacmahac, 79

Tamarack, 22, 27, 29

Temperature depends upon conditions and species, 171

Test samples for scalometer, 248

Theory and description of the forest service kiln, 161

Theory of kiln-drying, 157

Thermometer, the recording, 245

Thermometer, the registering, 246

Thorned acacia, three, 66

Three-thorned acacia, 66

Tide-land spruce, 28

Timber, 1

Timber beetles, ambrosia or, 99

Timber with bark on, round, 106

Timber worms, 103

Tolerance of red gum, 56

Toothed aspen, large-, 79

Torch pine, 26

Tower dry kiln, the, 202

Treatments, preliminary, 151

Tree, abele, 79

Tree, bee, 39

Tree, button ball, 80

Tree, coffee, 49

Tree, cucumber, 49, 67

Tree, fir, 20

Tree, lime, 39

Tree, nettle, 62

Tree of life, 17

Tree, plane, 80

Trees, broad-leaved, 31

Trees, classes of, 5

Trees, coniferous, 8

Trees, list of important coniferous, 17

Trees, list of most important broad-leaved, 37

Tree, sorrel, 80

Tree, spindle, 82

Tree, stump, 49

Trees, wood of broad-leaved, 31

Trees, wood of the coniferous, 8

Tree, tulip, 81

Tree, umbrella, 67

Troemroid Scalometer, the, 247

Truss hoops, dry cooperage stock and, 112

Tulip tree, 81

Tulip wood, 67, 81

Tupelo, 82

Tupelo gum, 60

Tupelo gum, range of, 61

Tupelo gum, uses of, 61

Types of dry kilns, different, 185

Types of kiln doors, different, 231

Types, kilns of different, 196


Umbrella Tree, 67

Underlying principles of kiln-drying, 166

Unseasoned products in the rough, 109

Unseasoned wood, difference between seasoned and, 121

Unsolved problems in kiln-drying, 143

Uses of the humidity diagram, 237

Uses of tupelo gum, 61


Vacuum, Drying under Pressure and, 146

Valparaiso oak, 76

Virgilia, 85


Wahoo, 51, 82

Walnut, 45, 82

Walnut, black, 44, 82

Walnut, circassian, 60

Walnut, satin, 54

Walnut, white, 45, 83

Water beech, 44, 80

Water by dry wood, absorption of, 124

Water elm, 50

Water in wood, 114

Water in wood, distribution of, 114

Water in wood, local distribution of, 114

Water in wood, seasonal distribution of, 115

Water lost in drying 100 lb. of green wood in the kiln, pounds of, 179

Water, manner of evaporation of, 123

Water maple, 69

Water oak, 73

Weeping willow, 84

Weighing with scalometer, 248

Weight, and figure in wood, grain, color, odor, 86

Weight of kiln-dried wood of different species, 95

Weight of wood, 91

Western larch, 22

Western pine, 25

Western white oak, 71

Western white pine, 25

Western yellow pine, 25

West, red cedar of the, 17

Weymouth pine, 23

What seasoning is, 119

White ash, 37

White basswood, 39

White beech, 40

White birch, 42, 43

White cedar, 17, 18

White cypress, 19

White elm, 50

White fir, 20, 21

White heart hickory, 64

White mahogany, 45

White maple, 69

White oak, 71, 72

White oak, swamp, 72, 73

White oak, western, 71

White pine, 23, 24

White pine, California, 25

White pine, western, 25

White poplar, 79, 81

White spruce, 28

White walnut, 45, 83

White willow, 83

Whitewood, 39, 81, 83

Wild apple, 49

Wild cherry, 47

Wild red cherry, 47

Willow, 83

Willow, almond-leaf, 84

Willow, bebb, 84

Willow, black, 83

Willow, blue, 83

Willow, crack, 84

Willow, glaucous, 84

Willow, long-leaf, 84

Willow, oak, 72

Willow, perch, 84

Willow, pussy, 84

Willow, sand bar, 84

Willow, shining, 84

Willow, weeping, 84

Willow, white, 83

Willow, yellow, 83

Winged elm, 51

Wintergreen birch, 41

Wood, absorption of water by dry, 124

Wood, beaver, 67

Wood, canary, 81

Wood, characteristics and properties of, 1

Wood, color and odor of, 89

Wood, different grains of, 86

Wood, difference between seasoned and unseasoned, 121

Wood, difficulties of drying, 138

Wood, distribution of water in, 114

Wood, effects of moisture on, 117

Wood, enemies of, 98

Wood, expansion of, 135

Wood, figure in, 96

Wood, grain, color, odor, weight, and figure in, 86

Wood, how seasoned, 145

Wood in the kiln, pounds of water lost in drying 100 lb. of green, 179

Wood, iron, 65

Wood, kiln-drying of, 156

Wood, lever, 65

Wood, local distribution of water in, 114

Wood, moose, 70

Wood, of broad-leaves trees, 31

Wood of different species, weight of kiln-dried, 95

Wood of coniferous trees, 8

Wood, physical conditions governing the drying of, 156

Wood, properties of, 4

Wood, seasonal distribution of water in, 115

Wood, shrinkage of, 130

Woods, list of important coniferous, 17

Wood, spring and summer, 12

Wood, structure of, 4

Wood that effect drying, properties of, 141

Wood, the fibre saturation point in, 118

Wood, tulip, 67, 81

Wood, water in, 114

Wood, weight of, 89

Wood, white, 81, 83

Wood, yellow, 85

Wooden truss hoops, dry cooperage, stock and, 112

Worms, timber, 103


Yearly Ring, the Annual of, 10

Yellow birch, 42

Yellow cedar, 18

Yellow deal, 23

Yellow fir, 29

Yellow locust, 66

Yellow oak, 73, 74

Yellow pine, 24, 25, 26

Yellow pine, western, 25

Yellow poplar, 81

Yellow willow, 83

Yellow wood, 85

Yew, 29, 30


                        D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY
                             25 PARK PLACE
                               NEW YORK


                          SHORT-TITLE CATALOG
                                  OF
                     Publications and Importations
                                  OF
                      SCIENTIFIC AND ENGINEERING
                                 BOOKS

                            [Illustration]

                          This list includes
    the technical publications of the following English publishers:

            SCOTT, GREENWOOD & CO. JAMES MUNRO & CO., Ltd.
          CONSTABLE & COMPANY, Ltd. TECHNICAL PUBLISHING CO.
                 ELECTRICIAN PRINTING & PUBLISHING CO.

         for whom D. Van Nostrand Company are American agents.


                                                      JULY, 1917

                          SHORT-TITLE CATALOG
                                OF THE
                     Publications and Importations
                                  OF
                        D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY
                         25 PARK PLACE, N. Y.

             _Prices marked with an asterisk (*) are NET._

          _All bindings are in cloth unless otherwise noted._


Abbott, A. V. The Electrical Transmission of Energy          8vo, *$5 00

---- A Treatise on Fuel. (Science Series No. 9)             16mo,   0 50

---- Testing Machines. (Science Series No. 74.)             16mo,   0 50

Adam, P. Practical Bookbinding. Trans. by T. E. Maw         12mo,  *2 50

Adams, H. Theory and Practice in Designing                   8vo,  *2 50

Adams, H. C. Sewage of Sea Coast Towns                       8vo,  *2 00

Adams, J. W. Sewers and Drains for Populous Districts        8vo,   2 50

Adler, A. A. Theory of Engineering Drawing                   8vo,  *2 00

---- Principles of Parallel Projecting-line Drawing          8vo,  *1 00

Aikman, C. M. Manures and the Principles of Manuring         8vo,   2 50

Aitken, W. Manual of the Telephone                           8vo,  *8 00

d'Albe, E. E. F., Contemporary Chemistry                    12mo,  *1 25

Alexander, J. H. Elementary Electrical Engineering          12mo,   2 00

Allan, W. Strength of Beams Under Transverse Loads.
  (Science Series No. 19.)                                  16mo,   0 50

---- Theory of Arches. (Science Series No. 11)              16mo,

Allen, H. Modern Power Gas Producer Practice and
  Applications.                                             12mo,  *2 50

Anderson, J. W. Prospector's Handbook                       12mo,   1 50

Andés, L. Vegetable Fats and Oils                            8vo,  *4 00

---- Animal Fats and Oils. Trans. by C. Salter               8vo,  *4 00

---- Drying Oils, Boiled Oil, and Solid and Liquid Driers    8vo,  *5 00

---- Iron Corrosion, Anti-fouling and Anti-corrosive
  Paints. Trans. by C. Salter                                8vo,  *4 00

---- Oil Colors, and Printers' Ink. Trans. by A. Morris
  and H. Robson                                              8vo,  *2 50

---- Treatment of Paper for Special Purposes. Trans.
  by C. Salter                                              12mo,  *2 50

Andrews, E. S. Reinforced Concrete Construction             12mo,  *1 50

---- Theory and Design of Structures                         8vo,  *3 50

---- Further Problems in the Theory and Design
  of Structures                                              8vo,  *2 50

---- The Strength of Materials                               8vo,  *4 00

Andrews, E. S., and Heywood, H. B. The Calculus
  for Engineers.                                            12mo,  *1 50

Annual Reports on the Progress of Chemistry. Twelve
  Volumes now ready. Vol. I., 1904, Vol. XII., 1914    8vo, each,  *2 00

Argand, M. Imaginary Quantities. Translated from the
  French by A. S. Hardy. (Science Series No. 52.)           16mo,   0 50

Armstrong, R., and Idell, F. E. Chimneys for Furnaces
  and Steam Boilers. (Science Series No. 1.)                16mo,   0 50

Arnold, E. Armature Windings of Direct-Current Dynamos.
  Trans. by F. B. DeGress                                    8vo,  *2 00

Asch, W., and Asch, D. The Silicates in Chemistry
  and Commerce                                               8vo,  *6 00

Ashe, S. W., and Kelley, J. D. Electric Railways.
  Theoretically and Practically Treated. Vol. I.
  Rolling Stock                                             12mo,  *2 50

Ashe, S. W. Electric Railways. Vol. II. Engineering
  Preliminaries and Direct Current Sub-Stations             12mo,  *2 50

---- Electricity: Experimentally and Practically Applied    12mo,  *2 00

Ashley, R. H. Chemical Calculations                         12mo,  *2 00

Atkins, W. Common Battery Telephony Simplified              12mo,  *1 25

Atkinson, A. A. Electrical and Magnetic Calculations         8vo,  *1 50

Atkinson, J. J. Friction of Air in Mines. (Science
  Series No. 14.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Atkinson, J. J., and Williams, Jr., E. H. Gases Met
  with in Coal Mines. (Science Series No. 13.)              16mo,   0 50

Atkinson, P. The Elements of Electric Lighting              12mo,   1 00

---- The Elements of Dynamic Electricity and Magnetism      12mo,   2 00

---- Power Transmitted by Electricity                       12mo,   2 00

Auchincloss, W. S. Link and Valve Motions Simplified         8vo,  *1 50

Austin, E. Single Phase Electric Railways                    4to,  *5 00

Austin and Cohn. Pocketbook of Radiotelegraphy      (_In Press._)

Ayrton, H. The Electric Arc                                  8vo,  *5 00


Bacon, F. W. Treatise on the Richards Steam-Engine
  Indicator                                                 12mo,   1 00

Bailey, R. D. The Brewers' Analyst                           8vo,  *5 00

Baker, A. L. Quaternions                                     8vo,  *1 25

---- Thick-Lens Optics                                      12mo,  *1 50

Baker, Benj. Pressure of Earthwork. (Science
  Series No. 56.)                                           16mo,

Baker, G. S. Ship Form, Resistance and Screw Propulsion      8vo,  *4 50

Baker, I. O. Levelling. (Science Series No. 91.)            16mo,   0 50

Baker, M. N. Potable Water. (Science Series No. 61.)        16mo,   0 50

---- Sewerage and Sewage Purification. (Science
  Series No. 18.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Baker, T. T. Telegraphic Transmission of Photographs        12mo,  *1 25

Bale, G. R. Modern Iron Foundry Practice. Two Volumes.      12mo.
    Vol. I. Foundry Equipment, Materials Used                      *2 50
    Vol. II. Machine Moulding and Moulding Machines                *1 50

Ball, J. W. Concrete Structures in Railways                  8vo,  *2 50

Ball, R. S. Popular Guide to the Heavens                     8vo,  *5 00

---- Natural Sources of Power. (Westminster Series.)         8vo,  *2 00

Ball, W. V. Law Affecting Engineers                          8vo,  *3 50

Bankson, Lloyd. Slide Valve Diagrams. (Science
  Series No. 108.).                                         16mo,   0 50

Barham, G. B. Development of the Incandescent Electric
  Lamp                                                       8vo,  *2 00

Barker, A. F. Textiles and Their Manufacture.
  (Westminster Series.)                                      8vo,   2 00

Barker, A. F., and Midgley, E. Analysis of Textile Fabrics   8vo,   3 00

Barker, A. H. Graphic Methods of Engine Design              12mo,  *1 50

---- Heating and Ventilation                                 4to,  *8 00

Barnard, J. H. The Naval Militiaman's Guide        16mo, leather,   1 00

Barnard, Major J. G. Rotary Motion. (Science
  Series No. 90.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Barnes, J. B. Elements of Military Sketching                16mo,  *0 60

Barrus, G. H. Engine Tests                                   8vo,  *4 00

Barwise, S. The Purification of Sewage                      12mo,   3 50

Baterden, J. R. Timber. (Westminster Series.)                8vo,  *2 00

Bates, E. L., and Charlesworth, F. Practical Mathematics
  and Geometry                                              12mo,
    Part I. Preliminary and Elementary Course                      *1 50
    Part II. Advanced Course                                       *1 50

---- Practical Mathematics                                  12mo,  *1 50

---- Practical Geometry and Graphics                        12mo,  *2 00

Batey, J. The Science of Works Management                   12mo,  *1 50

---- Steam Boilers and Combustion                           12mo,  *1 50

Bayonet Training Manual                                     16mo,   0 30

Beadle, C. Chapters on Papermaking. Five Volumes      12mo, each,  *2 00

Beaumont, R. Color in Woven Design                           8vo,  *6 00

---- Finishing of Textile Fabrics                            8vo,  *4 00

---- Standard Cloths                                         8vo,  *5 00

Beaumont, W. W. The Steam-Engine Indicator                   8vo,   2 50

Bechhold, H. Colloids in Biology and Medicine. Trans.
  by J. G. Bullowa                                         (_In Press._)

Beckwith, A. Pottery                                  8vo, paper,   0 60

Bedell, F., and Pierce, C. A. Direct and Alternating
  Current Manual                                             8vo,   4 00

Beech, F. Dyeing of Cotton Fabrics                           8vo,   4 00

---- Dyeing of Woolen Fabrics                                8vo,  *3 50

Begtrup, J. The Slide Valve                                  8vo,  *2 00

Beggs, G. E. Stresses in Railway Girders and Bridges       (_In Press._)

Bender, C. E. Continuous Bridges. (Science Series No. 26.)  16mo,   0 50

---- Proportions of Pins used in Bridges. (Science
  Series No. 4.)                                            16mo,   0 50

Bengough, G. D. Brass. (Metallurgy Series.)                (_In Press._)

Bennett, H. G. The Manufacture of Leather                    8vo,  *5 00

Bernthsen, A. A Text book of Organic Chemistry. Trans.
  by G. M'Gowan                                             12mo,  *3 00

Bersch. J. Manufacture of Mineral and Lake Pigments.
  Trans. by A. C. Wright                                     8vo,  *5 00

Bertin, L. E. Marine Boilers. Trans. by L. S. Robertson      8vo,   5 00

Beveridge, J. Papermaker's Pocket Book                      12mo,  *4 00

Binnie, Sir A. Rainfall Reservoirs and Water Supply          8vo,   3 00

Binns, C. F. Manual of Practical Potting                     8vo,  *7 50

---- The Potter's Craft                                     12mo,  *2 00

Birchmore, W. H. Interpretation of Gas Analysis             12mo,  *1 25

Blaine, R. G. The Calculus and Its Applications             12mo,  *1 50

Blake, W. H. Brewers' Vade Mecum                             8vo,  *4 00

Blasdale, W. C. Quantitative Chemical Analysis.
  (Van Nostrand's Textbooks.)                               12mo,  *2 50

Bligh, W. G. The Practical Design of Irrigation Works        8vo,  *6 00

Bloch, L. Science of Illumination. Trans. by W. C. Clinton   8vo,  *2 50

Blok, A. Illumination and Artificial Lighting               12mo,   1 25

Blücher, H. Modern Industrial Chemistry. Trans. by
  J. P. Millington.                                          8vo,  *7 50

Blyth, A. W. Foods: Their Composition and Analysis           8vo,   7 50

---- Poisons: Their Effects and Detection                    8vo,   7 50

Böckmann, F. Celluloid                                      12mo,  *2 50

Bodmer, G. R. Hydraulic Motors and Turbines                 12mo,   5 00

Boileau, J. T. Traverse Tables                               8vo,   5 00

Bonney, G. E. The Electro-platers' Handbook                 12mo,   1 50

Booth, N. Guide to the Ring-spinning Frame                  12mo,  *1 25

Booth, W. H. Water Softening and Treatment                   8vo,  *2 50

---- Superheaters and Superheating and Their Control         8vo,  *1 50

Bottcher, A. Cranes: Their Construction, Mechanical
  Equipment and Working. Trans. by A. Tolhausen              4to, *10 00

Bottler, M. Modern Bleaching Agents. Trans. by C. Salter    12mo,  *2 50

Bottone, S. R. Magnetos for Automobilists                   12mo,  *1 00

Boulton, S. B. Preservation of Timber. (Science
  Series No. 82.).                                          16mo,   0 50

Bourcart, E. Insecticides, Fungicides and Weedkillers        8vo,  *4 50

Bourgougnon, A. Physical Problems. (Science Series
  No. 113.)                                                 16mo,   0 50

Bourry, E. Treatise on Ceramic Industries. Trans.
  by A. B. Searle.                                           8vo,  *5 00

Bowie, A. J., Jr. A Practical Treatise on Hydraulic Mining   8vo,   5 00

Bowles, O. Tables of Common Rocks. (Science Series
  No. 125.).                                                16mo,   0 50

Bowser, E. A. Elementary Treatise on Analytic Geometry      12mo,   1 75

---- Elementary Treatise on the Differential and
   Integral Calculus.                                       12mo,   2 25

---- Elementary Treatise on Analytic Mechanics              12mo,   3 00

---- Elementary Treatise on Hydro-mechanics                 12mo,   2 50

---- A Treatise on Roofs and Bridges                        12mo,  *2 25

Boycott, G. W. M. Compressed Air Work and Diving             8vo,  *4 00

Bragg, E. M. Marine Engine Design                           12mo,  *2 00

---- Design of Marine Engines and Auxiliaries                8vo,  *3 00

Brainard, F. R. The Sextant. (Science Series No. 101.)      16mo,

Brassey's Naval Annual for 1915. War Edition                 8vo,   4 00

Briggs, R., and Wolff, A. R. Steam-Heating. (Science
  Series No. 67.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Bright, C. The Life Story of Sir Charles Tilson Bright       8vo,  *4 50

Brislee, T. J. Introduction to the Study of Fuel.
  (Outlines of Industrial Chemistry.)                        8vo,  *3 00

Broadfoot, S. K. Motors, Secondary Batteries.
  (Installation Manuals Series.)                            12mo,  *0 75

Broughton, H. H. Electric Cranes and Hoists                        *9 00

Brown, G. Healthy Foundations. (Science Series No. 80.)     16mo,   0 50

Brown, H. Irrigation                                         8vo,  *5 00

Brown, H. Rubber                                             8vo,  *2 00

---- W. A. Portland Cement Industry                          8vo,   3 00

Brown, Wm. N. Dipping, Burnishing, Lacquering and Bronzing
  Brass Ware                                                12mo,  *1 25

---- Handbook on Japanning                                  12mo,  *1 50

Brown, Wm. N. The Art of Enamelling on Metal                12mo,  *1 00

---- House Decorating and Painting                          12mo,  *1 50

---- History of Decorative Art                              12mo,  *1 25

---- Workshop Wrinkles                                       8vo,  *1 00

Browne, C. L. Fitting and Erecting of Engines                8vo,  *1 50

Browne, R. E. Water Meters. (Science Series No. 81.)        16mo,   0 50

Bruce, E. M. Pure Food Tests                                12mo,  *1 25

Brunner, R. Manufacture of Lubricants, Shoe Polishes
   and Leather Dressings. Trans. by C. Salt                  8vo,  *3 00

Buel, R. H. Safety Valves. (Science Series No. 21.)         16mo,   0 50

Burley, G. W. Lathes, Their Construction and Operation      12mo,   1 25

Burnside, W. Bridge Foundations                             12mo,  *1 50

Burstall, F. W. Energy Diagram for Gas. With Text            8vo,   1 50

---- Diagram. Sold separately                                      *1 00

Burt, W. A. Key to the Solar Compass               16mo, leather,   2 50

Buskett, E. W. Fire Assaying                                12mo,  *1 25

Butler, H. J. Motor Bodies and Chassis                       8vo,  *2 50

Byers, H. G., and Knight, H. G. Notes on Qualitative
  Analysis                                                   8vo,  *1 50


Cain, W. Brief Course in the Calculus                       12mo,  *1 75

---- Elastic Arches. (Science Series No. 48.)               16mo,   0 50

---- Maximum Stresses. (Science Series No. 38.)             16mo,   0 50

---- Practical Designing Retaining of Walls. (Science
  Series No. 3.)                                            16mo,   0 50

---- Theory of Steel-concrete Arches and of Vaulted
  Structures. (Science Series No. 42.)                      16mo,   0 50

---- Theory of Voussoir Arches. (Science Series No. 12.)    16mo,   0 50

---- Symbolic Algebra. (Science Series No. 73.)             16mo,   0 50

Carpenter, F. D. Geographical Surveying. (Science
  Series No. 37.)                                           16mo,

Carpenter, R. C., and Diederichs, H. Internal Combustion
  Engines                                                    8vo,  *5 00

Carter, H. A. Ramie (Rhea), China Grass                     12mo,  *2 00

Carter, H. R. Modern Flax, Hemp, and Jute Spinning           8vo,  *3 00

---- Bleaching, Dyeing and Finishing of Fabrics              8vo,  *1 00

Cary, E. R. Solution of Railroad Problems with the
  Slide Rule                                                16mo,  *1 00

Casler, M. D. Simplified Reinforced Concrete Mathematics    12mo,  *1 00

Cathcart, W. L. Machine Design. Part I. Fastenings           8vo,  *3 00

Cathcart, W. L., and Chaffee, J. I. Elements of
  Graphic Statics                                            8vo,  *3 00

---- Short Course in Graphics                               12mo,   1 50

Caven, R. M., and Lander, G. D. Systematic Inorganic
  Chemistry                                                 12mo,  *2 00

Chalkley, A. P. Diesel Engines                               8vo,  *4 00

Chambers' Mathematical Tables                                8vo,   1 75

Chambers, G. F. Astronomy                                   16mo,  *1 50

Chappel, E. Five Figure Mathematical Tables                  8vo,  *2 00

Charnock, Mechanical Technology                              8vo,  *3 00

Charpentier, P. Timber                                       8vo,  *6 00

Chatley, H. Principles and Designs of Aeroplanes.
  (Science Series No. 126)                                  16mo,   0 50

---- How to Use Water Power                                 12mo,  *1 00

---- Gyrostatic Balancing                                    8vo,  *1 00

Child, C. D. Electric Arc                                    8vo,  *2 00

Christian, M. Disinfection and Disinfectants. Trans.
  by Chas. Salter                                           12mo,   2 00

Christie, W. W. Boiler-waters, Scale, Corrosion, Foaming     8vo,  *3 00

---- Chimney Design and Theory                               8vo,  *3 00

---- Furnace Draft. (Science Series No. 123.)               16mo,   0 50

---- Water: Its Purification and Use in the Industries       8vo,  *2 00

Church's Laboratory Guide. Rewritten by Edward Kinch         8vo,  *1 50

Clapham, J. H. Woolen and Worsted Industries                 8vo,   2 00

Clapperton, G. Practical Papermaking                         8vo,   2 50

Clark, A. G. Motor Car Engineering.
    Vol. I. Construction                                           *3 00
    Vol. II. Design                                          8vo,  *3 00

Clark, C. H. Marine Gas Engines                             12mo,  *1 50

Clark, J. M. New System of Laying Out Railway Turnouts      12mo,   1 00

Clarke, J. W., and Scott, W. Plumbing Practice.
    Vol. I. Lead Working and Plumbers' Materials             8vo,  *4 00
    Vol. II. Sanitary Plumbing and Fittings                (_In Press._)
    Vol. III. Practical Lead Working on Roofs              (_In Press._)

Clarkson, R. B. Elementary Electrical Engineering          (_In Press._)

Clausen-Thue, W. A B C Universal Commercial Telegraphic
  Code. Sixth Edition                                      (_In Press._)

Clerk, D., and Idell, F. E. Theory of the Gas Engine.
  (Science Series No. 62.)                                  16mo,   0 50

Clevenger, S. R. Treatise on the Method of
  Government Surveying.                            16mo, morocco,   2 50

Clouth, F. Rubber, Gutta-Percha, and Balata                  8vo,  *5 00

Cochran, J. Concrete and Reinforced Concrete Specifications  8vo,  *2 50

---- Inspection of Concrete Construction                     8vo,  *4 00

---- Treatise on Cement Specifications                       8vo,  *1 00

Cocking, W. C. Calculations for Steel-Frame Structures      12mo,  *2 25

Coffin, J. H. C. Navigation and Nautical Astronomy          12mo,  *3 50

Colburn, Z., and Thurston, R. H. Steam Boiler
  Explosions. (Science Series No. 2.)                       16mo,   0 50

Cole, R. S. Treatise on Photographic Optics                 12mo,   1 50

Coles-Finch, W. Water, Its Origin and Use                    8vo,  *5 00

Collins, J. E. Useful Alloys and Memoranda for
  Goldsmiths, Jewelers.                                     16mo,   0 50

Collis, A. G. High and Low Tension Switch-Gear Design        8vo,  *3 50

---- Switchgear. (Installation Manuals Series.)             12mo,  *0 50

Comstock, D. F., and Troland, L. T. The Nature
  of Electricity and Matter                                  8vo,  *2 00

Coombs, H. A. Gear Teeth. (Science Series No. 120.)         16mo,   0 50

Cooper, W. R. Primary Batteries                              8vo,  *4 00

Copperthwaite, W. C. Tunnel Shields                          4to,  *9 00

Corfield, W. H. Dwelling Houses. (Science Series No. 50.)   16mo,   0 50

---- Water and Water-Supply. (Science Series No. 17.)       16mo,   0 50

Cornwall, H. B. Manual of Blow-pipe Analysis                 8vo,  *2 50

Cowee, G. A. Practical Safety Methods and Devices            8vo,  *3 00

Cowell, W. B. Pure Air, Ozone, and Water                    12mo,  *2 00

Craig, J. W., and Woodward, W. P. Questions and
  Answers About Electrical Apparatus               12mo, leather,   1 50

Craig, T. Motion of a Solid in a Fuel. (Science
  Series No. 49.)                                           16mo,   0 50

---- Wave and Vortex Motion. (Science Series No. 43.)       16mo,   0 50

Cramp, W. Continuous Current Machine Design                  8vo,  *2 50

Crehore, A. C. Mystery of Matter and Energy                  8vo,   1 00

Creedy, F. Single Phase Commutator Motors                    8vo,  *2 00

Crocker, F. B. Electric Lighting. Two Volumes.               8vo,
    Vol. I. The Generating Plant                                    3 00
    Vol. II. Distributing Systems and Lamps

Crocker, F. B., and Arendt, M. Electric Motors               8vo,  *2 50

Crocker, F. B., and Wheeler, S. S. The Management
  of Electrical Machinery                                   12mo,  *1 00

Cross, C. F., Bevan, E. J., and Sindall, R. W. Wood
  Pulp and Its Applications. (Westminster Series.)           8vo,  *2 00

Crosskey, L. R. Elementary Perspective                       8vo,   1 25

Crosskey, L. R., and Thaw, J. Advanced Perspective           8vo,   1 50

Culley, J. L. Theory of Arches. (Science Series No. 87.)    16mo,   0 50

Cushing, H. C., Jr., and Harrison, N. Central Station
  Management                                                       *2 00


Dadourian, H. M. Analytical Mechanics                       12mo,  *3 00

Dana, R. T. Handbook of Construction plant         12mo, leather,  *5 00

Danby, A. Natural Rock Asphalts and Bitumens                 8vo,  *2 50

Davenport, C. The Book. (Westminster Series.)                8vo,  *2 00

Davey, N. The Gas Turbine                                    8vo,  *4 00

Davies, F. H. Electric Power and Traction                    8vo,  *2 00

---- Foundations and Machinery Fixing. (Installation
  Manual Series.)                                           16mo,  *1 00

Deerr, N. Sugar Cane                                         8vo,   8 00

Deite, C. Manual of Soapmaking. Trans. by S. T. King         4to,  *5 00

De la Coux, H. The Industrial Uses of Water. Trans.
  by A. Morris.                                              8vo,  *4 50

Del Mar, W. A. Electric Power Conductors                     8vo,  *2 00

Denny, G. A. Deep-level Mines of the Rand                    4to, *10 00

---- Diamond Drilling for Gold                                     *5 00

De Roos, J. D. C. Linkages. (Science Series No. 47.)        16mo,   0 50

Derr, W. L. Block Signal Operation                   Oblong 12mo,  *1 50

---- Maintenance-of-Way Engineering                  (_In Preparation._)

Desaint, A. Three Hundred Shades and How to Mix Them         8vo,  *8 00

De Varona, A. Sewer Gases. (Science Series No. 55.)         16mo,   0 50

Devey, R. G. Mill and Factory Wiring. (Installation
  Manuals Series.)                                          12mo,  *1 00

Dibdin, W. J. Purification of Sewage and Water               8vo,   6 50

Dichmann, Carl. Basic Open-Hearth Steel Process             12mo,  *3 50

Dieterich, K. Analysis of Resins, Balsams, and Gum Resins    8vo,  *3 00

Dilworth, E. C. Steel Railway Bridges                        4to,  *4 00

Dinger, Lieut. H. C. Care and Operation of Naval
  Machinery                                                 12mo,  *2 00

Dixon, D. B. Machinist's and Steam Engineer's
  Practical Calculator.                            16mo, morocco,   1 25

Dodge, G. F. Diagrams for Designing Reinforced
  Concrete Structures,                                     folio,  *4 00

Dommett, W. E. Motor Car Mechanism                          12mo,  *1 50

Dorr, B. F. The Surveyor's Guide and Pocket
  Table-book.                                      16mo, morocco,   2 00

Draper, C. H. Elementary Text-book of Light,
  Heat and Sound                                            12mo,   1 00

---- Heat and the Principles of Thermo-dynamics             12mo,  *2 00

Dron, R. W. Mining Formulas                                 12mo,   1 00

Dubbel, H. High Power Gas Engines                            8vo,  *5 00

Dumesny, P., and Noyer, J. Wood Products, Distillates,
  and Extracts.                                              8vo,  *4 50

Duncan, W. G., and Penman, D. The Electrical Equipment
  of Collieries.                                             8vo,  *4 00

Dunkley, W. G. Design of Machine Elements                    8vo,   1 50

Dunstan, A. E., and Thole, F. B. T. Textbook of
  Practical Chemistry.                                      12mo,  *1 40

Durham, H. W. Saws                                           8vo,   2 50

Duthie, A. L. Decorative Glass Processes.
  (Westminster Series.).                                     8vo,  *2 00

Dwight, H. B. Transmission Line Formulas                     8vo,  *2 00

Dyson, S. S. Practical Testing of Raw Materials              8vo,  *5 00

Dyson, S. S., and Clarkson, S. S. Chemical Works             8vo,  *7 50


Eccles, W. H. Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony             12mo,  *4 50

Eck, J. Light, Radiation and Illumination. Trans.
  by Paul Hogner,                                            8vo,  *2 50

Eddy, H. T. Maximum Stresses under Concentrated Loads        8vo,   1 50

Eddy, L. C. Laboratory Manual of Alternating Currents       12mo,   0 50

Edelman, P. Inventions and Patents                          12mo,  *1 50

Edgcumbe, K. Industrial Electrical Measuring
  Instruments                                         8vo, (_In Press._)

Edler, R. Switches and Switchgear. Trans.
  by Ph. Laubach                                             8vo,  *4 00

Eissler, M. The Metallurgy of Gold                           8vo,   7 50

---- The Metallurgy of Silver                                8vo,   4 00

---- The Metallurgy of Argentiferous Lead                    8vo,   5 00

---- A Handbook on Modern Explosives                         8vo,   5 00

Ekin, T. C. Water Pipe and Sewage Discharge Diagrams       folio,  *3 00

Electric Light Carbons, Manufacture of                       8vo,   1 00

Eliot, C. W., and Storer, F. H. Compendious Manual
  of Qualitative Chemical Analysis                          12mo,  *1 25

Ellis, C. Hydrogenation of Oils                       8vo, (_In Press._)

Ellis, G. Modern Technical Drawing                           8vo,  *2 00

Ennis, Wm. D. Linseed Oil and Other Seed Oils                8vo,  *4 00

---- Applied Thermodynamics                                  8vo,  *4 50

---- Flying Machines To-day                                 12mo,  *1 50

---- Vapors for Heat Engines                                12mo,  *1 00

Ermen, W. F. A. Materials Used in Sizing                     8vo,  *2 00

Erwin, M. The Universe and the Atom                         12mo,  *2 00

Evans, C. A. Macadamized Roads                             (_In Press._)

Ewing, A. J. Magnetic Induction in Iron                      8vo,  *4 00


Fairie, J. Notes on Lead Ores                               12mo,  *0 50

---- Notes on Pottery Clays                                 12mo,  *1 50

Fairley, W., and Andre, Geo. J. Ventilation of Coal
  Mines. (Science Series No. 58.)                           16mo,   0 50

Fairweather, W. C. Foreign and Colonial Patent Laws          8vo,  *3 00

Falk, M. S. Cement Mortars and Concretes                     8vo,  *2 50

Fanning, J. T. Hydraulic and Water-supply Engineering        8vo,  *5 00

Fay, I. W. The Coal-tar Colors                               8vo,  *4 00

Fernbach, R. L. Glue and Gelatine                            8vo,  *3 00

Firth, J. B. Practical Physical Chemistry                   12mo,  *1 00

Fischer, E. The Preparation of Organic Compounds.
  Trans. by R. V. Stanford                                  12mo,  *1 25

Fish, J. C. L. Lettering of Working Drawings          Oblong 8vo,   1 00

---- Mathematics of the Paper Location of a Railroad
  paper                                                     12mo,  *0 25

Fisher, H. K. C., and Darby, W. C. Submarine Cable
  Testing                                                    8vo,  *3 50

Fleischmann, W. The Book of the Dairy. Trans. by
  C. M. Aikman                                               8vo,   4 00

Fleming, J. A. The Alternate-current Transformer. Two
  Volumes.                                                   8vo.
    Vol. I. The Induction of Electric Currents                     *5 00
    Vol. II. The Utilization of Induced Currents                   *5 00

---- Propagation of Electric Currents                        8vo,  *3 00

---- A Handbook for the Electrical Laboratory and
  Testing Room. Two Volumes                            8vo, each,  *5 00

Fleury, P. Preparation and Uses of White Zinc Paints         8vo,  *2 50

Flynn, P. J. Flow of Water. (Science Series No. 84.)        12mo,   0 50

---- Hydraulic Tables. (Science Series No. 66.)             16mo,   0 50

Forgie, J. Shield Tunneling                           8vo. (_In Press._)

Foster, H. A. Electrical Engineers' Pocket-book.
  (_Seventh Edition._)                             12mo, leather,   5 00

---- Engineering Valuation of Public Utilities
  and Factories                                              8vo,  *3 00

---- Handbook of Electrical Cost Data                  8vo (_In Press._)

Fowle, F. F. Overhead Transmission Line Crossings           12mo,  *1 50

---- The Solution of Alternating Current Problems      8vo (_In Press._)

Fox, W. G. Transition Curves. (Science Series No. 110.)     16mo,   0 50

Fox, W., and Thomas, C. W. Practical Course in
  Mechanical Drawing                                        12mo,   1 25

Foye, J. C. Chemical Problems.
  (Science Series No. 69.)                                  16mo,   0 50

---- Handbook of Mineralogy. (Science Series No. 86.)       16mo,   0 50

Francis, J. B. Lowell Hydraulic Experiments                  4to,  15 00

Franzen, H. Exercises in Gas Analysis                       12mo,  *1 00

Freudemacher, P. W. Electrical Mining Installations.
  (Installation Manuals Series.)                            12mo,  *1 00

Frith, J. Alternating Current Design                         8vo,  *2 00

Fritsch, J. Manufacture of Chemical Manures. Trans.
  by D. Grant.                                               8vo,  *4 00

Frye, A. I. Civil Engineers' Pocket-book           12mo, leather,  *5 00

Fuller, G. W. Investigations into the Purification of
  the Ohio River                                             4to, *10 00

Furnell, J. Paints, Colors, Oils, and Varnishes              8vo,  *1 00


Gairdner, J. W. I. Earthwork                           8vo (_In Press._)

Gant, L. W. Elements of Electric Traction                    8vo,  *2 50

Garcia, A. J. R. V. Spanish-English Railway Terms            8vo,  *4 50

Gardner, H. A. Paint Researches, and Their Practical
  Applications                                               8vo,  *5 00

Garforth, W. E. Rules for Recovering Coal Mines
  after Explosions and Fires                       12mo, leather,   1 50

Garrard, C. C. Electric Switch and Controlling Gear          8vo,  *6 00

Gaudard, J. Foundations. (Science Series No. 34.)           16mo,   0 50

Gear, H. B., and Williams, P. F. Electric Central
  Station Distribution Systems                               8vo,  *3 50

Geerligs, H. C. P. Cane Sugar and Its Manufacture            8vo,  *5 00

Geikie, J. Structural and Field Geology                      8vo,  *4 00

---- Mountains. Their Growth, Origin and Decay               8vo,  *4 00

---- The Antiquity of Man in Europe                          8vo,  *3 00

Georgi, F., and Schubert, A. Sheet Metal Working.
  Trans. by C. Salter                                        8vo,   3 00

Gerhard, W. P. Sanitation, Watersupply and Sewage
  Disposal of Country Houses                                12mo,  *2 00

---- Gas Lighting  (Science Series No. 111.)                16mo,   0 50

---- Household Wastes. (Science Series No. 97.)             16mo,   0 50

---- House Drainage. (Science Series No. 63.)               16mo,   0 50

---- Sanitary Drainage of Buildings. (Science Series
  No. 93.)                                                  16mo,   0 50

Gerhardi, C. W. H. Electricity Meters                        8vo,  *4 00

Geschwind, L. Manufacture of Alum and Sulphates.
  Trans. by C. Salter                                        8vo,  *5 00

Gibbings, A. H. Oil Fuel Equipment for Locomotives           8vo,  *5 00

Gibbs, W. E. Lighting by Acetylene                          12mo,  *1 50

Gibson, A. H. Hydraulics and Its Application                 8vo,  *5 00

---- Water Hammer in Hydraulic Pipe Lines                   12mo,  *2 00

Gibson, A. H., and Ritchie, E. G. Circular
  Arc Bow Girder                                             4to,  *3 50

Gilbreth, F. B. Motion Study                                12mo,  *2 00

---- Bricklaying System                                      8vo,  *3 00

---- Field System                                  12mo, leather,  *3 00

---- Primer of Scientific Management                        12mo,  *1 00

Gillette, H. P. Handbook of Cost Data              12mo, leather,  *5 00

---- Rock Excavation Methods and Cost                       12mo,  *5 00

---- and Dana, R. T. Cost Keeping and Management
  Engineering                                                8vo,  *3 50

---- and Hill, C. S. Concrete Construction, Methods
  and Cost                                                   8vo,  *5 00

Gillmore, Gen. Q. A. Roads, Streets, and Pavements          12mo,   1 25

Godfrey, E. Tables for Structural Engineers        16mo, leather,  *2 50

Golding, H. A. The Theta-Phi Diagram                        12mo,  *1 25

Goldschmidt, R. Alternating Current Commutator Motor         8vo,  *3 00

Goodchild, W. Precious Stones. (Westminster Series.)         8vo,  *2 00

Goodeve, T. M. Textbook on the Steam-engine                 12mo,   2 00

Gore, G. Electrolytic Separation of Metals                   8vo,  *3 50

Gould, E. S. Arithmetic of the Steam-engine                 12mo,   1 00

---- Calculus. (Science Series No. 112.)                    16mo,   0 50

---- High Masonry Dams. (Science Series No. 22.)            16mo,   0 50

Gould, E. S. Practical Hydrostatics and Hydrostatic
  Formulas. (Science Series No. 117.)                       16mo,   0 50

Gratacap, L. P. A Popular Guide to Minerals                  8vo,  *3 00

Gray, J. Electrical Influence Machines                      12mo,   2 00

---- Marine Boiler Design                                   12mo,  *1 25

Greenhill, G. Dynamics of Mechanical Flight                  8vo,  *2 50

Gregorius, R. Mineral Waxes. Trans. by C. Salter            12mo,  *3 00

Grierson, R. Some Modern Methods of Ventilation              8vo,  *3 00

Griffiths, A. B. A Treatise on Manures                      12mo,   3 00

---- Dental Metallurgy                                       8vo,  *3 50

Gross, E. Hops                                               8vo,  *4 50

Grossman, J. Ammonia and Its Compounds                      12mo,  *1 25

Groth, L. A. Welding and Cutting Metals by Gases or
  Electricity. (Westminster Series)                          8vo,  *2 00

Grover, F. Modern Gas and Oil Engines                        8vo,  *2 00

Gruner, A. Power-loom Weaving                                8vo,  *3 00

Güldner, Hugo. Internal Combustion Engines. Trans.
  by H. Diederichs                                           4to, *15 00

Gunther, C. O. Integration                                   8vo,  *1 25

Gurden, R. L. Traverse Tables                folio, half morocco,  *7 50

Guy, A. E. Experiments on the Flexure of Beams               8vo,  *1 25


Haenig, A. Emery and Emery Industry                          8vo,  *2 50

Hainbach, R. Pottery Decoration. Trans. by C. Salter        12mo,  *3 00

Hale, W. J. Calculations of General Chemistry               12mo,  *1 00

Hall, C. H. Chemistry of Paints and Paint Vehicles          12mo,  *2 00

Hall, G. L. Elementary Theory of Alternate Current
  Working                                                    8vo,  *1 50

Hall, R. H. Governors and Governing Mechanism               12mo,  *2 00

Hall, W. S. Elements of the Differential and Integral
  Calculus                                                   8vo,  *2 25

---- Descriptive Geometry             8vo volume and a 4to atlas,  *3 50

Haller, G. F., and Cunningham, E. T. The Tesla Coil         12mo,  *1 25

Halsey, F. A. Slide Valve Gears                             12mo,   1 50

---- The Use of the Slide Rule. (Science Series No.
  114.)                                                     16mo,   0 50

---- Worm and Spiral Gearing. (Science Series No.
  116.)                                                     16mo,   0 50

Hancock, H. Textbook of Mechanics and Hydrostatics           8vo,   1 50

Hancock, W. C. Refractory Materials. (Metallurgy
  Series.)                                                 (_In Press._)

Hardy, E. Elementary Principles of Graphic Statics          12mo,  *1 50

Haring, H. Engineering Law
    Vol. I. Law of Contract                                  8vo,  *4 00

Harper, J. H. Hydraulic Tables on the Flow of Water         16mo,  *2 00

Harris, S. M. Practical Topographical Surveying            (_In Press._)

Harrison, W. B. The Mechanics' Tool-book                    12mo,   1 50

Hart, J. W. External Plumbing Work                           8vo,  *3 00

---- Hints to Plumbers on Joint Wiping                       8vo,  *3 00

---- Principles of Hot Water Supply                          8vo,  *3 00

---- Sanitary Plumbing and Drainage                          8vo,  *3 00

Haskins, C. H. The Galvanometer and Its Uses                16mo,   1 50

Hatt, J. A. H. The Colorist                          square 12mo,  *1 50

Hausbrand, E. Drying by Means of Air and Steam.
  Trans. by A. C. Wright                                    12mo,  *2 00

---- Evaporating, Condensing and Cooling Apparatus.
  Trans. by A. C. Wright                                     8vo,  *5 00

Hausmann, E. Telegraph Engineering                           8vo,  *3 00

Hausner, A. Manufacture of Preserved Foods and
  Sweetmeats. Trans. by A. Morris and H. Robson              8vo,  *3 00

Hawkesworth, J. Graphical Handbook for Reinforced
  Concrete Design.                                           4to,  *2 50

Hay, A. Continuous Current Engineering                       8vo,  *2 50

Hayes, H. V. Public Utilities, Their Cost New and
  Depreciation                                               8vo,  *2 00

---- Public Utilities, Their Fair Present Value and
  Return                                                     8vo,  *2 00

Heath, F. H. Chemistry of Photography 8vo.                 (_In Press._)

Heather, H. J. S. Electrical Engineering                     8vo,  *3 50

Heaviside, O. Electromagnetic Theory. Vols. I and II   8vo, each,  *5 00
                                     Vol. III                8vo,  *7 50

Heck, R. C. H. The Steam Engine and Turbine                  8vo,  *3 50

---- Steam-Engine and Other Steam Motors. Two Volumes.
    Vol. I. Thermodynamics and the Mechanics                 8vo,  *3 50
    Vol. II. Form, Construction, and Working                 8vo,  *5 00

---- Notes on Elementary Kinematics                  8vo, boards,  *1 00

---- Graphics of Machine Forces                      8vo, boards,  *1 00

Heermann, P. Dyers' Materials. Trans. by A. C.
  Wright                                                    12mo,  *2 50

Heidenreich, E. L. Engineers' Pocketbook of Reinforced
  Concrete                                         16mo, leather,  *3 00

Hellot, Macquer and D'Apligny. Art of Dyeing Wool, Silk
  and Cotton                                                 8vo,  *2 00

Henrici, O. Skeleton Structures                              8vo,   1 50

Hering, C., and Getman, F. H. Standard Tables of
  Electro-Chemical Equivalents                              12mo,  *1 50

Hering, D. W. Essentials of Physics for College
  Students                                                   8vo,  *1 75

Hering-Shaw, A. Domestic Sanitation and Plumbing.
  Two Vols.                                                  8vo,  *5 00

Hering-Shaw, A. Elementary Science                           8vo,  *2 00

Herington, C. F. Powdered Coal and Fuel                    (_In Press._)

Herrmann, G. The Graphical Statics of Mechanism.
  Trans. by A. P. Smith                                     12mo,   2 00

Herzfeld, J. Testing of Yarns and Textile Fabrics            8vo,  *3 50

Hildebrandt, A. Airships, Past and Present                   8vo,  *3 50

Hildenbrand, B. W. Cable-Making. (Science Series No. 32.)   16mo,   0 50

Hilditch, T. P. A Concise History of Chemistry              12mo,  *1 25

Hill, C. S. Concrete Inspection                             16mo,  *1 00

Hill, J. W. The Purification of Public Water Supplies.
  New Edition                                              (_In Press._)

---- Interpretation of Water Analysis                      (_In Press._)

Hill, M. J. M. The Theory of Proportion                      8vo,  *2 50

Hiroi, I. Plate Girder Construction. (Science Series
  No. 95.)                                                  16mo,   0 50

---- Statically-Indeterminate Stresses                      12mo,  *2 00

Hirshfeld, C. F. Engineering Thermodynamics. (Science
  Series No. 45.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Hoar, A. The Submarine Torpedo Boat                         12mo,  *2 00

Hobart, H. M. Heavy Electrical Engineering                   8vo,  *4 50

---- Design of Static Transformers                          12mo,  *2 00

---- Electricity                                             8vo,  *2 00

---- Electric Trains                                         8vo,  *2 50

---- Electric Propulsion of Ships                            8vo,  *2 50

Hobart, J. F. Hard Soldering, Soft Soldering and Brazing.   12mo,  *1 00

Hobbs, W. R. P. The Arithmetic of Electrical Measurements.  12mo,   0 50

Hoff, J. N. Paint and Varnish Facts and Formulas.           12mo,  *1 50

Hole, W. The Distribution of Gas.                            8vo,  *7 50

Holley, A. L. Railway Practice.                            folio,   6 00

Hopkins, N. M. Model Engines and Small Boats.               12mo,   1 25

Hopkinson, J., Shoolbred, J. N., and Day, R. E.
  Dynamic Electricity. (Science Series No. 71.)             16mo,   0 50

Horner, J. Practical Ironfounding.                           8vo,  *2 00

---- Gear Cutting, in Theory and Practice.                   8vo,  *3 00

Houghton, C. E. The Elements of Mechanics of Materials.     12mo,  *2 00

Houstoun, R. A. Studies in Light Production.                12mo,   2 00

Hovenden, F. Practical Mathematics for Young Engineers.     12mo,  *1 50

Howe, G. Mathematics for the Practical Man.                 12mo,  *1 25

Howorth, J. Repairing and Riveting Glass, China
  and Earthenware.                                    8vo, paper,  *0 50

Hoyt, W. E. Chemistry by Experimentation.                    8vo,  *0 70

Hubbard, E. The Utilization of Wood-waste.                   8vo,  *2 00

Hübner, J. Bleaching and Dyeing of Vegetable and
  Fibrous Materials. (Outlines of Industrial Chemistry.)     8vo,  *5 00

Hudson, O. F. Iron and Steel. (Outlines of Industrial
  Chemistry.)                                                8vo,  *2 00

Humphrey, J. C. W. Metallography of Strain. (Metallurgy
  Series.)                                                 (_In Press._)

Humphreys, A. C. The Business Features of Engineering
  Practice.                                                  8vo,  *1 25

Hunter, A. Bridge Work. 8vo.                               (_In Press._)

Hurst. G. H. Handbook of the Theory of Color.                8vo,  *2 50

---- Dictionary of Chemicals and Raw Products.               8vo,  *4 50

---- Lubricating Oils, Fats and Greases.                     8vo,  *4 00

---- Soaps.                                                  8vo,  *5 00

Hurst, G. H., and Simmons, W. H. Textile Soaps and Oils.     8vo,   3 00

Hurst, H. E., and Lattey, R. T. Text-book of Physics.        8vo,  *3 00

---- Also published in three parts.
    Part   I. Dynamics and Heat.                                   *1 25
    Part  II. Sound and Light.                                     *1 25
    Part III. Magnetism and Electricity.                           *1 50

Hutchinson, R. W., Jr. Long Distance Electric Power
  Transmission.                                             12mo,  *3 00

Hutchinson, R. W., Jr., and Thomas, W. A. Electricity
  in Mining.                                         12mo, (_In Press._)

Hutchinson, W. B. Patents and How to Make Money Out
  of Them.                                                  12mo,   1 00

Hutton, W. S. The Works' Manager's Handbook.                 8vo,   6 00

Hyde, E. W. Skew Arches. (Science Series No. 15.)           16mo,   0 50

Hyde, F. S. Solvents, Oils, Gums, Waxes.                     8vo,  *2 00


Induction Coils. (Science Series No. 53.)                   16mo,   0 50

Ingham, A. E. Gearing. A practical treatise.                 8vo,  *2 50

Ingle, H. Manual of Agricultural Chemistry.                  8vo,  *3 00

Inness, C. H. Problems in Machine Design.                   12mo,  *2 00

---- Air Compressors and Blowing Engines.                   12mo,  *2 00

---- Centrifugal Pumps.                                     12mo,  *2 00

---- The Fan.                                               12mo,  *2 00


Jacob, A., and Gould, E. S. On the Designing and
  Construction of Storage Reservoirs. (Science Series
  No. 6)                                                    16mo,   0 50

Jannettaz, E. Guide to the Determination of
  Rocks. Trans. by G. W. Plympton.                          12mo,   1 50

Jehl, F. Manufacture of Carbons.                             8vo,  *4 00

Jennings, A. S. Commercial Paints and Paintings.
  (Westminster Series.)                                      8vo,  *2 00

Jennison, F. H. The Manufacture of Lake Pigments.            8vo,  *3 00

Jepson, G. Cams and the Principles of their Construction.    8vo,  *1 50

---- Mechanical Drawing.                        8vo. (_In Preparation._)

Jervis-Smith, F. J. Dynamometers.                            8vo,  *3 50

Jockin, W. Arithmetic of the Gold and Silversmith.          12mo,  *1 00

Johnson, J. H. Arc Lamps and Accessory Apparatus.
  (Installation Manuals Series.)                            12mo,  *0 75

Johnson, T. M. Ship Wiring and Fitting. (Installation
  Manuals Series.)                                          12mo,  *0 75

Johnson, W. McA. The Metallurgy of Nickel.           (_In Preparation._)

Johnston, J. F. W., and Cameron, C. Elements of
  Agricultural Chemistry and Geology.                       12mo,   2 60

Joly, J. Radioactivity and Geology.                         12mo,  *3 00

Jones, H. C. Electrical Nature of Matter
  and Radioactivity.                                        12mo,  *2 00

---- Nature of Solution.                                     8vo,  *3 50

---- New Era in Chemistry.                                  12mo,  *2 00

Jones, J. H. Tinplate Industry.                              8vo,  *3 00

Jones, M. W. Testing Raw Materials Used in Paint.           12mo,  *2 00

Jordan, L. C. Practical Railway Spiral.            12mo, leather,  *1 50

Joynson, F. H. Designing and Construction of
  Machine Gearing.                                           8vo,   2 00

Jüptner, H. F. V. Siderology: The Science of Iron.           8vo,  *5 00


Kapp, G. Alternate Current Machinery. (Science
  Series No. 96.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Kapper, F. Overhead Transmission Lines.                      4to,  *4 00

Keim, A. W. Prevention of Dampness in Buildings.             8vo,  *2 00

Keller, S. S. Mathematics for Engineering Students.  12mo, half leather.

---- and Knox, W. E. Analytical Geometry and Calculus.             *2 00

Kelsey, W. R. Continuous-current Dynamos and Motors.         8vo,  *2 50

Kemble, W. T., and Underhill, C. R. The Periodic Law
  and the Hydrogen Spectrum.                          8vo, paper,  *0 50

Kennedy, A. B. W., and Thurston, R. H. Kinematics of
  Machinery. (Science Series No. 54.)                       16mo,   0 50

Kennedy, A. B. W., Unwin, W. C., and Idell,
  F. E. Compressed Air. (Science Series No. 106.)           16mo,   0 50

Kennedy, R. Electrical Installations. Five Volumes.          4to,  15 00
    Single Volumes.                                         each,   3 50

---- Flying Machines; Practice and Design.                  12mo,  *2 00

---- Principles of Aeroplane Construction.                   8vo,  *1 50

Kennelly, A. E. Electro-dynamic Machinery.                   8vo,   1 50

Kent, W. Strength of Materials. (Science Series No. 41.)    16mo,   0 50

Kershaw, J. B. C. Fuel, Water and Gas Analysis.              8vo,  *2 50

---- Electrometallurgy. (Westminster Series.)                8vo,  *2 00

---- The Electric Furnace in Iron and Steel Production.     12mo,  *1 50

---- Electro-Thermal Methods of Iron and Steel Production.   8vo,  *3 00

Kindelan, J. Trackman's Helper.                             12mo,   2 00

Kinzbrunner, C. Alternate Current Windings.                  8vo,  *1 50

---- Continuous Current Armatures.                           8vo,  *1 50

---- Testing of Alternating Current Machines.                8vo,  *2 00

Kirkaldy, A. W., and Evans, A. D. History and
  Economics of Transport.                                    8vo,  *3 00

Kirkaldy, W. G. David Kirkaldy's System of
  Mechanical Testing.                                        4to,  10 00

Kirkbride, J. Engraving for Illustration.                    8vo,  *1 50

Kirkham, J. E. Structural Engineering.                       8vo,  *5 00

Kirkwood, J. P. Filtration of River Waters.                  4to,   7 50

Kirschke, A. Gas and Oil Engines.                           12mo,  *1 25

Klein, J. F. Design of a High-speed Steam-engine.            8vo,  *5 00

---- Physical Significance of Entropy.                       8vo,  *1 50

Klingenberg, G. Large Electric Power Stations.               4to,  *5 00

Knight, R.-Adm. A. M. Modern Seamanship.                     8vo,  *6 50

Knott, C. G., and Mackay, J. S. Practical Mathematics.       8vo,   2 00

Knox, G. D. Spirit of the Soil.                             12mo,  *1 25

Knox, J. Physico-Chemical Calculations.                     12mo,  *1 25

---- Fixation of Atmospheric Nitrogen. (Chemical
  Monographs.)                                              12mo,  *0 75

Koester, F. Steam-Electric Power Plants.                     4to,  *5 00

---- Hydroelectric Developments and Engineering.             4to,  *5 00

Koller, T. The Utilization of Waste Products.                8vo,  *3 00

---- Cosmetics.                                              8vo,  *2 50

Koppe, S. W. Glycerine.                                     12mo,  *2 50

Kozmin, P. A. Flour Milling. Trans. by M. Falkner.    8vo. (_In Press._)

Kremann, R. Application of the Physico-Chemical
  Theory to Technical Processes and Manufacturing Methods.
  Trans. by H. E. Potts.                                     8vo,  *3 00

Kretchmar, K. Yarn and Warp Sizing.                          8vo,  *4 00


Lallier, E. V. Elementary Manual of the Steam Engine.       12mo,  *2 00

Lambert, T. Lead and Its Compounds.                          8vo,  *3 50

---- Bone Products and Manures.                              8vo,  *3 00

Lamborn, L. L. Cottonseed Products.                          8vo,  *3 00

---- Modern Soaps, Candles, and Glycerin.                    8vo,  *7 50

Lamprecht, R. Recovery Work After Pit Fires. Trans.
  by C. Salter.                                              8vo,  *4 00

Lancaster, M. Electric Cooking, Heating and Cleaning.        8vo,  *1 00

Lanchester, F. W. Aerial Flight. Two Volumes.                8vo.
    Vol. I. Aerodynamics.                                          *6 00
    Vol. II. Aerodonetics.                                         *6 00

Lanchester, F. W. The Flying Machine.                        8vo,  *3 00

Lange, K. R. By-Products of Coal-Gas Manufacture.           12mo,   2 00

Larner, E. T. Principles of Alternating Currents.           12mo,  *1 25

La Rue, B. F. Swing Bridges. (Science Series No. 107.)      16mo,   0 50

Lassar-Cohn. Dr. Modern Scientific Chemistry. Trans.
  by M. M. Pattison Muir                                    12mo,  *2 00

Latimer, L. H., Field, C. J., and Howell, J. W.
  Incandescent Electric Lighting. (Science
  Series No. 57.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Latta, M. N. Handbook of American Gas-Engineering Practice.  8vo,  *4 50

---- American Producer Gas Practice.                         4to,  *6 00

Laws, B. C. Stability and Equilibrium of Floating Bodies.    8vo,  *3 50

Lawson, W. R. British Railways. A Financial and
  Commercial Survey.                                         8vo,   2 00

Leask, A. R. Breakdowns at Sea.                             12mo,   2 00

---- Refrigerating Machinery.                               12mo,   2 00

Lecky, S. T. S. "Wrinkles" in Practical Navigation.          8vo,  10 00

Le Doux, M. Ice-Making Machines. (Science Series No. 46.)   16mo,   0 50

Leeds, C. C. Mechanical Drawing for Trade Schools. oblong    4to,  *2 00

---- Mechanical Drawing for High and Vocational Schools.     4to,  *1 25

Lefévre, L. Architectural Pottery. Trans. by H. K.
  Bird and W. M. Binns.                                      4to,  *7 50

Lehner, S. Ink Manufacture. Trans. by A. Morris
  and H. Robson.                                             8vo,  *2 50

Lemstrom, S. Electricity in Agriculture and Horticulture.    8vo,  *1 50

Letts, E. A. Fundamental Problems in Chemistry.              8vo,  *2 00

Le Van, W. B. Steam-Engine Indicator. (Science
  Series No. 78.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Lewes, V. B. Liquid and Gaseous Fuels. (Westminster
  Series.)                                                   8vo,  *2 00

---- Carbonization of Coal.                                  8vo,  *3 00

Lewis, L. P. Railway Signal Engineering.                     8vo,  *3 50

Lewis Automatic Machine Rifle; Operation of.                16mo,  *0 75

Licks, H. E. Recreations in Mathematics.                    12mo,  *1 25

Lieber, B. F. Lieber's Five Letter Standard
  Telegraphic Code.                                          8vo, *10 00

---- Code. German Edition.                                   8vo, *10 00

---- ---- Spanish Edition.                                   8vo, *10 00

---- ---- French Edition.                                    8vo, *10 00

---- Terminal Index.                                         8vo,  *2 50

---- Lieber's Appendix.                                    folio, *15 00

---- ---- Handy Tables.                                      4to,  *2 50

---- Bankers and Stockbrokers' Code and Merchants
  and Shippers' Blank Tables.                                8vo, *15 00

---- 100,000,000 Combination Code.                           8vo, *10 00

---- Engineering Code.                                       8vo, *12 50

Livermore, V. P., and Williams, J. How to Become
  a Competent Motorman                                      12mo,  *1 00

Livingstone, R. Design and Construction of Commutators.      8vo,  *2 25

---- Mechanical Design and Construction of Generators.       8vo,  *3 50

Lloyd, S. L. Fertilizer Materials.                         (_In Press._)

Lobben, P. Machinists' and Draftsmen's Handbook.             8vo,   2 50

Lockwood, T. D. Electricity, Magnetism, and
  Electro-telegraph.                                         8vo,   2 50

---- Electrical Measurement and the Galvanometer.           12mo,   0 75

Lodge, O. J. Elementary Mechanics.                          12mo,   1 50

---- Signalling Across Space without Wires.                  8vo,  *2 00

Loewenstein, L. C., and Crissey, C. P. Centrifugal Pumps.          *4 50

Lomax, J. W. Cotton Spinning.                               12mo,   1 50

Lord, R. T. Decorative and Fancy Fabrics.                    8vo,  *3 50

Loring, A. E. A Handbook of the Electromagnetic Telegraph.  16mo,   0 50

---- Handbook. (Science Series No. 39.)                     16mo,   0 50

Lovell, D. H. Practical Switchwork.                         12mo,  *1 00

Low, D. A. Applied Mechanics (Elementary).                  16mo,   0 80

Lubschez, B. J. Perspective.                                12mo,  *1 50

Lucke, C. E. Gas Engine Design.                              8vo,  *3 00

---- Power Plants: Design, Efficiency, and Power
  Costs. 2 vols.                                     (_In Preparation._)

Luckiesh, M. Color and Its Application.                      8vo,  *3 00

---- Light and Shade and Their Applications.                 8vo,  *2 50

Lunge, G. Coal-tar and Ammonia. Three Volumes.               8vo, *20 00

---- Technical Gas Analysis.                                 8vo,  *4 00

---- Manufacture of Sulphuric Acid and Alkali. Four Volumes. 8vo,
     Vol. I. Sulphuric Acid. In three parts.                       18 00
---- Vol. I. Supplement.                                     8vo,   5 00
     Vol. II. Salt Cake, Hydrochloric Acid and Leblanc
       Soda. In two parts.                                        *15 00
     Vol. III. Ammonia Soda.                                      *10 00
     Vol. IV. Electrolytic Methods.                        (_In Press._)

---- Technical Chemists' Handbook.                 12mo, leather,  *3 50

---- Technical Methods of Chemical Analysis. Trans.
       by C. A. Keane in collaboration with
       the corps of specialists.
     Vol. I. In two parts.                                   8vo, *15 00
     Vol. II. In two parts.                                  8vo, *18 00
     Vol. III. In two parts.                                 8vo, *18 00
     The set (3 vols.) complete.                                  *50 00

Luquer, L. M. Minerals in Rock Sections.                     8vo,  *1 50


Macewen, H. A. Food Inspection.                              8vo,  *2 50

Mackenzie, N. F. Notes on Irrigation Works.                  8vo,  *2 50

Mackie, J. How to Make a Woolen Mill Pay.                    8vo,  *2 00

Maguire, Wm. R. Domestic Sanitary Drainage and Plumbing.     8vo,   4 00

Malcolm, C. W. Textbook on Graphic Statics.                  8vo,  *3 00

Malcolm, H. W. Submarine Telegraph Cable.                  (_In Press._)

Mallet, A. Compound Engines. Trans. by R. R. Buel.
  (Science Series No. 10.)                                  16mo,

Mansfield, A. N. Electro-magnets. (Science Series No. 64.)  16mo,   0 50

Marks, E. C. R. Construction of Cranes and Lifting
  Machinery.                                                12mo,  *1 50

---- Construction and Working of Pumps.                     12mo,  *1 50

---- Manufacture of Iron and Steel Tubes.                   12mo,  *2 00

---- Mechanical Engineering Materials.                      12mo,  *1 00

Marks, G. C. Hydraulic Power Engineering.                    8vo,   3 50

---- Inventions, Patents and Designs.                       12mo,  *1 00

Marlow, T. G. Drying Machinery and Practice.                 8vo,  *5 00

Marsh, C. F. Concise Treatise on Reinforced Concrete.        8vo,  *2 50

---- Reinforced Concrete Compression Member Diagram.
  Mounted on Cloth Boards.                                         *1 50

Marsh, C. F., and Dunn, W. Manual of Reinforced
  Concrete and Concrete Block Construction.        16mo, morocco,  *2 50

Marshall, W. J., and Sankey, H. R. Gas Engines.
  (Westminster Series.)                                      8vo,  *2 00

Martin, G. Triumphs and Wonders of Modern Chemistry.         8vo,  *2 00

---- Modern Chemistry and Its Wonders.                       8vo,  *2 00

Martin, N. Properties and Design of Reinforced Concrete.    12mo,  *2 50

Martin, W. D. Hints to Engineers.                           12mo,  *1 50

Massie, W. W., and Underhill, C. R. Wireless Telegraphy
  and Telephony.                                            12mo,  *1 00

Mathot, R. E. Internal Combustion Engines.                   8vo,  *4 00

Maurice, W. Electric Blasting Apparatus and Explosives.      8vo,  *3 50

---- Shot Firer's Guide.                                     8vo,  *1 50

Maxwell, J. C. Matter and Motion. (Science Series No. 36.)  16mo,   0 50

Maxwell, W. H., and Brown, J. T. Encyclopedia of
  Municipal and Sanitary Engineering.                        4to, *10 00

Mayer, A. M. Lecture Notes on Physics.                       8vo,   2 00

Mayer, C., and Slippy, J. C. Telephone Line Construction.    8vo,  *3 00

McCullough, E. Practical Surveying.                         12mo,  *2 00

---- Engineering Work in Cities and Towns.                   8vo,  *3 00

---- Reinforced Concrete.                                   12mo,  *1 50

McCullough, R. S. Mechanical Theory of Heat.                 8vo,   3 50

McGibbon, W. C. Indicator Diagrams for Marine Engineers.     8vo,  *3 00

---- Marine Engineers' Drawing Book.                  oblong 4to,  *2 50

McIntosh, J. G. Technology of Sugar.                         8vo,  *5 00

---- Industrial Alcohol.                                     8vo,  *3 00

---- Manufacture of Varnishes and Kindred Industries.
      Three Volumes.                                         8vo.
    Vol. I. Oil Crushing, Refining and Boiling.                    *3 50
    Vol. II. Varnish Materials and Oil Varnish Making.             *4 00
    Vol. III. Spirit Varnishes and Materials.                      *4 50

McKnight, J. D., and Brown, A. W. Marine Multitubular Boilers.     *1 50

McMaster, J. B. Bridge and Tunnel Centres. (Science
  Series No. 20.)                                           16mo,   0 50

McMechen, F. L. Tests for Ores, Minerals and Metals.        12mo,  *1 00

McPherson, J. A. Water-works Distribution.                   8vo,   2 50

Meade, A. Modern Gas Works Practice.                         8vo,  *7 50

McGibbon, W. C. Marine Engineers Pocketbook.                12mo,  *4 00

Meade, R. K. Design and Equipment of Small Chemical
  Laboratories,                                              8vo,

Melick, C. W. Dairy Laboratory Guide.                       12mo,  *1 25

Mensch, L. J. Reinforced Concrete Pocket Book.     16mo, leather,  *4 00

Merck, E. Chemical Reagents; Their Purity and Tests. Trans.
  by H. E. Schenck.                                          8vo,   1 00

Merivale, J. H. Notes and Formulae for Mining Students.     12mo,   1 50

Merritt, Wm. H. Field Testing for Gold and Silver. 16mo, leather,   1 50

Mierzinski, S. Waterproofing of Fabrics. Trans. by A.
  Morris and H. Robson.                                      8vo,  *2 50

Miessner, B. F. Radio Dynamics.                             12mo,  *2 00

Miller, G. A. Determinants. (Science Series No. 105.)       16mo,

Miller, W. J. Introduction to Historical Geology.           12mo,  *2 00

Milroy, M. E. W. Home Lace-making.                          12mo,  *1 00

Mills, C. N. Elementary Mechanics for Engineers.             8vo,  *1 00

Mitchell, C. A. Mineral and Aerated Waters.                  8vo,  *3 00

Mitchell, C. A., and Prideaux, R. M. Fibres Used in
  Textile and Allied Industries.                             8vo,  *3 00

Mitchell, C. F., and G. A. Building Construction
       and Drawing.                                         12mo.
     Elementary Course.                                            *1 50
     Advanced Course.                                              *2 50

Monckton, C. C. F. Radiotelegraphy. (Westminster Series.)    8vo,  *2 00

Monteverde, R. D. Vest Pocket Glossary of English-Spanish,
  Spanish-English Technical Terms.                 64mo, leather,  *1 00

Montgomery, J. H. Electric Wiring Specifications.           16mo,  *1 00

Moore, E. C. S. New Tables for the Complete Solution of
  Ganguillet and Kutter's Formula.                           8vo,  *5 00

Morecroft, J. H., and Hehre, F. W. Short Course
  in Electrical Testing.                                     8vo,  *1 50

Morgan, A. P. Wireless Telegraph Apparatus for Amateurs.    12mo,  *1 50

Moses, A. J. The Characters of Crystals.                     8vo,  *2 00

---- and Parsons, C. L. Elements of Mineralogy.              8vo,  *3 00

Moss, S. A. Elements of Gas Engine Design. (Science
  Series No. 121.)                                          16mo,   0 50

---- The Lay-out of Corliss Valve Gears. (Science
  Series No. 119.)                                          16mo,   0 50

Mulford, A. C. Boundaries and Landmarks.                    12mo,  *1 00

Mullin, J. P. Modern Moulding and Pattern-making.           12mo,   2 50

Munby, A. E. Chemistry and Physics of Building
  Materials. (Westminster Series.)                           8vo,  *2 00

Murphy, J. G. Practical Mining.                             16mo,   1 00

Murray, J. A. Soils and Manures. (Westminster Series.)       8vo,  *2 00


Nasmith, J. The Student's Cotton Spinning.                   8vo,   3 00

---- Recent Cotton Mill Construction.                       12mo,   2 50

Neave, G. B., and Heilbron, I. M. Identification of
  Organic Compounds.                                        12mo,  *1 25

Neilson, R. M. Aeroplane Patents.                            8vo,  *2 00

Nerz, F. Searchlights. Trans. by C. Rodgers.                 8vo,  *3 00

Neuberger, H., and Noalhat, H. Technology of Petroleum.
  Trans. by J. G. McIntosh.                                  8vo, *10 00

Newall, J. W. Drawing, Sizing and Cutting Bevel-gears.       8vo,   1 50

Newell, F. H., and Drayer, C. E. Engineering
  as a Career                                        12mo, cloth,  *1 00
                                                           paper,   0 75

Newbeging, T. Handbook for Gas Engineers and Managers.       8vo,  *6 50

Nicol, G. Ship Construction and Calculations.                8vo,  *5 00

Nipher, F. E. Theory of Magnetic Measurements.              12mo,   1 00

Nisbet, H. Grammar of Textile Design                         8vo,  *3 00

Nolan, H. The Telescope. (Science Series No. 51.)           16mo,   0 50

North, H. B. Laboratory Experiments in General Chemistry    12mo,  *1 00

Nugent, E. Treatise on Optics                               12mo,   1 50


O'Connor, H. The Gas Engineer's Pocketbook         12mo, leather,   3 50

Ohm, G. S., and Lockwood, T. D. Galvanic Circuit.
  Translated by William Francis. (Science Series
  No. 102.)                                                 16mo,   0 50

Olsen, J. C. Text-book of Quantitative Chemical Analysis     8vo,   3 50

Olsson, A. Motor Control, in Turret Turning and Gun
  Elevating. (U. S. Navy Electrical Series, No. 1.)  12mo, paper,  *0 50

Ormsby, M. T. M. Surveying                                  12mo,   1 50

Oudin, M. A. Standard Polyphase Apparatus and Systems        8vo,  *3 00

Owen, D. Recent Physical Research                            8vo,  *1 50


Pakes, W. C. C., and Nankivell, A. T. The Science of
  Hygiene                                                    8vo,  *1 75

Palaz, A. Industrial Photometry. Trans. by G. W.
  Patterson, Jr.                                             8vo,  *4 00

Pamely, C. Colliery Manager's Handbook                       8vo, *10 00

Parker, P. A. M. The Control of Water                        8vo,  *5 00

Parr, G. D. A. Electrical Engineering Measuring
  Instruments                                                8vo,  *3 50

Parry, E. J. Chemistry of Essential Oils and
  Artificial Perfumes,                                     (_In Press._)

---- Foods and Drugs. Two Volumes.
    Vol. I. Chemical and Microscopical Analysis
      of Foods and Drugs                                           *7 50
    Vol. II. Sale of Food and Drugs Act                            *3 00

---- and Coste, J. H. Chemistry of Pigments                  8vo,  *4 50

Parry, L. Notes on Alloys                                    8vo,  *3 00

---- Metalliferous Wastes                                    8vo,  *2 00

---- Analysis of Ashes and Alloys                            8vo,  *2 00

Parry, L. A. Risk and Dangers of Various Occupations         8vo,  *3 00

Parshall, H. F., and Hobart, H. M. Armature Windings         4to,  *7 50

---- Electric Railway Engineering                            4to, *10 00

Parsons, J. L. Land Drainage                                 8vo,  *1 50

Parsons, S. J. Malleable Cast Iron                           8vo,  *2 50

Partington, J. R. Higher Mathematics for Chemical Students  12mo,  *2 00

---- Textbook of Thermodynamics                              8vo,  *4 00

Passmore, A. C. Technical Terms Used in Architecture         8vo,  *3 50

Patchell, W. H. Electric Power in Mines                      8vo,  *4 00

Paterson, G. W. L. Wiring Calculations                      12mo,  *2 00

---- Electric Mine Signalling Installations                 12mo,  *1 50

Patterson, D. The Color Printing of Carpet Yarns             8vo,  *3 50

---- Color Matching on Textiles                              8vo,  *3 00

---- Textile Color Mixing                                    8vo,  *3 00

Paulding, C. P. Condensation of Steam in Covered and
  Bare Pipes                                                 8vo,  *2 00

---- Transmission of Heat through Cold-storage Insulation   12mo,  *1 00

Payne, D. W. Iron Founders' Handbook                         8vo,  *4 00

Peckham, S. F. Solid Bitumens                                8vo,  *5 00

Peddie, R. A. Engineering and Metallurgical Books           12mo,  *1 50

Peirce, B. System of Analytic Mechanics                      4to,  10 00

---- Linnear Associative Algebra                             4to,   3 00

Pendred, V. The Railway Locomotive. (Westminster Series.)    8vo,  *2 00

Perkin, F. M. Practical Methods of Inorganic
  Chemistry                                                 12mo,  *1 00

Perrin, J. Atoms                                             8vo,  *2 50

---- and Jaggers, E. M. Elementary Chemistry                12mo,  *1 00

Perrine, F. A. C. Conductors for Electrical
  Distribution                                               8vo,  *3 50

Petit, G. White Lead and Zinc White Paints                   8vo,  *1 50

Petit, R. How to Build an Aeroplane. Trans. by
  T. O'B. Hubbard, and J. H. Ledeboer                        8vo,  *1 50

Pettit, Lieut. J. S. Graphic Processes. (Science
  Series No. 76.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Philbrick, P. H. Beams and Girders. (Science Series
  No. 88.)                                                  16mo,

Phillips, J. Gold Assaying                                   8vo,  *2 50

---- Dangerous Goods                                         8vo,   3 50

Phin, J. Seven Follies of Science                           12mo,  *1 25

Pickworth, C. N. The Indicator Handbook. Two
  Volumes                                             12mo, each,   1 50

---- Logarithms for Beginners                       12mo, boards,   0 50

---- The Slide Rule                                         12mo,   1 00

Plattner's Manual of Blow-pipe Analysis. Eighth
  Edition, revised. Trans. by H. B. Cornwall                 8vo,  *4 00

Plympton, G. W. The Aneroid Barometer. (Science
  Series No. 35.)                                           16mo,   0 50

---- How to become an Engineer. (Science Series No.
  100.)                                                     16mo,   0 50

---- Van Nostrand's Table Book,  (Science Series No.
  104.)                                                     16mo,   0 50

Pochet, M. L. Steam Injectors. Translated from the
  French. (Science Series No. 29.)                          16mo,   0 50

Pocket Logarithms to Four Places. (Science Series No.
  65.)                                                      16mo,   0 50
                                                         leather,   1 00

Polleyn, F. Dressings and Finishings for Textile
  Fabrics                                                    8vo,  *3 00

Pope, F. G. Organic Chemistry                               12mo,  *2 25

Pope, F. L. Modern Practice of the Electric Telegraph        8vo,   1 50

Popplewell, W. C. Prevention of Smoke                        8vo,  *3 50

---- Strength of Materials                                   8vo,  *1 75

Porritt, B. D. The Chemistry of Rubber. (Chemical
  Monographs, No. 3.)                                       12mo,  *0 75

Porter, J. R. Helicopter Flying Machine                     12mo,  *1 25

Potts, H. E. Chemistry of the Rubber Industry.
  (Outlines of Industrial Chemistry)                         8vo,  *2 50

Practical Compounding of Oils, Tallow and Grease             8vo,  *3 50

Pratt, K. Boiler Draught                                    12mo,  *1 25

---- High Speed Steam Engines                                8vo,  *2 00

Pray, T., Jr. Twenty Years with the Indicator                8vo,   2 50

---- Steam Tables and Engine Constant                        8vo,   2 00

Prelini, C. Earth and Rock Excavation                        8vo,  *3 00

---- Graphical Determination of Earth Slopes                 8vo,  *2 00

---- Tunneling. New Edition                                  8vo,  *3 00

---- Dredging. A Practical Treatise                          8vo,  *3 00

Prescott, A. B. Organic Analysis                             8vo,   5 00

Prescott, A. B., and Johnson, O. C. Qualitative
  Chemical Analysis                                          8vo,  *3 50

Prescott, A. B., and Sullivan, E. C. First Book in
  Qualitative Chemistry                                     12mo,  *1 50

Prideaux, E. B. R. Problems in Physical Chemistry            8vo,  *2 00

Primrose, G. S. C. Zinc. (Metallurgy Series.)              (_In Press._)

Prince, G. T. Flow of Water                                 12mo,  *2 00

Pullen, W. W. F. Application of Graphic Methods to
  the Design of Structures                                  12mo,  *2 50

---- Injectors: Theory, Construction and Working            12mo,  *1 50

---- Indicator Diagrams                                      8vo,  *2 50

---- Engine Testing                                          8vo,  *4 50

Putsch, A. Gas and Coal-dust Firing                          8vo,  *3 00

Pynchon, T. R. Introduction to Chemical Physics              8vo,   3 00


Rafter G. W. Mechanics of Ventilation. (Science Series
  No. 33.)                                                  16mo,   0 50

---- Potable Water. (Science Series No. 103.)               16mo,   0 50

---- Treatment of Septic Sewage. (Science Series
  No. 118.)                                                 16mo,   0 50

Rafter, G. W., and Baker, M. N. Sewage Disposal in
  the United States.                                         4to,  *6 00

Raikes, H. P. Sewage Disposal Works                          8vo,  *4 00

Randau, P. Enamels and Enamelling                            8vo,  *4 00

Rankine, W. J. M. Applied Mechanics                          8vo,   5 00

---- Civil Engineering                                       8vo,   6 50

---- Machinery and Millwork                                  8vo,   5 00

---- The Steam-engine and Other Prime Movers                 8vo,   5 00

Rankine, W. J. M., and Bamber, E. F. A Mechanical
  Text-book                                                  8vo,   3 50

Ransome, W. R. Freshman Mathematics                         12mo,  *1 35

Raphael, F. C. Localization of Faults in Electric
  Light and Power Mains                                      8vo,   3 50

Rasch, E. Electric Arc Phenomena. Trans. by K. Tornberg      8vo,  *2 00

Rateau, A. Flow of Steam through Nozzles and Orifices.
  Trans. by H. B. Brydon                                     8vo,  *1 50

Rathbone, R. L. B. Simple Jewellery                          8vo,  *2 00

Rausenberger, F. The Theory of the Recoil of Guns            8vo,  *4 50

Rautenstrauch, W. Notes on the Elements of Machine
  Design                                             8vo, boards,  *1 50

Rautenstrauch, W., and Williams, J. T. Machine Drafting
  and Empirical Design.
    Part I. Machine Drafting                                 8vo,  *1 25
    Part II. Empirical Design                        (_In Preparation._)

Raymond, E. B. Alternating Current Engineering              12mo,  *2 50

Rayner, H. Silk Throwing and Waste Silk Spinning             8vo,  *2 50

Recipes for the Color, Paint, Varnish, Oil, Soap and
  Drysaltery Trades                                          8vo,  *3 50

Recipes for Flint Glass Making                              12mo,  *4 50

Redfern, J. B., and Savin, J. Bells, Telephones
  (Installation Manuals Series.)                            16mo,  *0 50

Redgrove, H. S. Experimental Mensuration                    12mo,  *1 25

Redwood, B. Petroleum. (Science Series No. 92.)             16mo,   0 50

Reed, S. Turbines Applied to Marine Propulsion                     *5 00

Reed's Engineers' Handbook                                   8vo,  *6 00

---- Key to the Nineteenth Edition of Reed's
  Engineers' Handbook                                        8vo,  *3 00

---- Useful Hints to Sea-going Engineers                    12mo,   1 50

Reid, E. E. Introduction to Research in Organic
  Chemistry                                                (_In Press._)

Reid, H. A. Concrete and Reinforced Concrete
  Construction                                               8vo,  *5 00

Reinhardt, C. W. Lettering for Draftsmen, Engineers,
  and Students                                oblong 4to, boards,   1 00

Reinhardt, C. W. The Technic of Mechanical Drafting,
                                             oblong, 4to, boards,  *1 00

Reiser, F. Hardening and Tempering of Steel. Trans. by A.
  Morris and H. Robson                                      12mo,  *2 50

Reiser, N. Faults in the Manufacture of Woolen Goods.
  Trans. by A. Morris and H. Robson                          8vo,  *2 50

---- Spinning and Weaving Calculations                       8vo,  *5 00

Renwick, W. G. Marble and Marble Working                     8vo,   5 00

Reuleaux, F. The Constructor. Trans. by H. H. Suplee         4to,  *4 00

Reuterdahl, A. Theory and Design of Reinforced
  Concrete Arches.                                           8vo,  *2 00

Rey, Jean. The Range of Electric Searchlight Projectors      8vo,  *4 50

Reynolds, O., and Idell, F. E. Triple Expansion Engines.
  (Science Series No. 99.)                                  16mo,   0 50

Rhead, G. F. Simple Structural Woodwork                     12mo,  *1 00

Rhodes, H. J. Art of Lithography                             8vo,   3 50

Rice, J. M., and Johnson, W. W. A New Method of Obtaining
  the Differential of Functions                             12mo,   0 50

Richards, W. A. Forging of Iron and Steel                   12mo,   1 50

Richards, W. A., and North, H. B. Manual of Cement Testing  12mo,  *1 50

Richardson, J. The Modern Steam Engine                       8vo,  *3 50

Richardson, S. S. Magnetism and Electricity                 12mo,  *2 00

Rideal, S. Glue and Glue Testing                             8vo,  *4 00

Rimmer, E. J. Boiler Explosions, Collapses and Mishaps       8vo,  *1 75

Rings, F. Concrete in Theory and Practice                   12mo,  *2 50

---- Reinforced Concrete Bridges                             4to,  *5 00

Ripper, W. Course of Instruction in Machine Drawing        folio,  *6 00

Roberts, F. C. Figure of the Earth. (Science Series
  No. 79.)                                                  16mo,   0 50

Roberts, J., Jr. Laboratory Work in Electrical Engineering   8vo,  *2 00

Robertson, L. S. Water-tube Boilers                          8vo,   2 00

Robinson, J. B. Architectural Composition                    8vo,  *2 50

Robinson, S. W. Practical Treatise on the Teeth of Wheels.
  (Science Series No. 24.)                                  16mo,   0 50

---- Railroad Economics. (Science Series No. 59.)           16mo,   0 50

---- Wrought Iron Bridge Members. (Science Series No. 60.)  16mo,   0 50

Robson, J. H. Machine Drawing and Sketching                  8vo,  *1 50

Roebling, J. A. Long and Short Span Railway Bridges        folio,  25 00

Rogers, A. A Laboratory Guide of Industrial Chemistry      (_In Press._)

---- Elements of Industrial Chemistry                       12mo,  *3 00

---- Manual of Industrial Chemistry                          8vo,  *5 00

Rogers, F. Magnetism of Iron Vessels. (Science Series
  No. 30.).                                                 16mo,   0 50

Rohland, P. Colloidal and Crystalloidal State of Matter.
  Trans. by W. J. Britland and H. E. Potts                  12mo,  *1 25

Rollinson, C. Alphabets                             Oblong, 12mo,  *1 00

Rose, J. The Pattern-makers' Assistant                       8vo,   2 50

---- Key to Engines and Engine-running                      12mo,   2 50

Rose, T. K. The Precious Metals. (Westminster Series.)       8vo,  *2 00

Rosenhain, W. Glass Manufacture. (Westminster Series.)       8vo,  *2 00

---- Physical Metallurgy, An Introduction to. (Metallurgy
  Series.)                                                   8vo,  *3 50

Roth, W. A. Physical Chemistry                               8vo,  *2 00

Rowan, F. J. Practical Physics of the Modern Steam-boiler    8vo,  *3 00

---- and Idell, F. E. Boiler Incrustation and Corrosion.
  (Science Series No. 27.)                                  16mo,   0 50

Roxburgh, W. General Foundry Practice. (Westminster
  Series.).                                                  8vo,  *2 00

Ruhmer, E. Wireless Telephony. Trans. by J. Erskine-Murray.  8vo,  *3 50

Russell, A. Theory of Electric Cables and Networks           8vo,  *3 00

Rutley, F. Elements of Mineralogy                           12mo,  *1 25


Sanford, P. G. Nitro-explosives                              8vo,  *4 00

Saunders, C. H. Handbook of Practical Mechanics             16mo,   1 00
                                                         leather,   1 25

Sayers, H. M. Brakes for Tram Cars                           8vo,  *1 25

Scheele, C. W. Chemical Essays                               8vo,  *2 00

Scheithauer, W. Shale Oils and Tars                          8vo,  *3 50

Scherer, R. Casein. Trans. by C. Salter                      8vo,  *3 00

Schidrowitz, P. Rubber, Its Production and Industrial Uses   8vo,  *5 00

Schindler, K. Iron and Steel Construction Works             12mo,  *1 25

Schmall, C. N. First Course in Analytic Geometry,
  Plane and Solid.                            12mo, half leather,  *1 75

Schmeer, L. Flow of Water                                    8vo,  *3 00

Schumann, F. A Manual of Heating and Ventilation   12mo, leather,   1 50

Schwarz, E. H. L. Causal Geology                             8vo,  *2 50

Schweizer, V. Distillation of Resins                         8vo,  *3 50

Scott, W. W. Qualitative Analysis. A Laboratory Manual       8vo,  *1 50

---- Standard Methods of Chemical Analysis                   8vo,  *6 00

Scribner, J. M. Engineers' and Mechanics'
  Companion                                        16mo, leather,   1 50

Scudder, H. Electrical Conductivity and Ionization Constants
  of Organic Compounds                                       8vo,  *3 00

Searle, A. B. Modern Brickmaking                             8vo,  *5 00

---- Cement, Concrete and Bricks                             8vo,  *3 00

Searle, G. M. "Sumners' Method."  Condensed and Improved.
  (Science Series No. 124.)                                 16mo,   0 50

Seaton, A. E. Manual of Marine Engineering                   8vo,   8 00

Seaton, A. E., and Rounthwaite, H. M. Pocket-book of
  Marine Engineering                               16mo, leather,   3 50

Seeligmann, T., Torrilhon, G. L., and Falconnet, H. India
  Rubber and Gutta Percha. Trans. by J. G. McIntosh          8vo,  *5 00

Seidell, A. Solubilities of Inorganic and Organic
  Substances                                                 8vo,   4 50

Seligman, B. Aluminum. (Metallurgy Series.)                (_In Press._)

Sellew, W. H. Steel Rails                                    4to, *10 00

---- Railway Maintenance Engineering                        12mo,  *2 50

Senter, G. Outlines of Physical Chemistry                   12mo,  *1 75

---- Text-book of Inorganic Chemistry                       12mo,  *1 75

Sever, G. F. Electric Engineering Experiments        8vo, boards,  *1 00

Sever, G. F., and Townsend, F. Laboratory and Factory
  Tests in Electrical Engineering                            8vo,  *2 50

Sewall, C. H. Wireless Telegraphy                            8vo,  *2 00

---- Lessons in Telegraphy                                  12mo,  *1 00

Sewell, T. The Construction of Dynamos                       8vo,  *3 00

Sexton, A. H. Fuel and Refractory Materials                 12mo,  *2 50

---- Chemistry of the Materials of Engineering              12mo,  *2 50

---- Alloys (Non-Ferrous)                                    8vo,  *3 00

Sexton, A. H., and Primrose, J. S. G. The Metallurgy of
  Iron and Steel.                                            8vo,  *6 50

Seymour, A. Modern Printing Inks                             8vo,  *2 00

Shaw, Henry S. H. Mechanical Integrators. (Science
  Series No. 83.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Shaw, S. History of the Staffordshire Potteries              8vo,   2 00

---- Chemistry of Compounds Used in Porcelain Manufacture    8vo,  *5 00

Shaw, T. R. Driving of Machine Tools                        12mo,  *2 00

Shaw, W. N. Forecasting Weather                              8vo,  *3 50

Sheldon, S., and Hausmann, E. Direct Current Machines       12mo,  *2 50

---- Alternating Current Machines                           12mo,  *2 50

Sheldon, S., and Hausmann, E. Electric Traction and
  Transmission Engineering                                  12mo,  *2 50

---- Physical Laboratory Experiments, for Engineering
  Students                                                   8vo,  *1 25

Shields, J. E. Notes on Engineering Construction            12mo,   1 50

Shreve, S. H. Strength of Bridges and Roofs                  8vo,   3 50

Shunk, W. F. The Field Engineer                    12mo, morocco,   2 50

Simmons, W. H., and Appleton, H. A. Handbook of
  Soap Manufacture,                                          8vo,  *3 00

Simmons, W. H., and Mitchell, C. A. Edible Fats and Oils     8vo,  *3 00

Simpson, G. The Naval Constructor                  12mo, morocco,  *5 00

Simpson, W. Foundations                               8vo. (_In Press._)

Sinclair, A. Development of the Locomotive
  Engine                                       8vo, half leather,   5 00

Sindall, R. W. Manufacture of Paper. (Westminster Series.)   8vo,  *2 00

Sindall, R. W., and Bacon, W. N. The Testing of Wood Pulp    8vo,  *2 50

Sloane, T. O'C. Elementary Electrical Calculations          12mo,  *2 00

Smallwood, J. C. Mechanical Laboratory Methods. (Van
  Nostrand's Textbooks)                            12mo, leather,  *2 50

Smith, C. A. M. Handbook of Testing, MATERIALS               8vo,  *2 50

Smith, C. A. M., and Warren, A. G. New Steam Tables          8vo,  *1 25

Smith, C. F. Practical Alternating Currents and Testing      8vo,  *2 50

---- Practical Testing of Dynamos and Motors                 8vo,  *2 00

Smith, F. A. Railway Curves                                 12mo,  *1 00

---- Standard Turnouts on American Railroads                12mo,  *1 00

---- Maintenance of Way Standards                           12mo,  *1 50

Smith, F. E. Handbook of General Instruction for
  Mechanics                                                 12mo,   1 50

Smith, H. G. Minerals and the Microscope                    12mo,  *1 25

Smith, J. C. Manufacture of Paint                            8vo,  *3 50

Smith, R. H. Principles of Machine Work                     12mo,

---- Advanced Machine Work                                  12mo,  *3 00

Smith, W. Chemistry of Hat Manufacturing                    12mo,  *3 00

Snell, A. T. Electric Motive Power                           8vo,  *4 00

Snow, W. G. Pocketbook of Steam Heating and Ventilation.   (_In Press._)

Snow, W. G., and Nolan, T. Ventilation of Buildings.
  (Science Series No. 5.)                                   16mo,   0 50

Soddy, F. Radioactivity                                      8vo,  *3 00

Solomon, M. Electric Lamps. (Westminster Series.)            8vo,  *2 00

Somerscales, A. N. Mechanics for Marine Engineers           12mo,  *2 00

---- Mechanical and Marine Engineering Science               8vo,  *5 00

Sothern, J. W. The Marine Steam Turbine                      8vo,  *6 00

---- Verbal Notes and Sketches for Marine Engineers          8vo,  *7 50

Sothern, J. W., and Sothern, R. M. Elementary
  Mathematics for Marine Engineers                          12mo,  *1 50

---- Simple Problems in Marine Engineering Design           12mo,  *1 50

Southcombe, J. E. Chemistry of the Oil Industries.
  (Outlines of Industrial Chemistry.)                        8vo,  *3 00

Soxhlet, D. H. Dyeing and Staining Marble. Trans.
  by A. Morris and H. Robson                                 8vo,  *2 50

Spangenburg, L. Fatigue of Metals. Translated by
  S. H. Shreve. (Science Series No. 23.)                    16mo,   0 50

Specht, G. J., Hardy, A. S., McMaster, J. B., and
  Walling. Topographical Surveying. (Science Series
  No. 72.)                                                  16mo,   0 50

Spencer, A. S. Design of Steel-Framed Sheds                  8vo,  *3 50

Speyers, C. L. Text-book of Physical Chemistry               8vo,  *1 50

Spiegel, L. Chemical Constitution and Physiological
  Action. (Trans. by C. Luedeking and A. C. Boylston.)      12mo,  *1 25

Sprague, E. H. Hydraulics                                   12mo,   1 50

---- Elements of Graphic Statics                             8vo,   2 00

---- Stability of Masonry                                   12mo,   1 50

---- Elementary Mathematics for Engineers                   12mo,  *1 50

Stahl, A. W. Transmission of Power. (Science Series
  No. 28.)                                                  16mo,

Stahl, A. W., and Woods, A. T. Elementary Mechanism         12mo,  *2 00

Staley, C., and Pierson, G. S. The Separate System of
  Sewerage                                                   8vo,  *3 00

Standage, H. C. Leatherworkers' Manual                       8vo,  *3 50

---- Sealing Waxes, Wafers, and Other Adhesives              8vo,  *2 00

---- Agglutinants of all Kinds for all Purposes             12mo,  *3 50

Stanley, H. Practical Applied Physics                      (_In Press._)

Stansbie, J. H. Iron and Steel. (Westminster Series.)        8vo,  *2 00

Steadman, F. M. Unit Photography                            12mo,  *2 00

Stecher, G. E. Cork. Its Origin and Industrial Uses         12mo,   1 00

Steinman, D. B. Suspension Bridges and Cantilevers.
  (Science Series No. 127.)                                         0 50

---- Melan's Steel Arches and Suspension Bridges             8vo,  *3 00

Stevens, H. P. Paper Mill Chemist                           16mo,  *2 50

Stevens, J. S. Theory of Measurements                       12mo,  *1 25

Stevenson, J. L. Blast-Furnace Calculations        12mo, leather,  *2 00

Stewart, G. Modern Steam Traps                              12mo,  *1 25

Stiles, A. Tables for Field Engineers                       12mo,   1 00

Stodola, A. Steam Turbines. Trans. by L. C.
  Loewenstein                                                8vo,  *5 00

Stone, H. The Timbers of Commerce                            8vo,   3 50

Stopes, M. Ancient Plants                                    8vo,  *2 00

---- The Study of Plant Life                                 8vo,  *2 00

Sudborough, J. J., and James, T. C. Practical Organic
  Chemistry                                                 12mo,  *2 00

Suffling, E. R. Treatise on the Art of Glass Painting        8vo,  *3 50

Sullivan, T. V., and Underwood, N. Testing and
  Valuation of Building and Engineering Materials          (_In Press._)

Sur, F. J. S. Oil Prospecting and Extracting                 8vo,  *1 00

Svenson, C. L. Handbook on Piping                          (_In Press._)

Swan, K. Patents, Designs and Trade Marks.
  (Westminster Series.)                                      8vo,  *2 00

Swinburne, J., Wordingham, C. H., and Martin, T. C.
  Electric Currents. (Science Series No. 109.)              16mo,   0 50

Swoope, C. W. Lessons in Practical Electricity              12mo,  *2 00


Tailfer, L. Bleaching Linen and Cotton Yarn and Fabrics      8vo,   6 00

Tate, J. S. Surcharged and Different Forms of
  Retaining-walls. (Science Series No. 7.)                  16mo,   0 50

Taylor, F. N. Small Water Supplies                          12mo,  *2 50

---- Masonry in Civil Engineering                            8vo,  *2 50

Taylor, T. U. Surveyor's Handbook                  12mo, leather,  *2 00

---- Backbone of Perspective                                12mo,  *1 00

Taylor, W. P. Practical Cement Testing                       8vo,  *3 00

Templeton, W. Practical Mechanic's Workshop
  Companion                                        12mo, morocco,   2 00

Tenney, E. H. Test Methods for Steam Power Plants.
  (Van Nostrand's Textbooks.)                               12mo,  *2 50

Terry, H. L. India Rubber and its Manufacture.
  (Westminster Series.)                                      8vo,  *2 00

Thayer, H. R. Structural Design.                             8vo.
    Vol. I. Elements of Structural Design                          *2 00
    Vol. II. Design of Simple Structures                           *4 00
    Vol. III. Design of Advanced Structures          (_In Preparation._)

---- Foundations and Masonry                         (_In Preparation._)

Thiess, J. B., and Joy, G. A. Toll Telephone Practice        8vo,  *3 50

Thom, C., and Jones, W. H. Telegraphic Connections  oblong, 12mo,   1 50

Thomas, C. W. Paper-makers' Handbook                       (_In Press._)

Thompson, A. B. Oil Fields of Russia                         4to,  *7 50

---- Oil Field Development                                          7 50

Thompson, S. P. Dynamo Electric Machines. (Science
  Series No. 75.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Thompson, W. P. Handbook of Patent Law of All
  Countries                                                 16mo,   1 50

Thomson, G. Modern Sanitary Engineering                     12mo,  *3 00

Thomson, G. S. Milk and Cream Testing                       12mo,  *1 75

---- Modern Sanitary Engineering, House Drainage, etc.       8vo,  *3 00

Thornley, T. Cotton Combing Machines                         8vo,  *3 00

---- Cotton Waste                                            8vo,  *3 00

---- Cotton Spinning.                                        8vo.
    First Year                                                     *1 50
    Second Year                                                    *3 00
    Third Year                                                     *2 50

Thurso, J. W. Modern Turbine Practice                        8vo,  *4 00

Tidy, C. Meymott. Treatment of Sewage. (Science Series
  No. 94.)                                                  16mo,   0 50

Tillmans, J. Water Purification and Sewage Disposal.
  Trans. by Hugh S. Taylor                                   8vo,  *2 00

Tinney, W. H. Gold-mining Machinery                          8vo,  *3 00

Titherley, A. W. Laboratory Course of Organic Chemistry      8vo,  *2 00

Tizard, H. T. Indicators                                   (_In Press._)

Toch, M. Chemistry and Technology of Paints                  8vo,  *4 00

---- Materials for Permanent Painting                       12mo,  *2 00

Tod, J., and McGibbon, W. C. Marine Engineers' Board
  of Trade Examinations                                      8vo,  *2 00

Todd, J., and Whall, W. B. Practical Seamanship              8vo,   8 00

Tonge, J. Coal. (Westminster Series.)                        8vo,  *2 00

Townsend, F. Alternating Current Engineering         8vo, boards,  *0 75

Townsend, J. S. Ionization of Gases by Collision             8vo,  *1 25

Transactions of the American Institute of Chemical
  Engineers, 8vo. Eight volumes now ready. Vol. I.
  to IX., 1908-1916                                    8vo, each,   6 00

Traverse Tables. (Science Series No. 115.)                  16mo,   0 50
                                                         morocco,   1 00

Treiber, E. Foundry Machinery. Trans. by C. Salter          12mo,   1 50

Trinks, W., and Housum, C. Shaft Governors. (Science
  Series No. 122.)                                          16mo,   0 50

Trowbridge, W. P. Turbine Wheels. (Science Series No.
  44.)                                                      16mo,   0 50

Tucker, J. H. A Manual of Sugar Analysis                     8vo,   3 50

Tunner, P. A. Treatise on Roll-turning. Trans. by
  J. B. Pearse.                        8vo, text and folio atlas,  10 00

Turnbull, Jr., J., and Robinson, S. W. A Treatise on
  the Compound Steam-engine. (Science Series No. 8.)        16mo,

Turner, H. Worsted Spinners' Handbook                       12mo,  *2 00

Turrill, S. M. Elementary Course in Perspective             12mo,  *1 25

Twyford, H. B. Purchasing                                    8vo,  *3 00

Tyrrell, H. G. Design and Construction of Mill
  Buildings                                                  8vo,  *4 00

---- Concrete Bridges and Culverts                 16mo, leather,  *3 00

---- Artistic Bridge Design                                  8vo,  *3 00


Underhill, C. R. Solenoids, Electromagnets and
  Electromagnetic Windings                                  12mo,  *2 00

Underwood, N., and Sullivan, T. V. Chemistry and
  Technology of Printing Inks                                8vo,  *3 00

Urquhart, J. W. Electro-plating                             12mo,   2 00

---- Electrotyping                                          12mo,   2 00

Usborne, P. O. G. Design of Simple Steel Bridges             8vo,  *4 00


Vacher, F. Food Inspector's Handbook                        12mo,

Van Nostrand's Chemical Annual. Third issue 1913   leather, 12mo,  *2 50

---- Year Book of Mechanical Engineering Data              (_In Press._)

Van Wagenen, T. F. Manual of Hydraulic Mining               16mo,   1 00

Vega, Baron Von. Logarithmic Tables                   8vo, cloth,   2 00
                                                    half morocco,   2 50

Vincent, C. Ammonia and its Compounds. Trans. by
  M. J. Salter                                               8vo,  *2 00

Volk, C. Haulage and Winding Appliances                      8vo,  *4 00

Von Georgievics, G. Chemical Technology of Textile
  Fibres. Trans. by C. Salter                                8vo,  *4 50

---- Chemistry of Dyestuffs. Trans. by C. Salter             8vo,  *4 50

Vose, G. L. Graphic Method for Solving Certain
  Questions in Arithmetic and Algebra (Science
  Series No. 16.)                                           16mo,   0 50

Vosmaer, A. Ozone                                            8vo,  *2 50


Wabner, R. Ventilation in Mines. Trans. by C. Salter         8vo,  *4 50

Wade, E. J. Secondary Batteries                              8vo,  *4 00

Wadmore, T. M. Elementary Chemical Theory                   12mo,  *1 50

Wadsworth, C. Primary Battery Ignition                      12mo,  *0 50

Wagner, E. Preserving Fruits, Vegetables, and Meat          12mo,  *2 50

Wagner, J. B. A Treatise on the Natural and Artificial
  Processes of Wood Seasoning                         8vo, (_In Press._)

Waldram, P. J. Principles of Structural Mechanics           12mo,  *3 00

Walker, F. Aerial Navigation                                 8vo,   2 00

---- Dynamo Building. (Science Series No. 98.)              16mo,   0 50

Walker, J. Organic Chemistry for Students of Medicine        8vo,  *2 50

Walker, S. F. Steam Boilers, Engines and Turbines            8vo,   3 00

---- Refrigeration, Heating and Ventilation on
  Shipboard                                                 12mo,  *2 00

---- Electricity in Mining                                   8vo,  *3 50

Wallis-Tayler, A. J. Bearings and Lubrication                8vo,  *1 50

---- Aerial or Wire Ropeways                                 8vo,  *3 00

---- Sugar Machinery                                        12mo,  *2 00

Walsh, J. J. Chemistry and Physics of Mining and
  Mine Ventilation,                                         12mo,  *2 00

Wanklyn, J. A. Water Analysis                               12mo,   2 00

Wansbrough, W. D. The A B C of the Differential
  Calculus                                                  12mo,  *1 50

---- Slide Valves                                           12mo,  *2 00

Waring, Jr., G. E. Sanitary Conditions. (Science
  Series No. 31.)                                           16mo,   0 50

---- Sewerage and Land Drainage                                    *6 00

---- Modern Methods of Sewage Disposal                      12mo,   2 00

---- How to Drain a House                                   12mo,   1 25

Warnes, A. R. Coal Tar Distillation                          8vo,  *3 00

Warren, F. D. Handbook on Reinforced Concrete               12mo,  *2 50

Watkins, A. Photography. (Westminster Series.