#The Red Mark#, by _John Russell_ (Alfred A. Knopf). This uneven volume of
short stories by a writer of real though undisciplined talent is full of
color and kaleidoscopic hurrying of events. Apart from "The Adversary,"
which is successful to a degree, the book is uncertain in its rendering
of character, though Mr. Russell's handling of plot leaves little to be
desired.

#The Pagan#, by _Gordon Arthur Smith_ (Charles Scribner's Sons). It was
expected that when Mr. Smith's first volume of short stories should
appear, it would take its place at once as pre-eminent in the romantic
revival which is beginning to be apparent in the American short story.
This volume does not disappoint our expectations, although it would have
gained in authority had it been confined to the five Taillandy Stories,
"Jeanne, the Maid," and "The Return." Mr. Smith's output has always been
wisely limited, and "The Pagan" represents the best work of nine years.
These stories are only second in their kind to those of James Branch
Cabell and Stephen French Whitman.

#The Elder's People#, by _Harriet Prescott Spofford_ (Houghton, Mifflin
Company). Mrs. Spofford has collected in this volume the best among the
short stories which she has written since 1904, and the collection shows
no diminution in her powers of accurate and tender observation of New
England folk. These fourteen prose idyls have a mellow humanism which
portrays the last autumn fires of a dying tradition. They rank with the
best work of Miss Jewett and Mrs. Spofford herself in the same kind, and
are a permanent addition to the small store of New England literature. I
wish to call special attention to "An Old Fiddler," "A Village
Dressmaker," and "A Life in a Night."

#The Valley of Vision#, by _Henry van Dyke_ (Charles Scribner's Sons).
This volume of notes for stories rather than stories themselves calls
for no particular comment save for two admirable fugitive studies
entitled "A Remembered Dream" and "The Broken Soldier and the Maid of
France." These seem to me creditable additions to the small store of
American legends which the war produced, but the other stories and
sketches are rather bloodless. They are signs of the spiritual anæmia
which is so characteristic of much of American life.

#The Ninth Man#, by _Mary Heaton Vorse_ (Harper & Brothers). When this
story was published in Harper's Magazine six years ago, it attracted
wide attention as a vividly composed presentment of human passions in a
mediæval scene. The allegory was not stressed unduly, and was perhaps
taken into less account then than it will be now. But events have since
clarified the story in a manner which proves Miss Vorse to have been
curiously prophetic. In substance it is very different from what we have
come to associate with her work, but I think that its modern social
significance will now be obvious to any reader. Philosophy aside, I
commend it as an admirably woven story.

#Anchors Aweigh#, by _Harriet Welles_ (Charles Scribner's Sons). I think
the chief value of this volume is as a quiet record of experience
without any remarkable qualities of plot and style, but it is full of
promise for the future, and in "Orders" Mrs. Welles has written a
memorable story. The introduction by the Secretary of the Navy rather
overstates the case, but I think no one will deny the genuine feeling
and truth with which Mrs. Welles has presented her point of view.

#Ma Pettengill#, by _Harry Leon Wilson_ (Doubleday, Page & Company). I
must confess that temperamentally I am not inclined to rank these
humorous stories of American life as highly as many critics. I grant
their sincerity of portraiture, but they show only too plainly the signs
of Mr. Wilson's compromise with his large audience in The Saturday
Evening Post. They are written, however, with the author's eye on the
object, and Ma Pettengill herself is vividly realized.

#Hungry Hearts#, by _Anzia Yezierska_ (Houghton Mifflin Company). When I
reprinted "Fat of the Land" last year I stated that it seemed to me
perhaps the finest imaginative contribution to the short story made by
an American artist last year. My opinion is confirmed by Miss
Yezierska's first collection of stories, and particularly by "Hunger,"
"The Miracle," and "My Own People." I know of no other American writer
who is driven by such inevitable compulsion to express her ideal of what
America might be, and it serves to underscore the truth that the chief
idealistic contribution to American life comes no longer from the anæmic
Anglo-Saxon puritan, but from the younger elements of our mixed racial
culture. Such a flaming passion of mingled indignation and love for
America embodies a message which other races must heed, and proves that
there is a spiritual America being born out of suffering and oppression
which is destined to rule before very long.


II. #English and Irish Authors#

#Windmills: A Book of Fables#, by _Gilbert Cannan_ (B. W. Huebsch, Inc.).
This is the first American edition of a book published in London in
1915. Conceived as a new "Candide," it is a bitter satire on war and
international politics. While it ostensibly consists of four short
stories, they have a unity of action which is sketched rather than fully
set forth. In fact, the volume is really a notebook for a larger work.
Set beside the satire of Voltaire, Mr. Cannan's master, it is seen to
fail because of its lack of kindly irony. In fact, it is a little
overdone.

#The Eve of Pascua#, by "_Richard Dehan_" (George H. Doran Company). Two
years ago I had occasion to call attention to the quite unstressed
romanticism of Mrs. Graves' "Under the Hermes." The present volume is of
much less significance, and I only mention it because of the title
story, which is an adequately rendered picture of contemporary Spanish
life, much less overdrawn than the other stories.

#Poems and Prose#, of _Ernest Dowson_ (Boni and Liveright). Five of the
nine short stories by Ernest Dowson are included in this admirable
reprint, but it omits the better stories which appeared in The Savoy,
and in a later edition I suggest that the poems be printed in a volume
by themselves with Mr. Symons' memoir, and all the stories in another
volume which should include among others "The Dying of Francis Donne"
and "Countess Marie of The Angels."

#The Golden Bird and Other Sketches#, by _Dorothy Eastern_, with a
foreword by _John Galsworthy_ (Alfred A. Knopf). These forty short
sketches of Sussex and of France are rendered deftly with a faithful
objectivity of manner which has not barred out the essential poetry of
their substance. These pictures are lightly touched with a quiet
brooding significance, as if they had been seen at twilight moments in a
dream world in which human relationships had been partly forgotten. They
are frankly impressionistic, except for the group of French stories, in
which Miss Easton has sought more definitely to interpret character. The
danger of this form is a certain preciosity which the author has
skilfully evaded, and the influence of Mr. Galsworthy is nowhere too
clearly apparent. I recommend the volume as one of the best English
books which has come to us during the past year.

#My Neighbors: Stories of the Welsh People#, by _Caradoc Evans_ (Harcourt,
Brace and Howe). In his third collection of stories, Mr. Evans has for
the most part forsaken his study of the Cardigan Bay peasant for the
London Welsh, and although his style preserves the same stark biblical
notation as before, it seems less suited to record the ironies of an
industrial civilization. Allowing for this, and for Mr. Evans' bent
towards an unduly acid estimate of human nature, it must be confessed
that these stories have a certain permanent literary quality, most
successful in "Earthbred," "Joseph's House," and "A Widow Woman." These
three collections make it tolerably clear that Mr. Evans will find his
true medium in the novel, where an epic breadth of material is at hand
to fit his epic breadth of speech.

#Tatterdemalion#, by _John Galsworthy_ (Charles Scribner's Sons). This
volume contains the ripest product of Mr. Galsworthy's short story art
during the past seven years. Its range is very wide, and in these
twenty-three stories, we have the best of the mystical war legends from
"The Grey Angel" to "Cafard," the gentle irony of "The Recruit" and
"Defeat," and the gracious vision of "Spindleberries," "The Nightmare
Child," and "Buttercup-Night." Nowhere in the volume do we find the
slight touch of sentimentality which has marred the strength of Mr.
Galsworthy's later novels, but everywhere very quietly realised pictures
of a golden age which is still possible to his imagination, despite the
harsh conflict with material realities which his art has often
encountered. Perhaps the best story in the present collection is
"Cafard," where Mr. Galsworthy has almost miraculously succeeded in
extracting the last emotional content out of a situation in which a
single false touch of sentiment would have wrecked his story.

#Limbo#, by _Aldous Huxley_ (George H. Doran Company). This collection of
six fantasies in prose and one play has no special principle of unity
except its attempt to apply the art of Laforgue to much less adequate
material. Setting aside "Happy Families" as entirely negligible, and
"Happily Ever After" and "Eupompus Gave Splendour to Art by Numbers" as
qualified successes, the other four stories do achieve more or less what
they set out to do, although Mr. Huxley only achieves a personal
synthesis of style and substance in "The Death of Lully." The other
three stories are full of promise as yet unrealised because of Mr.
Huxley's inability or unwillingness to conceal the technique of his art.

#Deep Waters#, by _W. W. Jacobs_ (Charles Scribner's Sons). Mr. Jacobs'
formula is not yet outworn, but it is becoming perilously uncertain. His
talent has always been a narrow one, but in his early volumes his
realization of character was quite vivid, and his plot technique superb.
At least two of these stories are entirely mechanical, and the majority
do not rise above mediocrity. "Paying Off," "Sam's Ghost," and "Dirty
Work" faintly recall Mr. Jacobs' early manner.

#Lo, and Behold Ye!#, by _Seumas MacManus_ (Frederick A. Stokes Company).
Many of these chimney-corner stories are older than Homer, but Mr.
MacManus has retold them in the language of the roads, and this pageant
of tinkers and kings, fairies and scholars, lords and fishermen march by
to the sound of the pipes and the ribald comments of little boys along
the road. The quality of this volume is as fresh as that of those first
Donegal fairy stories which Mr. McClure discovered twenty-five years
ago. I think that the best of these stories are "The Mad Man, The Dead
Man, and the Devil," "Dark Patrick's Blood-horse," and "Donal
O'Donnell's Standing Army," but this is only a personal selection.

#The Clintons, and Others#, by _Archibald Marshall_ (Dodd, Mead and
Company). I believe that this is Mr. Marshall's first volume of short
stories, and they have a certain interest as a quiet chronicle of an old
social order which has gone never to return. The comparison of Mr.
Marshall's work with that of Anthony Trollope is as inevitable as it is
to the former's disadvantage. This volume shows honest, sincere
craftsmanship, and never rises nor falls below an average level of
mediocrity.

#The Man Who Understood Women#, and #While Paris Laughed#, by _Leonard
Merrick_ (E. P. Dutton and Company). These two volumes of the collected
edition of Mr. Merrick's novels and stories are of somewhat uneven
value. The best of them have a finish which is unsurpassed in its kind
by any of his English contemporaries, but there are many stories in the
first of these two volumes which are somewhat ephemeral. Mr. Locke in
his introduction to "The Man Who Understood Women" rather overstates Mr.
Merrick's case, but at his best these stories form an interesting
English parallel to the work of O. Henry. The second volume suffers the
fate of all sequels in endeavouring to revive after a lapse of years the
pranks and passions of the poet Tricotrin. The first five stories in the
volume, while they do not attain the excellence of "The Tragedy of a
Comic Song," are worthy stories in the same kind. The other seven
stories are frankly mawkish in content, although redeemed by Mr.
Merrick's excellent technique.

#Workhouse Characters#, by _Margaret Wynne Nevinson_ (The Macmillan
Company). This collection of newspaper sketches written during the past
fifteen years have no pretensions to art, and were written with a
frankly propagandist intention. The vividness of their portraiture and
the passion of their challenge to the existing social order warrant
their mention here, and I do not think they will be forgotten readily by
those who read them. This volume has attracted little comment in the
American press, and it would be a pity if it is permitted to go out of
print over here.

#The New Decameron#: Volume the First (Robert M. McBride & Co.). There is
more to be said for the idea which prompted these stories than for the
success with which the idea has been carried out. A group of tourists
seeking adventures on the Continent agree to beguile the tedium of the
journey by telling each other tales. Unfortunately the Nightingale does
not sing on, and the young Englishmen and women who have collaborated in
this volume have gone about their task in a frankly amateurish spirit.
The stories by W. F. Harvey and Sherard Vines attain a measured success,
and some mention may be made of M. Storm-Jameson's story, "Mother-love."
It is to be hoped that in future volumes of the series, the editor will
choose his contributors more carefully, and frankly abandon the
Decameron structure, which has been artificially imposed after the
stories were written.

#Wrack, and Other Stories#, by "_Dermot O'Byrne_" (Dublin: The Talbot
Press, Ltd.), #The Golden Barque, and the Weaver's Grave#, by _Seumas
O'Kelly_ (Dublin: The Talbot Press, Ltd.), and #Eight Short Stories#, by
_Lennox Robinson_ (Dublin: The Talbot Press, Ltd.). As these three
volumes are not published in America, I only mention them here in the
hope that this notice may reach a friendly publisher's eye. Up to a few
years ago poetry and drama were the only two creative forms of the Irish
Literary Revival. This tide has now ebbed, and is succeeded by an
equally significant tide of short story writers. The series of volumes
issued by the Talbot Press, of which those I have just named are the
most noteworthy, should be promptly introduced to the American public,
and I think that I can promise safely that they are the forerunners of a
most promising literature.

#The Old Card#, by _Roland Pertwee_ (Boni and Liveright, Inc.). This
series of twelve short stories depict the life of an English touring
actor with a quiet artistry of humor suggestive of Leonard Merrick's
best work. They are quite frankly studies in sentiment, but they
successfully avoid sentimentality for the most part, and in "Eliphalet
Cardomay" I feel that the author has created a definitely perceived
character.

#Old Junk#, by _H. M. Tomlinson_ (Alfred A. Knopf). It is not my function
here to point out that "Old Junk" is one of the best volumes of essays
published in recent years, but simply to direct attention to the fact
that it includes two short stories, "The Lascar's Walking-Stick" and
"The Extra Hand," which are fine studies in atmospheric values. I think
that the former should find a place in most future anthologies.

#By Violence#, by "_John Trevena_" (The Four Seas Company). Although John
Trevena's novels have found a small public in America, his short stories
are practically unknown. The present volume reprints three of them, of
which "By Violence" is the best. In fact, it is only surpassed by
"Matrimony" in its revelation of poetic grace and gentle vision. If the
feeling is veiled and somewhat aloof from the common ways of men, there
is none the less a fine human sympathy concealed in it. I like to think
that a new reading of earth may be deciphered from this text.

#Port Allington Stories#, by _R. E. Vernède_ (George H. Doran Company).
This volume of stories which is drawn from the late Lieutenant
Vernède's output during the past twelve years reveals a genuine talent
for the felicitous portrayal of social life in an English village, and
suggests that he might have gone rather far in stories of adventure.
"The Maze" is the best story in the volume, and makes it clear that a
brilliant short story writer was lost in France during the war.

#Holy Fire, and Other Stories#, by _Ida A. R. Wylie_ (John Lane Company).
I have called attention to many of these stories in previous years, but
now that they are reprinted as a group I must reaffirm my belief that
few among the younger English short story writers have such a command of
dramatic finality as Miss Wylie. It is true that these stories might
have been told with advantage in a more quiet tone. This would have made
the war stories more memorable, but perhaps the problem which the book
presents for solution is whether or no an instinctive dramatist is using
the wrong literary medium. Certainly in "Melia, No Good" her treatment
would have been less effective in a play than in a short story.


III. #Translations#

#When the King Loses His Head, and Other Stories#, by _Leonid Andreyev._
Translated by _Archibald J. Wolfe_ (International Book Publishing
Company), and #Modern Russian Classics.# Introduction by _Isaac Goldberg_
(The Four Seas Company). In previous years I have called attention to
other selections of Andreyev's stories. The present collection includes
the best from the other volumes, with some new material. "Judas
Iscariot" and "Lazarus" are the best of the prose poems. "Ben-Tobith,"
"The Marseillaise," and "Dies Iræ" are the most memorable of his very
short stories, while the volume also includes "When The King Loses His
Head," and a less-known novelette entitled "Life of Father Vassily." The
volume entitled "Modern Russian Classics" includes five short stories by
Andreyev, Sologub, Artzibashev, Chekhov, and Gorky.

#Prometheus: the Fall of the House of Limón: Sunday Sunlight: Poetic
Novels of Spanish Life#, by _Ramón Pérez de Ayala_, Prose translations by
_Alice P. Hubbard_: Poems done into English by _Grace Hazard Conkling_
(E. P. Dutton & Co.). Señor Pérez de Ayala has achieved in these three
stories what may be quite frankly regarded as a literary form. They do
not conform to a single rule of the short story as we have been taught
to know it. In fact, this is a pioneer book which opens up a new field.
The stories have no plot, no climax, no direct characterization, and at
first sight no plan. Presently it appears that the author's apparent
episodic treatment of his substance has a special unity of its own woven
around the spiritual relations of his heroes. It is hard to judge of an
author's style in translation, but the brilliant coloring of his
pictures is apparent from this English version. The nearest analogue in
English are the fantasies of Norman Douglas, but Pérez de Ayala has a
much more profoundly realized philosophy of life. The poems which serve
as interludes in these stories, curiously enough, add to the unity of
the action.

#The Last Lion, and Other Tales#, by _Vicente Blasco Ibáñez_, with an
Introduction by _Mariano Joaquin Lorente_ (The Four Seas Company). The
present vogue of Señor Blasco Ibáñez is more sentimental than justified,
but in "Luxury" he has written an admirable story, and the other five
stories have a certain distinction of coloring.

#The Bishop, and Other Stories#, and #The Chorus Girl, and Other Stories#,
by _Anton Chekhov_; translated from the Russian by _Constance Garnett_
(The Macmillan Company). I have called attention to previous volumes in
this edition of Chekhov from time to time. These two new additions to
the series carry the English version of the complete tales two-thirds of
the way toward completion. Chekhov is one of the three short story
writers of the world indispensable to every fellow craftsman, and these
nineteen stories are drawn for the most part from the later and more
mature period of his work.

#The Surprises of Life#, by _Georges Clémenceau_; translated by _Grace
Hall_ (Doubleday, Page & Company). Although this volume shows a gift of
crisp narrative and sharply etched portraiture, it is chiefly important
as a revelation of M. Clémenceau's state of mind. Had it been called to
the attention of Mr. Wilson before he went to Paris, the course of
international diplomacy might have been rather different. These
twenty-five stories and sketches one and all reveal a sneering
scepticism about human nature and an utter denial of moral values. From
a technical point of view, "The Adventure of My Curé" is a successful
story.

#Tales of My Native Town#, by _Gabriele D'Annunzio_; translated by _G.
Mantellini_, with an Introduction by _Joseph Hergesheimer_ (Doubleday,
Page & Company). This anthology drawn from various volumes of Signor
D'Annunzio's stories gives the American a fair bird's-eye view of the
various aspects of his work. These twelve portraits by the Turner of
corruption have a severe logic of their own which may pass for being
classical. As diploma pieces they are incomparable, but as renderings of
life they carry no sense of conviction. Mr. Hergesheimer's introduction
is a more or less unsuccessful special plea. While it is perfectly true
that the author has achieved what he set out to do, these stories
already seem old-fashioned, and as years go on will be read, if at all,
for their landscapes only.

#Military Servitude and Grandeur#, by _Alfred de Vigny_; translated by
_Frances Wilson Huard_ (George H. Doran Company). It is curious that
this volume should have waited so long for a translator. Alfred de Vigny
was an early nineteenth century forerunner of Barbusse and Duhamel, and
this record of the Napoleonic wars is curiously analogous to the books
of these later men. I call attention to it here because it includes
"Laurette," which is one of the great French short stories.

#An Honest Thief, and Other Stories#, by _Fyodor Dostoevsky_; translated
from the Russian by _Constance Garnett_ (The Macmillan Company). This is
the eleventh volume in the first collected English edition of
Dostoevsky's works. The great Russian novelist was not a consummate
technician when he wrote short stories, but the massive epic sweep of
his genius clothed the somewhat inorganic substance of his tales with a
reality which is masterly in the title story, in "An Unpleasant
Predicament," and in "Another Man's Wife." The volume includes among
other stories "The Dream of a Ridiculous Man," which, though little
known, is the key to the philosophy of his greater novels.

#Civilization#, 1914-1917, by _Georges Duhamel_; translated by _E. S.
Brooks_ (The Century Co.). This volume shares with Élie Faure's "La
Sainte Face" first place among the volumes of permanent literature
produced in France during the war. With more subtle and restrained
artistry than M. Barbusse, the author has portrayed the simple
chronicles of many of his comrades. He employs only the plainest
notation of speech, with an economy not unlike that of Maupassant, and
the indictment is the more terrible because of this emphasis of
understatement. Before the war, M. Duhamel was known as a competent and
somewhat promising poet and dramatist, and he was one of the few to whom
the war brought an ampler endowment rather than a numbing silence.

#Czecho-Slovak Stories#, translation by _Ŝárka B. Hrbkova_ (Duffield
and Company). I trust that this volume will prove a point of departure
for a series of books each devoted to the work of a separate
Czecho-Slovak master. Certainly the work of Jan Neruda, Svatopluk
Čech, and Caroline SvĚtlá, to name no others, ranks with the best
of the Russian masters, and the reader is compelled to speculate as to
how many more equally fine writers remain unknown to him. For such
stories as these can only come out of a long and conscious tradition of
art, and the greater part of these stories are drawn from volumes
published during the last half century. The volume contains an admirable
historical and critical introduction, and adequate biographies and
bibliographies of the authors included.

#Serenus, and Other Stories of the Past and Present#, by _Jules Lemaître_;
translated by "_Penguin_" (_A. W. Evans_) (London: Selwyn & Blount).
Although this volume has not yet been published in the United States, it
is one of the few memorable short story books of the season, and should
readily find a publisher over here. Anatole France has prophesied that
it will stand out in the history of the thought of the nineteenth
century, just as to-day "Candide" or "Zadig" stands out in that of the
eighteenth. These fourteen stories are selected from about four times
that number, and a complete Lemaître would be as valuable in English as
the new translation of Anatole France. The present version is
faultlessly rendered by an English stylist who has sought to set down
the exact shade of the critic's meaning.

#Tales of Mystery and Horror#, by _Maurice Level_; translated from the
French by _Alys Eyre Macklin_, with an Introduction by _Henry B. Irving_
(Robert M. McBride & Co.). Mr. Irving's introduction rather overstates
M. Level's case. These stories are not literature, but their hard
polished technique is as competent as that of Melville Davisson Post,
and I suppose that these two men have carried Poe's technique as far as
it can be carried with talent. The stories are frankly melodramatic, and
wring the last drop of emotion and sentiment out of each situation
presented. I think the volume will prove valuable to students of short
story construction, and there is no story which does not arrest the
attention of the reader.

#The Story of Gotton Connixloo#, followed by #Forgotten#, by _Camille
Mayran_; translated by _Van Wyck Brooks_ (E.P. Dutton & Company). Mr.
Brooks' translation of these two stories in the tradition of Flaubert
have been a labor of love. They will not attract a large public, but the
art of this Belgian writer is flawless, and worthy of his master. Out of
the simplest material he has extracted an exquisite spiritual essence,
and held it up quietly so as to reflect every aspect of its value. If
the first of these two stories is the most completely rounded from a
technical point of view, I think that the second points the way toward
his future development. He presents his characters more directly, and
achieves his revelation through dialogue rather than personal statement.

#Short Stories from the Spanish#; Englished by _Charles B. McMichael_
(Boni and Liveright, Inc.). The present volume contains seven short
stories by Rubén Dario, Jacinto Octavio Picón, and Leopoldo Alas. They
are wretchedly translated, but even in their present form one can divine
the art of "The Death of the Empress of China" by the Nicaraguan Rubén
Dario, and "After the Battle" by the Spaniard Jacinto Octavio Picón. The
other stories are of unequal value, so far as we can judge from Mr.
McMichael's translation.

#The Fairy Spinning Wheel, and the Tales It Spun#, by _Catulle Mendès_;
translated by _Thomas J. Vivian_ (The Four Seas Company). It was a happy
thought to reprint this translation of M. Mendès' fairy tales which has
been out of print for many years. It is probably the only work of its
once renowned author which survives the passage of time. Here he has
entered the child's mind and deftly presented a series of legends which
suggest more than they state. Their substance is slight enough, but each
has a certain symbolic value, and the poetry of M. Mendès' style has
been successfully transferred to the English version.

#Temptations#, by _David Pinski_; translated by _Isaac Goldberg_
(Brentano's). We have already come to know what a keen analyst America
has in Mr. Pinski from the translations of his plays which have been
published. Here he is much less interested in the surface movement of
plot than in the relentless search for motive. To his Yiddish public he
seems perhaps the best of short story writers who write in his tongue,
and certainly he can hold his own with the best of his contemporaries in
all countries. He has the universal note as few English writers may
claim it, and he stands apart from his creation with absolute
detachment. His work, together with that of Asch, Aleichem, Perez, and
one or two others establishes Yiddish as a great literary tongue. A
further series of these tales are promised if the present volume meets
with the response which it deserves.

#Russian Short Stories#, edited by _Harry C. Schweikert_ (Scott, Foresman
and Company). This is a companion volume to Mr. Schweikert's excellent
collection of French short stories, and ranges over a wide field. From
Pushkin to Kuprin his selection gives a fair view of most of the Russian
masters, and the collection includes a valuable historical and critical
introduction, with biographical notes, and a critical apparatus for the
student of short story technique. It is of special educational
importance as the only volume in the field. In the next edition I
suggest that Sologub should be represented for the sake of completeness.

#Iolanthe's Wedding#, by _Hermann Sudermann_; translated by _Adèle S.
Seltzer_ (Boni and Liveright, Inc.). This collection of four minor works
by Sudermann contains two excellent stories, one of which is full of
folk quality and a kindly irony, and the other more akin to the nervous
art of Arthur Schnitzler. "The Woman Who Was His Friend" and "The
Gooseherd" are less important, but of considerable technical interest.

#Short Stories from the Balkans#; translated by _Edna Worthley Underwood_
(Marshall Jones Company). This volume should be set beside the
collection of "Czecho-Slovak Stories," which I have mentioned on an
earlier page. Here will be found further stories by Jan Neruda and
Svatopluk Čech, together with a remarkable group of stories by
Rumanian, Serbian, Croatian, and Hungarian authors. Neruda emerges as
the greatest artist of them all, and one of the greatest artists in
Europe, but special attention should be called also to the Czech writer
Vrchlický, the Rumanian Caragiale, and the Hungarian Mikszáth. The
translation seems competently done.

#Modern Greek Stories#; translated by _Demetra Vaka_ and _Aristides
Phoutrides_ (Duffield and Company). While this collection reveals no
such undoubted master as Jan Neruda, it is an extremely interesting
introduction to an equally unknown literature. Seven of the nine stories
are of great literary value, and perhaps the best of these is "Sea" by
A. Karkavitsas. Romaic fiction still bears the marks of a young
tradition, and each new writer would seem to be compelled to strike out
more or less completely for himself. Consequently it is necessary to
allow more than usual for technical inadequacy, but the substance of
most of these stories is sufficiently remarkable to justify us in
wishing a further introduction to Romaic literature.


VOLUMES OF SHORT STORIES PUBLISHED IN THE UNITED STATES

OCTOBER, 1919, TO SEPTEMBER, 1920: AN INDEX


#Note.# _An asterisk before a title indicates distinction. This list
includes single short stories, collections of short stories, and a few
continuous narratives based on short stories previously published in
magazines. Volumes announced for publication in the autumn of 1920 are
listed here, though in some cases they had not yet appeared at the time
this book went to press._


I. #American Authors#

#Abdullah, Achmed.# *Wings. McCann.

#Abdullah, Achmed#, _and others._ Ten Foot Chain. Reynolds.

#Ade, George.# Home Made Fables. Doubleday, Page.

#Anderson, Emma Maria Thompson.#  A 'Chu. Review and Herald Pub. Assn.

#Anderson, Robert Gordon.# Seven O'clock Stories. Putnam.

#Barbour, Ralph Henry.# Play That Won. Appleton.

#Benneville, James Seguin De.# Tales of the Tokugawa. Reilly.

#Bishop, William Henry.# Anti-Babel. Neale.

#Boyer, Wilbur S.# Johnnie Kelly. Houghton Mifflin.

#Bridges, Victor.# Cruise of the "Scandal." Putnam.

#Brown, Alice.# *Homespun and Gold. Macmillan.

#Butler, Ellis Parker.# Swatty. Houghton Mifflin.

#Carroll, P. J.# Memory Sketches. School Plays Pub. Co.

#Cather, Willa Sibert.# *Youth and the Bright Medusa. Knopf.

#Chambers, Robert W.# Slayer of Souls. Doran.

#Cohen, Octavus Roy.# Come Seven. Dodd, Mead.

#Comfort, Will Levington#, and #Dost, Zamin Ki.# Son of Power. Doubleday,
Page.

#Connolly, James B.# *Hiker Joy. Scribner.

"#Crabb, Arthur.#" Samuel Lyle, Criminologist. Century Co.

#Cram, Mildred.# Lotus Salad. Dodd, Mead.

#Cutting, Mary Stewart.# Some of Us Are Married. Doubleday, Page.

#Davies, Ellen Chivers.# Ward Tales. Lane.

#Deland, Margaret.# *Small Things. Harper.

#Dickson, Harris.# Old Reliable in Africa. Stokes.

#Dodge, Henry Irving.# Skinner Makes It Fashionable. Harper.

#Dost, Zami Ki.# _See_ Comfort, Will Levington and Dost, Zamin Ki.

#Dwight, H. G.# *Emperor of Elam. Doubleday, Page.

#Edgar, Randolph#, _editor._ *Miller's Holiday: Short Stories from The
Northwestern Miller. Miller Pub. Co.

#Ferber, Edna.# *Half Portions. Doubleday, Page.

#Fillmore, Parker.# *Shoemaker's Apron. Harcourt, Brace and Howe.

#Fitzgerald, Francis Scott Key.# Flappers and Philosophers. Scribner.

#Ford, Sewell.# Meet 'Em with Shorty McCabe. Clode.
  Torchy and Vee. Clode.
  Torchy as a Pa. Clode.

#French, Joseph Lewis#, _editor._ *Best Psychic Stories. Boni and
Liveright.
  *Masterpieces of Mystery. 4 vol. Doubleday, Page.

#Gittins, H. N.# Short and Sweet. Lane.

#Graham, James C.# It Happened at Andover. Houghton Mifflin.

#Hall, Herschel S.# Steel Preferred. Dutton.

#Haslett, Harriet Holmes.# Impulses. Cornhill Co.

#Heydrick,  Benjamin#, _editor._ *Americans  All. Harcourt, Brace, and
Howe.

#Hill, Frederick Trevor.# Tales Out of Court. Stokes.

#Howells, William Dean#, _editor._ *Great Modern American Stories. Boni and
Liveright.

#Hughes, Jennie V.# Chinese Heart-Throbs. Revell.

#Hughes, Rupert.# *Momma, and Other Unimportant People. Harper.

#Huneker, James.# *Bedouins. Scribner.

#Imrie, Walter McLaren.# *Legends. Midland Press.

#Irwin, Wallace.# Suffering Husbands. Doran.

#James, Henry.# *Master Eustace. Seltzer.

#Jessup, Alexander#, _editor._ *Best American Humorous Short Stories. Boni
and Liveright.

#Johnson, Arthur.# *Under the Rose. Harper.

#Kelley, F. C.# City and the World. Extension Press.

#Lamprey, L.# Masters of the Guild. Stokes.

#Leacock, Stephen.# Winsome Winnie. Lane.

#Linderman, Frank Bird.# *On a Passing Frontier. Scribner.

#Linton, C. E.# Earthomotor. Privately Printed.

#McCarter, Margaret Hill.# Paying Mother. Harper.

#Mackay, Helen.# *Chill Hours. Duffield.

#MacManus, Seumas.# *Top o' the Mornin'. Stokes.

#McSpadden, J. Walker#, _editor._ Famous Detective Stories. Crowell.
  Famous Psychic Stories. Crowell.

#Martin, George Madden.# *Children in the Mist. Appleton.

#Means, E. K.# *Further E. K. Means. Putnam.

#Miller, Warren H.# Sea Fighters. Macmillan.

#Montague, Margaret Prescott.# *England to America. Doubleday, Page.
  *Uncle Sam of Freedom Ridge. Doubleday, Page.

#Montgomery, L. M.# Further Chronicles of Avonlea. Page.

#Morgan, Byron.# Roaring Road. Doran.

#O'Brien, Edward J.# Best Short Stories of 1919. Small, Maynard.

#Paine, Ralph D.# Ships Across the Sea. Houghton Mifflin.

#Perry, Lawrence.# For the Game's Sake. Scribner.

#Pitman, Norman Hinsdale.# Chinese Wonder Book. Dutton.

#Poe, Edgar Allan.# *Gold-bug. Four Seas.

#Post, Melville Davisson.# *Sleuth of St. James's Square. Appleton.

#Rhodes, Harrison.# *High Life. McBride.

#Rice, Alice Hegan#, and #Rice, Cale Young.# Turn About Tales. Century Co.

#Richards, Clarice E.# Tenderfoot Bride. Revell.

#Richmond, Grace S.# Bells of St. John's. Doubleday, Page.

#Rinehart, Mary Roberts.# Affinities. Doran.

#Robbins, Tod.# *Silent, White, and Beautiful. Boni and Liveright.

#Robinson, William Henry.# Witchery of Rita. Berryhill Co.

#Sedgwick, Anne Douglas.# *Christmas Roses. Houghton Mifflin.

#Smith, Gordon Arthur.# *Pagan. Scribner.

#Society of Arts and Sciences.# *O. Henry Memorial Prize Stories, 1919.
Doubleday, Page.

#Spofford, Harriet Prescott.# *Elder's People. Houghton Mifflin.

#Train, Arthur.# Tutt and Mr. Tutt. Scribner.

#Vorse, Mary Heaton.# *Ninth Man. Harper.

#Whalen, Louise Margaret.# Father Ladden, Curate. Magnificat Pub. Co.

#White, Stewart Edward.# Killer. Doubleday, Page.

#Widdemer, Margaret.# Boardwalk. Harcourt, Brace, and Howe.

#Wiggin, Kate Douglas.# *Homespun Tales. Houghton Mifflin.

#Wiley, Hugh.# Wildcat. Doran.

#Yezierska, Anzia.# *Hungry Hearts. Houghton Mifflin.


II. #English and Irish Authors#

#Baxter, Arthur Beverley.# Blower of Bubbles. Appleton.

#Beerbohm, Max.# *Seven Men. Knopf.

#Cannan, Gilbert.# *Windmills. Huebsch.

"#Dehan, Richard.#" (#Clotilde Graves#). Eve of Pascua. Doran.

#Dell, Ethel May.# Tidal Wave. Putnam.

#Dunsany, Lord.# *Tales of Three Hemispheres. Luce.

#Easton, Dorothy.# *Golden Bird. Knopf.

#Evans, Caradoc.# *My Neighbors. Harcourt, Brace, & Howe.

#Galsworthy, John.# *Tatterdemalion. Scribner.

#Graves, Clotilde.# _See_ "Dehan, Richard."

#Grogan, Gerald.# William Pollok. Lane.

#Hardy, Thomas.# *Two Wessex Tales. Four Seas.

#Hichens, Robert.# Snake-bite. Doran.

#Hutten, Baroness Von.# _See_ Von Hutten, Baroness.

#Huxley, Aldous.# *Limbo. Doran.

#James, Montague Rhodes.# *Thin Ghost. Longmans.

#Jeffery, Jeffery E.# Side Issues. Seltzer.

#Kipling, Rudyard.# *Man Who Would Be King. Four Seas.

#Lipscomb, W. P.# Staff Tales. Dutton.

#New Decameron: Second Day.# McBride.

#O'Kelly, Seumas.# *Golden Barque, and the Weaves's Grave. Putnam.

"#Ross, Martin.#" _See_ "Somerville, E. Œ.," and "Ross, Martin."

#Sabatini, Rafael.# Historical Nights' Entertainment, Second Series.
Lippincott.

"#Somerville, E. Œ.#," _and_ "#Ross, Martin#," Stray-Aways. Longmans,
Green.

"#Trevena, John.#" *By Violence. Four Seas.

#Vernède, R. E.# Port Allington Stories. Doran.

#Von Hutten, Baroness.# Helping Hersey. Doran.

#Wylie, Ida Alena Ross.# *Holy Fire. Lane.


III. #Translations#

"#Aleichem, Shalom.#" _(Yiddish.)_ *Jewish Children. Knopf.

#Andreiev, Leonid.# _(Russian.)_ *When the King Loses His Head.
International Bk. Pub.

#Andreiev, Leonid#, _and others._ (_Russian._) *Modern Russian Classics.
Four Seas.

#Annunzio, Gabriele D'.# _(Italian.)_ *Tales of My Native Town.
Doubleday, Page.

#Blasco Ibáñez, Vicente.# _(Spanish.)_ *Last Lion. Four Seas.

#Brown, Demetra Vaka#, and #Phoutrides, Aristides#, _trs._ (_Modern
Greek._) *Modern Greek Stories. Duffield.

#Chekhov, Anton.# _(Russian.)_ *Chorus Girl. Macmillan.

#Clémenceau, Georges.# _(French.)_ *Surprises of Life. Doubleday, Page.

#Coster, Charles de.# _(French.)_ *Flemish Legends. Stokes.

#Dostoevsky, Fedor Mikhailovich.# _(Russian.)_ *Honest Thief. Macmillan.

#Friedlander, Gerald#, _ed. and tr._ (_Hebrew._) Jewish Fairy Tales and
Stories. Dutton.

#Hrbkova, Sarka B.#, _editor._ (_Czecho-Slovak._) *Czecho-Slovak Stories.
Dutton.

#Jacobsen, Jens Peter.# _(Danish.)_ *Mogens. Brown.

#Level, Maurice.# _(French.)_ *Tales of Mystery and Horror. McBride.

#McMichael, Charles B.#, _translator._ (_Spanish._) *Short Stories from
the Spanish. Boni & Liveright.

#Maupassant, Guy de.# _(French.)_ *Mademoiselle Fifi. Four Seas.

#Mayran, Camille.# _(French.)_ *Story of Gotton Connixloo. Dutton.

#Pérez de Ayala, Ramón.# _(Spanish.)_ *Prometheus. Dutton.

#Ragozin, Z. A.#, _editor._ (_Russian._) *Little Russian Masterpieces.
4 vol. Putnam.


VOLUMES OF SHORT STORIES PUBLISHED IN ENGLAND AND IRELAND ONLY


I. #English and Irish#

#Andrew, Emily.# Happiness in the Valley. Charles Joscelyn.

#Barr, Robert.# Helping Hand. Mills and Boon.
  Tales of Two Continents. Mills and Boon.

#Beerbohm, Max.# *And Even Now. Heinemann.

#Calthrop, Dion Clayton.# *Bit at a Time. Mills and Boon.

#Cole, Sophie.# Variety Entertainment. Mills and Boon.

#Conyers, Dorothea.# Irish Stew. Skeffington.

#Cross, Victoria.# Daughters of Heaven. Laurie.

#Drury, W. P.# All the King's Men. Chapman and Hall.

#Evans, C. S.# Nash and Some Others. Heinemann.

#Everard, Mrs. H. D.# Death Mask. Philip Allan.

#Forster, E. M.# *Story of the Siren. Hogarth Press.

#Frampton, Mary.# Forty Years On. Arrowsmith.

#Garvice, Charles.# Girl at the "Bacca" Shop. Skeffington.

#Gaunt, Mary.# Surrender, Laurie.

#Gibbon, Perceval.# *Those Who Smiled. Cassell.

#Green, Peter.# Our Kid. Arnold.

#Grimshaw, Beatrice.# Coral Palace. Mills and Boon.

#Harvey, William Fryer.# Misadventures of Athelstan Digby.
Swarthmore Press.

#Howard, F. Moreton.# Happy Rascals. Methuen.

#Key, Uel.# Broken Fang. Hodder and Stoughton.

#Knowlson, T. Sharper.# Man Who Would Not Grow Old. Laurie.

#Leo, T. O. D. C.# Two Feasts of St. Agnes. Morland.

#Le Queux, William.# Mysteries of a Great City. Hodder and Stoughton.

#McGuffin, William.# Australian Tales of the Border. Lothian Book Pub. Co.

#Mansfield, Katherine.# *Je Ne Parle Pas Français. Heron Press.
  *Prelude. Hogarth Press.

#Mayne, Ethel Colburn.# *Blindman. Chapman and Hall.

#Mordaunt, Elinor.# *Old Wine in New Bottles. Hutchinson.

#Muir, Ward.# Adventures in Marriage. Simpkin, Marshall.

#Newham, C. E.# Gippo. W. P. Spalding.

#Newman, F. J.# Romance and Law in the Divorce Court. Melrose.

#O'Kelly, Seumas.# *Leprechaun of Killmeen. Martin Lester.

#Palmer, Arnold.# *My Profitable Friends. Selwyn and Blount.

#Paterson, A. B.# Three Elephant Power. Australian Book Co.

#Riley, W.# Yorkshire Suburb. Jenkins.

#Robins, Elizabeth.# Mills of the Gods. Butterworth.

#Robinson, Lennox.# *Eight Short Stories. Talbot Press.

"#Sea-Pup.#" Musings of a Martian. Heath Cranton.

#Shorter, Dora Sigerson.# *Dull Day in London. Nash.

#Smith, Logan Pearsall.# *Stories from the Old Testament.
Hogarth Press.

#Stein, Gertrude.# *Three Lives. Lane.

#Stock, Ralph.# Beach Combings. Pearson.

#Taylor, Joshua.# Lure of the Links. Heath Cranton.

#Warrener, Marcus and Violet.# House of Transformations.
Epworth Press.

#Wicksteed, Hilda.# Titch. Swarthmore Press.

#Wilderhope, John.# Arch Fear. Murray and Evenden.

#Wildridge, Oswald.# *Clipper Folk. Blackwood.

#Woolf, Virginia.# *Mark on the Wall. Hogarth Press.


II. #Translations#

#Chekhov, Anton.# _(Russian.)_ *My Life. Daniel.

#Kuprin, Alexander.# _(Russian.)_ *Sasha. Paul.

#Lemaître, Jules.# _(French.)_ *Serenus. Selwyn and Blount.


VOLUMES OF SHORT STORIES PUBLISHED IN FRANCE


#Ageorges, Joseph.# Contes sereins. Figuière.

#Arcos, René.# *Bien commun. Le Sablier.

#Boylesve, René.# *Nymphes dansant avec des satyres. Calmann-Lévy.

"#Farrĕre, Claude.#" Dernière déesse. Flammarion.

#Geffroy, Gustave.# Nouveaux contes du pays d'Quest. Crès.

#Géniaux, Charles.# Mes voisins de campagne. Flammarion.

#Ginisty, Paul.# *Terreur. Société anonyme d'édition.

#Herold, A. Ferdinand.# *Guirlande d'Aphrodite. Edition d'Art.

#Hesse, Raymond.# Bouzigny! Payot.

#Hirsch, Charles-Henry.# Craquement. Flammarion.

Lautrec, Gabriel de. Histoires de Tom Joé. Edition française
illustrée.

#Le Glay, Maurice.# Récits marocains. Berger-Levrault.

#Machard, Alfred.# *Cent Gosses. Flammarion.
  *Syndicat des fessés. Ferenczi.

#Marie, Jacques.# Sous l'armure. Jouve.

#Mille, Pierre.# *Nuit d'amour sur la montagne. Flammarion.
  *Trois femmes. Calmann-Lévy.

#Pillon, Marcel.# Contes à ma cousine. Figuière.

#Pottecher, Maurice.# Joyeux Contes de la Cicogne d'Alsace.
Ollendorff.

"#Rachilde.#" *Découverte de l'Amérique. Kundig.

#Régnier, Henri de.# *Histories incertaines. Mercure de France.

#Rhaïs, Elissa.# *Café chantant. Plon.

#Rochefoucauld, Gabriel de la.# *Mari Calomnié. Plon-Nourrit.

#Russo, Luigi Libero.# Contes à la cigogne. 2e série. Messein.

#Sarcey, Yvonne.# Pour vivre heureux.

#Sutton, Maurice.# Contes retrouvés. Edit. Formosa. Bruxelles.

#Tisserand, Ernest.# Contes de la popote. Crès.

#Villiers de l'Isle-Adam.# *Nouveaux Contes Cruels. Crès.


ARTICLES ON THE SHORT STORY

OCTOBER, 1919, TO SEPTEMBER, 1920


_The following abbreviations are used in this index_:--

_Ath._                             Athenæum
_B. E. T._                         Boston Evening Transcript
_Book (London)_                    Bookman (London)
_Book (N. Y.)_                     Bookman (New York)
_Cath. W._                         Catholic World
_Chap._                            Monthly Chapbook
_Cont. R._                         Contemporary Review
_Edin. R._                         Edinburgh Review
_Eng. R._                          English Review
_Fortn. R._                        Fortnightly Review
_Harp. M._                         Harper's Magazine
_L. H. J._                         Ladies' Home Journal
_Lib._                             Liberator
_Liv. Age._                        Living Age
_Lit. R._                          Little Review
_L. Merc._                         London Mercury
_M. de F._                         Mercure de France
_Mir._                             Reedy's Mirror
_Mun._                             Munsey's Magazine
_Nat. (London)_                    Nation (London)
_N. Rep._                          New Republic
_New S._                           New Statesman
_19th Cent._                       Nineteenth Century and After
_N. R. F._                         Nouvelle Revue Française
_Peop._                            People's Favorite Magazine
_Quart. R._                        Quarterly Review
_R. de D. M._                      Revue des Deux Mondes
_Sat. R._                          Saturday Review
_Strat. J._                        Stratford Journal
_Times Lit. Suppl._                Times Literary Supplement
_Touch._                           Touchstone (London)
_Yale R._                          Yale Review


Abdullah, Achmed.
  By Rebecca West. New S. May 8. (15:137.)

"Aleichem, Shalom."
  Anonymous. New S. Mar. 13. (14:682.)

#Alexander, Grace.#
  Thomas Hardy. N. Rep. Aug. 18. (23:335.)

#Alvord, James Church.#
  Typical American Short Story. Yale R. Apr. (9:650.)

American Short Story.
  By James Church Alvord. Yale R. Apr. (9:650.)

Andreyev, Leonid.
  By Eugene M. Kayden. Dial. Nov. 15, '19. (67:425.)
  By Moissaye J. Olgin. N. Rep. Dec. 24, '19. (21:123.)
  By A. Sokoloff. New S. Nov. 15, '19. (14:190.)

Annunzio, Gabriele d'.
  By Joseph Collins. Scr. Sept. (68:304.)
  By Rebecca West. New S. June 5, (15:253.)
                   N. Rep. June 30. (23:155.)

Anonymous.
  Buying $2,000,000 Worth of Fiction. Peop. Oct., '19. (12.)

Apuleius.
  By Lord Ernle. Quart. R. Jul. (234:41.)

Arcos, René.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jan. 22. (19:48.)


#Bailey, John.#
  Henry James. London Observer. Apr. 25.

Balkan Short Stories.
  By Kate Buss. B. E. T. Oct. 18, '19. (pt. 3, p. 9.)

Balzac, Honoré de.
  By Princess Catherine Radziwill. Book. (N. Y.) Aug. (51:639.)
  By Sir Frederick Wedmore. 19th Cent. Mar. (87:484.)
  By M. P. Willcocks. Nation. (London.) Mar. 20. (26:864) and Mar. 27.

Barnes, J. S.
  Contemporary Italian Short Stories. New Europe. Nov. 27, '19. (13:214.)

Beaubourg, Maurice.
  By Legrand-Chabrier. M. de F. 15 août. (142:5.)

#Beaunier, André.#
  Pierre Mille. R. de D. M. 1 juillet. (6 sér. 58:191.)

Beerbohm, Max.
  Anonymous. Nation. (London.)  Nov. 22, '19. (26:272.)
    By Bohun Lynch. L. Merc. June. (2:168.)
    By S. W. Ath. Nov. 14, '19. (1186.)

#Bent, Silas.#
  Henry James. Mir. June 3. (29:448.) June 24. (29:510.)

Beyle, Henri. _See_ "Stendhal."

Blackwood, Algernon.
  By Henriette Reeves. Touch. May. (7:147.)

#Bourget, Paul.#
  Prosper Mérimée. R. de D. M. 15 Sept. (59:257.)

Bourget, Paul.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Sept. 30. (19:634.)
  By R. Le Clerc Phillips. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:448.)

#Braithwaite, William Stanley.#
  American Short Story. B. E. T. Mar. 27. (pt. 3. p. 10.)

#Brooks, Van Wyck.#
  Mark Twain. Dial. Mar. Nat. Apr. (68:275, 424.)

#Buss, Kate.#
  Balkan Short Stories. B. E. T. Oct. 18, '19. (pt. 3. p. 9.)


#Cabell, James Branch.#
  Joseph Hergesheimer. Book. (N. Y.) Nov.-Dec., '19. (50:267.)

#Calthrop, Dion Clayton.#
  O. Henry. London Observer. May 2.

#Chekhov, Anton.#
  Diary. Ath. Apr. 2. (460.)
  Letters. XII. Ath. Oct. 24, '19. (1078.)
          XIII. Ath. Oct. 31, '19. (1135.)

Chekhov, Anton.
  Anonymous. Ath. Jan. 23, Feb. 6. ('20:1:124, 191.)
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Feb. 12, Jul. 15. (19:103, 455.)
  By Edmund Gosse. London Sunday Times. Mar. 14.
  By Robert Morss Lovett. Dial. May. (68:626.)
  By Robert Lynd. London Daily News. Feb. 11.
  By Robert Lynd. Nation (London.) Feb. 28. (26:742.)
  By J. Middleton Murry. Ath. Mar. 5. ('20:1:299.)
  By Robert Nichols. London Observer. Mar. 7.
  By Charles K. Trueblood. Dial. Feb. (68:253.)

#Chew, Samuel C.#
  Thomas Hardy. N. Rep. June 2. (23:22.)

#Child, Harold.#
  Thomas Hardy. Book. (London.) June. (58:101.)

Clemens, Samuel L. _See_ "Twain, Mark."

#Collins, Joseph.#
  Alfredo Panzini and Luigi Pirandello. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:410.)
  Giovanni Papini. Book. (N. Y.)  (51:160.)
  Gabriele D'Annunzio. Scr. Sept. (68:304.)

#Colvin, Sir Sidney.#
  Robert Louis Stevenson. Scr. Mar. (67:338.)

#Conrad, Joseph.#
  Stephen Crane. Book.  (N. Y.)  Feb.  (50:528.)  L. Merc. Dec., '19.
 (1:192.)

Conrad, Joseph.
  By Stephen Gwynn. Edin. R. Apr. (231:318.)
  By Ford Madox Hueffer. Eng. R. Jul.-Aug. (31:5, 107.)
    Dial. Jul.-Aug. (69:52, 132.)
  By R. Ellis Roberts. Book. (London.) Aug. (58:160.)
  By Gilbert Seldes. Dial. Aug. (69:191.)

Coppée, François.
  By Joseph J. Reilly. Cath. W. (111:614.)

#Cor, Raphael.#
  Charles Dickens. M. de F. 1 juillet. (141:82.)

Corthis, André.
  Anonymous. Rev. de D. M. 15 juin. (6 sér. 57:816.)

#Coulon, Marcel.#
  Rachilde. M. de F. 15 sept. (142:545.)

Couperus, Louis.
  By J. L. Walch. Ath. Oct. 31, '19. (1133.)

Crane, Stephen.
  By Joseph Conrad. Book. (N. Y.) Feb. (50:529.) L. Merc. Dec., '19.
 (1:192.)

Cunninghame Grahame, R. B. _See_ Grahame, R. B. Cunninghame.


D'Annunzio, Gabriele. _See_ Annunzio, Gabriele d'.

#Deffoux, Léon#, _and_ #Zavie, Émile.#
  Editions Kistemaekers et le "Naturalisme." M. de F. 16 oct., '19.
 (135:639.)
  Émile Zola. M. de F. 15 fév. (138:68.)

#Dell, Floyd.#
  Mark Twain. Lib. Aug. (26.)

#Dewey, John.#
  Americanism and Localism. Dial. June. (68:684.)

Dickens, Charles.
  By Raphael Cor. M. de F. 1 juillet. (141:82.)

Dobie, Charles Caldwell.
  By Joe Whitnah. San Francisco Bulletin. Jan. 3.

Dostoevsky, Fyodor.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Sept. 23. (19:612.)
  By E. M. Forster. London Daily News. Nov. 11, '19.
  By Charles K. Trueblood. Dial. June. (68:774.)

Doyle, A. Conan.
  By Beverly Stark. Book. (N. Y.) Jul. (51:579.)

Duhamel, Georges.
  By Henry J. Smith. Chicago Daily News. Dec. 3, '19.

Dunsany, Lord.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 11, '19. (18:737.) July 8. (19:437.)
  By Clayton Hamilton. Book. (N. Y.) Feb. (50:537.)
  By Norreys Jephson O'Conor. B. E. T. Oct. 22, '19. (pt. 3. p. 2.)
  By Gilbert Seldes. B. E. T. Oct. 15, '19. (pt. 2. p. 4.)
  By F. W. Stokoe. Ath. Aug. 13. ('20:2:202.)
  By Marguerite Wilkinson. Touch. Dec., '19. (6:111.)

#Dyer, Walter A.#
  Short Story Orgy. Book. (N. Y.) Apr. (51:217.)


#Edgett, Edwin F.#
  O. Henry. B. E. T. Oct. 15, '19. (pt. 3. p. 4.)
  W. W. Jacobs. B. E. T. Oct. 18, '19. (pt. 3. p. 10.)
  Henry James. B. E. T. Apr. 10.
  W.B. Maxwell. B. E. T. Nov. 22, '19. (pt. 3. p. 8.)

#Egan, Maurice Francis.#
  Henry James. Cath. W. June. (111:289.)

"Eliot, George."
  By H. C. Minchin. Fortn. R. Dec., '19. (112:896.)
  By Edward A. Parry. Fortn. R. Dec., '19. (112:883.)
  By Thomas Seccombe. Cont. R. Dec., '19. (116:660.)

#Enoch, Helen.#
  W. J. Locke. Cont. R. June. (117:855.)

#Ernle, Lord.#
  Apuleius. Quart. R. Jul. (234:41.)

#Erskine, John.#
  William Dean Howells. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:385.)

#Evans, C.S.#
  W. H. Hudson. Book. (N. Y.) Sept. (52:18.)


#Ferber, Edna.#
  By Rebecca West. New S. Apr. 3. (14:771.)

#Finger, Charles J.#
  Hudson and Grahame. Mir. Nov. 27, '19. (28:836.)

Flaubert, Gustave.
  By Marcel Proust. N. R. F. Jan. (14:72.)
  By George Saintsbury. Ath. Oct. 3, '19. (983.)
  By Albert Thibaudet. N. R. F. Nov., 19. (13:942.)

#Forster, E. M.#
  Fyodor Dostoevsky. London Daily News. Nov. 11, '19.

Forster, E. M.
  By Katherine Mansfield. Ath. Aug. 13. ('20:2:209.)
  By Rebecca West. New S. Aug. 28. (15:576.)

Fox, John.
  By Thomas Nelson Page. Scr. Dec., '19. (66:674.)


Gale, Zona.
  By Constance Mayfield Rourke. N. Rep. Aug. 11. (23:315.)

#George, W. L.#
  Joseph Hergesheimer. Book. (London.) Sept. (58:193.)

Giraudoux, Jean.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jul. 22. (19:470.)
  By Albert Thibaudet. N. R. F. Dec., '19. (13:1064.)

#Goldberg, Isaac.#
  Hungarian Short Stories. B. E. T. Oct. 8, '19. (pt.3. p.4.)
  Ercole Luigi Morselli. Book. (N. Y.) Jul. (51:557.)
  Amado Nervo. Strat. J. Jan.-Mar. (6:3.)
  Spanish-American Short Stories. Book.  (N. Y.)  Feb. (50:565.)

#Gorky, Maxim.#
  Reminiscences of Tolstoi. L. Merc. Jul. (2:304.)

Gorky, Maxim.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jul. 15. (19:453.)
  By S. Koteliansky. Ath. Apr. 30. ('20:1:587.)
  By J. W. N. S. Ath. Jul. 16. ('20:2:77.)

#Gosse, Edmund.#
  Anton Chekhov. London Sunday Times. Mar. 14.
  Henry James. L. Merc. Apr.-May. (1:673, 2:29.)
    Scr. Apr.-May. (67:422, 548.)

Gozzano, Guido.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jul. 15. (19:450.)

Grahame, R. B. Cunninghame.
  By Charles J. Finger. Mir. Nov. 27, '19. (28:836.)

#Gwynn, Stephen.#
  Joseph Conrad. Edin. R. Apr. (231:318.)


#Hamilton, Clayton.#
  Lord Dunsany. Book. (N. Y.) Feb. (50:537.)

Hardy, Thomas.
  By Grace Alexander. N. Rep. Aug. 18. (23:335.)
  By Samuel C. Chew. N. Rep. June 2. (23:22.)
  By Harold Child. Book. (London.) June. (58:101)
  By W. M. Parker, 19th Cent. Jul. (88: 63.)
  By Arthur Symons. Dial. Jan. (68:66.)

Harte, Bret.
  By Agnes Day Robinson. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:445.)

#Hawthorne, Nathaniel.#
  By Mary G. Tuttiett. 19th Cent. Jan. (87:118.)

Henriet, Maurice.
  Jules Lemaître. M. De F. 1 juin. (140:289.)

"Henry, O."
  By Dion Clayton Calthrop. London Observer. May 2.
  By Edwin F. Edgett. B. E. T. Oct. 15, '19. (pt. 3. p. 4.)
  By Edward Francis Mohler. Cath. W. Sept. (111:756.)
  By Raoul Narsy. Liv. Age. Oct. 11, '19. (303:86.)
  By John Seymour Wood. Book. (N. Y.) Jan. (50:474.)

Hergesheimer, Joseph.
  By James Branch Cabell. Book. (N. Y.) Nov.-Dec., '19. (50:267.)
  By W. L. George. Book. (London.) Sept. (58:193.)

Holz, Arno.
  Anonymous. Ath. Apr. 9. ('20:1:490.)

Hook, Theodore.
  Anonymous. Sat. R. Sept. 25. (130:254.)

#Hopkins, Gerard.#
  Short Story. Chap. Feb. (25.)

Howells, William Dean.
  Anonymous. N. Rep. May 26. (22:393.)
  By John Erskine. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:385.)
  By Henry A. Lappin. Cath. W. Jul. (111:445.)
  By Edward S. Martin. Harp. M. Jul. (141:265.)
  By Arthur Hobson Quinn. Cen. Sept. (100:674.)
  By Henry Rood. L. H. J. Sept. (42.)
  By Booth Tarkington. Harp. M. Aug. (141: 346.)

Hudson, W. H.
  By C. S. Evans. Book. (N. Y.) Sept. (52:18.)
  By Charles J. Finger. Mir. Nov. 27, '19. (28:836.)
  By Ford Madox Hueffer. Lit. R. May-June. (5.)
  By Ezra Pound. Lit. R. May-June. (13.)
  By Ernest Rhys. 19th Cent. Jul. (88:72.)
  By John Rodker. Lit. R. May-June. (18.)

#Hueffer, Ford Madox.#
  W. H. Hudson. Lit. R. May-June. (5.)
  Thus to Revisit. Eng. R. Jul.-Aug. (31:5, 107.)
    Dial. Jul.-Aug. (69:52, 132.)

#Huneker, James Gibbons.#
  Henry James. Book. (N. Y.) May. (51:364.)

Huneker, James Gibbons.
  Anon. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 12. (19:515.)

Hungarian Short Stories.
  By Isaac Goldberg. B. E. T. Oct. 8, '19. (pt. 3. p. 4.)

Huxley, Aldous.
  By Michael Sadleir. Voices. June. (3:235.)


Italian Short Stories.
  By J. S. Barnes. New Europe. Nov. 27, '19. (13:214.)


Jacobs, W. W.
  By E. F. Edgett. B. E. T. Oct. 18, '19. (pt. 3. p. 10.)

James, Henry.
  Anonymous. Nation. (London.) May 8. (27:178.)
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Apr. 8. (19:217.)
  Anonymous. Sat. R. June 12. (129:537.)
  Anonymous. Cont. R. Jul. (118:142.)
  By John Bailey. London Observer. Apr. 25.
  By Silas Bent. Mir. June 3. (29: 448.) June 24. (29:510.)
  By Edwin F. Edgett. B. E. T. Apr. 10.
  By Maurice Francis Egan. Cath. W. June. (111:289.)
  By Edmund Gosse. L. Merc. Apr.-May.  (1:673:2:29.)
    Scr. Apr.-May. (67:422, 548.)
  By Ford Madox Hueffer. Eng. R. Jul.-Aug. (31:5, 107.)
    Dial. Jul.-Aug. (69:52, 132.)
  By James G. Huneker. Book. (N. Y.) May. (51:364.)
  By Philip Littell. N. Rep. June 9. (23:63.)
  By Desmond MacCarthy. New S. May 15. (15:162.)
  By Brander Matthews. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:389.)
  By Thomas Moult. Eng. R. Aug. (31:183.)
  By E. S. Nadal. Scr. Jul. (68:89.)
  By Forrest Reid. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 12. (19:520.)
  By Gilbert Seldes. Dial. Jul. (69:83.)
  By J. C. Squire. London Sunday Times. Apr. 18.
  By Louise R. Sykes. Book. (N. Y.) Apr. (51:240.)
  By Allan Wade. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 19. (19:537.)
  By A. B. Walkley. Fortn. R. June. (n. s. 107:864.) London Times.
    June 16, Sept. 15.
  By Sidney Waterlow. Ath. Apr. 23. ('20:1:537.)
  By Edith Wharton. Quart. R. Jul. (234:188.)

#Johnson, Alvin.#
  Mark Twain. N. Rep. Jul. 14. (23:201.)


#Kayden, Eugene M.#
  Leonid Andreyev. Dial. Nov. 15, '19. (67:425.)

Keller, Gottfried.
  By Alec W. G. Randall. Cont. R. Nov., '19. (116:532.)

Kipling, Rudyard.
  Anonymous. Sat. R. Aug. 7. (130:113.)
  By Richard Le Gallienne. Mun. Nov., '19. (68:238.)
  By Desmond MacCarthy. New S. June 5. (15:249.)
  By Virginia Woolf. Ath. Jul. 16. ('20:2:75.)

#Koteliansky, S.#
  Tolstoy and Gorky. Ath. Apr. 30. ('20:1:582.)

Kuprin, Alexander.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Nov. 27, '19. (18:691)
  By Katherine Mansfield. Ath. Dec. 26, '19. (1399.)


#Lappin, Henry A.#
  William Dean Howells. Cath. W. Jul. (111:445.)

Lawrence, D. H.
  By Louis Untermeyer. N. Rep. Aug. 11. (23:314.)

#Le Gallienne, Richard.#
  Rudyard Kipling. Mun. Nov., '19. (68:238.)

#Legrand-Chabrier.#
  Maurice Beaubourg. M. de F. 15 août. (142:5.)

Lemaître, Jules.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Sept. 2. (19:562.)
  By Maurice Henriet. M. de F. 1 juin. (140:289.)

#Littell, Philip.#
  Henry James. N. Rep. June 9. (23:63.)

Locke, W. J.
  By Helen Enoch. Cont. R. June. (117:855.)

London, Jack.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 12. (19:519.)
  By Katherine Mansfield. Ath. Aug. 27. ('20:2:272.)

#Lovett, Robert Morss.#
  Anton Chekhov. Dial. May. (68:626.)
  Mark Twain. Dial. Sept. (69:293.)

#Lynch, Bohun.#
  Max Beerbohm. L. Merc. June. (2:168.)

#Lynd, Robert.#
  Anton Chekhov. London Daily News. Feb. 11.
  Anton Chekhov. Nation. (London.) Feb. 28. (26:742.)
  George Meredith. London Daily News. Jan. 30.

#Lysaght, S. R.#
  Robert Louis Stevenson. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 4, '19. (18:713.)


#MacCarthy, Desmond.#
  Henry James. New S. May 15. (15:162.)
  Rudyard Kipling. New S. June 5. (15:249.)

"Macleod, Fiona." (William Sharp.)
  By Ethel Rolt-Wheeler. Fortn. R. Nov., '19. (112:780.)

#Mansfield, Katharine.#
  E. M. Forster. Ath. Aug. 13. ('20:2:209.)
  Alexander Kuprin. Ath. Dec. 26, '19. (1399.)
  Jack London. Ath. Aug. 27. ('20:2:272.)

#Martin, Edward S.#
  William Dean Howells. Harp. M. Jul. (141:265.)

Masefield, John.
  By Edward Shanks. L. Merc. Sept. (2:578.)

Maseras, Alfons.
  By Camille Pitollet. M. de F. 15 août. (142:230.)

#Matthews, Brander.#
  Henry James. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:389).
  Mark Twain. S. E. P. Mar. 6. (14.)

Maxwell, W. B.
  By E. F. Edgett, B. E. T. Nov. 22, '19. (pt. 3. p. 8.)

Meredith, George.
  By Robert Lynd. London Daily News. Jan. 30.

Mérimée, Prosper.
  By Paul Bourget R. de D. M. 15 sept. (59:257.)

Mille, Pierre.
  By André Beaunier. R. de D. M. 1 juillet. (6 sér. 58:191.)

#Minchin, H. C.#
  George Eliot. Fortn. R. Dec. '19. (112:896.)

Mirbeau, Octave.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 12. (19:518.)

#Mohler, Edward Francis.#
  "O. Henry." Cath. W. Sept. (111:756.)

Morrow, W. C.
  By Vincent Starrett. Mir. Oct. 30, '19. (28:751.)

Morselli, Ercole Luigi.
  By Isaac Goldberg. Book. (N. Y.) Jul. (51:557.)

#Moult, Thomas.#
  Henry James. Eng. R. Aug. (31:183.)

#Murry, J. Middleton.#
  Anton Chekhov. Ath. Mar. 5. ('20:1:299.)
  Stendhal. Ath. Sept. 17. ('20:2:388.)
  Oscar Wilde. Ath. Sept. 24. ('20:2:401.)


#Nadal, E. S.#
  Henry James. Scr. Jul. (68:89.)

#Narsy, Raoul.#
  O. Henry. Liv. Age. Oct. 11, '19. (303:86.)

Naturalism. _See_ #Deffoux, Léon#, _and_ #Zavie, Émile.#

Nervo, Amado.
  By Isaac Goldberg. Strat. J. Jan.-Mar. (6:3.)

"New Decameron."
  Anonymous. Sat. R. Aug. 7. (130:113.)
  By F. W. Stokoe. Ath. Aug. 6. ('20:2:172.)

#Nichols, Robert.#
  Anton Chekhov. London Observer. Mar. 7.

Nodier, Charles.
  By George Saintsbury. Ath. Jan. 16. ('20:1:91.)


#O'Brien, Edward J.#
  Best Short Stories of 1919. B. E. T. Nov. 28, '19. (14.)

O'Brien, Fitzjames.
  By Joseph J. Reilly. Cath. W. Mar. (110:751.)

#O'Conor, Norreys Jephson.#
  Lord Dunsany. B. E. T. Oct. 22, '19. (pt. 3. p. 2.)

#Olgin, Moissaye J.#
  Leonid Andreyev. N. Rep. Dec. 24, '19. (21:123.)


#Page, Thomas Nelson.#
  John Fox. Scr. Dec., '19. (66:674.)

Panzini, Alfredo.
  By Joseph Collins. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:410.)
  By Guido de Ruggiero. Ath. Feb. 13. ('20:1:222.)

Papini, Giovanni.
  By Joseph Collins. Book. (N. Y.) Apr. (51:160.)

#Parker, W. M.#
  Thomas Hardy, 19th Cent. Jul. (88:63.)

#Parry, Edward A.#
  George Eliot. Fortn. R. Dec., '19. (112:883.)

#Phillips, R. Le Clerc.#
  Paul Bourget. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:448.)

Pirandello, Luigi.
  By Joseph Collins. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:410.)

#Pitollet, Camille.#
  Alfons Maseras. M. de F. 15 août. (142:230.)

Pontoppidan, Henrik.
  By J. G. Robertson. Cont. R. Mar. (117:374.)

#Pound, Ezra.#
  W. H. Hudson. Lit. R. May-June. (13.)

#Proust, Marcel.#
  Gustave Flaubert. N. R. F. Jan. (14:72.)

#Purcell, Gertrude M.#
  Ellis Parker Butler. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:473.)


#Quinn, Arthur Hobson.#
  William Dean Howells. Cen. Sept. (100:674.)


"Rachilde." (Mme. Alfred Vallette.)
  By Marcel Coulon. M. de F. 15 sept. (142:545.)

#Radziwill, Princess Catherine.#
  Honoré de Balzac. Book. (N. Y.) Aug. (51:639.)

#Randall, Alec W. G.#
  Gottfried Keller. Cont. R. Nov., '19. (116:532.)

#Raynaud, Ernest.#
  Oscar Wilde. La Minerve Française. 15 août.

Read, Opie.
  By Vincent Starrett. Mir. Nov. 6, '19. (28:769.)

#Reeves, Henriette.#
  Algernon Blackwood. Touch. May. (7:147.)

Régnier, Henri de.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Feb. 19. (19:118.)

#Reid, Forrest.#
  Henry James. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 12. (19:520.)

#Reilly, Joseph J.#
  François Coppée. Cath. W. Aug. (111:614.)
  Fitzjames O'Brien. Cath. W. Mar. (110:751.)

#Rhys, Ernest.#
  W. H. Hudson, 19th Cent. Jul. (88:72.)

#Roberts, R. Ellis.#
  Joseph Conrad. Book. (London.) Aug. (58:160.)

#Robertson, J. G.#
  Henrik Pontoppidan. Cont. R. Mar. (117:374.)

#Robinson, Agnes Day.#
  Bret Harte. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:445.)

#Rodker, John.#
  W. H. Hudson, Lit. R. May-June. (18.)

#Rolt-Wheeler, Ethel.#
  "Fiona Macleod." Fortn. R. Nov., '19. (112:780.).

#Rood, Henry.#
  William Dean Howells. L. H. J. Sept. (42.)

#Rourke, Constance Mayfield.#
  Zona Gale. N. Rep. Aug. 11. (23:315.)

#Ruggiero, Guido de.#
  Alfred Panzini. Ath. Feb. 13. ('20:1:222.)


S., J. W. N.
  Tolstoy and Gorky. Ath. Jul. 16. ('20:2:77.)

#Sadleir, Michael.#
  Aldous Huxley. Voices. June. (3:235.)

#Saintsbury, George.#
  Gustave Flaubert. Ath. Oct. 3, '19. (983.)
  Charles Nodier. Ath. Jan. 16. ('20:1:91.)

#Seccombe, Thomas.#
  George Eliot. Cont. R. Dec., '19. (116:660.)

#Seldes, Gilbert.#
  Joseph Conrad. Dial. Aug. (69:191.)
  Lord Dunsany. B. E. T. Oct. 15, '19. (pt. 2. p. 4.)
  Henry James. Dial. Jul. (69:83.)

#Shanks, Edward.#
  John Masefield. L. Merc. Sept. (2:578.)
  Sharp, William. _See_ "Fiona Macleod."

Singh, Kate Prosunno.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Sept. 2. (19:562.)

#Smith, Henry J.#
  Georges Duhamel. Chicago Daily News. Dec. 3, '19.

#Sokoloff, A.#
  Leonid Andreyev. New S. Nov. 15, '19. (14:190.)

Spanish-American Short Story. See #Goldberg, Isaac.#

#Squire, J. C.#
  Henry James. London Sunday Times. Apr. 18.

#Stark, Beverly.#
  A. Conan Doyle. Book. (N. Y.) Jul. (51:579.)

#Starrett, Vincent.#
  W. C. Morrow. Mir. Oct. 30, '19. (28:751.)
  Opie Read. Mir. Nov. 6, '19. (28:769.)

"Stendhal," (Henri Beyle.)
  By John Middleton Murry. Ath. Sept. 17. ('20:2:388.)

Stevenson, Robert Louis.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 4, '19. (18:701.)
  By Sir Sidney Colvin. Scr. Mar. (67:338.)
  By S. R. Lysaght. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 4, '19. (18:713.)

#Stokoe, F. W.#
  Lord Dunsany. Ath. Aug. 13. ('20:2:202.)
  "New Decameron." Ath. Aug. 6. ('20:2:172.)

#Sykes, Louise R.#
  Henry James. Book. (N. Y.) Apr. (51:240.)

#Symons, Arthur.#
  Thomas Hardy. Dial. Jan. (68:66.)
  Oscar Wilde. Book. (N. Y.) Apr. (51:129.)


#Tarkington, Booth.#
  William Dean Howells. Harp. M. Aug. (141:346.)

#Tchekhov, Anton.# _See_ Chekhov, Anton.

#Thibaudet, Albert.#
  Gustave Flaubert. N. R. F. Nov., '19. (13:942.)
  Jean Giraudoux. N. R. F. Dec., '19. (13:1064.)

Tolstoy, Count Lyof.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Jul. 15. (19:453.)
  Anonymous. New S. Aug. 7. (15:505.)
  By Maxim Gorky. L. Merc. Jul. (2:304.)
  By S. Koteliansky. Ath. Apr. 30. ('20:1:587.)
  By J. W. N. S. Ath. Jul. 16. ('20:2:77.)

#Trueblood, Charles K.#
  Anton Chekhov. Dial. Jan. (68:80.)
  Fyodor Dostoevsky. Dial. June. (68:774.)
  Edith Wharton. Dial. Jan. (68:80.)

#Tuttiett, Mary G.#
  Nathaniel Hawthorne, 19th Cent. Jan. (87:118.)

"Twain, Mark."
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Sept. 23. (19:615.)
  By Van Wyck Brooks. Dial. Mar. (68:275), and Apr. (68:424.)
  By Floyd Dell. Lib. Aug. (26.)
  By Alvin Johnson. N. Rep. Jul. 14. (23:201.)
  By Robert Morss Lovett. Dial. Sept. (69:293.)
  By Brander Matthews. S. E. P. Mar. 6. (14.)


#Untermeyer, Louis.#
  D. H. Lawrence. N. Rep. Aug. 11. (23:314.)


Vallette, Mme. Alfred. _See_ "Rachilde."

Villiers de l'Isle-Adam.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Dec. 4, '19. (18:711.)


#Wade, Allan.#
  Henry James. Times Lit. Suppl. Aug. 19. (19:537.)

#Walch, J. L.#
  Louis Couperus. Ath. Oct. 31, '19. (1133.)

#Waldo, Harold.#
  Old Wests for New. Book. (N. Y.) June. (51:396.)

#Walkley, A. B.#
  Henry James. Fortn. R. June. (n. s. 107:864.)
  Henry James. London Times. June 16 and Sept. 15.

#Waterlow, Sydney.#
  Henry James. Ath. Apr. 23. ('20:1:537.)

#Wedmore, Sir Frederick.#
  Honoré de Balzac, 19th Cent. Mar. (87:484.)

Wells, H. G.
  By Ford Madox Hueffer. Eng. R. Jul.-Aug. (31:5, 107.)
    Dial. Jul.-Aug. (69:52, 132.) Reply by H. G. Wells.
    Eng. R. Aug. (31:178.)

#West, Rebecca.#
  Achmed Abdullah. New S. May 8. (15:137.)
  Gabriele D'Annunzio. New S. June 5. (15:253.) N. Rep. June 30. (23:155.)
  Edna Ferber. New S. Apr. 3. (14:771.)
  E. M. Forster. New S. Aug. 28. (15:576.)

#Wharton, Edith.#
  Henry James. Quart. R. Jul. (234:188.)

#Wharton, Edith.#
  By Charles K. Trueblood. Dial. Jan. (68:80.)

#Whitnah, Joe.#
  Charles Caldwell Dobie. San Francisco Bulletin. Jan. 3.

Wilde, Oscar.
  Anonymous. Times Lit. Suppl. Oct. 30, '19. (18:605.)
  By J. Middleton Murry. Ath. Sept. 24. ('20:2:401.)
  By Ernest Raynaud. La Minerve Française. 15 août.
  By Arthur Symons. Book. (N. Y.) Apr. (51:129.)

#Wilkinson, Marguerite.#
  Lord Dunsany. Touch. Dec., '19. (6:111.)

#Willcocks, M. P.#
  Honoré de Balzac. Nation. (London.) Mar. 20. (26:864.) and Mar. 27.

#Williams, Orlo.#
  "Yellow Book." L. Merc. Sept. (2:567.)

#Wilson, Arthur.#
  "New Decameron." Dial. Nov. 1, '19. (67:372.)

#Wood, John Seymour.#
  O. Henry. Book. (N. Y.) Jan. (50:474.)

#Woolf, Virginia.#
  Rudyard Kipling. Ath. Jul. 16. ('20:2:75.)


"Yellow Book."
  By Orlo Williams. L. Merc. Sept. (2:567.)


Zola, Émile.
  By Léon Deffoux and Émile Zavie. M. de F. 15 fév. (138:68.)


INDEX OF SHORT STORIES IN BOOKS


I. #American Authors#

NOVEMBER, 1918, TO SEPTEMBER, 1920


ABBREVIATIONS

_Abdullah A._               Abdullah. Honorable Gentleman.
_Abdullah B._               Abdullah. Wings.
_Andrews B._                Andrews. Joy in the Morning.
_Andreyev C._               Andreyev. When the King Loses His Head.
_Ayala_                     Ayala. Prometheus.
_Cannan_                    Cannan. Windmills.
_Cather_                    Cather. Youth and the Bright Medusa.
_Chekhov D._                Chekhov. Bishop.
_Chekhov E._                Chekhov. Chorus Girl.
_Clémenceau_                Clémenceau. Surprises of Life.
_Cobb B._                   Cobb. Life of the Party.
_Cobb C._                   Cobb. From Place to Place.
_Connolly A._               Connolly. Hiker Joy.
_D'Annunzio_                D'Annunzio. Tales of My Native Town.
_Dostoevsky B._             Dostoevsky. Honest Thief.
_Dowson_                    Dowson. Poems and Prose.
_Dreiser B._                Dreiser. Twelve Men.
_Dwight A._                 Dwight. Emperor of Elam.
_Easton_                    Easton. Golden Bird.
_Edgar_                     Edgar. Miller's Holiday.
_Evans A._                  Evans. My Neighbors.
_Ferber B._                 Ferber. Half Portions.
_French B._                 French. Best Psychic Stories.
_Galsworthy B._             Galsworthy. Tatterdemalion.
_Hearn_                     Hearn. Fantastics.
_Henry B._                  Henry. Waifs and Strays.
_Hergesheimer B._           Hergesheimer. Happy End.
_Holmes_                    Holmes and Starbuck. War Stories.
_Howells_                   Howells. Great Modern American Stories.
_Hrbkova_                   Hrbkova. Czecho-Slovak Stories.
_Huneker_                   Huneker. Bedouins.
_Hurst B._                  Hurst. Humoresque.
_Huxley_                    Huxley. Limbo.
_Ibáñez_                    Blasco Ibáñez. Last Lion.
_Imrie_                     Imrie. Legends.
_Jacobs A._                 Jacobs. Deep Waters.
_James A._                  James. Travelling Companions.
_Jessup A._                  Jessup. Best American Humorous Stories.
_Johnson_                   Johnson. Under the Rose.
_La Motte_                  La Motte. Civilization.
_Laselle_                   Laselle. Short Stories of the New America.
_Lemaître_                  Lemaître. Serenus.
_Level_                     Level. Tales of Mystery and Horror.
_Mackay_                    Mackay. Chill Hours.
_MacManus A._               MacManus. Lo, and Behold Ye!
_Marshall_                  Marshall. Clintons.
_Martin_                    Martin. Children in the Mist.
_Mayran_                    Mayran. Story of Gotton Connixloo.
_McMichael_                 McMichael. Short Stories from the Spanish.
_Merrick A._                Merrick. Man Who Understood Women.
_Merrick B._                Merrick. While Paris Laughed.
_Montague A._               Montague. Gift.
_Montague B._               Montague. England to America.
_Montague C._               Montague. Uncle Sam of Freedom Ridge.
_Nevinson_                  Nevinson. Workhouse Characters.
_New Dec. A._               New Decameron. Prologue and First Day.
_O'Brien A._                O'Brien. Best Short Stories of 1918.
_O'Brien B._                O'Brien. Best Short Stories of 1919.
_O'Brien C._                O'Brien. Great Modern English Stories.
_O'Byrne A._                O'Byrne. Wrack.
_O'Higgins A._              O'Higgins. From the Life.
_O'Kelly B._                O'Kelly. Golden Barque.
_Pertwee_                   Pertwee. Old Card.
_Pinski A._                 Pinski. Temptations.
_Post B._                   Post. Mystery of the Blue Villa.
_Prize A._                  O. Henry Memorial Prize Stories. 1919.
_Reeve_                     Reeve and French. Best Ghost Stories.
_Rhodes_                    Rhodes. High Life.
_Robbins_                   Robbins. Silent, White and Beautiful.
_Robinson_                  Robinson. Eight Short Stories.
_Russell_                   Russell. Red Mark.
_Russian A._                Modern Russian Classics. (Four Seas Co.)
_Schweikert B._             Schweikert. Russian Short Stories.
_Smith_                     Smith. Pagan.
_Spofford A._               Spofford. Elder's People.
_Sudermann_                 Sudermann. Iolanthe's Wedding.
_Tomlinson_                 Tomlinson. Old Junk.
_Trevena_                   Trevena. By Violence.
_Underwood A._              Underwood. Short Stories from the Balkans.
_Vernède_                   Vernède. Port Allington Stories.
_Vaka_                      Vaka and Phoutrides. Modern Greek Stories.
_Van Dyke A._               Van Dyke. Valley of Vision.
_Vigny_                     Vigny. Military Servitude and Grandeur.
_Vorse_                     Vorse. Ninth Man.
_Welles_                    Welles. Anchors Aweigh.
_Wilson A._                 Wilson. Ma Pettengill.
_Wylie_                     Wylie. Holy Fire.
_Yezierska_                 Yezierska. Hungry Hearts.

#Abdullah, Achmed. (Achmed Abdullah Nadir Khan El-Durani El-Idrissyeh.#)
  (1881- .)
  **After His Kind. Abdullah A. 144.
  ***Cobbler's Wax. Abdullah A. 112.
  *Disappointment.  Abdullah B. 43.
  *Fear. Abdullah B. 211.
  ***Hatchetman. Abdullah A. 41.
  *Himself,  to  Himself  Alone. Abdullah A. 241.
  ***Honourable Gentleman. Abdullah A. 1.
  **Khizr. Abdullah B. 183.
  Krishnavana,  Destroyer  of Souls. Abdullah B. 115.
  ***Light. Abdullah B. 231.
  *Man Who Lost Caste. Abdullah B. 153.
  *Pell Street Spring Song. Abdullah A. 73.
  Renunciation. Abdullah B. 103.
  **Silence. Abdullah B. 163.
  ***Simple Act of Piety. Abdullah A. 196. O'Brien A. 3.
  Tartar. Abdullah B. 77.
  That Haunting Thing. Abdullah B. 135.
  ***To be Accounted for. Abdullah B. 63.
  ***Wings. Abdullah B. 1.

#Ade, George.# (1866- .)
  ***Effie Whittlesy. Howells. 288.

#Aldrich, Thomas Bailey.# (1836-1907.)
  ***Mlle. Olympe Zabriski. Howells, 110.

#Allen, James Lane.# (1849- .)
   Old Mill on the Elkhorn. Edgar. 133.

#Alsop, Gulielma Fell.#
   ***Kitchen Gods. O'Brien B. 3. Prize A. 253.

#Ames, Jr., Fisher.#
   *Sergt. Warren Comes Back from France. Laselle 171.

#Anderson, Sherwood# (1876- .)
   ***Awakening. O'Brien B. 24.

#Andrews, Mary Raymond Shipman.# (_See 1918._)
  ***Ditch. Andrews B. 1.
  ***Dundonald's  Destroyer. Andrews B. 299.
  *He That Loseth His Life Shall Find It, Andrews B. 193.
  **Her Country Too. Andrews B. 37.
  Only One of Them. Andrews B. 137.
  Robina's Doll. Andrews B. 283.
  *Russian. Andrews B. 263.
  **Silver  Stirrup. Andrews B. 241.
  **Swallow. Andrews B. 85.
  *V. C. Andrews B. 163.


#Babcock, Edwina Stanton.#
  ***Cruelties. O'Brien A. 24
  ***Willum's Vanilla. O'Brien B, 34.

#Barnes, Djuna.# (1892- .)
  ***Night  Among  the  Horses. O'Brien B. 65.

#Bartlett, Frederic Orin.#  (1876- .)
   Château-Thierry. Laselle. 199.
   ***Long, Long Ago. O'Brien B. 74.

#Beer, Thomas.# (1889- .)
  *Absent Without Leave. Holmes. 1.

#Bierce, Ambrose.# (1842-1914.) (_See 1918._)
  ***Damned Thing. Reeve. 160.
  ***Eyes of the Panther. French B. 95.
  ***Occurrence at  Owl Creek Bridge. Howells. 237.

#Brooks, Alden.#
  **Out of the Sky. Holmes. 17.

#Brown, Alice.# (1857- .) _(See 1918.)_
  ***Told in the Poorhouse. Howells. 225.

#Brown, Katharine Holland.#
  ***Buster. O'Brien A. 43.

#Brownell, Agnes Mary.#
  ***Dishes. O'Brien B. 82.

#Bunner, Henry Cuyler.# (1855-1896.)
  **Nice People. Jessup A. 141.

#Burnet, Dana.# (1888- .)
  *Christmas Fight of X 157. Holmes. 39.
   *"Red,  White,  and  Blue." Holmes. 49.

#Burt, Maxwell Struthers.# (1882- .)  (_See 1918._)
   ***Blood-Red One. O'Brien B. 96.

#Butler, Ellis Parker.# (1869- .)
   ***Dey Ain't No Ghosts. Reeve. 177.

"#Byrne, Donn.#" (#Bryan Oswald Donn-Byrne.#) (1888- .)
  **Underseaboat  F-33. Holmes. 61.


#Cabell, James Branch.# (1879- .)
  **Porcelain Cups. Prize A. 210.
  ***Wedding-Jest. O'Brien B. 108.

#Cable, George Washington.# (1844- .)
  ***Jean-Ah Poquelin. Howells. 390.

#Canfield, Dorothy.# (#Dorothy Canfield Fisher.#) (1879- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Little Kansas Leaven. Laselle 1.

#Cather, Willa Sibert.# (1875- .)
  ***Coming, Aphrodite! Cather. 11.
  ***"Death in the Desert." Cather. 273.
  ***Diamond Mine. Cather. 79.
  **Gold Slipper. Cather. 140.
  ***Paul's Case. Cather. 199.
  **Scandal. Cather. 169.
  ***Sculptor's Funeral. Cather. 248.
  ***Wagner Matinée. Cather. 235.

#Chester, George Randolph.# (1869- .)
  Bargain Day at Tutt House. Jessup A. 213.

#Clemens, Samuel Langhorne.# _See_ "#Twain, Mark.#"

#Cobb, Irvin Shrewsbury.# (1876- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Boys Will Be Boys. Cobb C. 96.
  *Bull Called Emily. Cobb C. 382.
  ***Gallowsmith. Cobb C. 11.
  Hoodwinked. Cobb C. 332.
  John J. Coincidence. Cobb C. 259.
  **Life of the Party. Cobb B. 11.
  **Luck Piece. Cobb C. 156.
  ***Quality Folks. Cobb C. 206.
  *Thunders of Silence. Cobb C. 55.
  *When August the Second Was April the First. Cobb C. 302.

#Connolly, James Brendan.# (1868- .)
  *Aboard the Horse-Boat. Connolly A. 53.
  *Flying Sailor. Connolly A. 132.
  *Good-bye the Horse-Boat. Connolly A. 105.
  *Jack o' Lanterns. Connolly A. 6.
  *London Lights. Connolly A. 214.
  *Lumber Schooner. Connolly A. 27.
  *North Sea Men. Connolly A. 187.
  *Undersea Men. Connolly A. 79.
  *Wimmin 'n' Girls. Connolly A. 159.

#Cook, Mrs. George Cram.# _See_ #Glaspell, Susan.#

#Cooke, Grace MacGowan.# (1863- .)
  *Call. Jessup A. 237.

#Coolidge, Grace.#
  **Indian of the Reservation. Laselle. 109.

#Curtis, George William.# (1824-1892.)
  **Titbottom's Spectacles. Jessup A. 52.


#Dashiell, Landon R.#
  ***Aunt Sanna Terry. Howells. 352.

#Derieux, Samuel Arthur.#  (1881- .)
  *Trial in Tom Belcher's Store. Prize A. 192.

#Dobie, Charles Caldwell.# (1881- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Open Window. O'Brien A. 61.

#Dreiser, Theodore.# (1871- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Country Doctor. Dreiser B. 110.
  ***Culhane, the Solid Man. Dreiser B. 134.
  ***De Maupassant, Jr. Dreiser B. 206.
  ***Doer of the Word. Dreiser B. 53.
  ***Lost Phoebe. Howells. 295.
  ***Mayor and His People. Dreiser B. 320.
  ***Mighty Rourke. Dreiser  B. 287.
  ***My Brother Paul. Dreiser B. 76.
  ***Peter. Dreiser B. 18.
  ***True Patriarch. Dreiser B. 187.
  ***Vanity, Vanity. Dreiser B. 263.
  ***Village Feudists. Dreiser B. 239.
  ***W. L. S. Dreiser B. 344.

#Dwight, Harry Griswold.# (1875- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Bald Spot. Dwight A. 290.
  **Bathers. Dwight A. 151.
  ***Behind the Door. Dwight A. 266.
  ***Emperor of Elam. Dwight A. 306.
  ***Henrietta Stackpole _Radiviva._ Dwight A. 32.
  ***Like Michael. Dwight A. 3.
  **Mrs. Derwall and the Higher Life. Dwight A. 131.
  ***Pagan. Dwight A. 52.
  **Retarded Bombs. Dwight A. 172.
  ***Studio Smoke. Dwight A. 252.
  ***Susannah and the Elder. Dwight A. 191.
  ***Unto the Day. Dwight A. 108.
  ***White Bombazine. Dwight A. 82.

#Dwight, Harry Griswold.# (1875- .) (_See 1918_) _and_ #Taylor, John R. M.#
  ***Emerald of Tamerlane. Dwight A. 221.

#Dwyer, James Francis.# (1874- .)
  ***Citizen. Laselle. 85.
  *Little Man in the Smoker. Holmes. 79.

#Dyke, Henry Van.# _See_ #Van Dyke, Henry.#


#Edwards, George Wharton.# (1859- .)
  **Clavecin-Bruges. French B. 54.

#Edwards, Harry Stillwell.# (1855- .)
  **Elder Brown's Backslide. Jessup A. 109.

#Emery, Gilbert.#
  "Squads Right." Holmes. 86.

#Empey, Arthur Guy.# (1883- .)
  *Coward. Laselle. 181.


#Ferber, Edna.# (1887- .)
  April 25th, As Usual. Ferber B. 36. Price A. 274.
  *Dancing Girls. Ferber B. 280.
  *Farmer in the Dell. Ferber B. 239.
  *Long Distance. Ferber B. 148.
  ***Maternal Feminine. Ferber B. 3.
  **Old Lady Mandle. Ferber B. 76.
  One Hundred Per Cent. Ferber B. 201. Holmes. 95.
  *Un Morso Doo Pang. Ferber B. 157.
  ***You've Got To Be Selfish. Ferber B. 113.

#Fish, Horace.# (1885- .)
  ***Wrists on the Door. O'Brien B. 123.

#Fisher, Dorothy Canfield.# _See_ #Canfield, Dorothy.#

#Freedley, Mary Mitchell.# (1894- .)
  ***Blind Vision. Holmes. 119. O'Brien A. 85.

#Freeman, Mary E. Wilkins.# (1862- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Revolt of Mother. Howells. 207.

#French, Alice.# _See_ "#Thanet, Octave.#"

#Fuller, Henry Blake.# (1857- .)
  ***Striking an Average. Howells. 267.


#Garland, Hamlin.# (1860- .) (_See 1918._)
  *Graceless Husband. Edgar. 142.
  ***Return of a Private. Howells. 248.

#Gerould, Gordon Hall.# (1877- .)
  ***Imagination. O'Brien A. 92.

#Gerry, Margarita Spalding.# (1870- .)
  *Flag Factory. Holmes. 126.

#Gilbert, George.# (1874- .)
  ***In Maulmain Fever-Ward. O'Brien A. 109.

#Gilman, Charlotte Perkins Stetson.# (1860- .)
  ***Yellow Wall Paper. Howells. 320.

#Glaspell, Susan (Keating). (Mrs. George Cram Cook.)# (1882- .)
  ***"Government Goat." O'Brien B. 147.

#Goodman, Henry.# (1893- .)
  ***Stone. O'Brien B. 167.


#Haines, Donal Hamilton.# (1886- .)
  *Bill. Holmes. 136.

#Hale, Edward Everett.# (1822-1909.)
  *First Grain Market. Edgar. 181.
  ***My Double; and How He Undid Me. Howells. 3. Jessup A. 75.

#Hallet, Richard Matthews.# (1887- .)
  ***To the Bitter End. O'Brien B. 178.

#Harris, Joel Chandler.# (1848-1908.) (_See 1918._)
  ***Brer Rabbit, Brer Fox, and the Tar Baby. Howells. 413.

#Harte, Francis Bret.# (1839-1902.) (_See 1918._)
  ***Colonel Starbottle for the Plaintiff. Jessup A. 170.
  ***Outcasts of Poker Flat. Howells. 143.

#Hastings, Wells.# (1878- .)
  *Gideon. Jessup A. 260.

#Hearn, Lafcadio.# (1850-1904.)
  ***All in White. Hearn. 29.
  ***Aphrodite and the King's Prisoner. Hearn. 102.
  ***Bird and the Girl. Hearn. 150.
  ***Black Cupid. Hearn. 71.
  ***Devil's Carbuncle. Hearn. 40.
  ***El Vomito. Hearn. 136.
  ***Fountain of Gold. Hearn. 110.
  ***Ghostly Kiss. Hearn. 66.
  ***Gipsy's Story. Hearn. 174.
  ***Hiouen-thsang. Hearn. 211.
  ***Idyl of a French Snuff-Box. Hearn. 143.
  ***Kiss Fantastical. Hearn. 152.
  ***Little Red Kitten. Hearn. 33.
  ***Name on the Stone. Hearn. 98.
  ***One Pill-Box. Hearn. 183.
  ***Post-Office. Hearn. 227.
  ***Vision of the Dead Creole. Hearn. 92.

"#Henry, O.#" (#William Sydney Porter.#) (1867-1910.) (_See 1918._)
  ***Cactus. Henry B. 76.
  *Church with an Overshot Wheel. Edgar. 1.
  Confessions of a Humourist. Henry B. 52.
  Detective Detector. Henry B. 82.
  *Dog and the Playlet. Henry B. 90.
  ***Duplicity of Hargraves. Jessup A. 199.
  Hearts and Hands. Henry B. 72.
  Little Talk About Mobs. Henry B. 97.
  *Out of Nazareth. Henry B. 32.
  ***Red Roses of Tonia. Henry B. 3.
  **Round the Circle. Henry B. 17.
  *Rubber Plant's Story. Henry B. 25.
  *Sparrows in Madison Square. Henry B. 66.

"#Henry, O.#" (#William Sydney Porter#) (1867-1910), _and_ #Lyon,
Harris Merton.# (1881-1916.)
  *Snow Man. Henry B. 102.

#Hergesheimer, Joseph.# (1880- .) (_See 1918._)
  *Bread. Hergesheimer B. 193.
  *Egyptian Chariot. Hergesheimer B. 55.
  Flower of Spain. Hergesheimer B. 93.
  **Lonely Valleys. Hergesheimer B. 11.
  ***Meeker Ritual. O'Brien B. 200.
  *Rosemary Roselle. Hergesheimer B. 231.
  **Thrush in the Hedge. Hergesheimer B. 283.
  **Tol'able David. Hergesheimer B. 155.

#Holmes, Oliver Wendell.# (1809-1894.)
  *Visit to the Asylum for Aged and Decayed Punsters. Jessup A. 94.

#Humphrey, George.# (1889- .)
  ***Father's Hand. O'Brien A. 125.

#Huneker, James Gibbons.# (1860- .)
  **Brothers-in-Law. Huneker. 201.
  **Cardinal's Fiddle. Huneker. 247.
  **Grindstones. Huneker. 216.
  Renunciation. Huneker. 256.
  *Supreme Sin. Huneker. 177.
  _Venus or Valkyr?_ Huneker. 225.
  *Vision Malefic. Huneker. 261.

#Hurst, Fannie.# (1889- .) (_See 1918._)
  **Boob Spelled Backward. Hurst B. 220.
  **Even as You and I. Hurst B. 262.
  *"Heads." Hurst B. 170.
  ***Humoresque. Hurst  B. 1. Prize A. 148.
  **Oats for the Woman. Hurst B. 45.
  **Petal on the Current. Hurst B. 85.
  **White Goods. Hurst B. 126.
  *Wrong Pew. Hurst B. 300.


#Imrie, Walter McLaren.#
 ***Daybreak. Imrie. 7.
 **Dead Men's Teeth. Imrie. 29.
 ***Remembrance. Imrie. 41.
 **Storm. Imrie. 15.

#Ingersoll, Will E.#
  ***Centenarian. O'Brien B. 225.


#James, Henry.# (1843-1916.)
  ***Adina. James A. 223.
  ***At Isella. James A. 125.
  ***De Grey: a Romance. James A. 269.
  ***Guest's Confession. James A. 157.
  *** Passionate Pilgrim. Howells. 43.
  ***Professor Fargo. James A. 87.
  ***Sweetheart of M. Briseux. James A. 53.
  ***Travelling Companions. James A. 1.

#Jewett, Sarah Orne.# (1849-1909.)
  ***Courting of Sister Wisby. Howells. 190.

#Johnson, Arthur.# (1881- .)
  ***His New Mortal Coil. Johnson 270.
  How the Ship Came In. Johnson. 303.
  ***Little Family. Johnson. 237.
  ***Mr. Eberdeen's House. Johnson. 138.
  **One Hundred Eightieth Meridian. Johnson. 115.
  ***Princess of Tork. Johnson. 1.
  ***Riders in the Dark. Johnson. 54.
  *Two Lovers. Johnson. 183.
  ***Visit of the Master. Johnson. 203. O'Brien A. 131.

#Johnston, Calvin.#
  ***Messengers. O'Brien B. 237.

#Johnston, Richard Malcolm.# (1822-1898.)
  *Hotel Experience of Mr. Pink Fluker. Jessup A. 128.

#Jones, Howard Mumford.#
  ***Mrs. Drainger's Veil. O'Brien B. 269.


#Kirkland, Caroline Matilda Stansbury.#  (1801-1864.) Schoolmaster's
Progress. Jessup A. 18.

#Kline, Burton.# (1877- .)
  ***In the Open Code. O'Brien A. 149.

#Kompert, Leopold.#
  ***Silent Woman. Reeve. 60.


#La Motte, Ellen Newbold.# (1873- .)
  **Canterbury Chimes. La Motte. 177.
  *Civilization. La Motte. 93.
  ***Cosmic Justice. La Motte. 247.
  *Homesick. La Motte. 65.
  **Misunderstanding. La Motte 121.
  ***On the Heights. La Motte. 33
  ***Prisoners. La Motte. 141.
  ***Under a Wineglass. O'Brien B. 297. La Motte. 217.
  **Yellow Streak. La Motte. 11.

#Lampton, William James.# ( -1917.)
  **How the Widow Won the Deacon. Jessup A. 252.

#Leslie, Eliza.# (1787-1858.)
  Watkinson Evening. Jessup A. 34.

#Lewars, Elsie Singmaster.# _See_ #Singmaster, Elsie.#

#Lewis, Sinclair.# (1885- .)
  ***Willow Walk. O'Brien A. 154.

#Lieberman, Elias.# (1883- .)
  ***Thing of Beauty. O'Brien B. 305.

#London, Jack.# (1876-1916.) (_See 1918._)
  *When the World Was Young. French B. 1.

#Lummis, Charles Fletcher.# (1859- .)
  *Blue-Corn Witch. Edgar. 120.
  *Swearing Enchiladas. Edgar. 156.

#Lyon, Harris Merton.# _See_ "Henry, O.", _and_ #Lyon, Harris Merton.#


#Mackay, Helen.# (1876- .)
  **At the End. Mackay. 3.
  **Cauldron. Mackay. 95.
  **Footsteps. Mackay. 178.
  ***"He Cost Us So Much." Mackay. 154.
  **"Here Are the Shadows!" Mackay. 160.
  **"I Take Pen in Hand." Mackay. 172.
  **Little Cousins of No. 12. Mackay. 148.
  **Madame Anna. Mackay. 143.
  *Moment. Mackay. 188.
  **9 and the 10. Mackay. 184.
  **Odette in Pink Taffeta. Mackay. 20.
  ***One or Another. Mackay. 72.
  ***Second Hay. Mackay. 49.
  *She Who Would Not Eat Soup. Mackay. 164.
  *Their Places. Mackay. 35.
  **Vow. Mackay. 168.

#MacManus, Seumas.# (1870- .)
  ***Bodach and the Boy. MacManus A. 51.
  ***Dark  Patrick's Blood-horse. MacManus A. 32.
  ***Day of the Scholars. MacManus A. 117.
  ***Donal O'Donnell's Standing Army. MacManus A. 131.
  ***Far Adventures of Billy Burns. MacManus A. 71.
  ***Jack and the Lord High Mayor. MacManus A. 215.
  **King's Curing. MacManus A. 163.
  ***Long Cromachy of the Crows. MacManus A. 196.
  **Lord Thorny's Eldest Son. MacManus A. 180.
  ***Mad Man, the Dead Man, and the Devil. MacManus A. 1.
  *Man Who Would Dream. MacManus A. 99.
  **Parvarted Bachelor. MacManus A. 150.
  ***Quare  Birds. MacManus  A. 240.
  ***Queen's Conquest. MacManus A. 16.
  ***Resurrection of Dinny Muldoon. MacManus A. 263.
  ***Son of Strength. MacManus A. 248.
  **Tinker of Tamlacht. MacManus A. 84.

#Marshall, Edison.# (1894- .)
  **Elephant Remembers. Prize A. 78.

#Martin, George Madden.# (1866- .)
  *Blue Handkerchief. Martin. 71.
  *Fire from  Heaven. Martin. 223.
  *Flight. Martin. 1.
  *Inskip Niggah. Martin. 120.
  *Malviney. Martin. 252.
  *Pom. Martin. 160.
  *Sixty Years  After. Martin. 276.
  *Sleeping Sickness. Martin. 200.

#Matthews, James Brander.# (1852- .)
  **Rival Ghosts. Reeve. 141.

#Montague, Margaret Prescott.# (1878- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***England to America. Prize A. 3. Montague B. 3.
  **Gift. Montague A. 3.
  ***Uncle Sam of Freedom Ridge. Montague C. 3.

#Morris, George Pope.# (1802-1864.)
  Little Frenchman and His Water Lots. Jessup A. 1.

#Morris, Gouverneur.# (1876- .)
  Behind the Door. Holmes. 145.
  ***Unsent Letter. Holmes. 155.

#Mosley, Katherine Prescott.#
  ***Story Vinton Heard at Mallorie. O'Brien A. 191.


#O'Brien, Mary Heaton Vorse.# _See_ #Vorse, Mary Heaton.#

#O'Higgins, Harvey Jerrold.# (1876- .)
  **Benjamin  McNeil Murdock. O'Higgins A. 129.
  **Conrad Norman. O'Higgins A. 171.
  **District Attorney Wickson. O'Higgins A. 305.
  **Hon. Benjamin P. Divins. O'Higgins A. 245.
  **Jane Shore. O'Higgins A. 45.
  ***Owen Carey. O'Higgins A. 3.
  **Sir Watson Tyler. O'Higgins A. 269.
  ***Thomas Wales Warren. O'Higgins A. 89.
  ***W.T. O'Higgins A. 217.

#Osborne, William Hamilton.# (1873- .)
  Infamous Inoculation. Holmes. 166.

#O'Sullivan, Vincent.# (1872- .)
  ***Interval. Reeve. 170.


#Payne, Will.# (1855- .)
  ***His Escape. Holmes. 196.

#Pelley, William Dudley.#
  ***Toast to Forty-Five. O'Brien A. 200.

#Pier, Arthur Stanwood.# (1874- .)
  Night Attack. Laselle. 119.

#Poe, Edgar Allan# (1809-1849.) (_See 1918._)
  *Angel of the Odd. Jessup A. 7.
  ***Ligeia. French B. 61.

#Pope, Laura Spencer Portor.# _See_ #Portor, Laura Spencer.#

#Porter, William Sydney.# _See_ "#Henry, O.#"

#Portor, Laura Spencer.# (#Mrs. Francis Pope.#)  (_See 1918._)
  ***Boy's Mother. Holmes. 217.

#Post, Melville Davisson.# (1871- .)  (_See 1918._)
  Ally. Post B. 243.
  ***Baron Starkheim. Post B. 333.
  **Behind the Stars. Post B. 361.
  **Five Thousand Dollars Reward. Prize A. 120.
  *Girl in the Villa. Post B. 217.
  *Girl from Galacia. Post B. 117.
  **Great Legend. Post B. 55.
   Laughter of Allah. Post B. 79.
  **Lord  Winton's Adventure. Post B. 265.
  *Miller of Ostend. Post B. 199.
  ***Mystery at the Blue Villa. Post B. 3.
  ***New Administration. Post B. 29.
  *Pacifist. Post B. 137.
  ***Sleuth of the Stars. Post B. 157.
  **Stolen Life. Post B. 99.
  **Sunburned Lady. Post B. 311.
  **Wage-Earners. Post B. 291.
  *Witch of the Lecca. Post B. 179.

#Pulver, Mary Brecht.# (1883- .)
  ***Path of Glory. Laselle. 133.

#Putnam, George Palmer.# (1887- .)
  ***Sixth Man. Holmes. 233.

#Pyle, Howard.# (1853-1911.)
  **Blueskin, the Pirate. Edgar. 71.
  **Captain Scarfield. Edgar. 14.


#Ravenel, Beatrice Witte.# (1870- .)
  ***High Cost of Conscience. Prize A. 228.

#Rhodes, Harrison (Garfield).# (1871- .)
  ***Extra Men. O'Brien A. 223.
  *Fair Daughter of a Fairer Mother. Rhodes. 143.
  Importance of Being Mrs. Cooper. Rhodes. 171.
  **Little  Miracle  at  Tlemcar. Rhodes. 115.
  **Sad Case of Quag. Rhodes. 189.
  ***Spring-time. Rhodes. 213.
  **Vive l'Amérique! Rhodes. 233.

#Rice, Louise.#
  ***Lubbeny Kiss. Prize A. 180.

#Rickford, Katherine.#
  ***Joseph. French B. 41.

#Robbins, Tod.#
  *For Art's Sake. Robbins. 109.
  *Silent, White, and Beautiful. Robbins. 1.
  ***Who Wants a Green Bottle? Robbins. 30.
  **Wild Wullie, the Waster. Robbins. 71.

#Russell, John.# (1885- .)
  ***Adversary. Russell. 182.
  **Amok. Russell. 374.
  *Doubloon Gold. Russell. 59.
  *East of Eastward. Russell. 301.
  **Fourth Man. Russell. 327.
  Jetsam. Russell. 273.
  *Lost God. Russell. 219.
  **Meaning--Chase Yourself. Russell. 251.
  *Passion-Vine. Russell. 144.
  **Practicing of Christopher. Russell. 114.
  *Price of the Head. Russell. 356.
  Red Mark. Russell. 9.
  **Slanted Beam. Russell. 201.
  *Wicks of Macassar. Russell. 97.


#Singmaster, Elsie. (Elsie  Singmaster Lewars.)# (1879- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Survivors. Laselle. 43.

#Smith, Gordon Arthur.# (1886- .)
  **Bottom of the Cup. Smith. 67.
  **City of Lights. Smith. 38.
  ***End of the Road. Smith. 138.
  *Every Move. Smith. 249.
  ***Feet of Gold. Smith. 100.
  ***Jeanne, The Maid. Smith. 218.
  Letitia. Smith. 283.
  **Pagan. Smith. 3.
  ***Return. Smith. 345.
  *Tropic Madness. Smith. 177.
  *Young Man's Fancy. Smith. 315.

#Sneddon, Robert W.# (1880- .)
  *Son of Belgium. Holmes. 262.

#Spofford, Harriet Prescott.# (1835- .)
  **Blessing Called Peace. Spofford A. 179.
  **Change of Heart. Spofford A. 27.

#Spofford, Harriet Prescott# (_con._)
  ***Circumstance. Howells. 22.
  **Deacon's Whistle. Spofford A. 1.
  *Father James. Spofford A. 197.
  **Impossible Choice. Spofford A. 227.
  **John-a-Dreams. Spofford  A. 101.
  ***Life in a Night. Spofford A. 293.
  *Miss  Mahala  and  Johnny. Spofford A. 311.
  **Miss Mahala's Miracle. Spofford A. 125.
  **Miss Mahala's Will. Spofford A. 273.
  ***Old Fiddler. Spofford A. 147.
  **Rural Telephone. Spofford A. 55.
  **Step-Father. Spofford A. 77.
  ***Village Dressmaker. Spofford A. 243.

#Springer, Fleta Campbell.# (1886- .)
  ***Solitaire. O'Brien A. 232.

#Springer, Thomas Grant.#
  *Blood of the Dragon. Prize A. 135.

#Steele, Wilbur Daniel.# (1886- .) (_See_ 1918.)
  ***Dark Hour. O'Brien A. 258.
  ***"For They Know Not What They Do." Prize A. 21.

#Stetson, Charlotte Perkins.# _See_ #Gilman, Charlotte Perkins Stetson.#

#Stockton, Frank Richard.# (1834-1902.)
  ***Buller-Podington Compact. Jessup A. 151.
  ***Christmas Wreck. Howells. 155. Edgar. 203.

#Street, Julian (Leonard).# (1879- .)
  ***Bird of Serbia. O'Brien A. 268.

#Sullivan, Francis William.# (1887- .)
  Godson of Jeannette Gontreau. Holmes. 243.


#Tarkington, (Newton) Booth.# (1869- .)
  *Captain Schlotterwerz. Holmes. 276.

#Terhune, Albert Payson.# (1872- .)
  *On Strike. Price A. 56.
  Wildcat. Laselle. 55.

"#Thanet, Octave.#" (#Alice French.#) (1850- .)
  ***Labor Question at Glasscock's. Edgar. 171.
  Miller's Seal. Edgar. 104.
  Wild Western Way. Edgar. 35. 35.

#Tracy, Virginia.# (1875- .)
  ***Lotus Eaters. Howells. 361.

"#Twain, Mark.#" (#Samuel Langhorne Clemens.#) (1835-1910.)
  ***Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County. Howells. 36.
  Jessup A. 102.


#Van Dyke, Henry.# (1852- .)
  *Antwerp Road. Van Dyke A. 15.
  *Boy of Nazareth Dreams. Van Dyke A. 257.
  **Broken Soldier and the Maid of France. Van Dyke A. 87.
  City of Refuge. Van Dyke A. 21.
  Hearing Ear. Van Dyke A. 137.
  *Hero and Tin Soldiers. Van Dyke A. 231.
  Primitive and His Sandals. Van Dyke A. 216.
  **Remembered Dream. Van Dyke A. 1.
  *Salvage Point. Van Dyke A. 237.
  *Sanctuary of Trees. Van Dyke A. 37.

#Venable, Edward Carrington# (1884- .)
  ***At Isham's. O'Brien A. 293.

#Vorse, Mary (Marvin) Heaton. (Mary Heaton Vorse O'Brien.)#
  ***De Vilmarte's Luck. O'Brien A. 305.
  ***Ninth Man. Vorse. 1.
  ***Other Room. O'Brien B. 312.


#Welles, Harriet, Ogden Deen.#
  **Admiral's Birthday. Welles. 33.
  **Admiral's Hollyhocks. Welles. 128.
  *Anchors Aweigh. Welles. 98.
  **Between the Treaty Ports. Welles. 47.
  *Day. Welles. 165.
  **Duty First. Welles. 105.
  *Flags. Welles. 251.
  **Guam--and Effie. Welles. 214.
  *Holding Mast. Welles. 186.
  *In the Day's Work. Welles. 1.
  ***Orders. Welles. 79.
  **Wall. Welles. 197.

#Weston, George (T.).# (1880- .)
  **Feminine Touch. Holmes. 299.

#Wharton, Edith.# (1862- .)
  ***Mission of Jane. Howells. 170.

#Wilkins, Mary E.# _See_ #Freeman, Mary E. Wilkins.#

#Williams, Ben Ames.# (1889- .)
  **They Grind Exceeding Small. Prize A. 42.

#Wilson, Harry Leon.# (1866- .)
  *As to Herman Wagner. Wilson A. 281.
  *Can Happen! Wilson A. 234.
  *Change of Venus. Wilson A. 209.
  *Curls. Wilson A. 303.
  Love Story. Wilson A. 38.
  *Ma Pettengill and the Animal Kingdom. Wilson A. 3.
  *One Arrowhead Day. Wilson A. 145.
  *Porch Wren. Wilson A. 178.
  *Red-Gap and the Big-League Stuff. Wilson A. 76.
  *Taker-Up. Wilson A. 259.
  *Vendetta. Wilson A. 109.

#Wood, Frances Gilchrist.#
  ***Turkey Red. Prize A. 105.
  ***White Battalion. O'Brien A. 325.

#Wyatt, Edith Franklin.# (1873- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Failure. Howells. 312.

#Wynne, Madelene Yale.# (1847-1913.)
  ***Little Room. Howells. 338.


#Yezierska, Anzia.# (1886- .)
  ***"Fat of the Land." Yezierska. 178. O'Brien B. 326.
  *Free Vacation House. Yezierska. 97.
  **How I Found America. Yezierska. 250.
  ***Hunger. Yezierska. 35.
  **Lost "Beautifulness." Yezierska. 65.
  ***Miracle. Yezierska. 114.
  ***My Own People. Yezierska. 224.
  **Soap and Water. Yezierska. 163.
  **Where Lovers Dream. Yezierska. 142.
  **Wings. Yezierska. 1.


II. English and Irish Authors


#Barr, Robert.# (1850-1912.)
  *Dorothy of the Mill. Edgar. 53.
  *Mill on the Kop. Edgar. 188.

#Barrie, Sir James Matthew.#(1860- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***How Gavin Birse Put It to Mag Lownie. O'Brien C. 111.

#Bax, Arnold.# _See_ "#O'Byrne, Dermot.#"

#Benson, Edward Frederic.# (1867- .)
  ***Man Who Went Too Far. Reeve. 85.

#Beresford, John Davys.# (1873- .)
  ***Lost Suburb. O'Brien C. 309.

#Blackwell, Basil.#
  History of Joseph Binns. New Dec. A. 169.

#Blackwood, Algernon.# (1869- .)
  ***Man Who Played Upon the Leaf. O'Brien C. 176.
  ***Return. French B. 24.
  ***Second Generation. French B. 31.
  ***Woman's Ghost Story. Reeve. 108.

#Bulwer-Lytton, Lord Edward George.# (1803-1873.) (_See 1918._)
  ***Haunted and the Haunters. Reeve. 31.

#Burke, Thomas.# (1887- .)
  ***Chink and the Child. O'Brien C. 250.


#Cannan, Gilbert.# (1884- .)
  ***Birth. O'Brien C. 346.
  ***Gynecologia. Cannan. 107.
  ***Out of Work. Cannan. 159.
  ***Samways Island. Cannan. 1.
  ***Ultimus. Cannan. 49.

#Couch, Sir Arthur Thomas Quiller.# _See_ #Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur
Thomas.#

#Cunninghame Graham, Robert Bontine.# (1852- .)
  ***Fourth Magus. O'Brien C. 214.


#Defoe, Daniel.# (1659-1731.) (_See 1918._)
  ***Apparition of Mrs. Veal. Reeve. 3.

#De Sélincourt, Hugh.# _See_ #Sélincourt, Hugh de.#

#Dowson, Ernest.# (1867-1900.)
  ***Case of Conscience. Dowson. 150.
  ***Diary of a Successful Man. Dowson. 133.
  ***_Dying of Francis Donne._ O'Brien C. 64.
  ***Orchestral Violin. Dowson. 165.
  ***Souvenirs of an Egoist. Dowson. 187.
  *** Statute of Limitations. Dowson. 210.


#Easton, Dorothy.#
  **Adversity. Easton. 117.
  *Arbor Vitæ. Easton. 141.
  *Benefactors. Easton. 137.
  **Box of Chocolates. Easton. 92.
  *Corner Stone. Easton. 130.
  ***Day in the Country. Easton. 209.
  ***For the Red Cross. Easton. 38.
  ***Frog's Hole. Easton. 30.
  **Genteel. Easton. 69.
  ***Golden Bird. Easton. 11.
  ***Heart-Breaker. Easton. 56.
  **Heartless. Easton. 200.
  **Impossible. Easton. 19.
  **It Is Forbidden to Touch the Flowers. Easton. 191.
  **Laughing Down. Easton. 26.
  **Madame  Pottirand. Easton. 254.
  *Miss Audrey. Easton. 185.
  **Old Indian. Easton. 156.
  **Our Men. Easton. 172.
  ***Shepherd. Easton. 123.
  *Spring Evening. Easton. 77.
  **Steam Mill. Easton. 48.
  ***Transformation. Easton. 52.
  ***Twilight. Easton. 83.
  **Unfortunate. Easton. 228.

"#Egerton, George.#" (#Mary Chavelita Golding Bright.#)
  ***Empty Frame. O'Brien C. 88.

#Evans, Caradoc.#
  ***According to the Pattern. Evans A. 31.
  ***Earthbred. Evans A. 81.
  ***For Better. Evans A. 99.
  ***Greater Than Love. O'Brien C. 340.
  ***Joseph's House. Evans A. 155.
  ***Like Brothers. Evans A. 173.
  ***Lost Treasure. Evans A. 215.
  ***Love and Hate. Evans A. 11.
  ***Profit and Glory. Evans A. 231.
  **Saint David and the Prophets. Evans A. 131.
  ***Treasure and Trouble. Evans A. 117.
  **Two Apostles. Evans A. 59.
  ***Unanswered  Prayers. Evans A. 199.
  ***Widow Woman. Evans A. 187.


#Galsworthy, John.# (1867- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Bright Side. Galsworthy B. 75.
  *Buttercup  Night. Galsworthy B. 295.
  ***"Cafard." Galsworthy B. 105.
  ***Defeat. Galsworthy B. 27.
  *"Dog It Was That Died." Galsworthy B. 147.
  **Expectations. Galsworthy  B. 227.
  ***Flotsam  and  Jetsam. Galsworthy B. 51.
  ***Grey Angel. Galsworthy B. 3.
  *In Heaven and Earth. Galsworthy B. 169.
  **Manna. Galsworthy B. 239.
  Mother Stone. Galsworthy B. 173.
  **Muffled Ship. Galsworthy B. 187.
  ***Nightmare Child. Galsworthy B. 283.
  *Peace  Meeting. Galsworthy B. 137.
  *Poirot and Bidan. Galsworthy B. 179.
  *Recorded. Galsworthy B. 117.
  ***Recruit. Galsworthy B. 125.
  ***Spindleberries. Galsworthy B. 209.
  ***Strange Thing. Galsworthy B. 255.
  ***Two  Looks. Galsworthy  B. 271.

#Graham, R. B. Cunninghame.# _See_ #Cunninghame Graham, Robert Bontine.#

#Grant-Watson, E. L.#
  ***Man and Brute. O'Brien C. 296.


#Hardy, Thomas.# (1840- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Three Strangers. O'Brien. C. 1.

#Harvey, William F.#
  **Beast with Five Fingers. New Dec. A. 29.

#Henham, Ernest G.# _See_ "#Trevena, John.#"

#Hewlett, Maurice (Henry).# (1861- .)
  ***Quattrocentisteria. O'Brien C. 126.

#Hudson, W. H.#
  ***Old Thorn. O'Brien C. 196.

#Huxley, Aldous.#
  ***Bookshop. Huxley. 259.
  ***Cynthia. Huxley. 245.
  ***Death of Lully. Huxley. 269.
  **Eupompus Gave Splendour to Art by Numbers. Huxley. 192.
  ***Farcical  History of Richard Greenow. Huxley. 1.
  **Happily Ever After. Huxley. 116.


#Jacobs, William Wymark.# (1868- .) (_See 1918._)
  Bedridden. Jacobs A. 98.
  *Convert. Jacobs A. 112.
  **Dirty Work. Jacobs A. 262.
  *Family Cares. Jacobs A. 171.
  *Husbandry. Jacobs A. 140.
  *Made to Measure. Jacobs A. 51.
  **Paying Off. Jacobs A. 29.
  **Sam's Ghost. Jacobs A. 75.
  *Shareholders. Jacobs A. 1.
  *Striking Hard. Jacobs A. 234.
  *Substitute. Jacobs A. 207.
  Winter Offensive. Jacobs A. 199.

#James, Montague Rhodes.# (1862- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Canon Alberic's Scrap-Book. Reeve. 18.

#Jameson, M. Storm-.# _See_ #Storm-Jameson, M.#


#Kipling, Rudyard.# (1865- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Phantom Rickshaw. Reeve. 118.
  ***Three Musketeers. O'Brien C. 93.
  ***Wee Willie Winkie. O'Brien C. 99.


#Lawrence, David Herbert.# (1885- .)
  ***Sick Collier. O'Brien C. 332.

#Lytton, Lord. George Bulwer-.# _See_ #Bulwer-Lytton, Lord Edward George.#


"#Macleod, Fiona.#" (#William Sharp.#) (1856-1905.) (_See 1918._)
  **Fisher of Men. O'Brien C. 117.
  ***Sin-Eater. French B. 126.

#Marshall, Archibald.# (1866- .)
  *Audacious Ann. Marshall. 191.
  *Bookkeeper. Marshall. 303.
  *Builder. Marshall. 155.
  *"In that State of Life." Marshall. 95.
  *Kencote. Marshall. 3.
  *Little Squire. Marshall. 175.
  *Son of Service. Marshall. 63.
  *Squire and the War. Marshall. 327.
  *Terrors. Marshall. 41.

#Merrick, Leonard.# (1864- .)
  **Antenuptial. Merrick B. 274.
  **Antiques and Amoretti. Merrick B. 228.
  ***"At Home, Beloved, At Home." Merrick B. 29.
  **Back of Bohemia. Merrick A. 293.
  **Banquets of Kiki. Merrick B. 150.
  *Bishop's Comedy. Merrick A. 344.
  **Call from the Past. Merrick A. 383.
  *Child in the Garden. Merrick A. 160.
  ***Dead Violets. Merrick A. 239.
  *Favourite Plot. Merrick A. 259.
  **Frankenstein II. Merrick A. 50.
  ***Lady of Lyons. Merrick A. 313.
  ***Laurels and the Lady. Merrick A. 81.
  ***Letter to the Duchess. Merrick A. 180.
  ***Man Who Understood Women. Merrick A. 1.
  ***Meeting in the Galéries Lafayette. Merrick B. 78.
  ***Monsieur Blotto and the Lions. Merrick B. 54.
  ***"On Est Mieux Ici qu'en Face." Merrick B. 11.
  **Piece of Sugar. Merrick B. 127.
  **Poet Grows Practical. Merrick B. 173.
  ***Prince in the Fairy Tale. Merrick A. 200.
  *Reconciliation. Merrick A. 368.
  **Reformed  Character. Merrick B. 205.
  *Reverie. Merrick A. 364.
  **Tale That Wouldn't Do. Merrick A. 68.
  *Third M. Merrick A. 326.
  *Time the Humorist. Merrick A. 277.
  ***Very Good Thing For the Girl. Merrick A. 18.
  **Waiting for Henriette. Merrick B. 251.
  *With Intent to Defraud. Merrick A. 224.
  **Woman in the Book. Merrick B. 102.
  ***Woman Who Wished to Die. Merrick A. 35.

#Middleton, Richard.# (1882-1911.)
  ***Ghost Ship. O'Brien C. 225.


#Nevinson, Henry Woodd.# (1852- .)
  ***Fire of Prometheus. O'Brien C. 157.

#Nevinson, Margaret Wynne.#
  *Alien. Nevinson. 130.
  "And, Behold the Babe Wept." Nevinson. 47.
  *Blind and Deaf. Nevinson. 39.
  Daughter of the State. Nevinson. 80.
  *Detained by Marital Authority. Nevinson. 21.
  *Eunice Smith--Drunk. Nevinson. 13.
  "Girl! God Help Her!" Nevinson. 145.
  *In the Lunatic Asylum. Nevinson. 118.
  *In the Phthisis Ward. Nevinson. 80.
  **Irish Catholic. Nevinson. 91.
  *"Mary, Mary, Pity Women!" Nevinson. 53.
  *Mothers. Nevinson. 104.
  **Obscure Conversationist. Nevinson. 97.
  *Old Inky. Nevinson. 75.
  *Publicans and Harlots. Nevinson. 68.
  *Runaway. Nevinson. 138.
  *Suicide. Nevinson. 61.
  **Sweep's Legacy. Nevinson. 126.
  "Too Old at Forty." Nevinson. 115.
  ***Vow. Nevinson. 33.
  *Welsh Sailor. Nevinson. 27.
  *"Widows Indeed!" Nevinson. 134.
  *"Your Son's Your Son." Nevinson. 110.

#Nightingale, M. T.#
  *Stone House Affair. New Dec. A. 112.


"#O'Byrne, Dermot.#" (#Arnold Edward Trevor Bax.#) (1883- .)
  ***Before Dawn. O'Byrne A. 29.
  ***Coward's Saga. O'Byrne A. 84.
  ***"From the Fury of the O'Flahertys." O'Byrne A. 67.
  ***Invisible City of Coolanoole. O'Byrne A. 127.
  ***King's Messenger. O'Byrne A. 156.
  ***Vision of St. Molaise. O'Byrne A. 172.
  ***Wrack. O'Byrne A. 1.

#O'Kelly, Seumas.#
  ***Billy the Clown. O'Kelly B. 149.
  ***Derelict. O'Kelly B. 173.
  ***Haven. O'Kelly B. 134.
  ***Hike and Calcutta. O'Kelly B. 121.
  ***Man with the Gift. O'Kelly B. 200.
  ***Michael and Mary. O'Kelly B. 111.
  ***Weaver's Grave. O'Kelly B. 9.


#Pertwee, Roland.#
  ***Big Chance. Pertwee 1.
  ***Clouds. Pertwee. 243.
  ***Cure that Worked Wonders. Pertwee. 42.
  ***Dear Departed. Pertwee. 212.
  ***Eliphalet Touch. Pertwee. 67.
  ***Final Curtain. Pertwee. 271.
  ***Gas Works. Pertwee. 143.
  ***Getting the Best. Pertwee. 102.
  ***Mornice June. Pertwee. 165.
  ***Pistols for Two. Pertwee. 21.
  ***Quicksands of Tradition. Pertwee. 120.
  ***Red and White. O'Brien C. 278.
  ***Reversible Favour. Pertwee. 190.


Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur Thomas. (1863- .) (_See 1918._)
  ***Old Æson. O'Brien C. 152.


#Robinson, Lennox.#
  ***Chalice. Robinson. 30.
  ***Education.  Robinson. 96.
  ***Face. Robinson. 8.
  ***Looking After the Girls. Robinson. 18.
  ***Pair of Muddy Shoes. Robinson. 47.
  ***Return. Robinson. 1.
  ***Sponge. Robinson. 60.
  ***Weir. Robinson. 78.


#Sadler, Michael.#
  Tumbril Touch. New Dec. A. 189.

#Sélincourt, Hugh De.#
  ***Birth of an Artist. O'Brien C. 322.

#Sharp, William.# _See_ "#Macleod, Fiona.#"

#Stevenson, Robert Louis.# (1850-1894.)  (_See 1918._)
  ***Lodging for the Night. O'Brien C. 26.

#Storm-Jameson, M.#
  *Mother-Love. New Dec. A. 78.


#Tomlinson, H. M.# (1873- .)
  ***Extra Hand. Tomlinson. 149.
  ***Lascar's Walking-Stick. Tomlinson. 140.

"#Trevena, John.#" (#Ernest G. Henham.#) (1878- .)
  ***Business Is Business. Trevena. 45. O'Brien C. 236.
  ***By Violence. Trevena. 13.
  **Christening of the Fifteen Princesses. Trevena. 65.


#Vernède, Robert Ernest.# (1875-1917.)
  Adventure of the Persian Prince. Vernède. 194.
  Bad Samaritan. Vernède. 130.
  Finless Death. Vernède. 178.
  Greatness of Mr. Walherstone. Vernède. 33.
  Madame Bluebeard. Vernède. 233.
  Maze. Vernède. 301.
  Missing Princess. Vernède. 251.
  Night's Adventure. Vernède. 277.
  Offence of Stephen Danesford. Vernède. 80.
  On the Raft. Vernède. 218.
  *Outrage at Port Allington. Vernède. 55.
  Smoke on the Stairs. Vernède. 204.
  Soaring Spirits. Vernède. 102.
  Sunk Elephant. Vernède. 156.
  "This is Tommy." Vernède. 13.

#Vines, Sherard.#
  **Upper Room. New Dec. A. 178.


#Walpole, Hugh Seymour.# (1884- .)
  ***Monsieur Félicité. O'Brien C. 263.

#Watson, E. L. Grant.# _See_ #Grant Watson, E. L.#

#Wedmore, Sir Frederick.# (1844- .)
  ***To Nancy. O'Brien C. 75.

#Wells, Herbert George.# (1866- .)
  ***Stolen  Bacillus. O'Brien C. 144.

#Wilde, Oscar# (#Fingall O'Flahertie Wills.#) (1854-1900.)
  ***Star-Child. O'Brien C. 47.

#Wylie, Ida Alena Ross.# (1885- .)
  **Bridge Across. Wylie. 66.
  ***Colonel Tibbit Comes Home. Wylie. 133.
  Episcopal Scherzo. Wylie. 267. 195.
  **Gift for St. Nicholas. Wylie.
  ***Holy Fire. Wylie. 9.
  ***John Prettyman's Fourth Dimension. Wylie. 231.
  ***"'Melia, No Good." Wylie. 163.
  ***Thirst. Wylie. 28.
  **"Tinker--Tailor--"  Wylie. 97.


III. Translations


#Alas,  Leopoldo.# ("#Clarín#"). (1852-1901.) (_Spanish._)
  **Adios Cordera! McMichael. 97.

#Andreyev, Leonid Nikolaevich.# (1871-1919.) (_Russian._) (_See 1918._)
  ***Ben-Tobith. Andreyev C. 273.
  ***Dies Iræ. Andreyev C. 287.
  ***Judas Iscariot. Andreyev C. 45.
  ***Lazarus. Andreyev C. 131.
  ***Life of Father Vassily. Andreyev C. 161.
  ***Marseillaise. Andreyev C. 281.
  ***Silence. Russian A. 11.
  ***Valia. Schweikert B. 343.
  ***When the King Loses His Head. Andreyev C. 5.

#Annunzio, Gabriele D'.# (_Italian._) _See_ #D'Annunzio, Gabriele.#

#Artzibashev, Michael.# (_Russian._)
  ***Doctor. Russian A. 38.

#Ayala, Ramón Pérez De.# (_Spanish._)
  ***Fall of the House of Limón. Ayala. 77.
  ***Prometheus. Ayala. 1.
  ***Sunday Sunlight. Ayala. 163.


#Bizyenos,  George  T.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***Sin of My Mother. Vaka. 57.

#Blasco Ibáñez, Vicente.# (1867-.)  (_Spanish._)
  *Compassion. Ibáñez. 36.
  *Last Lion. Ibáñez. 15.
  ***Luxury. Ibáñez. 56.
  **Rabies. Ibáñez. 61.
  *Toad. Ibáñez. 26.
  **Windfall. Ibáñez. 46.


#Caragiale, J.L.# (_Rumanian._)
  Easter Candles. Underwood A. 49.

#Carco, Francis.# (_French._)
  Memory of Paris Days. New Dec. A. 217.

#Čech, Svatopluk.# (1846-1908.) (_Czech._)
  ***Foltyn's Drum. Hrbkova. 55.
  ***Journey. Underwood A. 75.

#Chekhov, Anton Pavlovich.# (1861-1904.) (_Russian._) (_See 1918._)
  ***At a Country House. Chekhov E. 173.
  **Bad Weather. Chekhov E. 269.
  ***Bishop. Chekhov D. 3.
  ***Chorus Girl. Chekhov E. 3.
  ***Easter Eve. Chekhov D. 49.
  ***Father. Chekhov E. 187. Russian A. 56.
  **Ivan Matveyitch. Chekhov E. 279.
  ***In Exile.  Schweikert B. 320.
  **Ivan Matveyitch. Chekhov E. 245.
  ***Letter. Chekhov D. 29.
  ***Murder. Chekhov D. 89.
  ***My Life. Chekhov E. 37.
  ***Nightmare. Chekhov D. 67.
  ***On the Road. Chekhov E. 201.
  ***Rothschild's  Fiddle. Chekhov E. 227.
  ***Steppe. Chekhov D. 161.
  ***Trivial Incident. Chekhov E. 227.
  ***Uprooted. Chekhov D. 135.
  ***Verotchka. Chekhov E. 15.
  **Zinotchka. Chekhov E. 257.

"#Clarín.#" (_Spanish._) _See_ #Alas, Leopoldo.#

#Clémenceau, Georges.# (_French._)
  About Nests. Clémenceau. 185.
  ***Adventure of My Curé. Clémenceau. 149.
  *At the Foot of the Cross. Clémenceau. 87.
  **Aunt  Rosalie's  Inheritance. Clémenceau. 45.
  **Better than Stealing. Clémenceau. 125.
  *Bullfinch and the Maker of Wooden Shoes. Clémenceau. 173.
  **Descendant of Timon. Clémenceau. 19.
  Domestic Drama. Clémenceau. 197.
  *Evil Beneficence. Clémenceau. 101.
  **Flower o' the Wheat. Clémenceau. 221.
  **Giambolo. Clémenceau. 313.
  *Gideon in His Grave. Clémenceau. 61.
  *Gray Fox. Clémenceau. 137.
  *Happy Union. Clémenceau. 263.
  *Hunting Accident. Clémenceau. 301.
  *Jean Piot's Feast. Clémenceau. 233.
  *Lovers in Florence. Clémenceau. 287.
  **Mad Thinker. Clémenceau. 113.
  **Malus  Vicinus. Clémenceau. 31.
  *Master Baptist, Judge. Clémenceau. 161.
  **Mokoubamba's Fetish. Clémenceau. 3.
  *Simon, Son of Simon. Clémenceau. 73.
  Six Cents. Clémenceau. 209.
  **Treasure of St. Bartholomew. Clémenceau. 249.
  *Well-Assorted Couple. Clémenceau. 275.

#D'Annunzio, Gabriele# (#Rapagnetta#). (1864- .) (_Italian._)
  ***Countess of Amalfi. D'Annunzio. 10.
  ***Death of the Duke of Ofena. D'Annunzio. 172.
  ***Downfall of Candia. D'Annunzio. 153.
  ***Gold Pieces. D'Annunzio. 83.
  ***Hero. D'Annunzio. 3.
  ***Idolaters. D'Annunzio. 119.
  ***Mungia. D'Annunzio. 140.
  ***Return of Turlendana. D'Annunzio. 56.
  ***Sorcery. D'Annunzio. 92.
  ***Turlendana Drunk. D'Annunzio. 72.
  ***Virgin Anna. D'Annunzio. 215.
  ***War of the Bridge. D'Annunzio. 192.

#Dario, Rubén.# (1867-1916.) (_Spanish._)
  **Box. McMichael. 31.
  ***Death of the Empress of China. McMichael. 3.
  *Veil of Queen Mab. McMichael. 21.

#De Vigny, Alfred.# (_French._) _See_ #Vigny, Alfred De.#

#Dostoevsky, Fyodor Mikhailovich.# (1821-1881.) (_Russian._) (_See 1918._)
  ***Another Man's Wife. Dostoevsky B. 208.
  ***Bobok. Dostoevsky B. 291.
  ***Crocodile. Dostoevsky B. 257.
  ***Dream of a Ridiculous Man. Dostoevsky B. 307.
  ***Heavenly Christmas Tree. Dostoevsky B. 248.
  ***Honest Thief. Dostoevsky B. 1.
  ***Novel in Nine Letters. Dostoevsky B. 145.
  ***Peasant Marey. Dostoevsky B. 252.
  ***Thief. Schweikert B. 79.
  ***Unpleasant Predicament. Dostoevsky B. 157.

#Drosines, George.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***God-father. Vaka. 93.


#Eftaliotes, Argyres.# (_Modern Greek._)
  Angelica. Vaka. 157.


#Friedenthal, Joachim.# (_German._)
  ***Pogrom  in  Poland. Underwood A. 195.


#Garshin, Wsewolod Michailovich.# (1855-1888.) (_Russian._)
  ***Signal. Schweikert B. 308.

#Gjalski, Xaver-Sandor.# (_Croatian._) _See_ #Sandor-Gjalski, Xaver.#

#Gogol, Nikolai Vasilievich.# (1809-1852.) (_Russian._) (_See 1918._)
  ***Cloak. Schweikert B. 40.

"#Gorki, Maxim.#" (#Alexei Maximovich Pyeshkov.#) (1868 or 1869- .)
(_Russian._) (_See 1918._)
  ***Chelkash.  Schweikert B. 381.
  ***Comrades. Schweikert B. 361.
  ***Her Lover. Russian A. 67.


#Herrman, Ignat.# (1854- .) (_Czech._)
  ***What Is Omitted from the Cook-book of Madame Magdálena Dobromila
  Rettigová. Hrbkova. 233.


#Ibáñez, Vicente Blasco.# (_Spanish._) _See_ #Blasco Ibáñez, Vicente.#


#Jirásek, Alois.# (1851- .) (_Czech._)
  **Philosophers. Hrbkova. 225.


#Karkavitsas, A.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***Sea. Vaka. 23.

#Kastanakis, Thrasyvoulos.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***Frightened Soul. Vaka. 221.

#Klecanda, Jan.# (1855- .) (_Czech._)
  ***For the Land of His Fathers. Hrbkova. 241.

#Korolenko, Vladimir Galaktionovich.# (1853- .) (_Russian._ Q.)
  ***Old Bell-Ringer. Schweikert B. 334.

#Kunětická, Božena Víková-.# (_Czech._) _See_ #Vikova-Kuneticka,
Bozena.#

#Kuprin, Alexander.# (1870- .) (_Russian._)
  ***Cain. Schweikert B. 430.


#Lazarevic, Lazar K.# (1851-1891.) (_Serbian._)
  **Robbers. Underwood A. 145.

#Lemaître (François Élie), Jules.# (1853-1914.) (_French._)  (_See 1918._)
  ***Bell. Lemaître. 105.
  ***Charity. Lemaître. 175.
  ***Conscience. Lemaître. 277.
  ***Hellé. Lemaître. 189.
  ***Lilith. Lemaître. 91.
  ***Mélie. Lemaître. 259.
  ***Myrrha. Lemaître. 57.
  ***Nausicaa. Lemaître. 207.
  ***Princess Mimi's Lovers. Lemaître. 221.
  ***Saint John and the Duchess Anne. Lemaître. 117.
  ***Serenus. Lemaître. 11.
  ***Sophie de Montcernay. Lemaître. 237.
  ***Two Flowers. Lemaître. 125.
  ***White Chapel. Lemaître. 165.

#Level, Maurice.# (_French._)
  *Bastard. Level. 197.
  **Beggar. Level. 151.
  ***Blue Eyes. Level. 269.
  **Confession. Level. 83.
  *Debt Collector. Level. 3.
  ***Empty House. Level. 281.
  **Extenuating Circumstances. Level. 71.
  **Fascination. Level. 187.
  **Father. Level. 115.
  **For Nothing. Level. 127.
  ***Illusion. Level. 39.
  ***In the Light of the Red Lamp. Level. 49.
  ***In the Wheat. Level. 139.
  ***Kennel. Level. 15.
  **Kiss. Level. 237.
  **Last Kiss. Level. 293.
  ***Man Who Lay Asleep. Level. 175.
  ***Maniac. Level. 249.
  *Mistake. Level. 59.
  **Poussette. Level. 103.
  *Taint. Level. 225.
  *10.50 Express. Level. 259.
  **Test. Level. 95.
  ***That Scoundrel Miron. Level. 211.
  *Under Chloroform. Level. 163.
  **Who? Level. 27.


#Machar, Joseph Svatopluk.# (1864- .) (_Czech._)
  ***Theories of Heroism. Hrbkova. 123.

#Mayran, Camille.# (_Belgian._)
  ***Forgotten. Mayran. 95.
  ***Story of Gotton Connixloo. Mayran. 1.

Mikszáth, Koloman. (1849- .) (_Hungarian._)
  ***Fiddlers Three. Underwood A. 217.
  **Trip to the Other World. Underwood A. 209.

#Mužák, Johanna Rottova.# (_Czech._) _See_ "#Světlá, Caroline.#"


#Němcová, Božena.# (1820-1862.) (_Czech._)
  ***"Bewitched Bára." Hrbkova. 151.

#Neruda, Jan.# (1834-1891.) (_Czech._)
  ***All Souls' Day, Underwood A. 119.
  ***At the Sign of the Three Lilies. Hrbkova. 86.
  ***Beneš. Hrbkova. 81.
  ***Foolish Jona. Underwood A. 136.
  **He was a Rascal. Hrbkova. 90.
  ***Vampire. Hrbkova. 75.

#Netto, Walther.# (_German._)
  ***Swine Herd. Underwood A. 233.


#Palamas, Kostes.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***Man's Death. Vaka. 173.

#Papadiamanty, A.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***She That Was Homesick. Vaka. 237.

#Pérez De Ayala, Ramón.# (_Spanish._) _See_ #Ayala, Ramón Pérez De.#

#Picón, Jacinto Octavio.# (1852- .) (_Spanish._)
  ***After the Battle. McMichael. 43.
  **Menace. McMichael. 67.
  **Souls in Contrast. McMichael. 81.

#Pinski, David.# (1872- .) (_Yiddish._)
  ***Beruriah. Pinski A. 3.
  ***Black Cat. Pinski A. 255.
  ***Drabkin. Pinski A. 171.
  ***In the Storm. Pinski A. 313.
  ***Johanan the High Priest. Pinski A. 101.
  ***Tale of a Hungry Man. Pinski A. 277.
  ***Temptations of Rabbi Akiba. Pinski A. 83.
  ***Jerubbabel. Pinski A. 131.

#Polylas, Iakovos.# (_Modern Greek._)
  *Forgiveness. Vaka. 133.

#Pushkin, Alexander Sergievich.# (1799-1837.)  (_Russian._)
  ***Shot, Schweikert B. 23.

#Pyeshkov, Alexei Maximovich.# (_Russian._) _See_ "#Gorki, Maxim.#"


#Šandor-Gjalski, Xaver.#  (_Croatian._)
  **Jagica. Underwood A. 181.
  **Naja. Underwood A. 165.

"#Sologub, Feodor.#" (#Feodor Kuzmitch Teternikov.#) (1863- .) (_Russian._)
  ***White Dog. Russian A. 30.

#Sudermann, Hermann.#  (_German._)
  **Gooseherd. Sudermann. 341.
  ***Iolanthe's   Wedding. Sudermann. 9.
  ***New Year's Eve Confession. Sudermann. 127.
  **Woman Who Was His Friend. Sudermann. 109.

"#Světlá, Caroline.#" (#Johanna Rottova Mužák.#) (1830-1899.)
(_Czech._)
  ***Barbara. Hrbkova. 279.

#Svoboda, František Xavier.# (1860- .) (_Czech._)
  ***Every Fifth Man. Hrbkova. 105.


#Tchekhov, Anton Pavlovich.# (_Russian._) _See_ #Chekhov, Anton Pavlovich.#

#Teternikov, Feodor Kuzmitch.# (_Russian._) _See_ "#Sologub, Feodor.#"

#Tolstoï, Lyof Nikolaievich, Count.# (1828-1910.) (_Russian._)
(_See 1918._)
  ***God Sees the Truth but Waits. Schweikert B. 209.
  ***Master and Man. Schweikert B. 220.
  ***Three Arshins of Land. Schweikert B. 287.

#Turgenev, Ivan Sergievich#, (1818-1883.) (_Russian._)
  ***Biryuk. Schweikert B. 103.
  ***Lear of the Steppes. Schweikert B. 113.


#Vestendorf, A. Von.# (_German._) _See_ #Von Vestendorf, A.#

#Vigny, Alfred De.# (_French._)
  ***Laurette, Vigny. 43.

#Víková-Kunětická, Božena.# (1863- .) (_Czech._)
  ***Spiritless. Hrbkova. 135.

#Von Vestendorf, A.# (_German._)
  ***Furor Illyricus. Underwood A.  37.

#Vrchlický, Yaroslav.# (1853-1912.) (_Czech._)
  ***Brother Cœlestin. Underwood A. 3.


#Xenopoulos,  Gregorios.# (_Modern Greek._)
  ***Mangalos. Vaka. 105.


MAGAZINE AVERAGES

OCTOBER, 1919, TO SEPTEMBER, 1920


_The following table includes the averages of American periodicals
published from October, 1919, to September, 1920, inclusive. One, two,
and three asterisks are employed to indicate relative distinction.
"Three-asterisk stories" are of somewhat permanent literary value. The
list excludes reprints._

______________________________________________________________________
                                 |          |           |
                                 |          |  NO. OF   |PERCENTAGE OF
                                 |  NO. OF  |DISTINCTIVE| DISTINCTIVE
PERIODICALS                      | STORIES  |  STORIES  |   STORIES
(OCT.-SEPT.)                     |PUBLISHED | PUBLISHED |  PUBLISHED
                                 |          |___________|_____________
                                 |          |   |   |   |   |   |
                                 |          | * | **|***| * | **|***
_________________________________|__________|___|___|___|___|___|_____
                                 |          |   |   |   |   |   |
Atlantic Monthly                 |    19    | 18| 15| 11| 95| 78| 58
Century                          |    43    | 36| 25| 12| 84| 56| 28
Collier's Weekly                 |    97    | 24|  8|  4| 25|  8|  4
Cosmopolitan                     |    75    | 17|  7|  3| 23|  9|  4
Dial (including translations)    |    19    | 19| 15| 11|100| 78| 58
Everybody's Magazine (including  |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |    75    | 23|  7|  0| 31|  9|  0
Harper's Magazine                |    57    | 43| 32| 15| 75| 56| 26
Hearst's Magazine (including     |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |    76    | 17|  6|  4| 22|  8|  5
McCall's Magazine (including     |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |    41    | 15|  7|  3| 37| 17|  7
McClure's Magazine (including    |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |    53    | 24| 16| 13| 45| 30| 25
Metropolitan                     |    78    | 20| 12|  6| 26| 15|  8
Midland                          |    13    | 11| 11|  8| 85| 85| 62
Munsey's Magazine                |    83    | 14|  5|  2| 17|  6|  2
New York Tribune (including      |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |    48    | 31|  5|  1| 63| 11|  2
Pagan (including translations)   |    21    | 10|  8|  6| 50| 40| 30
Pictorial Review                 |    46    | 30| 28| 25| 65| 61| 54
Red Book Magazine                |   117    | 17|  4|  2| 15|  4|  2
Reedy's Mirror (including        |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |    30    | 16|  8|  4| 53| 27| 13
Romance                          |    89    | 23|  6|  1| 26|  7|  1
Scribner's Magazine              |    51    | 36| 23| 10| 72| 46| 20
Smart Set (including             |          |   |   |   |   |   |
  translations)                  |   127    | 51| 25| 14| 40| 20| 11
_________________________________|__________|___|___|___|___|___|_____

_The following tables indicate the rank, during the period between
October, 1919, and September, 1920, inclusive, by number and percentage
of distinctive stories published, of the twenty-one periodicals coming
within the scope of my examination which have published an average of 15
per cent in stories of distinction. The lists exclude reprints, but not
translations._


#By Percentage of Distinctive Stories#

 1. Dial (including translations)                100%
 2. Atlantic Monthly                              95%
 3. Midland                                       85%
 4. Century                                       84%
 5. Harper's Magazine                             75%
 6. Scribner's Magazine                           72%
 7. Pictorial Review                              65%
 8. New York Tribune (including translations)     63%
 9. Reedy's Mirror (including translations)       53%
10. Pagan (including translations)                50%
11. McClure's Magazine (including translations)   45%
12. Smart Set (including translations)            40%
13. McCall's Magazine (including translations)    37%
14. Everybody's Magazine (including translations) 31%
15. Romance                                       26%
16. Metropolitan                                  26%
17. Collier's Weekly                              25%
18. Cosmopolitan                                  23%
19. Hearst's Magazine (including translations)    22%
20. Munsey's Magazine                             17%
21. Red Book Magazine                             15%


#By Number of Distinctive Stories#

 1. Smart Set (including translations)            51
 2. Harper's Magazine                             43
 3. Century                                       36
 4. Scribner's Magazine                           36
 5. New York Tribune (including translations)     31
 6. Pictorial Review                              30
 7. McClure's Magazine (including translations)   24
 8. Collier's Weekly                              24
 9. Everybody's Magazine (including translations) 23
10. Romance                                       23
11. Metropolitan                                  20
12. Dial (including translations)                 19
13. Atlantic Monthly                              18
14. Cosmopolitan                                  17
15. Hearst's Magazine (including translations)    17
16. Red Book Magazine                             17
17. Reedy's Mirror (including translations)       16
18. McCall's Magazine (including translations)    15
19. Munsey's Magazine                             14
20. Midland                                       11
21. Pagan (including translations)                10

_The following periodicals have published during the same period ten or
more "two-asterisk stories." The list excludes reprints, but not
translations. Periodicals represented in this list during 1915, 1916,
1917, 1918 and 1919 are represented by the prefixed letters a, b, c, d,
and e respectively._

1.     abcde    Harper's Magazine                                32
2.      bcde    Pictorial Review                                 28
3.     abcde    Century                                          25
4.     abcde    Smart Set (including translations)               25
5.     abcde    Scribner's Magazine                              23
6.              McClure's Magazine (including translations)      16
7.              Dial (including  translations)                   15
8.       cde    Atlantic Monthly                                 15
9.        be    Metropolitan                                     12
10.        c    Midland                                          11


_The following periodicals have published during the same period five or
more "three-asterisk stories." The list excludes reprints, but not
translations. The same signs are used as prefixes as in the previous
list._

1.     acde   Pictorial Review                              25
2.    abcde   Harper's Magazine                             15
3.       de   Smart Set (including translations)            14
4.            McClure's Magazine (including translations)   13
5.    abcde   Century                                       12
6.            Dial (including translations)                 11
7.      cde   Atlantic Monthly                              11
8.    abcde   Scribner's Magazine                           10
9.       ae   Midland                                        8
10.     ace   Metropolitan                                   6
11.      be   Pagan (including translations)                 6

_Ties in the above lists have been decided by taking relative rank in
other lists into account._


INDEX OF SHORT STORIES PUBLISHED IN AMERICAN MAGAZINES


OCTOBER, 1919, TO SEPTEMBER, 1920

_All short stories published in the following magazines and newspapers,
October, 1919, to September, 1920, inclusive, are indexed._

American Magazine
Asia
Atlantic Monthly
Catholic World
Century
Collier's Weekly (except Dec. 27)
Delineator (except Sept.)
Dial
Everybody's Magazine
Good Housekeeping (except Apr. and June)
Harper's Magazine
Ladies' Home Journal (except Mar.)
Liberator
Little Review (except Apr. and Sept.)
Metropolitan
Midland
New York Tribune
Pagan
Pictorial Review
Reedy's Mirror
Saturday Evening Post (except Jan. 31; Feb. 14, 21; Mar. 13, 20)
Scribner's Magazine
Smart Set
Stratford Journal
Sunset Magazine
Touchstone (Oct., '19-May)

_Short stories of distinction only, published in the following magazines
during the same period, are indexed._

Adventure (Oct.-Dec., '19; Jul.-Sept.)
Ainslee's Magazine
All Story Weekly
American Boy
Argosy
Black Cat
Cosmopolitan
Freeman
Harper's Bazar (except Oct., '19)
Hearst's Magazine
Holland's Magazine
Little Story Magazine
Live Stories
McCall's Magazine
McClure's Magazine
Magnificat
Munsey's Magazine
Parisienne
People's Favorite Magazine
Queen's Work (except Sept.)
Red Book Magazine
Romance
Short Stories
Snappy Stories
Telling Tales
To-day's Housewife
Top-Notch Magazine
Woman's Home Companion (except Sept.)
Woman's World

_Certain stories of distinction published in the following magazines and
newspapers during this period are indexed, because they have been
specially called to my attention._

Detroit Sunday News
Menorah Journal
Oxford Outlook
Pearson's Magazine
Red Cross Magazine
Popular Magazine
True Stories

_One, two, or three asterisks are prefixed to the titles of stories to
indicate distinction. Three asterisks prefixed to a title indicate the
more or less permanent literary value of the story, and entitle it to a
place on the annual "Rolls of Honor." An asterisk before the name of an
author indicates that he is not an American. Cross references after an
author's name refer to previous volumes of this series. (H) after the
name of an author indicates that other stories by this author, published
in American magazines between 1900 and 1914, are to be found indexed in
"The Standard Index of Short Stories," by Francis J. Hannigan, published
by Small, Maynard & Company, 1918. The figures in parentheses after the
title of a story refer to the volume and page number of the magazine. In
cases where successive numbers of a magazine are not paged
consecutively, the page number only is given in this index._

_The following abbreviations are used in the index_:--

_Adv._             Adventure
_Ain._             Ainslee's Magazine
_All._             All-Story Weekly
_Am._              American Magazine
_Am. B._           American Boy
_Arg._             Argosy
_Asia_             Asia
_Atl._             Atlantic Monthly
_B. C._            Black Cat
_Cath. W._         Catholic World
_Cen._             Century
_Col._             Collier's Weekly
_Cos._             Cosmopolitan
_Del._             Delineator
_Det. N._          Detroit Sunday News
_Dial_             Dial
_Ev._              Everybody's Magazine
_Free._            Freeman
_G. H._            Good Housekeeping
_Harp. B._         Harper's Bazar
_Harp. M._         Harper's Monthly
_Hear._            Hearst's Magazine
_Holl._            Holland's Magazine
_L. H. J._         Ladies' Home Journal
_Lib._             Liberator
_Lit. R._          Little Review
_Lit. St._         Little Story Magazine
_L. St._           Live Stories
_Mag._             Magnificat
_McC._             McClure's Magazine
_McCall_           McCall's Magazine
_Men._             Menorah Journal
_Met._             Metropolitan
_Mid._             Midland
_Mir._             Reedy's Mirror
_Mun._             Munsey's Magazine
_N. Y. Trib._      New York Tribune
_O. O._            Oxford Outlook
_Pag._             Pagan
_Par._             Parisienne
_Pear._            Pearson's Magazine
_Peop._            People's Favorite Magazine
_Pict. R._         Pictorial Review
_Pop._             Popular Magazine
_Q. W._            Queen's Work
_(R.)_             Reprint
_Red Bk._          Red Book Magazine
_Red Cross_        Red Cross Magazine
_Rom._             Romance
_Scr._             Scribner's Magazine
_S. E. P._         Saturday Evening Post
_Sh. St._          Short Stories
_Sn. St._          Snappy Stories
_S. S._            Smart Set
_Strat. J._        Stratford Journal
_Sun._             Sunset Magazine
_Tod._             To-day's Housewife
_Top._             Top-Notch Magazine
_Touch._           Touchstone
_True St._         True Stories
_T. T._            Telling Tales
_W. H. C._         Woman's Home Companion
_Wom. W._          Woman's World
(161)            Page 161
(2:161)          Volume 2, page 161
(_See '15_)        _See_ "Best Short Stories of 1915."

_Owing to labor and transportation difficulties, the files of certain
periodicals which I have consulted this year are not absolutely
complete. I shall report upon these missing issues next year._

#Abbott, Eleanor Hallowell.# (#Mrs. Fordyce Coburn.#) (1872- .) (_See
1915, 1918._) (_H._)
  Peace On Earth, Good Will to Dogs. Col. Dec. 13-20, '19. (5, 8.)

#Abbott, Helen Raymond.# (1888- .) (_See 1918._)
  *Stop Six. Cen. March. (99:666.)

#Abbott, Keene.# (1876- .) (_See 1915, 1916._) (_H._)
  *Cinders of the Cinderella Family. S. E. P. Oct. 18, '19. (12.)
  Thumb Minus Barlow. S. E. P. Dec. 20, '19. (28.)

#Abdullah, Achmed.# (#Achmed Abdullah Nadir Khan El-Durani El-Idrissyeh.#)
("A. A. Nadir.") (1881- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919._) (_H._)
  ***Evening Rice. Pict. R. June. (8.)
  *Hill Bred Yar Hydar. Am. B. Dec. '19. (11.)
  **Indian Jataka. All. March 13. (108:2.)
  *Pell Street Choice. Am. B. Nov. '19. (6.)
  **Tao. Cen. Apr. (99:819.)

#Abt, Marion.#
  Epithalamium. S. S. Sept. (63.)

#Adams, Charles Magee.#
  Fathers and Sons. Am. May. (28.)
  Todd's Plunge. S. E. P. Jan. 3. (41.)

#Adams, H. Austin.# (_See "H" under_ #Adams, Austin.#)
  "Bugs, But No One's Fool." Sun. Sept. (43.)

#Adams, Samuel Hopkins.# (1871- .) (_See 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918,
1919._) (_H._)
  *Guardian of God's Acre. Col. June 12. (18.)
  *Home Seekers. Col. Apr. 10. (13.)
  *House of Silvery Voices. Col. Mar. 20. (18.)
  *Patroness of Art. Col. Jul. 17. (5.)
  Pink Roses and the Wallop. S. E. P. Mar. 27. (12.)

#Addis, H. A. Noureddin.# (_See 1918._)
  **Weaver. Asia. Jan. (20:13.)

#Addison, Thomas.# (_See 1915, 1916, 1918, 1919._)
  Tricks in All Trades. Ev. Apr. (76.)