, the noble buffer,
     "Lost to sight, to memory dear,"
  Think of energetic VAIL
  Looking round to get his bail,
  While you're riding on a rail,
  Or on ocean gayly sail
     For UNCLE BULL'S dominion!
  How could you thus fly the track
  With so many stores to "crack,"
  And COLUMBUS at your back
  To defy the whiskey pack
     And popular opinion?
  Whiskey "fellers" feeling badly,
  Cigar-sellers smoking madly,
  Bondsmen looking sorely, sadly,
     If their signatures are clear,
     If you will not cost them dear,
     If in court they must appear
     Mournfully, in doubt and fear.
     Oh! you weak, unfeeling cuss,
     To get them in this shocking muss;
     How their pocket-books will rue it!
     J.F.B., how _could_ you do it?
  Are you putting for the West,
  Did you take French leave for Brest,
  Have you feathered well your nest,
  Do you sweetly take your rest;
  Say, whom _do_ you like the best--
     COOK, or JENKS, or FULLERTON?
  Would you, JOSH, believe it true,
  At the moment, sir, when you
  Waited for that verdict blue,
  O'er the wires the message flew,
  Paid or franked by BOUTWELL through:
  "The gig is up; the cuss won't do.
  Put the district Thirty-two
     Under General PLEASANTON."
  Oh! the vile ingratitude;
  Of Statesmen in this latitude;
  Worse than DELANO'S attitude.
  Say, what is your longitude,
     East or West from Washington?


       *       *       *       *       *

"Fox"-y.

FECHTER'S wig in HAMLET.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Echoes of the Clubs."

SOUND of the policemen's _batons_ on the sidewalk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Over and Under.

INDIANA is said to be "going over" her divorce laws. She has certainly gone
long enough under them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Bullet-in.

THE government has so many bad guns on hand that it deserves to be called,
"A snapper-up of unconsidered Rifles."

       *       *       *       *       *

Every Little Helps.

THE British newspapers say that ARTHUR HELPS writes the PRINCE OF WALES'S
speeches. Now, if ARTHUR HELPS the Prince, who helps ARTHUR?


CONDENSED CONGRESS.


SENATE.


By particular request, the Georgia bill came up. So did Senator SCHURZ. He
approved of almost all propositions which tended to complicate questions,
because the more complication the more offices, the more offices the more
patronage, and the more patronage the more fees. He knew that it was an
alluring precedent which was offered them in the action of the legislature
of Georgia, retaining itself for double the term it was elected to serve.
But it was the duty of Congress to resist temptation. He used the word duty
advisedly. Gentlemen might sneer; but he could tell them that the public
would not stand the infliction of such a Senate as that which he saw before
him for a day longer than it was obliged to by law. By disregarding law, he
wished to know whether the laws would not be greater than the profits. He
admitted that this was a pun; but appealed to PUNCHINELLO upon the point of
the propriety of puns. Reform, he would say, was a "plant" of slow growth.
He had sown it; and his colleague, Mr. -----, had watered it; but it did
not seem to thrive in Missouri.

Mr. DRAKE, who has been studying elocution under a graduate of the Old
Bowery, and has acquired a most tragic croak, which, with a little rouge
and burnt cork, and haggard hair, gives him a truly awful aspect, remarked
that the soil of the South was clotted with blood by fiends in human shape,
(sensation in the diplomatic gallery.) The metaphor might be meaningless;
but it struck him it was strong. These fiends were doubly protected by
midnight and the mask. In his own State the Ku-Klux ranged together with
the fierce whang-doodle. His own life had been threatened. (Faint
applause.) He had received an express package marked in large letters,
"D.H." The President of the United States, an expert in express packages,
had told him this meant "Dead Head." Was this right? Hah! Bellud!! Gore was
henceforth his little game. He would die in his seat. (Great cheering,
which rendered the remainder of the senator's remarks inaudible.)

The case of the admission of General AMES as a senator from Mississippi
came up. Senator CONKLING said that he had no objection to AMES in
particular; but in Brigadier-General, he considered the principle of
letting in men who elected themselves to be bad. Notoriously, General AMES
did not live in Mississippi. He considered this rather creditable to
General AMES'S good sense than otherwise. But did it not operate as a
trivial disqualification against his coming here to represent Mississippi?
Besides, if generals were allowed to elect themselves, where would it end?
General AUGUR, he believed, commanded the Indian district. He would send
himself to the Senate from that region, and be howling about the Piegan
massacre and such outrages upon his constituents, with which the Senate had
been sickened already. In that case AUGUR, he grieved to say, would be a
Bore. Then there is CANBY, who commands in Virginia. CANBY would like to be
a senator, no doubt, like other people who never tried it; and he will be
if he CANBY. A distinguished friend of his in the other house, whom it
would be detrimental to the public service for him to name, if this
military representation were to be recognized, instead of sitting for a
district in Massachusetts, would represent Dutch Gap. They had already, in
his friend from Missouri, a representative of the German Flats; and he
submitted that a member from Dutch Gap would be two tonic for the body
politic.

Mr. HOWARD was in favor of the admission of AMES. He considered the
arguments of the last speaker paltry, and his puns beneath contempt. What
difference did it make whether AMES represented Mississippi or not?
Mississippi was disloyal, and didn't deserve to have any representative.
AMES was a good fellow, and a good officer. Besides, he had been through
West-Point and knew something. He understood he played a very fair game of
billiards, and he would be an ornament to the Senate. Let us let him in.
The Senate had already let in REVELS, who had been sent by AMES; and it was
absurd to keep out AMES, who was the master of the REVELS. He considered
that, in the language of a manly sport with which senators were familiar,
he "saw" Senator CONKLING'S puns, and went several better, though he did
not wish to be considered a better himself.

All this time, singular to say, Senator SUMNER remained silent.


HOUSE.


The House had a little amusement over polygamy in Utah. That institution
shocks Mr. WARD, of New-York, and naturally also Mr. BUTLER, of
Massachusetts. Mr. WARD was astonished to see any member standing up in
defence of polygamy in the nineteenth century. If some member should stand
up in any other century and defend it, it would not astonish him at all. It
was sheer inhumanity to refuse to come to the rescue of our suffering
brethren in Utah. How a man who had one wife could consent to see fellow-
creatures writhing under the infliction of two or three each, was what, Mr.
WARD remarked, got over him. Mr. BUTLER pointed out how much money the
Mormons had made.

Mr. Cox did not see why we should interfere by force to prevent a man's
marrying as many wives as he chose. Such a man was his own worst enemy; and
his crime carried its own punishment.

Mr. HOOPER, of Utah, said the bill was an outrage. By all the wives that he
held most sacred, he felt impelled to resent it. MOSES was a polygamist;
hence his meekness. If this sort of thing was continued, no man's wives
would be safe. His own partners would be torn from him, and turned out upon
the world. He scorned to select from among them. Take all or none.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MARRIAGE MARKET IN ROME.


The business of catching impecunious counts, of magnetizing bankrupt
marquises, and of plucking penniless princes, as practised by American
women, appears to absorb all the attention in Rome at present. The rage for
titles is said to be so great among some classes of Americans resident in
the Holy City, that the only song one hears at evening parties and
receptions is the one commencing,

  "When I can read my title clear."

We should not be surprised any day to hear that a marriage market had been
opened on one of the plazas of Rome, the quotations of which would read
something after this fashion: Husbands dull and declining; American
beauties more active; foreign mammas less firm; American securities in
great demand; the market in princes somewhat stronger; holders of titles
much sought after; brains without money a drug in the market; "bogus"
counts at a discount; the genealogy market panicky and falling; the stock
of nobility rapidly depreciating; the pedigree exchange market flat and
declining, etc., etc. This traffic in titles, this barter in dowries, this
swapping of "blood" for dollars, is an offense too rank for words to embody
it. The trade in cadetships is mild in comparison with it, because in these
commercial transactions with counts, while one party may be the purchaser,
both parties are inevitably seen to be sold. The business may only be
excusable on the theory that "an even exchange is no robbery." But so long
as brains are not bartered for a title, or beauty sacrificed for a
pedigree, we should not complain. Of money, there is plenty in America;
and, while marquises are in the market, let Shoddy continue to pipe for its
own. A fig for Macbeth's philosophy that "blood will have blood." We modify
it in these degenerate days to "blood will have money:"

  "Maidens, like moths, are ever caught by glare;
  And Mammon wins his way where Seraphs might despair."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "The Lay of the Last Minstrel."

  "SHOO FLY, don't bodder me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Benedict's Time."

THE honeymoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Homoeopathic Cure for Hydrophobia.

BARK.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ode to my Washerwoman.

$2 50.


A.T. STEWART & CO.

ARE MAKING

_GREAT REDUCTIONS,_

In the Prices of the Goods

IN ALL THE DEPARTMENTS

OF THEIR

Retail Establishment,

NAMELY

SILKS, SATINS, VELVETS,

Dress Goods, Laces, Embroideries,

REAL INDIA CAMEL'S HAIR SHAWLS,

Ladies', Misses', and Children's

Walking-Suits, Reception-Dresses,

Morning-Robes, Undergarments,


INFANT'S WARDROBES,


Gentlemen's Furnishing Goods of every Description,


HOUSEKEEPING AND HOUSE-FURNISHING GOODS,

Linens, Sheetings, Damasks,

Damask Table-Cloths, Napkins,

Towels, Towelings,

Blankets. Flannels,

Quilts, Counterpanes, Carpets, Mats, Rugs,


ENGLISH AND AMERICAN OIL-CLOTHS

Upholstery Goods in Brocatelles,

Silk Terrys, Plain Satins, Figured

Cotelaines, Striped Reps,

Furniture Chintzes,

Etc., Etc., Etc.,

AT EXTREMELY LOW PRICES.

       *       *       *       *       *

BROADWAY,

Fourth Avenue, Ninth and Tenth Streets,

       *       *       *       *       *

The two great objects of a learner's ambition ought to be to speak a
foreign language idiomatically, and to pronounce it correctly; and these
are the objects which are most carefully provided for in the MASTERY
SYSTEM.

The Mastery of Languages;

OR

THE ART OF SPEAKING LANGUAGES

IDIOMATICALLY.

BY THOMAS PRENDERGAST.

  _I. Hand-Book of The Mastery Series.

 II. The Mastery Series. French.

III. The Mastery Series. German.

 IV. The Mastery Series. Spanish._

PRICE 50 CENTS EACH.

_From Professor E.M. Gallaudet, of the National Deaf Mute College._

