Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


_Armour's
Monthly CookBook_

[Illustration]

A Monthly Magazine Of Household Interest--.

VOL. II NO. 12

OCTOBER 1913.


[Illustration]

CONTENTS


A Necessity in the Pantry                  6

Answers to Correspondents                 22

Baked Beans--A National Dish              21

Baking Day                                13

Everyday Uses of Armour's Grape Juice      4

From the Pantry Shelf                      8

Halloween                                 11

Halloween Hints                            6

Hints for October                         23

Home Dressmaking                          11

Informal Porch Suppers                     5

Little Stories by Our Readers             18

Making Money for the Church               19

Prize Contest Story                        9

Sautéing and Frying                        7

Small Pieces from the Whole Ham           12

Supplying the Meat Flavor                 10

The Daily Menu                14, 15, 16, 17

The Subject of Desserts                    4

Where Does Your Housekeeping Money Go?    20

Why Eat Fruit?                            20


The Garden in October

October is a fine time to plant every kind of "bulb, root and tuber,"
also all deciduous plants and shrubs, except those with thin bark or
thick, fleshy roots (e.g., birch magnolia).

       *       *       *       *       *

Clean up and burn diseased plants, manure the garden, plow it and leave
it all winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Burn asparagus tops and manure the bed. Also make new asparagus and
rhubarb beds and plant sets of extra early pearl onions for use next
March. Put some parsley plants in a box and place it in a light cellar
or in a shed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Put some frozen rhubarb roots in a barrel of earth in the cellar where
they will produce "pie-plant," for winter use. Dig chickory for salad
and store in sand in a dry cellar. Blanch endive by tying lightly at the
tips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pull up cabbages, leaving roots on, and stand upside down on shelf in
cellar. Pick cranberries this month. Then cover the bog with a foot of
water to drown bugs and to protect from frost. Rake up the fallen leaves
and use as a mulch for flowers and shrubs. Hardwood leaves like oak and
chestnut contain more plant food than those from soft wooded
trees.--_Garden and Farm Almanac. Doubleday, Page and Company._


Every Morning

A Little Crystal of Thought for Every Day in the Week


     SUNDAY.

     Most of us could manage to be fairly happy if we really
     tried to make the best of things.


     MONDAY.

     _Don't get depressed even if things do seem to be going
     wrong at the moment. Depression will make matters worse
     rather than better. If you do your duty faithfully, the sun
     is sure to shine again sometime._


     TUESDAY.

     Many people pride themselves on their plain speaking. An
     ability to put things pleasantly is really far more
     valuable. Even fault-finding can be pleasantly done.


     WEDNESDAY.

     _It always seems to me that God is probably less anxious
     that we should fulfil our tasks in life than that we should
     do our best._


     THURSDAY.

     Of the people who complain most bitterly that they have "no
     chance" probably a very small proportion would do great
     things if great opportunities came. "No chance" is a very
     old excuse.


     FRIDAY.

     _Don't give way to selfishness--that detestable vice that we
     all find it so difficult to forgive in others._


     SATURDAY.

     Even if you don't like your work, try to do it well. It may
     lead on to your true vocation.


For the Automobile Visitor

It is the frequent experience of the housewife living in the country or
suburbs these days to receive unexpected visits from friends who are
touring in automobiles, and she finds she must have something
attractive, dainty and nourishing ready at a moment's notice to
supplement the cup of tea or coffee so welcome after a hot, dusty trip.
It is a wise plan to keep a variety of Summer Sausage on hand, as in a
very few minutes delicious sandwiches may be prepared with this, these
sandwiches having the charm of novelty. It is impossible to deal in a
short article with the many varieties of Summer Sausage, but there are
three or four which can be touched upon. To have a thorough
understanding of their goodness one must not only read about them but
taste them. They are the staple diet in many foreign countries and in
the Armour brand the native flavoring has been done with remarkable
faithfulness--so much so that large quantities are shipped from this
country every week to the countries where they originated.

CERVELAT: This sausage is made of finest pork chopped fine, smoked and
air dried. It is highly spiced. A very delicious way to serve this is to
cut thin slices of white bread in rounds just the size of the sausage.
Put the meat, cut very thin, between the slices of bread and toast for a
minute with a very hot fire. This keeps the exposed sides absolutely dry
and the sandwich can be eaten without a fork.

GERMAN SALAMI: This sausage will be much appreciated by people who like
the smoky flavor of ham and bacon. In it the meat is chopped a little
coarser than in the Cervelat, and the spicing is the same as that used
in Germany. Serve cut very thin, with rye or bran bread.

LACKSCHINKEN: This is a very delicately flavored German titbit. It is
made of boneless pork loins cured in mild sweet pickle before smoking.
It makes delicious sandwiches with white or brown bread sliced thin and
lightly buttered.

MORTADELLA, a favorite Italian sausage, is made from lean pork ham meat
chopped very fine. The flavoring is delicious, the careful blending of
spices giving a distinctly foreign touch.

In many restaurants throughout the country they serve, as in foreign
countries, a slice or two of Summer Sausage as an appetizer before
beginning the meal. This custom is rapidly spreading into the home, and
Summer Sausage now has an established place in the daily bill of fare.


Armour's Monthly Cook Book


     Copyright, 1913, by Armour and Company

_A Magazine Devoted to the Interests of Women_

Vol. II

OCTOBER, 1913

No. 12

[Illustration: _All true work is sacred; in all work, were it but true
hand labour, there is something of divineness._--CARLYLE.]


Editorial


[Illustration]

In Germany the government maintains a system of education in what is
called intensive farming. Through instructors who go about the country,
the farmers are taught how to get a bigger yield from the same area of
soil. The work of these wonderful teachers is supplemented by women
domestic science teachers who in the same manner visit the homes in
their districts and instruct the good _Haus Frau_ on how to improve,
economize, and systematize in kitchen and household work.

The manner in which these women instruct is, I am sure, of especial
interest to the Cook Book readers, inasmuch as the method is in a way
practically the same as what the Cook Book is doing. Where they teach by
hand and mouth the Cook Book has taught through its exchange of ideas,
contest stories, and recipe contests, the object being the same in both
cases that of instruction, education and economy in the kitchen and
saving of steps in the housework.

It is truly said of Germans that they are the most frugal and economical
of all people. In the past the usual method has been to exert this
frugality with what is already on hand in the larder left-overs, so to
speak. One point of the modern instruction of these wandering domestic
science teachers, as they go from home to home, is to show the economy
of systematic buying of groceries, meats and vegetables. Where the
practice in the past has been to buy a little, so there is not much
expenditure of money, German housewives are now taught the economy of
buying in bulk, because it is cheaper, and there is never any waste of
food in a German home, no matter how much of it there may be on hand.

Neither is there any good reason why there should be any waste of food
in an American home. Economy or frugality comes from knowing how, and
not from any stingy purpose, as some ill-advised people think.

The methods of these teachers show that this wonderful nation is alive
to the fact that the high cost of living is in our own waste and
carelessness, that oftentimes we do not make the most of what we have or
what we are given to do with.

[Illustration: Mary Jane McClure]


The Sweet Places

    _I want to go back to the sweet mysterious places,
      The crook in the creek-bed nobody knew but me,
    Where the roots in the bank thrust out strange knotty faces,
      Scaring the squirrels who stole there timidly._

    _I want to lie under the corn and hear it rustle,
      Cool and green in a long, straight, soldierly row,
    I am tired of white-faced women and men of iron.
      I want to go back where the country grasses grow._

    _To the well-remembered pasture's shadiest corner,
      Where under the trees the wild ferns wove their laces;
    Hearing the whip-poor-will's voice in its strange, rich sadness--
      I want to go back to the old beloved places._

       *       *       *       *       *

Unafraid

    Sleep lifts the flower-soul with gentle hand,
      And breathes upon it till the petals close
      Softly and drowsily; and, faint, there grows
    A melody from some far shining strand.
    The waking vision's holden to, till, fanned
      By vagrant winds from distant ports, it blows
      The singing lips of dreams into the rose.
    The white Night leans to kiss the nodding land.
    Thus, in a kindred way, will Brother Death
    At the appointed hour let fall his breath
    Upon my soul, which such kind dreamlessness
    Of pillowing, after Life's storm and stress.
    I shall lie unafraid, my petals furled,
    To bloom anew within some fairer world.

    --EXCHANGE

       *       *       *       *       *

To Bleach White Silk

When either white silk fabric or embroidery has become yellowed from
careless washing, it may be bleached in the following manner:

Dissolve two ounces each of salt and oxalic acid in six quarts of cold
water.

Soak the silk in this until the yellow tinge disappears. This will take
about an hour in ordinary cases.

Rinse immediately in several clear waters.


The Subject of Desserts


[Illustration]

Although a meal satisfies your hunger you should have dessert, because
the educated palate craves that particular spice as a proper finish.
Scientists tell us that a dinner digests better because of a tasty
dessert, which, they say, gives the final stimulus necessary to dispose
of the food previously received.

The simple desserts are the best desserts, and none is more pleasing to
the eye and the palate or so easily made or so frequently served in an
imperfect manner, than custards.

With a supply of good eggs in the pantry the housewife need never be at
a loss for a tasty custard, and if she is wise enough to buy Armour's
Fancy Selects when she orders eggs from her market man their goodness
will be reflected in her desserts. Aside from their goodness their extra
large size will always recommend their use to the wise housewife. They
come packed in an extra large carton.


Custard Puddings

These being the more easily made may be considered first. They may
either be steamed or baked but the mixture is the same in either case.
Allow two eggs and a teaspoonful of sugar to each half pint of milk.
Beat the eggs with sugar thoroughly, but do not froth them, as the
custard must be as smooth and free from holes as possible. Add the milk
slowly, also a few drops of flavoring essence--vanilla, almonds or
lemon. Pour into a buttered mould (or into individual moulds), set in a
pan of hot water and bake until firm. Chill thoroughly and turn out on
serving dish. Serve with sugar and cream. A pleasing addition to the
above is made by garnishing the sides of the mould with strips of Canton
ginger before pouring in the custard.


Coffee Custard

Make an infusion of coffee by pouring half a pint of boiling milk on a
heaping tablespoonful of powdered coffee. Put it aside to settle, and
when cold strain off the milk and use with the eggs as in previous
recipe.

Boiled Custard

This is also made from milk and eggs and is usually served instead of
cream with stewed or preserved fruit. "Boiled" custard is rather a
misnomer as on no account must the boiling point be reached in cooking,
for if the custard bubbles it curdles. As soon as the custard begins to
thicken the saucepan must be taken from the fire and the stirring
continued for a second or two longer. If the cooking is done in a double
boiler the risk of boiling is very much lessened.


Everyday Uses of Armour's Grape Juice

Give your family Armour's Grape Juice as an everyday beverage and their
bodies will be kept healthy without drugs.

Instead of serving fruit in the morning serve a wineglassful of Armour's
Grape Juice undiluted. If taken at the beginning of breakfast do not add
ice. For children, water may be added if desired.

In moistening mincemeat use Armour's Grape Juice instead of jelly or
wine. In making "Brown Betty" use Armour's Grape Juice instead of water
and molasses and you will find it richer and more delicious.

In making sauce for all kinds of fruit puddings, use Armour's Grape
Juice, hot or cold, thickened when necessary with a little cornstarch.

When making fruit salad to be served as a dessert, pour over the mixed
fruits, immediately before serving, a cup of Armour's Grape Juice.

In serving grape fruit, after carefully removing the white pith, pour
over each portion a wineglassful of Armour's Grape Juice.

Many people find it difficult to take raw eggs when recommended by their
doctor. This difficulty is removed by breaking the egg into a glass of
Armour's Grape Juice. The egg is swallowed easily and in addition to the
nourishment obtained there is the tonic value of the rich fruit from
which the grape juice is taken.

_VERIBEST CANNED MEATS--save work and worry_


Informal Porch Suppers

[Illustration]


If you are fortunate enough to possess a wide porch or a stretch of lawn
do not forget your less fortunate friends, and give an occasional
informal party there while the weather is still fine. Food always tastes
so much better in the fresh air and when friends are present it makes
the affair nothing more than a kind of glorified picnic. There are few
more pleasant ways of entertaining than by giving a porch party. It is
very little trouble to arrange an affair of this kind--less than the
average picnic indeed--and grown people usually enjoy it more as it is
much more comfortable to sit in a chair before a real table than to
perch on a log or rock while eating. A porch party is an ideal way of
entertaining for the woman who has to do her own work. Most of the
dishes can be prepared the day before, making the serving easier.

If not convenient to have a large table a number of small card tables
placed close together will answer the purpose. Charming table sets of
white crepe paper can be bought for very little and save very materially
in the doing up of the linen.

