     Thus with each gift of nature and of art,
     And wanting nothing but an honest heart;
     Grown all to all, from no one vice exempt,
     And most contemptible, to shun contempt;
     His passion still, to covet general praise,
     His life to forfeit it a thousand ways;
     A constant bounty which no friend has made;
     An angel tongue which no man can persuade;
     A fool with more of wit than all mankind;
     Too rash for thought, for action too refined.'

And then those memorable lines--

    'A tyrant to the wife his heart approved,
     A rebel to the very king he loved;
     He dies, sad outcast of each church and state;
     And, harder still! flagitious, yet not great.'

Though it may be doubted if the 'lust of praise' was the cause of his
eccentricities, so much as an utter restlessness and instability of
character, Pope's description is sufficiently correct, and will prepare
us for one of the most disappointing lives we could well have to read.

Philip, Duke of Wharton, was one of those men of whom an Irishman would
say, that they were fortunate before they were born. His ancestors
bequeathed him a name that stood high in England for bravery and
excellence. The first of the house, Sir Thomas Wharton, had won his
peerage from Henry VIII. for routing some 15,000 Scots with 500 men, and
other gallant deeds. From his father the marquis he inherited much of
his talents; but for the heroism of the former, he seems to have
received it only in the extravagant form of foolhardiness. Walpole
remembered, but could not tell where, a ballad he wrote on being
arrested by the guard in St. James's Park, for singing the Jacobite
song, 'The King shall have his own again,' and quotes two lines to show
that he was not ashamed of his own cowardice on the occasion:--

    'The duke he drew out half his sword,
     ---- the guard drew out the rest.'

At the siege of Gibraltar, where he took up arms against his own king
and country, he is said to have gone alone one night to the very walls
of the town, and challenged the outpost. They asked him who he was, and
when he replied, openly enough, 'The Duke of Wharton,' they actually
allowed him to return without either firing on or capturing him. The
story seems somewhat apocryphal, but it is quite possible that the
English soldiers may have refrained from violence to a well-known
mad-cap nobleman of their own nation.

Philip, son of the Marquis of Wharton, at that time only a baron, was
born in the last year but one of the seventeenth century, and came into
the world endowed with every quality which might have made a great man,
if he had only added wisdom to them. His father wished to make him a
brilliant statesman, and, to have a better chance of doing so, kept him
at home, and had him educated under his own eye. He seems to have easily
and rapidly acquired a knowledge of classical languages; and his memory
was so good that when a boy of thirteen he could repeat the greater part
of the 'Æneid' and of Horace by heart. His father's keen perception did
not allow him to stop at classics; and he wisely prepared him for the
career to which he was destined by the study of history, ancient and
modern, and of English literature, and by teaching him, even at that
early age, the art of thinking and writing on any given subject, by
proposing themes for essays. There is certainly no surer mode of
developing the reflective and reasoning powers of the mind; and the boy
progressed with a rapidity which was almost alarming. Oratory, too, was
of course cultivated, and to this end the young nobleman was made to
recite before a small audience passages from Shakspeare, and even
speeches which had been delivered in the House of Lords, and we may be
certain he showed no bashfulness in this display.

He was precocious beyond measure, and at sixteen was a man. His first
act of folly--or, perhaps, _he_ thought, of manhood--came off at this
early age. He fell in love with the daughter of a Major-General Holmes;
and though there is nothing extraordinary in that, for nine-tenths of us
have been love-mad at as early an age, he did what fortunately very few
do in a first love affair, he married the adored one. Early marriages
are often extolled, and justly enough, as safeguards against profligate
habits, but this one seems to have had the contrary effect on young
Philip. His wife was in every sense too good for him: he was madly in
love with her at first, but soon shamefully and openly faithless. Pope's
line--

    'A tyrant to the wife his heart approved,'

requires explanation here. It is said that she did not present her
boy-husband with a son for three years after their marriage, and on this
child he set great value and great hopes. About that time he left his
wife in the country, intending to amuse himself in town, and ordered her
to remain behind with the child. The poor deserted woman well knew what
was the real object of this journey, and could not endure the
separation. In the hope of keeping her young husband out of harm, and
none the less because she loved him very tenderly, she followed him soon
after, taking the little Marquis of Malmsbury, as the young live branch
was called, with her. The duke was, of course, disgusted, but his anger
was turned into hatred, when the child, which he had hoped to make his
heir and successor, caught in town the small-pox, and died in infancy.
He was furious with his wife, refused to see her for a long time, and
treated her with unrelenting coldness.

The early marriage was much to the distaste of Philip's father, who had
been lately made a marquis, and who hoped to arrange a very grand
'alliance' for his petted son. He was, in fact, so much grieved by it,
that he was fool enough to die of it in 1715, and the marchioness
survived him only about a year, being no less disgusted with the
licentiousness which she already discovered in her Young Hopeful.

She did what she could to set him right, and the young married man was
shipped off with a tutor, a French Huguenot, who was to take him to
Geneva to be educated as a Protestant and a Whig. The young scamp
declined to be either. He was taken, by way of seeing the world, to the
petty courts of Germany, and of course to that of Hanover, which had
kindly sent us the worst family that ever disgraced the English throne,
and by the various princes and grand-dukes received with all the honours
due to a young British nobleman.

The tutor and his charge settled at last at Geneva, and my young lord
amused himself with tormenting his strict guardian. Walpole tells us
that he once roused him out of bed only to borrow a pin. There is no
doubt that he led the worthy man a sad life of it; and to put a climax
to his conduct, ran away from him at last, leaving with him, by way of
hostage, a young bear-cub--probably quite as tame as himself--which he
had picked up somewhere, and grown very fond of--birds of a feather,
seemingly--with a message, which showed more wit than good-nature, to
this effect:--'Being no longer able to bear with your ill-usage, I think
proper to be gone from you; however, that you may not want company, I
have left you the bear, as the most suitable companion in the world that
could be picked out for you.'

The tutor had to console himself with a _tu quoque_, for the young
scapegrace had found his way to Lyons in October, 1716, and then did the
very thing his father's son should not have done. The Chevalier de St.
George, the Old Pretender, James III., or by whatever other _alias_ you
prefer to call him, having failed in his attempt 'to have his own again'
in the preceding year, was then holding high court in high dudgeon at
Avignon. Any adherent would, of course, be welcomed with open arms; and
when the young marquis wrote to him to offer his allegiance, sending
with his letter a fine entire horse as a peace offering, he was warmly
responded to. A person of rank was at once despatched to bring the youth
to the ex-regal court; he was welcomed with much enthusiasm, and the
empty title of Duke of Northumberland at once, most kindly, conferred on
him. However, the young marquis does not seem to have _goûté_ the
exile's court, for he stayed there one day only, and returning to Lyons,
set off to enjoy himself at Paris. With much wit, no prudence, and a
plentiful supply of money, which he threw about with the recklessness of
a boy just escaped from his tutor, he could not fail to succeed in that
capital; and, accordingly, the English received him with open arms. Even
the ambassador, Lord Stair, though he had heard rumours of his wild
doings, invited him repeatedly to dinner, and did his best, by advice
and warning, to keep him out of harm's way. Young Philip had a horror of
preceptors, paid or gratuitous, and treated the plenipotentiary with the
same coolness as he had served the Huguenot tutor. When the former,
praising the late marquis, expressed--by way of a slight hint--a hope
'that he would follow so illustrious an example of fidelity to his
prince, and affection to his country, by treading in the same steps,'
the young scamp replied, cleverly enough, 'That he thanked his
excellency for his good advice, and as his excellency had also a worthy
and deserving father, he hoped he would likewise copy so bright an
example, and tread in all his steps;' the pertness of which was
pertinent enough, for old Lord Stair had taken a disgraceful part
against his sovereign in the massacre of Glencoe.

His frolics at Paris were of the most reckless character for a young
nobleman. At the ambassador's own table he would occasionally send a
servant to some one of the guests, to ask him to join in the Old
Chevalier's health, though it was almost treason at that time to mention
his name even. And again, when the windows at the embassy had been
broken by a young English Jacobite, who was forthwith committed to Fort
l'Evêque, the hare-brained marquis proposed, out of revenge, to break
them a second time, and only abandoned the project because he could get
no one to join him in it. Lord Stair, however, had too much sense to be
offended at the follies of a boy of seventeen, even though that boy was
the representative of a great English family; he, probably, thought it
would be better to recall him to his allegiance by kindness and advice,
than, by resenting his behaviour, to drive him irrevocably to the
opposite party; but he was doubtless considerably relieved when, after
leading a wild life in the capital of France, spending his money
lavishly, and doing precisely everything which a young English nobleman
ought not to do, my lord marquis took his departure in December, 1716.

The political education he had received now made the unstable youth
ready and anxious to shine in the State; but being yet under age, he
could not, of course, take his seat in the House of Lords. Perhaps he
was conscious of his own wonderful abilities; perhaps, as Pope declares,
he was thirsting for praise, and wished to display them; certainly he
was itching to become an orator, and as he could not sit in an English
Parliament, he remembered that he had a peerage in Ireland, as Earl of
Rathfernhame and Marquis of Catherlogh, and off he set to see if the
Milesians would stand upon somewhat less ceremony. He was not
disappointed there. 'His brilliant parts,' we are told by contemporary
writers, but rather, we should think, his reputation for wit and
eccentricity, 'found favour in the eyes of Hibernian quicksilvers, and
in spite of his years, he was admitted to the Irish House of Lords.'

When a friend had reproached him, before he left France, with infidelity
to the principles so long espoused by his family, he is reported to have
replied, characteristically enough, that 'he had pawned his principles
to Gordon, the Chevalier's banker, for a considerable sum, and, till he
could repay him, he must be a Jacobite; but when that was done, he would
again return to the Whigs.' It is as likely as not that he borrowed from
Gordon on the strength of the Chevalier's favour, for though a marquis
in his own right, he was even at this period always in want of cash; and
on the other hand, the speech, exhibiting the grossest want of any sense
of honour, is in thorough keeping with his after-life. But whether he
paid Gordon on his return to England--which is highly improbable--or
whether he had not honour enough to keep his compact--which is extremely
likely--there is no doubt that my lord marquis began, at this period, to
qualify himself for the post of parish-weathercock to St. Stephens.

His early defection to a man who, whether rightful heir or not, had that
of romance in his history which is even now sufficient to make our young
ladies 'thorough Jacobites' at heart, was easily to be excused, on the
plea of youth and high spirit. The same excuse does not explain his
rapid return to Whiggery--in which there is no romance at all--the
moment he took his seat in the Irish House of Lords. There is only one
way to explain the zeal with which he now advocated the Orange cause:
he must have been either a very designing knave, or a very unprincipled
fool. As he gained nothing by the change but a dukedom for which he did
not care, and as he cared for little else that the government could give
him, we may acquit him of any very deep motives. On the other hand, his
life and some of his letters show that, with a vast amount of bravado,
he was sufficiently a coward. When supplicated, he was always obstinate;
when neglected, always supplicant. Now it required some courage in those
days to be a Jacobite. Perhaps he cared for nothing but to astonish and
disgust everybody with the facility with which he could turn his coat,
as a hippodromist does with the ease with which he changes his costume.
He was a boy and a peer, and he would make pretty play of his position.
He had considerable talents, and now, as he sat in the Irish House,
devoted them entirely to the support of the government.

For the next four years he was employed, on the one hand in political,
on the other in profligate, life. He shone in both; and was no less
admired, by the wits of those days, for his speeches, his arguments, and
his zeal, than for the utter disregard of public decency he displayed in
his vices. Such a promising youth, adhering to the government, merited
some mark of its esteem, and accordingly, before attaining the age of
twenty-one, he was raised to a dukedom. Being of age, he took his seat
in the English House of Lords, and had not been long there before he
again turned coat, and came out in the light of a Jacobite hero. It was
now that he gathered most of his laurels.

The Hanoverian monarch had been on the English throne some six years.
Had the Chevalier's attempt occurred at this period, it may be doubted
if it would not have been successful. The 'Old Pretender' came too soon,
the 'Young Pretender' too late. At the period of the first attempt, the
public had had no time to contrast Stuarts and Guelphs: at that of the
second, they had forgotten the one and grown accustomed to the other;
but at the moment when our young duke appeared on the boards of the
senate, the vices of the Hanoverians were beginning to draw down on them
the contempt of the educated and the ridicule of the vulgar; and
perhaps no moment could have been more favourable for advocating a
restoration of the Stuarts. If Wharton had had as much energy and
consistency as he had talent and impudence, he might have done much
towards that desirable, or undesirable end.

The grand question at this time before the House was the trial of
Atterbury, Bishop of Rochester, demanded by Sir Robert Walpole. The man
had a spirit almost as restless as his defender. The son of a man who
might have been the original of the Vicar of Bray, he was very little of
a poet, less of a priest, but a great deal of a politician. He was born
in 1662, so that at this time he must have been nearly sixty years old.
He had had by no means a hard life of it, for family interest, together
with eminent talents, procured him one appointment after another, till
he reached the bench at the age of fifty-one, in the reign of Anne. He
had already distinguished himself in several ways, most, perhaps, by
controversies with Hoadly, and by sundry high-church motions. But after
his elevation, he displayed his principles more boldly, refused to sign
the Declaration of the Bishops, which was somewhat servilely made to
assure George the First of the fidelity of the Established Church,
suspended the curate of Gravesend for three years because he allowed the
Dutch to have a service performed in his church, and even, it is said,
on the death of Anne, offered to proclaim King James III., and head a
procession himself in his lawn sleeves. The end of this and other
vagaries was, that in 1722, the Government sent him to the Tower, on
suspicion of being connected with a plot in favour of the Old Chevalier.
The case excited no little attention, for it was long since a bishop had
been charged with high treason; it was added that his gaolers used him
rudely; and, in short, public sympathy rather went along with him for a
time. In March, 1723, a bill was presented to the Commons, for
'inflicting certain pains and penalties' on Francis, Lord Bishop of
Rochester, and it passed that House in April; but when carried up to the
Lords, a defence was resolved on. The bill was read a third time on May
15th, and on that occasion the Duke of Wharton, then only twenty-four
years old, rose and delivered a speech in favour of the bishop. This
oration far more resembled that of a lawyer summing up the evidence than
of a parliamentary orator enlarging on the general issue. It was
remarkable for the clearness of its argument, the wonderful memory of
facts it displayed, and the ease and rapidity with which it annihilated
the testimony of various witnesses examined before the House. It was
mild and moderate, able and sufficient, but seems to have lacked all the
enthusiasm we might expect from one who was afterwards so active a
partisan of the Chevalier's cause. In short, striking as it was, it
cannot be said to give the duke any claim to the title of a great
orator; it would rather prove that he might have made a first-rate
lawyer. It shows, however, that had he chosen to apply himself
diligently to politics, he might have turned out a great leader of the
Opposition.

Neither this speech nor the bishop's able defence saved him; and in the
following month he was banished the kingdom, and passed the rest of his
days in Paris.

Wharton, however, was not content with the House as an arena of
political agitation. He was now old enough to have matured his
principles thoroughly, and he completely espoused the cause of the
exiled family. He amused himself with agitating throughout the country,
influencing elections, and seeking popularity by becoming a member of
the Wax-chandlers' Company. It is a proof of his great abilities, so
shamefully thrown away, that he now, during the course of eight months,
issued a paper, called 'The True Briton,' every Monday and Friday,
written by himself, and containing varied and sensible arguments in
support of his opinions, if not displaying any vast amount of original
genius. This paper, on the model of 'The Tatler,' 'The Spectator,' &c.,
had a considerable sale, and attained no little celebrity, so that the
Duke of Wharton acquired the reputation of a literary man as well as of
a political leader.

But, whatever he might have been in either capacity, his disgraceful
life soon destroyed all hope of success in them. He was now an
acknowledged wit about town, and what was then almost a recognized
concomitant of that character, an acknowledged profligate. He scattered
his large fortune in the most reckless and foolish manner: though
married, his moral conduct was as bad as that of any bachelor of the
day: and such was his extravagance and open licentiousness, that, having
wasted a princely revenue, he was soon caught in the meshes of Chancery,
which very sensibly vested his fortune in the hands of trustees, and
compelled him to be satisfied with an income of twelve hundred pounds a
year.

The young rascal now showed hypocritical signs of penitence--he was
always an adept in that line--and protested he would go abroad and live
quietly, till his losses should be retrieved. There is little doubt
that, under this laudable design, he concealed one of attaching himself
closer to the Chevalier party, and even espousing the faith of that
unfortunate prince, or pretender, whichever he may have been. He set off
for Vienna, leaving his wife behind to die, in April, 1726. He had long
since quarrelled with her, and treated her with cruel neglect, and at
her death he was not likely to be much afflicted. It is said, that,
after that event, a ducal family offered him a daughter and large
fortune in marriage, and that the Duke of Wharton declined the offer,
because the latter was to be tied up, and he could not conveniently tie
up the former. However this may be, he remained a widower for a short
time: we may be sure, not long.

The hypocrisy of going abroad to retrench was not long undiscovered. The
fascinating scapegrace seems to have delighted in playing on the
credulity of others; and Walpole relates that, on the eve of the day on
which he delivered his famous speech for Atterbury, he sought an
interview with the minister, Sir Robert Walpole, expressed great
contrition at having espoused the bishop's cause hitherto, and a
determination to speak against him the following day. The minister was
taken in, and at the duke's request, supplied him with all the main
arguments, pro and con. The deceiver, having got these well into his
brain--one of the most retentive--repaired to his London haunts, passed
the night in drinking, and the next day produced all the arguments he
had digested, _in the bishop's favour_.

At Vienna he was well received, and carried out his private mission
successfully, but was too restless to stay in one place, and soon set
off for Madrid. Tired now of politics, he took a turn at love. He was a
poet after a fashion, for the pieces he has left are not very good: he
was a fine gentleman, always spending more money than he had, and is
said to have been handsome. His portraits do not give us this
impression: the features are not very regular; and though not coarse,
are certainly _not_ refined. The mouth, somewhat sensual, is still much
firmer than his character would lead us to expect; the nose sharp at the
point, but cogitative at the nostrils; the eyes long but not large;
while the raised brow has all that openness which he displayed in the
indecency of his vices, but not in any honesty in his political career.
In a word, the face is not attractive. Yet he is described as having had
a brilliant complexion, a lively, varying expression, and a charm of
person and manner that was quite irresistible. Whether on this account,
or for his talents and wit, which were really shining, his new Juliet
fell as deeply in love with him as he with her.

She was maid of honour--and a highly honourable maid--to the Queen of
Spain. The Irish regiments long employed in the Spanish service had
become more or less naturalized in that country, which accounts for the
great number of thoroughly Milesian names still to be found there, some
of them, as O'Donnell, owned by men of high distinction. Among other
officers who had settled with their families in the Peninsula was a
Colonel O'Byrne, who, like most of his countrymen there, died penniless,
leaving his widow with a pension and his daughter without a sixpence. It
can well be imagined that an offer from an English duke was not to be
sneezed at by either Mrs. or Miss O'Byrne; but there were some grave
obstacles to the match. The duke was a Protestant. But what of that?--he
had never been encumbered with religion, nor even with a decent
observance of its institutions, for it is said that, when in England, at
his country seat, he had, to show how little he cared for
respectability, made a point of having the hounds out on a Sunday
morning. He was not going to lose a pretty girl for the sake of a faith
with which he had got disgusted ever since his Huguenot tutor tried to
make him a sober Christian. He had turned coat in politics, and would
now try his weathercock capabilities at religion. Nothing like variety,
so Romanist he became.

But this was not all: his friends on the one hand objected to his
marrying a penniless girl, and hers, on the other, warned her of his
disreputable character. But when two people have made up their minds to
be one, such trifles as these are of no consequence. A far more trying
obstacle was the absolute refusal of her Most Catholic Majesty to allow
her maid of honour to marry the duke.

It is a marvel that after the life of dissipation he had led, this man
should have retained the power of loving at all. But everything about
him was extravagant, and now that he entertained a virtuous attachment,
he was as wild in it as he had been reckless in less respectable
connections. He must have been sincere at the time, for the queen's
refusal was followed by a fit of depression that brought on a low fever.
The queen heard of it, and, touched by the force of his devotion, sent
him a cheering message. The moment was not to be lost, and, in spite of
his weak state, he hurried to court, threw himself at her Majesty's
feet, and swore he must have his lady-love or die. Thus pressed, the
queen was forced to consent, but warned him that he would repent of it.
The marriage took place, and the couple set off to Rome.

Here the Chevalier again received him with open arms, and took the
opportunity of displaying his imaginary sovereignty by bestowing on him
the Order of the Garter--a politeness the duke returned by wearing while
there the no less unrecognised title of Duke of Northumberland, which
'His Majesty' had formerly conferred on him. But James III., though no
saint, had more respect for decent conduct than his father and uncle;
the duke ran off into every species of excess, got into debt as usual--

    'When Wharton's just, and learns to pay his debts,
     And reputation dwells at Mother Brett's,

           *       *       *       *       *

     Then, Celia, shall my constant passion cease,
     And my poor suff'ring heart shall be at peace,'

says a satirical poem of the day, called 'The Duke of Wharton's
_Whens_'--was faithless to the wife he had lately been dying for; and
in short, such a thorough blackguard, that not even the Jacobites could
tolerate him, and they turned him out of the Holy City till he should
learn not to bring dishonour on the court of their fictitious sovereign.

The duke was not the man to be much ashamed of himself, though his poor
wife may now have begun to think her late mistress in the right, and he
was probably glad of an excuse for another change. At this time, 1727,
the Spaniards were determined to wrest Gibraltar from its English
defenders, and were sending thither a powerful army under the command of
Los Torres. The Duke had tried many trades with more or less success,
and now thought that a little military glory would tack on well to his
highly honourable biography. At any rate there was novelty in the din of
war, and for novelty he would go anywhere. It mattered little that he
should fight against his own king and own countrymen: he was not half
blackguard enough yet, he may have thought; he had played traitor for
some time, he would now play rebel outright--the game _was_ worth the
candle.

So what does my lord duke do but write a letter (like the Chinese behind
their mud-walls, he was always bold enough when well secured under the
protection of the post, and was more absurd in ink even than in action)
to the King of Spain, offering him his services as a volunteer against
'Gib.' Whether his Most Catholic Majesty thought him a traitor, a
madman, or a devoted partisan of his own, does not appear, for without
waiting for an answer--waiting was always too dull work for Wharton--he
and his wife set off for the camp before Gibraltar, introduced
themselves to the Conde in Command, were received with all the
honour--let us say honours--due to a duke--and established themselves
comfortably in the ranks of the enemy of England. But all the duke's
hopes of prowess were blighted. He had good opportunities. The Conde de
los Torres made him his aide-de-camp, and sent him daily into the
trenches to see how matters went on. When a defence of a certain Spanish
outwork was resolved upon, the duke, from his rank, was chosen for the
command. Yet in the trenches he got no worse wound than a slight one on
the foot from a splinter of a shell, and this he afterwards made an
excuse for not fighting a duel with swords; and as to the outwork, the
English abandoned the attack, so that there was no glory to be found in
the defence. He soon grew weary of such inglorious and rather dirty work
as visiting trenches before a stronghold; and well he might; for if
there be one thing duller than another and less satisfactory, it must be
digging a hole out of which to kill your brother mortals; and thinking
he should amuse himself better at the court, he set off for Madrid. Here
the king, by way of reward for his brilliant services in doing nothing,
made him _colonel-aggregate_--whatever that may be--of an Irish
regiment; a very poor aggregate, we should think. But my lord duke
wanted something livelier than the command of a band of Hispaniolized
Milesians; and having found the military career somewhat uninteresting,
wished to return to that of politics. He remembered with gusto the
frolic life of the Holy City, and the political excitement in the
Chevalier's court, and sent off a letter to 'His Majesty James III.,'
expressing, like a rusticated Oxonian, his penitence for having been so
naughty the last time, and offering to come and be very good again. It
is to the praise of the Chevalier de St. George that he had worldly
wisdom enough not to trust the gay penitent. He was tired, as everybody
else was, of a man who could stick to nothing, and did not seem to care
about seeing him again. Accordingly, he replied in true kingly style,
blaming him for having taken up arms against their common country, and
telling him in polite language--as a policeman does a riotous
drunkard--that he had better go home. The duke thought so too, was not
at all offended at the letter, and set off, by way of returning towards
his Penates, for Paris, where he arrived in May, 1728.

Horace Walpole--not _the_ Horace--but 'Uncle Horace,' or 'old Horace,'
as he was called, was then ambassador to the court of the Tuileries. Mr.
Walpole was one of the Houghton 'lot,' a brother of the famous minister
Sir Robert, and though less celebrated, almost as able in his line. He
had distinguished himself in various diplomatic appointments, in Spain,
at Hanover and the Hague, and having successfully tackled Cardinal
Fleury, the successor of the Richelieus and Mazarins at Paris, he was
now in high favour at home. In after years he was celebrated for his
duel with Chetwynd, who, when 'Uncle Horace' had in the House expressed
a hope that the question might be carried, had exclaimed, 'I hope to see
you hanged first!' 'You hope to see me hanged first, do you?' cried
Horace, with all the ferocity of the Walpoles; and thereupon, seizing
him by the most prominent feature of his face, shook him violently. This
was matter enough for a brace of swords and coffee for four, and Mr.
Chetwynd had to repent of his remark after being severely wounded. In
those days our honourable House of Commons was as much an arena of wild
beasts as the American senate of to-day.

To this minister our noble duke wrote a hypocritical letter, which, as
it shows how the man _could_ write penitently, is worth transcribing.

    'Lions, June 28, 1728.

'Sir,--Your excellency will be surpris'd to receive a letter from me;
but the clemency with which the government of England has treated me,
which is in a great measure owing to your brother's regard to my
father's memory, makes me hope that you will give me leave to express my
gratitude for it.

'Since his present majesty's accession to the throne I have absolutely
refused to be concerned with the Pretender or any of his affairs; and
during my stay in Italy have behaved myself in a manner that Dr. Peters,
Mr. Godolphin, and Mr. Mills can declare to be consistent with my duty
to the present king. I was forc'd to go to Italy to get out of Spain,
where, if my true design had been known, I should have been treated a
little severely.

'I am coming to Paris to put myself entirely under your excellency's
protection; and hope that Sir Robert Walpole's good-nature will prompt
him to save a family which his generosity induced him to spare. If your
excellency would permit me to wait upon you for an hour, I am certain
you would be convinc'd of the sincerity of my repentance for my former
madness, would become an advocate with his majesty to grant me his most
gracious pardon, which it is my comfort I shall never be required to
purchase by any step unworthy of a man of honour. I do not intend, in
case of the king's allowing me to pass the evening of my days under the
shadow of his royal protection, to see England for some years, but shall
remain in France or Germany, as my friends shall advise, and enjoy
country sports till all former stories are buried in oblivion. I beg of
your excellency to let me receive your orders at Paris, which I will
send to your hostel to receive. The Dutchess of Wharton, who is with me,
desires leave to wait on Mrs. Walpole, if you think proper.

    'I am, &c.'

After this, the ambassador could do no less than receive him; but he was
somewhat disgusted when on leaving him the duke frankly told
him--forgetting all about his penitent letter, probably, or too reckless
to care for it--that he was going to dine with the Bishop of
Rochester--Atterbury himself, then living in Paris--whose society was
interdicted to any subject of King George. The duke, with his usual
folly, touched on other subjects equally dangerous, his visit to Rome,
and his conversion to Romanism; and, in short, disgusted the cautious
Mr. Walpole. There is something delightfully impudent about all these
acts of Wharton's; and had he only been a clown at Drury Lane instead of
an English nobleman, he must have been successful. As it is, when one
reads of the petty hatred and humbug of those days, when liberty of
speech was as unknown as any other liberty, one cannot but admire the
impudence of his Grace of Wharton, and wish that most dukes, without
being as profligate, would be as free-spoken.

With six hundred pounds in his pocket, our young Lothario now set up
house at Rouen, with an establishment 'equal,' say the old-school
writers, 'to his position, but not to his means.' In other words, he
undertook to live in a style for which he could not pay. Twelve hundred
a year may be enough for a duke, as for any other man, but not for one
who considers a legion of servants a necessary appendage to his
position. My lord duke, who was a good French scholar, soon found an
ample number of friends and acquaintances, and not being particular
about either, managed to get through his half-year's income in a few
weeks. Evil consequence: he was assailed by duns. French duns know
nothing about forgiving debtors; 'your money first, and then my pardon,'
is their motto. My lord duke soon found this out. Still he had an
income, and could pay them all off in time. So he drank and was merry,
till one fine day came a disagreeable piece of news, which startled him
considerably. The government at home had heard of his doings, and
determined to arraign him for high treason.

He could expect little else, for had he not actually taken up arms
against his sovereign?

Now Sir Robert Walpole was, no doubt, a vulgarian. He was not a man to
love or sympathise with; but he _was_ good-natured at bottom. Our
'frolic grace' had reason to acknowledge this. He could not complain of
harshness in any measures taken against him, and he had certainly no
claim to consideration from the government he had treated so ill. Yet
Sir Robert was willing to give him every chance; and so far did he go,
that he sent over a couple of friends to him to induce him only to ask
pardon of the king, with a promise that it would be granted. For sure
the Duke of Wharton's character was anomalous. The same man who had more
than once humiliated himself when unasked, who had written to Walpole's
brother the letter we have read, would not now, when entreated to do so,
write a few lines to that minister to ask mercy. Nay, when the gentleman
in question offered to be content even with a letter from the duke's
valet, he refused to allow the man to write. Some people may admire what
they will believe to be firmness, but when we review the duke's
character and subsequent acts, we cannot attribute this refusal to
anything but obstinate pride. The consequence of this folly was a
stoppage of supplies, for as he was accused of high treason, his estate
was of course sequestrated. He revenged himself by writing a paper which
was published in 'Mist's Journal,' and which, under the cover of a
Persian tale, contained a species of libel on the government.

His position was now far from enviable; and, assailed by duns, he had
no resource but to humble himself, not before those he had offended, but
before the Chevalier, to whom he wrote in his distress, and who sent him
£2,000, which he soon frittered away in follies. This gone, the duke
begged and borrowed, for there are some people such fools that they
would rather lose a thousand pounds to a peer than give sixpence to a
pauper, and many a tale was told of the artful manner in which his grace
managed to cozen his friends out of a louis or two. His ready wit
generally saved him.

Thus on one occasion an Irish toady invited him to dinner: the duke
talked of his wardrobe, then sadly defective; what suit should he wear?
The Hibernian suggested black velvet. 'Could you recommend a tailor?'
'Certainly.' Snip came, an expensive suit was ordered, put on, and the
dinner taken. In due course the tailor called for his money. The duke
was not a bit at a loss, though he had but a few francs to his name.
'Honest man,' quoth he, 'you mistake the matter entirely. Carry the bill
to Sir Peter; for know that whenever I consent to wear another man's
livery, my master pays for the clothes,' and inasmuch as the
dinner-giver was an Irishman, he did actually discharge the account.

At other times he would give a sumptuous entertainment, and in one way
or another induce his guests to pay for it. He was only less adroit in
coining excuses than Theodore Hook, and had he lived a century later, we
might have a volume full of anecdotes to give of his ways and no means.
Meanwhile his unfortunate duchess was living on the charity of friends,
while her lord and master, when he could get anyone to pay for a band,
was serenading young ladies. Yet he was jealous enough of his wife at
times, and once sent a challenge to a Scotch nobleman, simply because
some silly friend asked him if he had forbidden his wife to dance with
the lord. He went all the way to Flanders to meet his opponent; but,
perhaps fortunately for the duke, Marshal Berwick arrested the
Scotchman, and the duel never came off.

Whether he felt his end approaching, or whether he was sick of vile
pleasures which he had recklessly pursued from the age of fifteen, he
now, though only thirty years of age, retired for a time to a convent,
and was looked on as a penitent and devotee. Penury, doubtless, cured
him in a measure, and poverty, the porter of the gates of heaven, warned
him to look forward beyond a life he had so shamefully misused. But it
was only a temporary repentance; and when he left the religious house,
he again rushed furiously into every kind of dissipation.

At length, utterly reduced to the last extremities, he bethought himself
of his colonelcy in Spain, and determined to set out to join his
regiment. The following letter from a friend who accompanied him will
best show what circumstances he was in:--

                                                'Paris, June 1, 1729.

'Dear Sir,--I am just returned from the Gates of Death, to return you
Thanks for your last kind Letter of Accusations, which I am persuaded
was intended as a seasonable Help to my Recollection, at a Time that it
was necessary for me to send an Inquisitor General into my Conscience,
to examine and settle all the Abuses that ever were committed in that
little Court of Equity; but I assure you, your long Letter did not lay
so much my Faults as my Misfortunes before me, which believe me, dear
----, have fallen as heavy and as thick upon me as the Shower of Hail
upon us two in E---- Forest, and has left me much at a Loss which way to
turn myself. The Pilot of the Ship I embarked in, who industriously ran
upon every Rock, has at last split the Vessel, and so much of a sudden,
that the whole Crew, I mean his Domesticks, are all left to swim for
their Lives, without one friendly Plank to assist them to Shore. In
short, he left me sick, in Debt, and without a Penny; but as I begin to
recover, and have a little time to Think, I can't help considering
myself, as one whisk'd up behind a Witch upon a Broomstick, and hurried
over Mountains and Dales through confus'd Woods and thorny Thickets, and
when the Charm is ended, and the poor Wretch dropp'd in a Desart, he can
give no other Account of his enchanted Travels, but that he is much
fatigued in Body and Mind, his Cloaths torn, and worse in all other
Circumstances, without being of the least Service to himself or any
body else. But I will follow your Advice with an active Resolution, to
retrieve my bad Fortune, and almost a Year miserably misspent.

'But notwithstanding what I have suffered, and what my Brother Mad-man
has done to undo himself, and every body who was so unlucky to have the
least Concern with him, I could not but be movingly touch'd at so
extraordinary a Vicissitude of Fortune, to see a great Man fallen from
that shining Light, in which I beheld him in the House of Lords, to such
a Degree of Obscurity, that I have observ'd the meanest Commoner here
decline, and the Few he would sometimes fasten on, to be tired of his
Company; for you know he is but a bad Orator in his Cups, and of late he
has been but seldom sober.

'A week before he left Paris, he was so reduced, that he had not one
single Crown at Command, and was forc'd to thrust in with any
Acquaintance for a Lodging; Walsh and I have had him by Turns, all to
avoid a Crowd of Duns, which he had of all Sizes, from Fourteen hundred
Livres to Four, who hunted him so close, that he was forced to retire to
some of the neighbouring Villages for Safety. I, sick as I was, hurried
about Paris to raise Money, and to St. Germain's to get him Linen; I
bought him one Shirt and a Cravat, which with 500 Livres, his whole
Stock, he and his Duchess, attended by one Servant, set out for Spain.
All the News I have heard of them since is that a Day or two after, he
sent for Captain Brierly, and two or three of his Domesticks, to follow
him; but none but the Captain obey'd the Summons. Where they are now, I
can't tell, but fear they must be in great Distress by this Time, if he
has no other Supplies; and so ends my Melancholy Story.

    'I am, &c.'

Still his good-humour did not desert him; he joked about their poverty
on the road, and wrote an amusing account of their journey to a friend,
winding up with the well-known lines:--

    'Be kind to my remains, and oh! defend,
     Against your judgment, your departed friend.'

His mind was as vigorous as ever, in spite of the waste of many
debauches; and when recommended to make a new translation of
'Telemachus;' he actually devoted one whole day to the work; the next he
forgot all about it. In the same manner he began a play on the story of
Mary Queen of Scots, and Lady M. W. Montagu wrote an epilogue for it,
but the piece never got beyond a few scenes. His genius, perhaps, was
not for either poetry or the drama. His mind was a keen, clear one,
better suited to argument and to grapple tough polemic subjects. Had he
but been a sober man, he might have been a fair, if not a great writer.
The 'True Briton,' with many faults of license, shows what his
capabilities were. His absence of moral sense may be guessed from his
poem on the preaching of Atterbury, in which is a parallel almost
blasphemous.

At length he reached Bilboa and his regiment, and had to live on the
meagre pay of eighteen pistoles a month. The Duke of Ormond, then an
exile, took pity on his wife, and supported her for a time: she
afterwards rejoined her mother at Madrid.

Meanwhile, the year 1730 brought about a salutary change in the duke's
morals. His health was fast giving way from the effects of divers
excesses; and there is nothing like bad health for purging a bad soul.
The end of a misspent life was fast drawing near, and he could only keep
it up by broth with eggs beaten up in it. He lost the use of his limbs,
but not of his gaiety. In the mountains of Catalonia he met with a
mineral spring which did him some good; so much, in fact, that he was
able to rejoin his regiment for a time. A fresh attack sent him back to
the waters; but on his way he was so violently attacked that he was
forced to stop at a little village. Here he found himself without the
means of going farther, and in the worst state of health. The monks of a
Bernardine convent took pity on him and received him into their house.
He grew worse and worse; and in a week died on the 31st of May, without
a friend to pity or attend him, among strangers, and at the early age of
thirty-two.

Thus ended the life of one of the cleverest fools that ever disgraced
our peerage.


    LORD HERVEY.

  George II. arriving from Hanover.--His Meeting with the
      Queen.--Lady Suffolk.--Queen Caroline.--Sir Robert
      Walpole.--Lord Hervey.--A set of Fine Gentlemen.--An Eccentric
      Race.--Carr, Lord Hervey.--A Fragile Boy.--Description of
      George II.'s Family.--Anne Brett.--A Bitter Cup.--The Darling
      of the Family.--Evenings at St. James's.--Frederick, Prince of
      Wales.--Amelia Sophia Walmoden.--Poor Queen Caroline!--Nocturnal
      Diversions of Maids of Honour.--Neighbour George's Orange
      Chest.--Mary Lepel, Lady Hervey.--Rivalry.--Hervey's Intimacy
      with Lady Mary.--Relaxations of the Royal Household.--Bacon's
      Opinion of Twickenham.--A Visit to Pope's Villa.--The Little
      Nightingale.--The Essence of Small Talk.--Hervey's Affectation
      and Effeminacy.--Pope's Quarrel with Hervey and Lady
      Mary.--Hervey's Duel with Pulteney.--'The Death of Lord Hervey:
      a Drama.'--Queen Caroline's last Drawing-room.--Her Illness and
      Agony.--A Painful Scene.--The Truth discovered.--The Queen's
      Dying Bequests.--The King's Temper.--Archbishop Potter is sent
      for.--The Duty of Reconciliation.--The Death of Queen
      Caroline.--A Change in Hervey's Life.--Lord Hervey's
      Death.--Want of Christianity.--Memoirs of his Own Time.


The village of Kensington was disturbed in its sweet repose one day,
more than a century ago, by the rumbling of a ponderous coach and six,
with four outriders and two equerries kicking up the dust; whilst a
small body of heavy dragoons rode solemnly after the huge vehicle. It
waded, with inglorious struggles, through a deep mire of mud, between
the Palace and Hyde Park, until the cortège entered Kensington Park, as
the gardens were then called, and began to track the old road that led
to the red-brick structure to which William III. had added a higher
story, built by Wren. There are two roads by which coaches could
approach the house: 'one,' as the famous John, Lord Hervey, wrote to his
mother, 'so convex, the other so concave, that, by this extreme of
faults, they agree in the common one of being, like the high road,
impassable.' The rumbling coach, with its plethoric steeds, toils slowly
on, and reaches the dismal pile, of which no association is so precious
as that of its having been the birthplace of our loved Victoria Regina.
All around, as the emblazoned carriage impressively veers round into the
grand entrance, savours of William and Mary, of Anne, of Bishop Burnet
and Harley, Atterbury and Bolingbroke. But those were pleasant days
compared to those of the second George, whose return from Hanover in
this mountain of a coach is now described.

The panting steeds are gracefully curbed by the state coachman in his
scarlet livery, with his cocked-hat and gray wig underneath it: now the
horses are foaming and reeking as if they had come from the world's end
to Kensington, and yet they have only been to meet King George on his
entrance into London, which he has reached from Helvoetsluys, on his way
from Hanover, in time, as he expects, to spend his birthday among his
English subjects.

It is Sunday, and repose renders the retirement of Kensington and its
avenues and shades more sombre than ever. Suburban retirement is usually
so. It is noon; and the inmates of Kensington Palace are just coming
forth from the chapel in the palace. The coach is now stopping, and the
equerries are at hand to offer their respectful assistance to the
diminutive figure that, in full Field-marshal regimentals, a cocked-hat
stuck crosswise on his head, a sword dangling even down to his heels,
ungraciously heeds them not, but stepping down, as the great iron gates
are thrown open to receive him, looks neither like a king or a
gentleman. A thin, worn face, in which weakness and passion are at once
pictured; a form buttoned and padded up to the chin; high Hessian boots
without a wrinkle; a sword and a swagger, no more constituting him the
military character than the 'your majesty' from every lip can make a
poor thing of clay a king. Such was George II.: brutal, even to his
submissive wife. Stunted by nature, he was insignificant in form, as he
was petty in character; not a trace of royalty could be found in that
silly, tempestuous physiognomy, with its hereditary small head: not an
atom of it in his made-up, paltry little presence; still less in his
bearing, language, or qualities.

The queen and her court have come from chapel, to meet the royal
absentee at the great gate: the consort, who was to his gracious majesty
like an elder sister rather than a wife, bends down, not to his knees,
but yet she bends, to kiss the hand of her royal husband. She is a fair,
fat woman, no longer young, scarcely comely; but with a charm of
manners, a composure, and a _savoir faire_ that causes one to regard her
as mated, not matched to the little creature in that cocked-hat, which
he does not take off even when she stands before him. The pair,
nevertheless, embrace: it is a triennial ceremony performed when the
king goes or returns from Hanover, but suffered to lapse at other times;
but the condescension is too great: and Caroline ends, where she began:
'gluing her lips to the ungracious hand held out to her in evident
ill-humour.

They turn, and walk through the court, then up the grand staircase, into
the queen's apartment. The king has been swearing all the way at England
and the English, because he has been obliged to return from Hanover,
where the German mode of life and new mistresses were more agreeable to
him than the English customs and an old wife. He displays, therefore,
even on this supposed happy occasion, one of the worst outbreaks of his
insufferable temper, of which the queen is the first victim. All the
company in the palace, both ladies and gentlemen, are ordered to enter:
he talks to them all, but to the queen he says not a word.

She is attended by Mrs. Clayton, afterwards Lady Sundon, whose lively
manners and great good temper and good will--lent out like leasehold to
all, till she saw what their friendship might bring,--are always useful
at these _tristes rencontres_. Mrs. Clayton is the amalgamating
substance between chemical agents which have, of themselves, no
cohesion; she covers with address what is awkward; she smooths down with
something pleasant what is rude; she turns off--and her office in that
respect is no sinecure at that court--what is indecent, so as to keep
the small majority of the company who have respectable notions in good
humour. To the right of Queen Caroline stands another of her majesty's
household, to whom the most deferential attention is paid by all
present; nevertheless, she is queen of the court, but not the queen of
the royal master of that court. It is Lady Suffolk, the mistress of
King George II., and long mistress of the robes to Queen Caroline. She
is now past the bloom of youth, but her attractions are not in their
wane; but endured until she had attained her seventy-ninth year. Of a
middle height, well made, extremely fair, with very fine light hair, she
attracts regard from her sweet, fresh face, which had in it a comeliness
independent of regularity of feature. According to her invariable
custom, she is dressed with simplicity; her silky tresses are drawn
somewhat back from her snowy forehead, and fall in long tresses on her
shoulders, not less transparently white. She wears a gown of rich silk,
opening in front to display a chemisette of the most delicate cambric,
which is scarcely less delicate than her skin. Her slender arms are
without bracelets, and her taper fingers without rings. As she stands
behind the queen, holding her majesty's fan and gloves, she is obliged,
from her deafness, to lean her fair face with its sunny hair first to
the right side, then to the left, with the helpless air of one
exceedingly deaf--for she had been afflicted with that infirmity for
some years: yet one cannot say whether her appealing looks, which seem
to say, 'Enlighten me if you please,'--and the sort of softened manner
in which she accepts civilities which she scarcely comprehends do not
enhance the wonderful charm which drew every one who knew her towards
this frail, but passionless woman.

[Illustration: SCENE BEFORE KENSINGTON PALACE--GEORGE II. AND QUEEN
CAROLINE.]

The queen forms the centre of the group. Caroline, daughter of the
Marquis of Brandenburgh-Anspach, notwithstanding her residence in
England of many years, notwithstanding her having been, at the era at
which this biography begins, ten years its queen--is still German in
every attribute. She retains, in her fair and comely face, traces of
having been handsome; but her skin is deeply scarred by the cruel
small-pox. She is now at that time of life when Sir Robert Walpole even
thought it expedient to reconcile her to no longer being an object of
attraction to her royal consort. As a woman, she has ceased to be
attractive to a man of the character of George II.; but, as a queen, she
is still, as far as manners are concerned, incomparable. As she turns to
address various members of the assembly, her style is full of sweetness
as well as of courtesy, yet on other occasions she is majesty itself.
The tones of her voice, with its still foreign accent, are most
captivating; her eyes penetrate into every countenance on which they
rest. Her figure, plump and matronly, has lost much of its contour; but
is well suited for her part. Majesty in women should be _embonpoint_.
Her hands are beautifully white, and faultless in shape. The king always
admired her bust; and it is, therefore, by royal command, tolerably
exposed. Her fair hair is upraised in full short curls over her brow:
her dress is rich, and distinguished in that respect from that of the
Countess of Suffolk.--'Her good Howard'--as she was wont to call her,
when, before her elevation to the peerage, she was lady of the
bedchamber to Caroline, had, when in that capacity, been often subjected
to servile offices, which the queen, though apologizing in the sweetest
manner, delighted to make her perform. 'My good Howard' having one day
placed a handkerchief on the back of her royal mistress, the king, who
half worshipped his intellectual wife, pulled it off in a passion,
saying, 'Because you have an ugly neck yourself, you hide the queen's!'
All, however, that evening was smooth as ice, and perhaps as cold also.
The company are quickly dismissed, and the king, who has scarcely spoken
to the queen, retires to his closet, where he is attended by the
subservient Caroline, and by two other persons.

Sir Robert Walpole, prime minister, has accompanied the king in his
carriage, from the very entrance of London, where the famous statesman
met him. He is now the privileged companion of their majesties, in their
seclusion for the rest of the evening. His cheerful face, in its full
evening disguise of wig and tie, his invariable good humour, his frank
manners, his wonderful sense, his views, more practical than elevated,
sufficiently account for the influence which this celebrated minister
obtained over Queen Caroline, and the readiness of King George to submit
to the tie. But Sir Robert's great source of ascendancy was his temper.
Never was there in the annals of our country a minister so free of
access: so obliging in giving, so unoffending when he refused; so
indulgent and kind to those dependent on him; so generous, so faithful
to his friends, so forgiving to his foes. This was his character under
one phase: even his adherents sometimes blamed his easiness of temper;
the impossibility in his nature to cherish the remembrance of a wrong,
or even to be roused by an insult. But, whilst such were the amiable
traits of his character, history has its lists of accusations against
him for corruption of the most shameless description. The end of this
veteran statesman's career is well known. The fraudulent contracts which
he gave, the peculation and profusion of the secret service money, his
undue influence at elections, brought around his later life a storm,
from which he retreated into the Upper House, when created Earl of
Orford. It was before this timely retirement from office that he burst
forth in these words: 'I oppose nothing; give in to everything; am said
to do everything; and to answer for everything; and yet, God knows, I
dare not do what I think is right.'

With his public capacity, however, we have not here to do: it is in his
character of a courtier that we view him following the queen and king.
His round, complacent face, with his small glistening eyes, arched
eyebrows, and with a mouth ready to break out aloud into a laugh, are
all subdued into a respectful gravity as he listens to King George
grumbling at the necessity for his return home. No English cook could
dress a dinner; no English cook could select a dessert; no English
coachman could drive; nor English jockey ride; no Englishman--such were
his habitual taunts--knew how to come into a room; no Englishwoman
understood how to dress herself. The men, he said, talked of nothing but
their dull politics, and the women of nothing but their ugly clothes.
Whereas, in Hanover, all these things were at perfection: men were
patterns of politeness and gallantry; women, of beauty, wit, and
entertainment. His troops there were the bravest in the world; his
manufacturers the most ingenious; his people the happiest: in Hanover,
in short, plenty reigned, riches flowed, arts flourished, magnificence
abounded, everything was in abundance that could make a prince great, or
a people blessed.

There was one standing behind the queen who listened to these outbreaks
of the king's bilious temper, as he called it, with an apparently
respectful solicitude, but with the deepest disgust in his heart. A
slender, elegant figure, in a court suit, faultlessly and carefully
perfect in that costume, stands behind the queen's chair. It is Lord
Hervey. His lofty forehead, his features, which have a refinement of
character, his well-turned mouth, and full and dimpled chin, form his
claims to that beauty which won the heart of the lovely Mary Lepel;
whilst the somewhat thoughtful and pensive expression of his
physiognomy, when in repose, indicated the sympathising, yet, at the
same time, satirical character of one who won the affections, perhaps
unconsciously, of the amiable Princess Caroline, the favourite daughter
of George II.

A general air of languor, ill concealed by the most studied artifice of
countenance, and even of posture, characterizes Lord Hervey. He would
have abhorred robustness; for he belonged to the clique then called
Maccaronis; a set of fine gentlemen, of whom the present world would not
be worthy, tricked out for show, fitted only to drive out fading majesty
in a stage coach; exquisite in every personal appendage, too fine for
the common usages of society; _point-device_, not only in every curl and
ruffle, but in every attitude and step; men with full satin roses on
their shining shoes; diamond tablet rings on their forefingers; with
snuff-boxes, the worth of which might almost purchase a farm; lace
worked by the delicate fingers of some religious recluse of an
ancestress, and taken from an altar-cloth; old point-lace, dark as
coffee-water could make it; with embroidered waistcoats, wreathed in
exquisite tambour-work round each capricious lappet and pocket; with cut
steel buttons that glistened beneath the courtly wax-lights: with these
and fifty other small but costly characteristics that established the
reputation of an aspirant Maccaroni. Lord Hervey was, in truth, an
effeminate creature: too dainty to walk; too precious to commit his
frame to horseback; and prone to imitate the somewhat recluse habits
which German rulers introduced within the court: he was disposed to
candle-light pleasures and cockney diversions; to Marybone and the Mall,
and shrinking from the athletic and social recreations which, like so
much that was manly and English, were confined almost to the English
squire _pur et simple_ after the Hanoverian accession; when so much
degeneracy for a while obscured the English character, debased its tone,
enervated its best races, vilified its literature, corrupted its morals,
changed its costume, and degraded its architecture.

Beneath the effeminacy of the Maccaroni, Lord Hervey was one of the few
who united to intense _finery_ in every minute detail, an acute and
cultivated intellect. To perfect a Maccaroni it was in truth advisable,
if not essential, to unite some smattering of learning, a pretension to
wit, to his super-dandyism; to be the author of some personal squib, or
the translator of some classic. Queen Caroline was too cultivated
herself to suffer fools about her, and Lord Hervey was a man after her
own taste; as a courtier he was essentially a fine gentleman; and, more
than that, he could be the most delightful companion, the most sensible
adviser, and the most winning friend in the court. His ill-health, which
he carefully concealed, his fastidiousness, his ultra-delicacy of
habits, formed an agreeable contrast to the coarse robustness of 'Sir
Robert,' and constituted a relief after the society of the vulgar,
strong-minded minister, who was born for the hustings and the House of
Commons rather than for the courtly drawing-room.

John Lord Hervey, long vice-chamberlain to Queen Caroline, was, like Sir
Robert Walpole, descended from a commoner's family, one of those good
old squires who lived, as Sir Henry Wotton says, 'without lustre and
without obscurity.' The Duchess of Marlborough had procured the
elevation of the Herveys of Ickworth to the peerage. She happened to be
intimate with Sir Thomas Felton, the father of Mrs. Hervey, afterwards
Lady Bristol, whose husband, at first created Lord Hervey, and
afterwards Earl of Bristol, expressed his obligations by retaining as
his motto, when raised to the peerage, the words 'Je n'oublieray
jàmais,' in allusion to the service done him by the Duke and Duchess of
Marlborough.

The Herveys had always been an eccentric race; and the classification of
'men, women, and Herveys,' by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, was not more
witty than true. There was in the whole race an eccentricity which
bordered on the ridiculous, but did not imply want of sense or of
talent. Indeed this third species, 'the Herveys,' were more gifted than
the generality of 'men and women.' The father of Lord Hervey had been a
country gentleman of good fortune, living at Ickworth, near Bury in
Suffolk, and representing the town in parliament, as his father had
before him, until raised to the peerage. Before that elevation he had
lived on in his own county, uniting the character of the English squire,
in that fox-hunting county, with that of a perfect gentleman, a scholar,
and a most admirable member of society. He was a poet, also, affecting
the style of Cowley, who wrote an elegy upon his uncle, William Hervey,
an elegy compared to Milton's 'Lycidas' in imagery, music, and
tenderness of thought. The shade of Cowley, whom Charles II. pronounced,
at his death, to be 'the best man in England,' haunted this peer, the
first Earl of Bristol. He aspired especially to the poet's _wit_; and
the ambition to be a wit flew like wildfire among his family, especially
infecting his two sons, Carr, the elder brother of the subject of this
memoir, and Lord Hervey.

It would have been well could the Earl of Bristol have transmitted to
his sons his other qualities. He was pious, moral, affectionate,
sincere; a consistent Whig of the old school, and, as such, disapproving
of Sir Robert Walpole, of the standing army, the corruptions, and that
doctrine of expediency so unblushingly avowed by the ministers.

Created Earl of Bristol in 1714, the heir-apparent to his titles and
estates was the elder brother, by a former marriage, of John, Lord
Hervey; the dissolute, clever, whimsical Carr, Lord Hervey. Pope, in one
of his satirical appeals to the _second_ Lord Hervey, speaks of his
friendship with Carr, 'whose early death deprived the family' (of
Hervey) 'of as much wit and honour as he left behind him in any part of
it.' The _wit_ was a family attribute, but the _honour_ was dubious:
Carr was as deistical as any Maccaroni of the day, and, perhaps, more
dissolute than most: in one respect he has left behind him a celebrity
which may be as questionable as his wit, or his honour; he is reputed to
be the father of Horace Walpole, and if we accept presumptive evidence
of the fact, the statement is clearly borne out, for in his wit, his
indifference to religion, to say the least, his satirical turn, his
love of the world, and his contempt of all that was great and good, he
strongly resembles his reputed son; whilst the levity of Lady Walpole's
character, and Sir Robert's laxity and dissoluteness, do not furnish any
reasonable doubt to the statement made by Lady Louisa Stuart, in the
introduction to Lord Wharncliffe's 'Life of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.'
Carr, Lord Hervey, died early, and his half-brother succeeded him in his
title and expectations.

John, Lord Hervey, was educated first at Westminster School, under Dr.
Freind, the friend of Mrs. Montagu; thence he was removed to Clare Hall,
Cambridge: he graduated as a nobleman, and became M.A. in 1715.

At Cambridge Lord Hervey might have acquired some manly prowess; but he
had a mother who was as strange as the family into which she had
married, and who was passionately devoted to her son: she evinced her
affection by never letting him have a chance of being like other English
boys. When his father was at Newmarket, Jack Hervey, as he was called,
was to ride a race, to please his father; but his mother could not risk
her dear boy's safety, and the race was won by a jockey. He was as
precious and as fragile as porcelain: the elder brother's death made the
heir of the Herveys more valuable, more effeminate, and more controlled
than ever by his eccentric mother. A court was to be his hemisphere, and
to that all his views, early in life, tended. He went to Hanover to pay
his court to George I.: Carr had done the same, and had come back
enchanted with George, the heir-presumptive, who made him one of the
lords of the bedchamber. Jack Hervey also returned full of enthusiasm
for the Prince of Wales, afterwards George II., and the Princess; and
that visit influenced his destiny.

He now proposed making the grand tour, which comprised Paris, Germany,
and Italy. But his mother again interfered: she wept, she exhorted, she
prevailed. Means were refused, and the stripling was recalled to hang
about the court, or to loiter at Ickworth, scribbling verses, and
causing his father uneasiness lest he should be too much of a poet, and
too little of a public man.

Such was his youth: disappointed by not obtaining a commission in the
Guards, he led a desultory butterfly-like life; one day at Richmond with
Queen Caroline, then Princess of Wales; another, at Pope's villa, at
Twickenham; sometimes in the House of Commons, in which he succeeded his
elder brother as member for Bury; and, at the period when he has been
described as forming one of the quartett in Queen Caroline's closet at
St. James's, as vice-chamberlain to his partial and royal patroness.

His early marriage with Mary Lepel, the beautiful maid of honour to
Queen Caroline, insured his felicity, though it did not curb his
predilections for other ladies.

Henceforth Lord Hervey lived all the year round in what were then called
lodgings, that is, apartments appropriated to the royal household, or
even to others, in St. James's, or at Richmond, or at Windsor. In order
fully to comprehend all the intimate relations which he had with the
court, it is necessary to present the reader with some account of the
family of George II. Five daughters had been the female issue of his
majesty's marriage with Queen Caroline. Three of these princesses, the
three elder ones, had lived, during the life of George I., at St.
James's with their grandfather; who, irritated by the differences
between him and his son, then Prince of Wales, adopted that measure
rather as showing his authority than from any affection to the young
princesses. It was, in truth, difficult to say which of these royal
ladies was the most unfortunate.

Anne, the eldest, had shown her spirit early in life whilst residing
with George I.; she had a proud, imperious nature, and her temper was,
it must be owned, put to a severe test. The only time that George I. did
the English the _honour_ of choosing one of the beauties of the nation
for his mistress, was during the last year of his reign. The object of
his choice was Anne Brett, the eldest daughter of the infamous Countess
of Macclesfield by her second husband. The neglect of Savage, the poet,
her son, was merely one passage in the iniquitous life of Lady
Macclesfield. Endowed with singular taste and judgment, consulted by
Colley Cibber on every new play he produced, the mother of Savage was
not only wholly destitute of all virtue, but of all shame. One day,
looking out of the window, she perceived a very handsome man assaulted
by some bailiffs who were going to arrest him: she paid his debt,
released, and married him. The hero of this story was Colonel Brett, the
father of Anne Brett.

The child of such a mother was not likely to be even
decently-respectable; and Anne was proud of her disgraceful preeminence
and of her disgusting and royal lover. She was dark, and her flashing
black eyes resembled those of a Spanish beauty. Ten years after the
death of George I., she found a husband in Sir William Leman, of
Northall, and was announced, on that occasion, as the half-sister of
Richard Savage.

To the society of this woman, when at St. James's, as 'Mistress Brett,'
the three princesses were subjected: at the same time the Duchess of
Kendal, the king's German mistress, occupied other lodgings at St.
James's.

Miss Brett was to be rewarded with the coronet of a countess for her
degradation, the king being absent on the occasion at Hanover; elated by
her expectations, she took the liberty, during his majesty's absence, of
ordering a door to be broken out of her apartment into the royal garden,
where the princesses walked. The Princess Anne, not deigning to
associate with her, commanded that it should be forthwith closed. Miss
Brett imperiously reversed that order. In the midst of the affair, the
king died suddenly, and Anne Brett's reign was over, and her influence
soon as much forgotten as if she had never existed. The Princess Anne
was pining in the dulness of her royal home, when a marriage with the
Prince of Orange, was proposed for the consideration of his parents. It
was a miserable match as well as a miserable prospect, for the prince's
revenue amounted to no more than £12,000 a year; and the state and pomp
to which the Princess Royal had been accustomed could not be
contemplated on so small a fortune. It was still worse in point of that
poor consideration, happiness. The Prince of Orange was both deformed
and disgusting in his person, though his face was sensible in
expression; and if he inspired one idea more strongly than another when
he appeared in his uniform and cocked hat, and spoke bad French, or
worse English, it was that of seeing before one a dressed-up baboon.

It was a bitter cup for the princess to drink, but she drank it: she
reflected that it might be the only way of quitting a court where, in
case of her father's death, she would be dependent on her brother
Frederick, or on that weak prince's strong-minded wife. So she
consented, and took the dwarf; and that consent was regarded by a
grateful people, and by all good courtiers, as a sacrifice for the sake
of Protestant principles, the House of Orange being, _par excellence_,
at the head of the orthodox dynasties in Europe. A dowry of £80,000 was
forthwith granted by an admiring Commons--just double what had ever been
given before. That sum was happily lying in the exchequer, being the
purchase-money of some lands in St. Christopher's which had lately been
sold; and King George was thankful to get rid of a daughter whose
haughtiness gave him trouble. In person, too, the princess royal was not
very ornamental to the Court. She was ill-made, with a propensity to
grow fat; her complexion, otherwise very fine, was marked with the
small-pox; she had, however, a lively, clean look--one of her chief
beauties--and a certain royalty of manner.

The Princess Amelia died, as the world thought, single, but consoled
herself with various love flirtations. The Duke of Newcastle made love
to her, but her affections were centred on the Duke of Grafton, to whom
she was privately married, as is confidently asserted.

The Princess Caroline was the darling of her family. Even the king
relied on her truth. When there was any dispute, he used to say, 'Send
for Caroline; she will tell us the right story.'

Her fate had its clouds. Amiable, gentle, of unbounded charity, with
strong affections, which were not suffered to flow in a legitimate
channel, she became devotedly attached to Lord Hervey: her heart was
bound up in him; his death drove her into a permanent retreat from the
world. No debasing connection existed between them; but it is misery, it
is sin enough to love another woman's husband--and that sin, that
misery, was the lot of the royal and otherwise virtuous Caroline.

The Princess Mary, another victim to conventionalities, was united to
Frederick, Landgrave of Hesse Cassel; a barbarian, from whom she
escaped, whenever she could, to come, with a bleeding heart, to her
English home. She was, even Horace Walpole allows, 'of the softest,
mildest temper in the world,' and fondly beloved by her sister Caroline,
and by the 'Butcher of Culloden,' William, Duke of Cumberland.

Louisa became Queen of Denmark in 1746, after some years' marriage to
the Crown Prince. 'We are lucky,' Horace Walpole writes on that
occasion, 'in the death of kings.'

The two princesses who were still under the paternal roof were
contrasts. Caroline was a constant invalid, gentle, sincere,
unambitious, devoted to her mother, whose death nearly killed her.
Amelia affected popularity, and assumed the _esprit fort_--was fond of
meddling in politics, and after the death of her mother, joined the
Bedford faction, in opposition to her father. But both these princesses
were outwardly submissive when Lord Hervey became the Queen's
chamberlain.

The evenings at St. James's were spent in the same way as those at
Kensington.

Quadrille formed her majesty's pastime, and, whilst Lord Hervey played
pools of cribbage with the Princess Caroline and the maids of honour,
the Duke of Cumberland amused himself and the Princess Amelia at
'buffet.' On Mondays and Fridays there were drawing-rooms held; and
these receptions took place, very wisely, in the evening.

Beneath all the show of gaiety and the freezing ceremony of those
stately occasions, there was in that court as much misery as family
dissensions, or, to speak accurately, family hatreds can engender.
Endless jealousies, which seem to us as frivolous as they were rabid;
and contentions, of which even the origin is still unexplained, had long
severed the queen from her eldest son. George II. had always loved his
mother: his affection for the unhappy Sophia Dorothea was one of the
very few traits of goodness in a character utterly vulgar, sensual, and
entirely selfish. His son, Frederick, Prince of Wales, on the other
hand, hated his mother. He loved neither of his parents: but the queen
had the preeminence in his aversion.

The king, during the year 1736, was at Hanover. His return was
announced, but under circumstances of danger. A tremendous storm arose
just as he was prepared to embark at Helvoetsluys. All London was on the
look out, weather-cocks were watched; tides, winds, and moons formed the
only subjects of conversation; but no one of his majesty's subjects was
so demonstrative as the Prince of Wales, and his cheerfulness, and his
triumph even, on the occasion, were of course resentfully heard of by
the queen.

During the storm, when anxiety had almost amounted to fever, Lord Hervey
dined with Sir Robert Walpole. Their conversation naturally turned on
the state of affairs, prospectively. Sir Robert called the prince a
'poor, weak, irresolute, false, lying, contemptible wretch.' Lord Hervey
did not defend him, but suggested that Frederick, in case of his
father's death, might be more influenced by the queen than he had
hitherto been. 'Zounds, my lord!' interrupted Sir Robert, 'he would tear
the flesh off her bones with red-hot irons sooner! The distinctions she
shows to you, too, I believe, would not be forgotten. Then the notion he
has of his great riches, and the desire he has of fingering them, would
make him pinch her, and pinch her again, in order to make her buy her
ease, till she had not a groat left.'

What a picture of a heartless and selfish character! The next day the
queen sent for Lord Hervey, to ask him if he knew the particulars of a
great dinner which the prince had given to the lord mayor the previous
day, whilst the whole country, and the court in particular, was
trembling for the safety of the king, his father. Lord Hervey told her
that the prince's speech at the dinner was the most ingratiating piece
of popularity ever heard; the healths, of course, as usual. 'Heavens!'
cried the queen: 'popularity always makes me sick, but _Fritz's_
popularity makes me vomit! I hear that yesterday, on the prince's side
of the House, they talked of the king's being cast away with the same
_sang froid_ as you would talk of an overturn; and that my good son
strutted about as if he had been already king. Did you mark the airs
with which he came into my drawing-room in the morning? though he does
not think fit to honour me with his presence, or _ennui_ me with his
wife's, of an evening? I felt something here in my throat that swelled
and half-choked me.'

Poor Queen Caroline! with such a son, and such a husband, she must have
been possessed of a more than usual share of German imperturbability to
sustain her cheerfulness, writhing, as she often was, under the pangs of
a long-concealed disorder, of which eventually she died. Even on the
occasion of the king's return in time to spend his birthday in England,
the queen's temper had been sorely tried. Nothing had ever vexed her
more than the king's admiration for Amelia Sophia Walmoden, who, after
the death of Caroline, was created Countess of Yarmouth. Madame Walmoden
had been a reigning belle among the married women at Hanover, when
George II. visited that country in 1735. Not that her majesty's
affections were wounded; it was her pride that was hurt by the idea that
people would think that this Hanoverian lady had more influence than she
had. In other respects the king's absence was a relief: she had the
_éclat_ of the regency; she had the comfort of having the hours which
her royal torment decreed were to be passed in amusing his dulness, to
herself; she was free from his 'quotidian sallies of temper, which,' as
Lord Hervey relates, 'let it be charged by what hand it would, used
always to discharge its hottest fire, on some pretence or other, upon
her.'

It is quite true that from the first dawn of his preference for Madame
Walmoden, the king wrote circumstantial letters of fifty or sixty pages
to the queen, informing her of every stage of the affair; the queen, in
reply, saying that she was only _one_ woman, and an old woman, and
adding, 'that he might love _more and younger women_.' In return, the
king wrote, 'You must love the Walmoden, for she loves _you_;' a civil
insult, which he accompanied with so minute a description of his new
favourite, that the queen, had she been a painter, might have drawn her
portrait at a hundred miles' distance.

The queen, subservient as she seemed, felt the humiliation. Such was the
debased nature of George II. that he not only wrote letters unworthy of
a man to write, and unfit for a woman to read, to his wife, but he
desired her to show them to Sir Robert Walpole. He used to 'tag several
paragraphs,' as Lord Hervey expresses it, with these words, '_Montrez
ceci, et consultez la-dessus de gros homme_,' meaning Sir Robert. But
this was only a portion of the disgusting disclosures made by the vulgar
licentious monarch to his too degraded consort.

In the bitterness of her mortification the queen consulted Lord Hervey
and Sir Robert as to the possibility of her losing her influence, should
she resent the king's delay in returning. They agreed, that her taking
the '_fière_ turn' would ruin her with her royal consort; Sir Robert
adding, that if he had a mind to flatter her into her ruin, he might
talk to her as if she were twenty-five, and try to make her imagine that
she could bring the king back by the apprehension of losing her
affection. He said it was now too late in her life to try new methods;
she must persist in the soothing, coaxing, submissive arts which had
been practised with success, and even press his majesty to bring this
woman to England! 'He taught her,' says Lord Hervey, 'this hard lesson
till she _wept_.' Nevertheless, the queen expressed her gratitude to the
minister for his advice. 'My lord,' said Walpole to Hervey, 'she laid
her thanks on me so thick that I found I had gone too far, for I am
never so much afraid of her rebukes as of her commendations.'

Such was the state of affairs between this singular couple.
Nevertheless, the queen, not from attachment to the king, but from the
horror she had of her son's reigning, felt such fears of the prince's
succeeding to the throne as she could hardly express. He would, she was
convinced, do all he could to ruin and injure her in case of his
accession to the throne.

The consolation of such a friend as Lord Hervey can easily be conceived,
when he told her majesty that he had resolved, in case the king had been
lost at sea, to have retired from her service, in order to prevent any
jealousy or irritation that might arise from his supposed influence with
her majesty. The queen stopped him short, and said, 'No, my lord, I
should never have suffered that; you are one of the greatest pleasures
of my life. But did I love you less than I do, or less like to have you
about me, I should look upon the suffering you to be taken from me as
such a meanness and baseness that you should not have stirred an inch
from me. You,' she added, 'should have gone with me to Somerset House;'
(which was hers in case of the king's death). She then told him she
should have begged Sir Robert Walpole on her knees not to have sent in
his resignation.

The animosity of the Prince of Wales to Lord Hervey augmented, there can
be no doubt, his unnatural aversion to the queen, an aversion which he
evinced early in life. There was a beautiful, giddy maid of honour, who
attracted not only the attention of Frederick, but the rival attentions
of other suitors, and among them, the most favoured was said to be Lord
Hervey, notwithstanding that he had then been for some years the husband
of one of the loveliest ornaments of the court, the sensible and
virtuous Mary Lepel. Miss Vane became eventually the avowed favourite of
the prince, and after giving birth to a son, who was christened
Fitz-Frederick Vane, and who died in 1736, his unhappy mother died a few
months afterwards. It is melancholy to read a letter from Lady Hervey to
Mrs. Howard, portraying the frolic and levity of this once joyous
creature, among the other maids of honour; and her strictures show at
once the unrefined nature of the pranks in which they indulged, and her
once sobriety of demeanour.

She speaks, on one occasion, in which, however, Miss Vane did not share
the nocturnal diversion, of some of the maids of honour being out in the
winter all night in the gardens at Kensington--opening and rattling the
windows, and trying to frighten people out of their wits; and she gives
Mrs. Howard a hint that the queen ought to be informed of the way in
which her young attendants amused themselves. After levities such as
these, it is not surprising to find poor Miss Vane writing to Mrs.
Howard, with complaints that she was unjustly aspersed, and referring to
her relatives, Lady Betty Nightingale and Lady Hewet, in testimony of
the falsehood of reports which, unhappily, the event verified.

The prince, however, never forgave Lord Hervey for being his rival with
Miss Vane, nor his mother for her favours to Lord Hervey. In vain did
the queen endeavour to reconcile Fritz, as she called him, to his
father;--nothing could be done in a case where the one was all dogged
selfishness; and where the other, the idol of the opposition party, as
the prince had ever been, so _legère de tête_ as to swallow all the
adulation offered to him, and to believe himself a demigod. 'The queen's
dread of a rival,' Horace Walpole remarks, 'was a feminine weakness: the
behaviour of her eldest son was a real thorn.' Some time before his
marriage to a princess who was supposed to augment his hatred of his
mother, Frederick of Wales had contemplated an act of disobedience. Soon
after his arrival in England, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, hearing
that he was in want of money, had sent to offer him her granddaughter,
Lady Diana Spencer, with a fortune of £100,000. The prince accepted the
young lady, and a day was fixed for his marriage in the duchess's lodge
at the Great Park, Windsor. But Sir Robert Walpole, getting intelligence
of the plot, the nuptials were stopped. The duchess never forgave either
Walpole or the royal family, and took an early opportunity of insulting
the latter. When the Prince of Orange came over to marry the Princess
Royal, a sort of boarded gallery was erected from the windows of the
great drawing-room of the palace, and was constructed so as to cross the
garden to the Lutheran chapel in the Friary, where the duchess lived.
The Prince of Orange being ill, went to Bath, and the marriage was
delayed for some weeks. Meantime the widows of Marlborough House were
darkened by the gallery. 'I wonder,' cried the old duchess, 'when my
neighbour George will take away his orange-chest!' The structure, with
its pent-house roof, really resembling an orange-chest.

Mary Lepel, Lady Hervey, whose attractions, great as they were, proved
insufficient to rivet the exclusive admiration of the accomplished
Hervey, had become his wife in 1720, some time before her husband had
been completely enthralled with the gilded prison doors of a court. She
was endowed with that intellectual beauty calculated to attract a man of
talent: she was highly educated, of great talent; possessed of _savoir
faire_, infinite good temper, and a strict sense of duty. She also
derived from her father, Brigadier Lepel, who was of an ancient family
in Sark, a considerable fortune. Good and correct as she was, Lady
Hervey viewed with a fashionable composure the various intimacies formed
during the course of their married life by his lordship.

The fact is, that the aim of both was not so much to insure their
domestic felicity as to gratify their ambition. Probably they were
disappointed in both these aims--certainly in one of them; talented,
indefatigable, popular, lively, and courteous, Lord Hervey, in the House
of Commons, advocated in vain, in brilliant orations, the measures of
Walpole. Twelve years, fourteen years elapsed, and he was left in the
somewhat subordinate position of vice-chamberlain, in spite of that high
order of talents which he possessed, and which would have been displayed
to advantage in a graver scene. The fact has been explained: the queen
could not do without him; she confided in him; her daughter loved him;
and his influence in that court was too powerful for Walpole to dispense
with an aid so valuable to his own plans. Some episodes in a life thus
frittered away, until, too late, promotion came, alleviated his
existence, and gave his wife only a passing uneasiness, if even indeed
they imparted a pang.

One of these was his dangerous passion for Miss Vane; another, his
platonic attachment to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.

Whilst he lived on the terms with his wife which is described even by
the French as being a '_Ménage de Paris_,' Lord Hervey, found in another
quarter the sympathies which, as a husband, he was too well-bred to
require. It is probable that he always admired his wife more than any
other person, for she had qualities that were quite congenial to the
tastes of a wit and a beau in those times. Lady Hervey was not only
singularly captivating, young, gay, and handsome; but a complete model
also of the polished, courteous, high-bred woman of fashion. Her manners
are said by Lady Louisa Stuart to have 'had a foreign tinge, which some
called affected; but they were gentle, easy, and altogether exquisitely
pleasing.' She was in secret a Jacobite--and resembled in that respect
most of the fine ladies in Great Britain. Whiggery and Walpolism were
vulgar: it was _haut ton_ to take offence when James II. was
anathematized, and quite good taste to hint that some people wished well
to the Chevalier's attempts: and this way of speaking owed its fashion
probably to Frederick of Wales, whose interest in Flora Macdonald, and
whose concern for the exiled family, were among the few amiable traits
of his disposition. Perhaps they arose from a wish to plague his
parents, rather than from a greatness of character foreign to this
prince.

Lady Hervey was in the bloom of youth, Lady Mary in the zenith of her
age, when they became rivals: Lady Mary had once excited the jealousy of
Queen Caroline when Princess of Wales.

'How becomingly Lady Mary is dressed to-night,' whispered George II. to
his wife, whom he had called up from the card-table to impart to her
that important conviction. 'Lady Mary always dresses well,' was the cold
and curt reply.

Lord Hervey had been married about seven years when Lady Mary Wortley
Montagu re-appeared at the court of Queen Caroline, after her long
residence in Turkey. Lord Hervey was thirty-three years of age; Lady
Mary was verging on forty. She was still a pretty woman, with a piquant,
neat-featured face; which does not seem to have done any justice to a
mind at once masculine and sensitive, nor to a heart capable of
benevolence--capable of strong attachments, and of bitter hatred.

Like Lady Hervey, she lived with her husband on well-bred terms: there
existed no quarrel between them; no avowed ground of coldness; it was
the icy boundary of frozen feeling that severed them; the sure and
lasting though polite destroyer of all bonds, indifference. Lady Mary
was full of repartee, of poetry, of anecdote, and was not averse to
admiration; but she was essentially a woman of common sense, of views
enlarged by travel, and of ostensibly good principles. A woman of
delicacy was not to be found in those days, any more than other
productions of the nineteenth century: a telegraphic message would have
been almost as startling to a courtly ear as the refusal of a fine lady
to suffer a _double entendre_. Lady Mary was above all scruples, and
Lord Hervey, who had lived too long with George II. and his queen to
have the moral sense in her perfection, liked her all the better for her
courage--her merry, indelicate jokes, and her putting things down by
their right names, on which Lady Mary plumed herself: she was what they
term in the north of England, 'Emancipated.' They formed an old
acquaintance with a confidential, if not a tender friendship; and that
their intimacy was unpleasant to Lady Hervey was proved by her
refusal--when, after the grave had closed over Lord Hervey, late in
life, Lady Mary ill, and broken down by age, returned to die in
England--to resume an acquaintance which had been a painful one to her.

Lord Hervey was a martyr to illness of an epileptic character; and Lady
Mary gave him her sympathy. She was somewhat of a doctor--and being
older than her friend, may have had the art of soothing sufferings,
which were the worse because they were concealed. Whilst he writhed in
pain, he was obliged to give vent to his agony by alleging that an
attack of cramp bent him double: yet he lived by rule--a rule harder to
adhere to than that of the most conscientious homoeopath in the
present day. In the midst of court gaieties and the duties of office, he
thus wrote to Dr. Cheyne:--

... 'To let you know that I continue one of your most pious votaries,
and to tell you the method I am in. In the first place, I never take
wine nor malt drink, nor any liquid but water and milk-tea; in the next,
I eat no meat but the whitest, youngest, and tenderest, nine times in
ten nothing but chicken, and never more than the quantity of a small one
at a meal. I seldom eat any supper, but if any, nothing absolutely but
bread and water; two days in the week I eat no flesh; my breakfast is
dry biscuit, not sweet, and green tea; I have left off butter as
bilious; I eat no salt, nor any sauce but bread-sauce.'

Among the most cherished relaxations of the royal household were visits
to Twickenham, whilst the court was at Richmond. The River Thames, which
has borne on its waves so much misery in olden times--which was the
highway from the Star-chamber to the tower--which has been belaboured in
our days with so much wealth, and sullied with so much impurity; that
river, whose current is one hour rich as the stream of a gold river, the
next hour, foul as the pestilent churchyard,--was then, especially
between Richmond and Teddington, a glassy, placid stream, reflecting on
its margin the chestnut-trees of stately Ham, and the reeds and wild
flowers which grew undisturbed in the fertile meadows of Petersham.

Lord Hervey, with the ladies of the court, Mrs. Howard as their
chaperon, delighted in being wafted to that village, so rich in names
which give to Twickenham undying associations with the departed great.
Sometimes the effeminate valetudinarian, Hervey, was content to attend
the Princess Caroline to Marble Hill only, a villa residence built by
George II. for Mrs. Howard, and often referred to in the correspondence
of that period. Sometimes the royal barge, with its rowers in scarlet
jackets, was seen conveying the gay party; ladies in slouched hats,
pointed over fair brows in front, with a fold of sarsenet round them,
terminated in a long bow and ends behind--with deep falling mantles over
dresses never cognizant of crinoline: gentlemen, with cocked-hats, their
bag-wigs and ties appearing behind; and beneath their puce-coloured
coats, delicate silk tights and gossamer stockings were visible, as they
trod the mossy lawn of the Palace Gardens at Richmond, or, followed by a
tiny greyhound, prepared for the lazy pleasures of the day.

Sometimes the visit was private; the sickly Princess Caroline had a
fancy to make one of the group who are bound to Pope's villa.
Twickenham, where that great little man had, since 1715, established
himself, was pronounced by Lord Bacon to be the finest place in the
world for study. 'Let Twitnam Park,' he wrote to his steward, Thomas
Bushell, 'which I sold in my younger days, be purchased, if possible,
for a residence for such deserving persons to study in, (since I
experimentally found the situation of that place much convenient for the
trial of my philosophical conclusions)--expressed in a paper sealed, to
the trust--which I myself had put in practice and settled the same by
act of parliament, if the vicissitudes of fortune had not intervened and
prevented me.'

Twickenham continued, long after Bacon had penned this injunction, to be
the retreat of the poet, the statesman, the scholar; the haven where the
retired actress, and broken novelist found peace; the abode of Henry
Fielding, who lived in one of the back-streets; the temporary refuge,
from the world of London, of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and the life-long
home of Pope.

Let us picture to ourselves a visit from the princess to Pope's
villa:--As the barge, following the gentle bendings of the river, nears
Twickenham, a richer green, a summer brightness, indicates it is
approaching that spot of which even Bishop Warburton says that 'the
beauty of the owner's poetic genius appeared to as much advantage in the
disposition of these romantic materials as in any of his best-contrived
poems.' And the loved toil which formed the quincunx, which perforated
and extended the grotto until it extended across the road to a garden on
the opposite side--the toil which showed the gentler parts of Pope's
better nature--has been respected, and its effects preserved. The
enamelled lawn, green as no other grass save that by the Thames side is
green, was swept until late years by the light boughs of the famed
willow. Every memorial of the bard was treasured by the gracious hands
into which, after 1744, the classic spot fell--those of Sir William
Stanhope.

In the subterranean passage this verse appears; adulatory it must be
confessed:--

    'The humble roof, the garden's scanty line,
     Ill suit the genius of the bard divine;
     But fancy now assumes a fairer scope,
     And Stanhope's plans unfold the soul of Pope.'

It should have been Stanhope's 'gold,'--a metal which was not so
abundant, nor indeed so much wanted in Pope's time as in our own. Let us
picture to ourselves the poet as a host.

As the barge is moored close to the low steps which lead up from the
river to the villa, a diminutive figure, then in its prime, (if prime it
_ever_ had), is seen moving impatiently forward. By that young-old face,
with its large lucid speaking eyes that light it up, as does a rushlight
in a cavern--by that twisted figure with its emaciated legs--by the
large, sensible mouth, the pointed, marked, well-defined nose--by the
wig, or hair pushed off in masses from the broad forehead and falling
behind in tresses--by the dress, that loose, single-breasted black
coat--by the cambric band and plaited shirt, without a frill, but fine
and white, for the poor poet has taken infinite pains that day in
self-adornment--by the delicate ruffle on that large thin hand, and
still more by the clear, most musical voice which is heard welcoming his
royal and noble guests, as he stands bowing low to the Princess
Caroline, and bending to kiss hands--by that voice which gained him more
especially the name of the little nightingale--is Pope at once
recognized, and Pope in the perfection of his days, in the very zenith
of his fame.

One would gladly have been a sprite to listen from some twig of that
then stripling willow which the poet had planted with his own hand, to
talk of those who chatted for a while under its shade, before they went
in-doors to an elegant dinner at the usual hour of twelve. How
delightful to hear, unseen, the repartees of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu,
who comes down, it is natural to conclude, from her villa near to that
of Pope. How fine a study might one not draw of the fine gentleman and
the wit in Lord Hervey, as he is commanded by the gentle Princess
Caroline to sit on her right hand; but his heart is across the table,
with Lady Mary! How amusing to observe the dainty but not sumptuous
repast contrived with Pope's exquisite taste, but regulated by his
habitual economy--for his late father, a worthy Jacobite hatter, erst in
the Strand, disdained to invest the fortune he had amassed, from the
extensive sale of cocked-hats, in the Funds, over which an Hanoverian
stranger ruled; but had lived on his capital of £20,000 (as spendthrifts
do, without either moral, religious, or political reasons), as long as
it lasted him; yet _he_ was no spendthrift. Let us look, therefore, with
a liberal eye, noting, as we stand, how that fortune, in league with
nature, who made the poet crooked, had maimed two of his fingers, such
time as, passing a bridge, the poor little poet was overturned into the
river, and he would have been drowned, had not the postilion broken the
coach window and dragged the tiny body through the aperture. We mark,
however, that he generally contrives to hide this defect, as he would
fain have hidden every other, from the lynx eyes of Lady Mary, who knows
him, however, thoroughly, and reads every line of that poor little heart
of his, enamoured of her as it was.

[Illustration: POPE AT HIS VILLA--DISTINGUISHED VISITORS.]

Then the conversation! How gladly would we catch here some drops of what
must have been the very essence of small-talk, and small-talk is the
only thing fit for early dinners! Our host is noted for his easy
address, his engaging manners, his delicacy, politeness, and a certain
tact he had of showing every guest that he was welcome in the choicest
expressions and most elegant terms. Then Lady Mary! how brilliant is her
slightest turn! how she banters Pope--how she gives _double entendre_
for _double entendre_ to Hervey! How sensible, yet how gay is all she
says; how bright, how cutting, yet how polished is the _équivoque_ of
the witty, high-bred Hervey! He is happy that day--away from the coarse,
passionate king, whom he hated with a hatred that burns itself out in
his lordship's 'Memoirs;' away from the somewhat exacting and pitiable
queen; away from the hated Pelham, and the rival Grafton.

And conversation never flags when all, more or less, are congenial; when
all are well-informed, well-bred and resolved to please. Yet there is a
canker in that whole assembly; that canker is a want of confidence; no
one trusts the other; Lady Mary's encouragement of Hervey surprises and
shocks the Princess Caroline, who loves him secretly; Hervey's
attentions to the queen of letters scandalizes Pope, who soon afterwards
makes a declaration to Lady Mary. Pope writhes under a lash just held
over him by Lady Mary's hand. Hervey feels that the poet, though all
suavity, is ready to demolish him at any moment, if he can; and the only
really happy and complacent person of the whole party is, perhaps,
Pope's old mother, who sits in the room next to that occupied for
dinner, industriously spinning.

This happy state of things came, however, as is often the case, in close
intimacies, to a painful conclusion. There was too little reality, too
little earnestness of feeling, for the friendship between Pope and Lady
Mary, including Lord Hervey, to last long. His lordship had his
affectations, and his effeminate nicety was proverbial. One day being
asked at dinner if he would take some beef, he is reported to have
answered, 'Beef? oh no! faugh! don't you know I never eat beef, nor
_horse_, nor curry, nor any of those things?' Poor man! it was probably
a pleasant way of turning off what he may have deemed an assault on a
digestion that could hardly conquer any solid food. This affectation
offended Lady Mary, whose _mot_, that there were three species, 'Men,
women, and Herveys'--implies a perfect perception of the eccentricities
even of her gifted friend, Lord Hervey, whose mother's friend she had
been, and the object of whose admiration she undoubtedly was.

Pope, who was the most irritable of men, never forgot or forgave even
the most trifling offence. Lady Bolingbroke truly said of him that he
played the politician about cabbages and salads, and everybody agrees
that he could hardly tolerate the wit that was more successful than his
own. It was about the year 1725, that he began to hate Lord Hervey with
such a hatred as only he could feel; it was unmitigated by a single
touch of generosity or of compassion. Pope afterwards owned that his
acquaintance with Lady Mary and with Hervey was discontinued, merely
because they had too much wit for him. Towards the latter end of 1732,
'The Imitation of the Second Satire of the First Book of Horace,'
appeared, and in it Pope attacked Lady Mary with the grossest and most
indecent couplet ever printed: she was called Sappho, and Hervey, Lord
Fanny; and all the world knew the characters at once.

In retaliation for this satire, appeared 'Verses to the Imitator of
Horace;' said to have been the joint production of Lord Hervey and Lady
Mary. This was followed by a piece entitled 'Letter from a Nobleman at
Hampton Court to a Doctor of Divinity.' To this composition Lord Hervey,
its sole author, added these lines, by way, as it seems, of extenuation.

Pope's first reply was in a prose letter, on which Dr. Johnson has
passed a condemnation. 'It exhibits,' he says, 'nothing but tedious
malignity.' But he was partial to the Herveys, Thomas and Henry Hervey,
Lord Hervey's brothers, having been kind to him--'If you call a dog
_Hervey_,' he said to Boswell, 'I shall love him.'

Next came the epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot, in which every infirmity and
peculiarity of Hervey are handed down in calm, cruel irony, and polished
verses, to posterity. The verses are almost too disgusting to be
revived in an age which disclaims scurrility. After the most personal
rancorous invective, he thus writes of Lord Hervey's conversation:--

    His wit all see-saw between this and _that_--
    Now high, now low--now _master_ up, now _miss_--
    And he himself one vile antithesis.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Fop at the toilet, flatterer at the board,
    Now trips a lady, and now struts a lord.
    Eve's tempter, thus the rabbins have expressed--
    A cherub's face--a reptile all the rest.
    Beauty that shocks you, facts that none can trust,
    Wit that can creep, and pride that bites the dust.'

'It is impossible,' Mr. Croker thinks, 'not to admire, however we may
condemn, the art by which acknowledged wit, beauty, and gentle
manners--the queen's favour--and even a valetudinary diet, are
travestied into the most odious offences.'

Pope, in two lines, pointed to the intimacy between Lady Mary and Lord
Hervey:--

    'Once, and but once, this heedless youth was hit,
     And liked that dangerous thing, a female wit.'

Nevertheless, he _afterwards_ pretended that the name _Sappho_ was not
applied to Lady Mary, but to women in general; and acted with a degree
of mean prevarication which greatly added to the amount of his offence.

The quarrel with Pope was not the only attack which Lord Hervey had to
encounter. Among the most zealous of his foes was Pulteney, afterwards
Lord Bath, the rival of Sir Robert Walpole, and the confederate with
Bolingbroke in opposing that minister. The 'Craftsman,' contained an
attack on Pulteney, written, with great ability, by Hervey. It provoked
a _Reply_ from Pulteney. In this composition he spoke of Hervey as 'a
thing below contempt,' and ridiculed his personal appearance in the
grossest terms. A duel was the result, the parties meeting behind
Arlington House, in Piccadilly, where Mr. Pulteney had the satisfaction
of almost running Lord Hervey through with his sword. Luckily the poor
man slipped down, so the blow was evaded, and the seconds interfered:
Mr. Pulteney then embraced Lord Hervey, and expressing his regret for
their quarrel, declared that he would never again, either in speech or
writing, attack his lordship. Lord Hervey only bowed, in silence; and
thus they parted.

The queen having observed what an alteration in the palace Lord Hervey's
death would cause, he said he could guess how it would be, and he
produced 'The Death of Lord Hervey; or, a Morning at Court; a Drama:'
the idea being taken it is thought, from Swift's verses on his own
death, of which Hervey might have seen a surreptitious copy. The
following scene will give some idea of the plot and structure of this
amusing little piece. The part allotted to the Princess Caroline is in
unison with the idea prevalent of her attachment to Lord Hervey:--

ACT I.

     SCENE: _The Queen's Gallery. The time, nine in the
     morning._

     _Enter the_ QUEEN, PRINCESS EMILY, PRINCESS CAROLINE,
     _followed by_ LORD LIFFORD, _and_ MRS. PURCEL.

     _Queen._ Mon Dieu, quelle chaleur! en vérité on étouffe. Pray
     open a little those windows.

     _Lord Lifford._ Hasa your Majesty heara de news?

     _Queen._ What news, my dear Lord?

     _Lord Lifford._ Dat my Lord Hervey, as he was coming last night
     to _tone_, was rob and murdered by highwaymen and tron in a
     ditch.

     _Princess Caroline._ Eh! grand Dieu!

     _Queen_ [_striking her hand upon her knee._] Comment est-il
     véritablement mort? Purcel, my angel, shall I not have a little
     breakfast?

     _Mrs. Purcel._ What would your Majesty please to have?

     _Queen._ A little chocolate, my soul, if you give me leave, and a
     little sour cream, and some fruit.      [_Exit_ MRS. PURCEL.

     _Queen_ [_to Lord Lifford._] Eh bien! my Lord Lifford, dites-nous
     un peu comment cela est arrivé. I cannot imagine what he had to
     do to be putting his nose there. Seulement pour un sot voyage
     avec ce petit mousse, eh bien?

     _Lord Lifford._ Madame, on scait quelque chose de celui de Mon.
     Maran, qui d'abord qu'il a vu les voleurs s'est enfin venu à
     grand galoppe à Londres, and after dat a waggoner take up the
     body and put it in his cart.

     _Queen._ [_to_ PRINCESS EMILY.] Are you not ashamed,
     Amalie, to laugh?

     _Princess Emily._ I only laughed at the cart, mamma.

     _Queen._ Oh! that is a very fade plaisanterie.

     _Princess Emily._ But if I may say it, mamma, I am not very
     sorry.

     _Queen._ Oh! fie donc! Eh bien! my Lord Lifford! My God! where is
     this chocolate, Purcel?

As Mr. Croker remarks, Queen Caroline's breakfast-table, and her
parentheses, reminds one of the card-table conversation of Swift:--

    'The Dean's dead: (pray what are trumps?)
     Then Lord have mercy on his soul!
     (Ladies, I'll venture for the vole.)
     Six Deans, they say, must bear the pall;
     (I wish I knew what king to call.)'

Fragile as was Lord Hervey's constitution, it was his lot to witness the
death-bed of the queen, for whose amusement he had penned the jeu
d'esprit just quoted, in which there was, perhaps, as much truth as wit.

The wretched Queen Caroline had, during fourteen years, concealed from
every one, except Lady Sundon, an incurable disorder, that of hernia. In
November (1737) she was attacked with what we should now call English
cholera. Dr. Tessier, her house-physician, was called in, and gave her
Daffey's elixir, which was not likely to afford any relief to the
deep-seated cause of her sufferings. She held a drawing-room that night
for the last time, and played at cards, even cheerfully. At length she
whispered to Lord Hervey, 'I am not able to entertain people.' 'For
heaven's sake, madam,' was the reply, 'go to your room: would to heaven
the king would leave off talking of the Dragon of Wantley, and release
you!' The Dragon of Wantley was a burlesque on the Italian opera, by
Henry Carey, and was the theme of the fashionable world.

The next day the queen was in fearful agony, very hot, and willing to
take anything proposed. Still she did not, even to Lord Hervey, avow the
real cause of her illness. None of the most learned court physicians,
neither Mead nor Wilmot, were called in. Lord Hervey sat by the queen's
bed-side, and tried to soothe her, whilst the Princess Caroline joined in
begging him to give her mother something to relieve her agony. At
length, in utter ignorance of the case, it was proposed to give her some
snakeroot, a stimulant, and, at the same time, Sir Walter Raleigh's
cordial; so singular was it thus to find that great mind still
influencing a court. It was that very medicine which was administered by
Queen Anne of Denmark, however, to Prince Henry; that medicine which
Raleigh said, 'would cure him, or any other, of a disease, except in
case of poison.'

However, Ranby, house-surgeon to the king, and a favourite of Lord
Hervey's, assuring him that a cordial with this name or that name was
mere quackery, some usquebaugh was given instead, but was rejected by
the queen soon afterwards. At last Raleigh's cordial was administered,
but also rejected about an hour afterwards. Her fever, after taking
Raleigh's cordial, was so much increased, that she was ordered instantly
to be bled.

Then, even, the queen never disclosed the fact that could alone dictate
the course to be pursued. George II., with more feeling than judgment,
slept on the outside of the queen's bed all that night; so that the
unhappy invalid could get no rest, nor change her position, not daring
to irritate the king's temper.

The next day the queen said touchingly to her gentle, affectionate
daughter, herself in declining health, 'Poor Caroline! you are very ill,
too: we shall soon meet again in another place.'

Meantime, though the queen declared to every one that she was sure
nothing could save her, it was resolved to hold a _levée_. The foreign
ministers were to come to court, and the king, in the midst of his real
grief, did not forget to send word to his pages to be sure to have his
last new ruffles sewed on the shirt he was to put on that day; a trifle
which often, as Lord Hervey remarks, shows more of the real character
than events of importance, from which one frequently knows no more of a
person's state of mind than one does of his natural gait from his
dancing.

Lady Sundon was, meantime, ill at Bath, so that the queen's secret
rested alone in her own heart. 'I have an ill,' she said, one evening,
to her daughter Caroline, 'that nobody knows of.' Still, neither the
princess nor Lord Hervey could guess at the full meaning of that sad
assertion.

The famous Sir Hans Sloane was then called in; but no remedy except
large and repeated bleedings were suggested, and blisters were put on
her legs. There seems to have been no means left untried by the faculty
to hasten the catastrophe--thus working in the dark.

The king now sat up with her whom he had so cruelly wounded in every
nice feeling. On being asked, by Lord Hervey, what was to be done in
case the Prince of Wales should come to inquire after the queen, he
answered in the following terms, worthy of his ancestry--worthy of
himself. It is difficult to say which was the most painful scene, that
in the chamber where the queen lay in agony, or without, where the
curse of family dissensions came like a ghoul to hover near the bed of
death, and to gloat over the royal corpse. This was the royal
dictum:--'If the puppy should, in one of his impertinent airs of duty
and affection, dare to come to St. James's, I order you to go to the
scoundrel, and tell him I wonder at his impudence for daring to come
here; that he has my orders already, and knows my pleasure, and bid him
go about his business; for his poor mother is not in a condition to see
him act his false, whining, cringing tricks now, nor am I in a humour to
bear with his impertinence; and bid him trouble me with no more
messages, but get out of my house.'

In the evening, whilst Lord Hervey sat at tea in the queen's outer
apartment with the Duke of Cumberland, a page came to the duke to speak
to the prince in the passage. It was to prefer a request to see his
mother. This message was conveyed by Lord Hervey to the king, whose
reply was uttered in the most vehement rage possible. 'This,' said he,
'is like one of his scoundrel tricks; it is just of a piece with his
kneeling down in the dirt before the mob to kiss her hand at the coach
door when she came home from Hampton Court to see the Princess, though
he had not spoken one word to her during her whole visit. I always hated
the rascal, but now I hate him worse than ever. He wants to come and
insult his poor dying mother; but she shall not see him: you have heard
her, and all my daughters have heard her, very often this year at
Hampton Court desire me if she should be ill, and out of her senses,
that I would never let him come near her; and whilst she had her senses
she was sure she should never desire it. No, no! he shall not come and
act any of his silly plays here.'

In the afternoon the queen said to the king, she wondered the _Griff_, a
nickname she gave to the prince, had not sent to inquire after her yet;
it would be so like one of his _paroitres_. 'Sooner or later,' she
added, 'I am sure we shall be plagued with some message of that sort,
because he will think it will have a good air in the world to ask to see
me; and, perhaps, hopes I shall be fool enough to let him come, and give
him the pleasure of seeing the last breath go out of my body, by which
means he would have the joy of knowing I was dead five minutes sooner
than he could know it in Pall Mall.'

She afterwards declared that nothing would induce her to see him except
the king's absolute commands. 'Therefore, if I grow worse,' she said,
'and should I be weak enough to talk of seeing him, I beg you, sir, to
conclude that I doat--or rave.'

The king, who had long since guessed at the queen's disease, urged her
now to permit him to name it to her physicians. She begged him not to do
so; and for the first time, and the last, the unhappy woman spoke
peevishly and warmly. Then Ranby, the house-surgeon, who had by this
time discovered the truth, said, 'There is no more time to be lost; your
majesty has concealed the truth too long: I beg another surgeon may be
called in immediately.'

The queen, who had, in her passion, started up in her bed, lay down
again, turned her head on the other side, and, as the king told Lord
Hervey, 'shed the only tear he ever saw her shed whilst she was ill.'

At length, too late, other and more sensible means were resorted to: but
the queen's strength was failing fast. It must have been a strange scene
in that chamber of death. Much as the king really grieved for the
queen's state, he was still sufficiently collected to grieve also lest
Richmond Lodge, which was settled on the queen, should go to the hated
_Griff_:[22] and he actually sent Lord Hervey to the lord chancellor to
inquire about that point. It was decided that the queen could make a
will, so the king informed her of his inquiries, in order to set her
mind at ease, and to assure her it was impossible that the prince could
in any way benefit pecuniarily from her death. The Princess Emily now
sat up with her mother. The king went to bed. The Princess Caroline
slept on a couch in the antechamber, and Lord Hervey lay on a mattress
on the floor at the foot of the Princess Caroline's couch.

On the following day (four after the first attack) mortification came
on, and the weeping Princess Caroline and Lord Hervey were informed that
the queen could not hold out many hours. Hervey was ordered to
withdraw. The king, the Duke of Cumberland, and the queen's four
daughters alone remained, the queen begging them not to leave her until
she expired; yet her life was prolonged many days.

When alone with her family, she took from her finger a ruby ring, which
had been placed on it at the time of the coronation, and gave it to the
king. 'This is the last thing,' she said, 'I have to give you; naked I
came to you, and naked I go from you; I had everything I ever possessed
from you, and to you whatever I have I return.' She then asked for her
keys, and gave them to the king. To the Princess Caroline she intrusted
the care of her younger sisters; to the Duke of Cumberland, that of
keeping up the credit of the family. 'Attempt nothing against your
brother, and endeavour to mortify him by showing superior merit,' she
said to him. She advised the king to marry again; he heard her in sobs,
and with much difficulty got out this sentence: '_Non, j'aurai des
maitresses_' To which the queen made no other reply than '_Ah, mon Dieu!
cela n'empêche pas._' 'I know,' says Lord Hervey, in his Memoirs, 'that
this episode will hardly be credited, but it is literally true.'

She then fancied she could sleep. The king kissed her, and wept over
her; yet when she asked for her watch, which hung near the chimney, that
she might give him the seal to take care of, his brutal temper broke
forth. In the midst of his tears he called out, in a loud voice, 'Let it
alone! _mon Dieu!_ the queen has such strange fancies; who should meddle
with your seal? It is as safe there as in my pocket.'

The queen then thought she could sleep, and, in fact, sank to rest. She
felt refreshed on awakening and said, 'I wish it was over; it is only a
reprieve to make me suffer a little longer; I cannot recover, but my
nasty heart will not break yet.' She had an impression that she should
die on a Wednesday: she had, she said, been born on a Wednesday, married
on a Wednesday, crowned on a Wednesday, her first child was born on a
Wednesday, and she had heard of the late king's death on a Wednesday.

On the ensuing day she saw Sir Robert Walpole. 'My good Sir Robert,'
she thus addressed him, 'you see me in a very indifferent situation. I
have nothing to say to you but to recommend the king, my children, and
the kingdom to your care.'

Lord Hervey, when the minister retired, asked him what he thought of the
queen's state.

'My lord,' was the reply, 'she is as much dead as if she was in her
coffin; if ever I heard a corpse speak, it was just now in that room!'

It was a sad, an awful death-bed. The Prince of Wales having sent to
inquire after the health of his dying mother, the queen became uneasy
lest he should hear the true state of her case, asking 'if no one would
send those ravens,' meaning the prince's attendants, out of the house.
'They were only,' she said, 'watching her death, and would gladly tear
her to pieces whilst she was alive.' Whilst thus she spoke of her son's
courtiers, that son was sitting up all night in his house in Pall Mall,
and saying, when any messenger came in from St. James's, 'Well, sure, we
shall soon have good news, she cannot hold out much longer.' And the
princesses were writing letters to prevent the Princess Royal from
coming to England, where she was certain to meet with brutal unkindness
from her father, who could not endure to be put to any expense. Orders
were, indeed, sent to stop her if she set out. She came, however, on
pretence of taking the Bath waters; but George II., furious at her
disobedience, obliged her to go direct to and from Bath without
stopping, and never forgave her.

Notwithstanding her predictions, the queen survived the fatal Wednesday.
Until this time no prelate had been called in to pray by her majesty,
nor to administer the Holy Communion and as people about the court began
to be scandalized by this omission, Sir Robert Walpole advised that the
Archbishop of Canterbury should be sent for: his opinion was couched in
the following terms, characteristic at once of the man, the times, and
the court:--

'Pray, madam,' he said to the Princess Emily, 'let this farce be played;
the archbishop will act it very well. You may bid him be as short as you
will: it will do the queen no hurt, no more than any good; and it will
satisfy all the wise and good fools, who will call us atheists if we
don't pretend to be as great fools as they are.'

Unhappily, Lord Hervey, who relates this anecdote, was himself an
unbeliever; yet the scoffing tone adopted by Sir Robert seems to have
shocked even him.

In consequence of this advice, Archbishop Potter prayed by the queen
morning and evening, the king always quitting the room when his grace
entered it. Her children, however, knelt by her bedside. Still the
whisperers who censured were unsatisfied--the concession was thrown
away. Why did not the queen receive the communion? Was it, as the world
believed, either 'that she had reasoned herself into a very low and cold
assent to Christianity?' or 'that she was heterodox?' or 'that the
archbishop refused to administer the sacrament until she should be
reconciled to her son?' Even Lord Hervey, who rarely left the
antechamber, has only by his silence proved that she did _not_ take the
communion. That antechamber was crowded with persons who, as the prelate
left the chamber of death, crowded around, eagerly asking, 'Has the
queen received?' 'Her majesty,' was the evasive reply, 'is in a heavenly
disposition:' the public were thus deceived. Among those who were near
the queen at this solemn hour was Dr. Butler, author of the 'Analogy.'
He had been made clerk of the closet, and became, after the queen's
death, Bishop of Bristol. He was in a remote living in Durham, when the
queen, remembering that it was long since she had heard of him, asked
the Archbishop of York 'whether Dr. Butler was dead?'--'No, madam,'
replied that prelate (Dr. Blackburn), 'but he is buried;' upon which she
had sent for him to court. Yet he was not courageous enough, it seems,
to speak to her of her son and of the duty of reconciliation; whether
she ever sent the prince any message or not is uncertain; Lord Hervey is
silent on that point, so that it is to be feared that Lord
Chesterfield's line--

    'And, unforgiving, unforgiven, dies!'

had but too sure a foundation in fact; so that Pope's sarcastic verses--

    'Hang the sad verse on Carolina's urn,
     And hail her passage to the realms of rest;
     All _parts performed_ and _all_ her children blest,'

may have been but too just, though cruelly bitter. The queen lingered
till the 20th of November. During that interval of agony her consort was
perpetually boasting to every one of her virtues, her sense, her
patience, her softness, her delicacy; and ending with the praise,
'_Comme elle soutenoit sa dignité avec grace, avec politesse, avec
douceur!_' Nevertheless he scarcely ever went into her room. Lord Hervey
states that he did, even in this moving situation, _snub_ her for
something or other she did or said. One morning, as she lay with her
eyes fixed on a point in the air, as people sometimes do when they want
to keep their thoughts from wandering, the king coarsely told her 'she
looked like a calf which had just had its throat cut.' He expected her
to die in state. Then, with all his bursts of tenderness he always
mingled his own praises, hinting that though she was a good wife he knew
he had deserved a good one, and remarking, when he extolled her
understanding, that he did not 'think it the worse for her having kept
him company so many years.' To all this Lord Hervey listened with,
doubtless, well-concealed disgust; for cabals were even then forming for
the future influence that might or might not be obtained.

The queen's life, meantime, was softly ebbing away in this atmosphere of
selfishness, brutality, and unbelief. One evening she asked Dr. Tessier
impatiently how long her state might continue.

'Your Majesty,' was the reply, 'will soon be released.'

'So much the better,' the queen calmly answered.

At ten o'clock that night, whilst the king lay at the foot of her bed,
on the floor, and the Princess Emily on a couch-bed in the room, the
fearful death-rattle in the throat was heard. Mrs. Purcell, her chief
and old attendant, gave the alarm: the Princess Caroline and Lord Hervey
were sent for; but the princess was too late, her mother had expired
before she arrived. All the dying queen said was, 'I have now got an
asthma; open the window:' then she added, '_Pray!_' That was her last
word. As the Princess Emily began to read some prayers, the sufferer
breathed her last sigh. The Princess Caroline held a looking-glass to
her lips, and finding there was no damp on it, said, ''Tis over!' Yet
she shed not one tear upon the arrival of that event, the prospect of
which had cost her so many heartrending sobs.

The king kissed the lifeless face and hands of his often-injured wife,
and then retired to his own apartment, ordering that a page should sit
up with him for that and several other nights, for his Majesty was
afraid of apparitions, and feared to be left alone. He caused himself,
however, to be buried by the side of his queen, in Henry VII.'s chapel,
and ordered that one side of his coffin and of hers should be withdrawn;
and in that state the two coffins were discovered not many years ago.

With the death of Queen Caroline, Lord Hervey's life, as to court, was
changed. He was afterwards made lord privy seal, and had consequently to
enter the political world, with the disadvantage of knowing that much
was expected from a man of so high a reputation for wit and learning. He
was violently opposed by Pelham, Duke of Newcastle, who had been adverse
to his entering the ministry, and since, with Walpole's favour, it was
impossible to injure him by fair means, it was resolved to oppose Lord
Hervey by foul ones. One evening, when he was to speak, a party of
fashionable Amazons, with two duchesses--her grace of Queensberry and
her grace of Ancaster--at their head, stormed the House of Lords and
disturbed the debate with noisy laughter and sneers. Poor Lord Hervey
was completely daunted, and spoke miserably. After Sir Robert Walpole's
fall Lord Hervey retired. The following letter from him to Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu fully describes his position and circumstances:--

'I must now,' he writes to her, 'since you take so friendly a part in
what concerns me, give you a short account of my natural and political
health; and when I say I am still alive, and still privy seal, it is all
I can say for the pleasure of one or the honour of the other; for since
Lord Orford's retiring, as I am too proud to offer my service and
friendship where I am not sure they will be accepted of, and too
inconsiderable to have those advances made to me (though I never forgot
or failed to return any obligation I ever received), so I remain as
illustrious a nothing in this office as ever filled it since it was
erected. There is one benefit, however, I enjoy from this loss of my
court interest, which is, that all those flies which were buzzing about
me in the summer sunshine and full ripeness of that interest, have all
deserted its autumnal decay, and from thinking my natural death not far
off, and my political demise already over, have all forgot the death-bed
of the one and the coffin of the other.'

Again he wrote to her a characteristic letter:--

'I have been confined these three weeks by a fever, which is a sort of
annual tax my detestable constitution pays to our detestable climate at
the return of every spring; it is now much abated, though not quite gone
off.'

He was long a helpless invalid; and on the 8th of August, 1743, his
short, unprofitable, brilliant, unhappy life was closed. He died at
Ickworth, attended and deplored by his wife, who had ever held a
secondary part in the heart of the great wit and beau of the court of
George II. After his death his son George returned to Lady Mary all the
letters she had written to his father: the packet was sealed: an
assurance was at the same time given that they had not been read. In
acknowledging this act of attention, Lady Mary wrote that she could
almost regret that he had not glanced his eye over a correspondence
which might have shown him what so young a man might perhaps be inclined
to doubt--'the possibility of a long and steady friendship subsisting
between two persons of different sexes without the least mixture of
love.'

Nevertheless some expressions of Lord Hervey's seem to have bordered on
the tender style, when writing to Lady Mary in such terms as these. She
had complained that she was too old to inspire a passion (a sort of
challenge for a compliment), on which he wrote: 'I should think anybody
a great fool that said he liked spring better than summer, merely
because it is further from autumn, or that they loved green fruit better
than ripe only because it was further from being rotten. I ever did, and
believe ever shall, like woman best--

    '"Just in the noon of life--those golden days,
      When the mind ripens ere the form decays."'

Certainly this looks very unlike a pure Platonic, and it is not to be
wondered at that Lady Hervey refused to call on Lady Mary, when, long
after Lord Hervey's death, that fascinating woman returned to England. A
wit, a courtier at the very fount of all politeness, Lord Hervey wanted
the genuine source of all social qualities--Christianity. That moral
refrigerator which checks the kindly current of neighbourly kindness,
and which prevents all genial feeling from expanding, produced its usual
effect--misanthropy. Lord Hervey's lines, in his 'Satire after the
manner of Persius,' describe too well his own mental canker:--

    'Mankind I know, their motives and their art,
     Their vice their own, their virtue best apart,
     Till played so oft, that all the cheat can tell,
     And dangerous only when 'tis acted well.'

Lord Hervey left in the possession of his family a manuscript work,
consisting of memoirs of his own time, written in his own autograph,
which was clean and legible. This work, which has furnished many of the
anecdotes connected with his court life in the foregoing pages, was long
guarded from the eye of any but the Hervey family, owing to an
injunction given in his will by Augustus, third Earl of Bristol, Lord
Hervey's son, that it should not see the light until after the death of
his Majesty George III. It was not therefore published until 1848, when
they were edited by Mr. Croker. They are referred to both by Horace
Walpole, who had heard of them, if he had not seen them, and by Lord
Hailes, as affording the most intimate portraiture of a court that has
ever been presented to the English people. Such a delineation as Lord
Hervey has left ought to cause a sentiment of thankfulness in every
British heart for not being exposed to such influences, to such examples
as he gives, in the present day, when goodness, affection, purity,
benevolence, are the household deities of the court of our beloved,
inestimable Queen Victoria.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 22: Prince Frederick.]


    PHILIP DORMER STANHOPE, FOURTH EARL OF CHESTERFIELD.

  The King of Table Wits.--Early Years.--Hervey's Description of his
      Person.--Resolutions and Pursuits.--Study of Oratory.--The
      Duties of an Ambassador.--King George II.'s Opinion of his
      Chroniclers.--Life in the Country.--Melusina, Countess of
      Walsingham.--George II. and his Father's Will.--Dissolving
      Views.--Madame du Bouchet.--The Broad-Bottomed
      Administration.--Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in Time of
      Peril.--Reformation of the Calendar.--Chesterfield
      House.--Exclusiveness.--Recommending 'Johnson's
      Dictionary.'--'Old Samuel,' to Chesterfield.--Defensive
      Pride.--The Glass of Fashion.--Lord Scarborough's Friendship
      for Chesterfield.--The Death of Chesterfield's Son.--His
      Interest in his Grandsons.--'I must go and Rehearse my
      Funeral.'--Chesterfield's Will.--What is a Friend?--Les
      Manières Nobles.--Letters to his Son.


The subject of this memoir may be thought by some rather the modeller of
wits than the original of that class; the great critic and judge of
manners rather than the delight of the dinner-table: but we are told to
the contrary by one who loved him not. Lord Hervey says of Lord
Chesterfield that he was 'allowed by everybody to have more conversable
entertaining table-wit than any man of his time; his propensity to
ridicule, in which he indulged himself with infinite humour and no
distinction; and his inexhaustible spirits, and no discretion; made him
sought and feared--liked and not loved--by most of his acquaintance.'

This formidable personage was born in London on the 2nd day of
September, 1694. It was remarkable that the father of a man so
vivacious, should have been of a morose temper; all the wit and spirit
of intrigue displayed by him remind us of the frail Lady Chesterfield,
in the time of Charles II.[23]--that lady who was looked on as a martyr
because her husband was jealous of her: 'a prodigy,' says De Grammont,
'in the city of London,' where indulgent critics endeavoured to excuse
his lordship on account of his bad education, and mothers vowed that
none of their sons should ever set foot in Italy, lest they should
'bring back with them that infamous custom of laying restraint on their
wives.'

Even Horace Walpole cites Chesterfield as the 'witty earl:' apropos to
an anecdote which he relates of an Italian lady, who said that she was
only four-and-twenty; 'I suppose,' said Lord Chesterfield, 'she means
four-and-twenty stone.'

By his father the future wit, historian, and orator was utterly
neglected; but his grandmother, the Marchioness of Halifax, supplied to
him the place of both parents, his mother--her daughter, Lady Elizabeth
Saville--having died in his childhood. At the age of eighteen,
Chesterfield, then Lord Stanhope, was entered at Trinity Hall,
Cambridge. It was one of the features of his character to fall at once
into the tone of the society into which he happened to be thrown. One
can hardly imagine his being 'an absolute pedant,' but such was,
actually, his own account of himself:--'When I talked my best, I quoted
Horace; when I aimed at being facetious, I quoted Martial; and when I
had a mind to be a fine gentleman, I talked Ovid. I was convinced that
none but the ancients had common sense; that the classics contained
everything that was either necessary, useful, or ornamental to men; and
I was not even without thoughts of wearing the toga virilis of the
Romans, instead of the vulgar and illiberal dress of the moderns.'

Thus, again, when in Paris, he caught the manners, as he had acquired
the language, of the Parisians. 'I shall not give you my opinion of the
French, because I am very often taken for one of them, and several have
paid me the highest compliment they think it in their power to
bestow--which is, "Sir, you are just like ourselves." I shall only tell
you that I am insolent; I talk a great deal; I am very loud and
peremptory; I sing and dance as I walk along; and, above all, I spend an
immense sum in hair-powder, feathers, and white gloves.'

Although he entered Parliament before he had attained the legal age,
and was expected to make a great figure in that assembly, Lord
Chesterfield preferred the reputation of a wit and a beau to any other
distinction. 'Call it vanity, if you will,' he wrote in after-life to
his son, 'and possibly it was so; but my great object was to make every
man and every woman love me. I often succeeded: but why? by taking great
pains.'

According to Lord Hervey's account he often even sacrificed his interest
to his vanity. The description given of Lord Chesterfield by one as
bitter as himself implies, indeed, that great pains were requisite to
counterbalance the defects of nature. Wilkes, one of the ugliest men of
his time, used to say, that with an hour's start he would carry off the
affections of any woman from the handsomest man breathing. Lord
Chesterfield, according to Lord Hervey, required to be still longer in
advance of a rival.

'With a person,' Hervey writes, 'as disagreeable, as it was possible for
a human figure to be without being deformed, he affected following many
women of the first beauty and the most in fashion. He was very short,
disproportioned, thick and clumsily made; had a broad, rough-featured,
ugly face, with black teeth, and a head big enough for a Polyphemus. One
Ben Ashurst, who said a few good things, though admired for many, told
Lord Chesterfield once, that he was like a stunted giant--which was a
humorous idea and really apposite.'

Notwithstanding that Chesterfield, when young, injured both soul and
body by pleasure and dissipation, he always found time for serious
study: when he could not have it otherwise, he took it out of his sleep.
How late soever he went to bed, he resolved always to rise early; and
this resolution he adhered to so faithfully, that at the age of
fifty-eight he could declare that for more than forty years he had never
been in bed at nine o'clock in the morning, but had generally been up
before eight. He had the good sense, in this respect, not to exaggerate
even this homely virtue. He did not rise with the dawn, as many early
risers pride themselves in doing, putting all the engagements of
ordinary life out of their usual beat, just as if the clocks had been
set two hours forward. The man in ordinary society, who rises at four in
this country, and goes to bed at nine, is a social and family nuisance.
Strong good sense characterized Chesterfield's early pursuits. Desultory
reading he abhorred. He looked on it as one of the resources of age, but
as injurious to the young in the extreme. 'Throw away,' thus he writes
to his son, 'none of your time upon those trivial, futile books,
published by idle necessitous authors for the amusement of idle and
ignorant readers.'

Even in those days such books 'swarm and buzz about one:' 'flap them
away,' says Chesterfield, 'they have no sting.' The earl directed the
whole force of his mind to oratory, and became the finest speaker of his
time. Writing to Sir Horace Mann, about the Hanoverian debate (in 1743,
Dec. 15), Walpole praising the speeches of Lords Halifax and Sandwich,
adds, 'I was there, and heard Lord Chesterfield make the finest oration
I have ever heard there.' This from a man who had listened to Pulteney,
to Chatham, to Carteret, was a singularly valuable tribute.

Whilst a student at Cambridge, Chesterfield was forming an acquaintance
with the Hon. George Berkeley, the youngest son of the second Earl of
Berkeley, and remarkable rather as being the second husband of Lady
Suffolk, the favourite of George II., than from any merits or demerits
of his own.

This early intimacy probably brought Lord Chesterfield into the close
friendship which afterwards subsisted between him and Lady Suffolk, to
whom many of his letters are addressed.

His first public capacity was a diplomatic appointment: he afterwards
attained to the rank of an ambassador, whose duty it is, according to a
witticism of Sir Henry Wotton's '_to lie_ abroad for the good of his
country;' and no man was in this respect more competent to fulfil these
requirements than Chesterfield. Hating both wine and tobacco, he had
smoked and drunk at Cambridge, 'to be in the fashion;' he gamed at the
Hague, on the same principle; and, unhappily, gaming became a habit and
a passion. Yet never did he indulge it when acting, afterwards, in a
ministerial capacity. Neither when Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, or as
Under-secretary of State, did he allow a gaming-table in his house. On
the very night that he resigned office he went to _White's_.

The Hague was then a charming residence: among others who, from
political motives, were living there, were John Duke of Marlborough and
Queen Sarah, both of whom paid Chesterfield marked attention. Naturally
industrious, with a ready insight into character--a perfect master in
that art which bids us keep one's thoughts close, and our countenances
open, Chesterfield was admirably fitted for diplomacy. A master of
modern languages and of history, he soon began to like business. When in
England, he had been accused of having 'a need of a certain proportion
of talk in a day:' 'that,' he wrote to Lady Suffolk, 'is now changed
into a need of such a proportion of writing in a day.'

In 1728 he was promoted: being sent as ambassador to the Hague, where he
was popular, and where he believed his stay would be beneficial both to
soul and body, there being 'fewer temptations, and fewer opportunities
to sin,' as he wrote to Lady Suffolk, 'than in England.' Here his days
passed, he asserted, in doing the king's business, very ill--and his own
still worse:--sitting down daily to dinner with fourteen or fifteen
people; whilst at five the pleasures of the evening began with a lounge
on the Voorhoot, a public walk planted by Charles V.:--then, either a
very bad French play, or a '_reprise quadrille_,' with three ladies, the
youngest of them fifty, and the chance of losing, perhaps, three florins
(besides one's time)--lasted till ten o'clock; at which time 'His
Excellency' went home, 'reflecting with satisfaction on the innocent
amusements of a well-spent day, that left nothing behind them,' and
retired to bed at eleven, 'with the testimony of a good conscience.'

All, however, of Chesterfield's time was not passed in this serene
dissipation. He began to compose 'The History of the Reign of George
II.' at this period. About only half a dozen chapters were written. The
intention was not confined to Chesterfield: Carteret and Bolingbroke
entertained a similar design, which was completed by neither. When the
subject was broached before George II., he thus expressed himself; and
his remarks are the more amusing as they were addressed to Lord Hervey,
who was, at that very moment, making his notes for that bitter chronicle
of his majesty's reign, which has been ushered into the world by the
late Wilson Croker--'They will all three,' said King George II., 'have
about as much truth in them as the _Mille et Une Nuits_. Not but I shall
like to read Bolingbroke's, who of all those rascals and knaves that
have been lying against me these ten years has certainly the best parts,
and the most knowledge. He is a scoundrel, but he is a scoundrel of a
higher class than Chesterfield. Chesterfield is a little, tea-table
scoundrel, that tells little womanish lies to make quarrels in families:
and tries to make women lose their reputations, and make their husbands
beat them, without any object but to give himself airs; as if anybody
could believe a woman could like a dwarf baboon.'

Lord Hervey gave the preference to Bolingbroke; stating as his reason,
that 'though Lord Bolingbroke had no idea of wit, his satire was keener
than any one's. Lord Chesterfield, on the other hand, would have a great
deal of wit in them; but, in every page you see he intended to be witty:
every paragraph would be an epigram. _Polish_, he declared, would be his
bane;' and Lord Hervey was perfectly right.

In 1732 Lord Chesterfield was obliged to retire from his embassy on the
plea of ill-health, but probably, from some political cause. He was in
the opposition against Sir Robert Walpole in the Excise Bill; and felt
the displeasure of that all-powerful minister by being dismissed from
his office of High Steward.

Being badly received at court he now lived in the country; sometimes at
Buxton, where his father drank the waters, where he had his recreations,
when not persecuted by two young brothers. Sir William Stanhope and John
Stanhope, one of whom performed 'tolerably ill upon a broken hautboy,
and the other something worse upon a cracked flute.' There he won three
half-crowns from the curate of the place, and a shilling from 'Gaffer
Foxeley' at a cock-match. Sometimes he sought relaxation in Scarborough,
where fashionable beaux 'danced with the pretty ladies all night,' and
hundreds of Yorkshire country bumpkins 'played the inferior parts; and,
as it were, only tumble, whilst the others dance upon the high ropes of
gallantry.' Scarborough was full of Jacobites: the popular feeling was
then all rife against Sir Robert Walpole's excise scheme. Lord
Chesterfield thus wittily satirized that famous measure:--

'The people of this town are, at present, in great consternation upon a
report they have heard from London, which, if true, they think will ruin
them. They are informed, that considering the vast consumption of these
waters, there is a design laid of _excising_ them next session; and,
moreover, that as bathing in the sea is become the general practice of
both sexes, and as the kings of England have always been allowed to be
masters of the seas, every person so bathing shall be gauged, and pay so
much per foot square, as their cubical bulk amounts to.'

In 1733, Lord Chesterfield married Melusina, the supposed niece, but, in
fact, the daughter of the Duchess of Kendal, the mistress of George I.
This lady was presumed to be a great heiress, from the dominion which
her mother had over the king. Melusina had been created (for life)
Baroness of Aldborough, county Suffolk, and Countess of Walsingham,
county Norfolk, nine years previous to her marriage.

Her father being George I., as Horace Walpole terms him, 'rather a good
sort of man than a shining king,' and her mother 'being no genius,'
there was probably no great attraction about Lady Walsingham, except her
expected dowry.

During her girlhood Melusina resided in the apartments at St.
James's--opening into the garden; and here Horace Walpole describes his
seeing George I., in the rooms appropriated to the Duchess of Kendal,
next to those of Melusina Schulemberg, or, as she was then called, the
Countess of Walsingham. The Duchess of Kendal was then very 'lean and
ill-favoured.' 'Just before her,' says Horace, 'stood a tall, elderly
man, rather pale, of an aspect rather good-natured than august: in a
dark tie-wig, a plain coat, waistcoat, and breeches of snuff-coloured
cloth, with stockings of the same colour, and a blue riband over all.
That was George I.'

[Illustration: A ROYAL ROBBER.]

The Duchess of Kendal had been maid of honour to the Electress
Sophia, the mother of George I. and the daughter of Elizabeth of
Bohemia. The duchess was always frightful; so much so that one night the
electress, who had acquired a little English, said to Mrs. Howard,
afterwards Lady Suffolk,--glancing at Mademoiselle Schulemberg--'Look at
that _mawkin_, and think of her being my son's passion!'

The duchess, however, like all the Hanoverians, knew how to profit by
royal preference. She took bribes:--she had a settlement of £3,000 a
year. But her daughter was eventually disappointed of the expected
bequest from her father, the king.[24]

In the apartments at St. James's Lord Chesterfield for some time lived,
when he was not engaged in office abroad; and there he dissipated large
sums in play. It was here, too, that Queen Caroline, the wife of George
II., detected the intimacy that existed between Chesterfield and Lady
Suffolk. There was an obscure window in Queen Caroline's apartments,
which looked into a dark passage, lighted only by a single lamp at
night. One Twelfth Night Lord Chesterfield, having won a large sum at
cards, deposited it with Lady Suffolk, thinking it not safe to carry it
home at night. He was watched, and his intimacy with the mistress of
George II. thereupon inferred. Thenceforth he could obtain no court
influence; and, in desperation, he went into the opposition.

On the death of George I., a singular scene, with which Lord
Chesterfield's interests were connected, occurred in the Privy Council.
Dr Wake, Archbishop of Canterbury, produced the king's will, and
delivered it to his successor, expecting that it would be opened and
read in the council; what was his consternation, when his Majesty,
without saying a word, put it into his pocket, and stalked out of the
room with real German imperturbability! Neither the astounded prelate
nor the subservient council ventured to utter a word. The will was never
more heard of: and rumour declared that it was burnt. The contents, of
course, never transpired; and the legacy of £40,000, said to have been
left to the Duchess of Kendal, was never more spoken of, until Lord
Chesterfield, in 1733, married the Countess of Walsingham. In 1743, it
is said, he claimed the legacy--in right of his wife--the Duchess of
Kendal being then dead: and was 'quieted' with £20,000, and got, as
Horace Walpole observes, nothing from the duchess--'except his wife.'

The only excuse that was urged to extenuate this act on the part of
George II., was that his royal father had burned two wills which had
been made in his favour. These were supposed to be the wills of the Duke
and Duchess of Zell and of the Electress Sophia. There was not even
common honesty in the house of Hanover at that period.

Disappointed in his wife's fortune, Lord Chesterfield seems to have
cared very little for the disappointed heiress. Their union was
childless. His opinion of marriage appears very much to have coincided
with that of the world of malcontents who rush, in the present day, to
the court of Judge Cresswell, with 'dissolving views.' On one occasion
he writes thus: 'I have at last done the best office that can be done to
most married people; that is, I have fixed the separation between my
brother and his wife, and the definitive treaty of peace will be
proclaimed in about a fortnight.'

Horace Walpole related the following anecdote of Sir William Stanhope
(Chesterfield's brother) and his lady, whom he calls 'a fond couple.'
After their return from Paris, when they arrived at Lord Chesterfield's
house at Blackheath, Sir William, who had, like his brother, a cutting,
polite wit, that was probably expressed with the 'allowed simper' of
Lord Chesterfield, got out of the chaise and said, with a low bow,
'Madame, I hope I shall never see your face again.' She replied, 'Sir, I
will take care that you never shall;' and so they parted.

There was little probability of Lord Chesterfield's participating in
domestic felicity, when neither his heart nor his fancy were engaged in
the union which he had formed. The lady to whom he was really attached,
and by whom he had a son, resided in the Netherlands: she passed by the
name of Madame du Bouchet, and survived both Lord Chesterfield and her
son. A permanent provision was made for her, and a sum of five hundred
pounds bequeathed to her, with these words: 'as a small reparation for
the injury I did her.' 'Certainly,' adds Lord Mahon, in his Memoir of
his illustrious ancestor, 'a small one.'

For some time Lord Chesterfield remained in England, and his letters are
dated from Bath, from Tonbridge, from Blackheath. He had, in 1726, been
elevated to the House of Lords upon the death of his father. In that
assembly his great eloquence is thus well described by his
biographer:--[25]

'Lord Chesterfield's eloquence, the fruit of much study, was less
characterized by force and compass than by elegance and perspicuity, and
especially by good taste and urbanity, and a vein of delicate irony
which, while it sometimes inflicted severe strokes, never passed the
limits of decency and propriety. It was that of a man who, in the union
of wit and good sense with politeness, had not a competitor. These
qualities were matured by the advantage which he assiduously sought and
obtained, of a familiar acquaintance with almost all the eminent wits
and writers of his time, many of whom had been the ornaments of a
preceding age of literature, while others were destined to become those
of a later period.'

The accession of George II., to whose court Lord Chesterfield had been
attached for many years, brought him no political preferment. The court
had, however, its attractions even for one who owed his polish to the
belles of Paris, and who was almost always, in taste and manners, more
foreign than English. Henrietta, Lady Pomfret, the daughter and heiress
of John, Lord Jeffreys, the son of Judge Jeffreys, was at that time the
leader of fashion.

Six daughters, one of them, Lady Sophia, surpassingly lovely recalled
the perfections of that ancestress, Arabella Fermor whose charms Pope
has so exquisitely touched in the 'Rape of the Lock.' Lady Sophia became
eventually the wife of Lord Carteret, the minister, whose talents and
the charms of whose eloquence constituted him a sort of rival to
Chesterfield. With all his abilities, Lord Chesterfield may be said to
have failed both as a courtier and as a political character, as far as
permanent influence in any ministry was concerned, until in 1744, when
what was called the 'Broad-bottomed administration' was formed, when he
was admitted into the cabinet. In the following year, however, he went,
for the last time, to Holland, as ambassador, and succeeded beyond the
expectations of his party in the purposes of his embassy. He took leave
of the States-General just before the battle of Fontenoy, and hastened
to Ireland, where he had been nominated Lord-Lieutenant previous to his
journey to Holland. He remained in that country only a year; but long
enough to prove how liberal were his views--how kindly the dispositions
of his heart.

Only a few years before Lord Chesterfield's arrival in Dublin, the Duke
of Shrewsbury had given as a reason for accepting the vice-regency of
that country, (of which King James I. had said, there was 'more ado'
than with any of his dominions,) 'that it was a place where a man had
business enough to keep him from falling asleep, and not enough to keep
him awake.'

Chesterfield, however, was not of that opinion. He did more in one year
than the duke would have accomplished in five. He began by instituting a
principle of impartial justice. Formerly, Protestants had alone been
employed as 'managers;' the Lieutenant was to see with Protestant eyes,
to hear with Protestant ears.

'I have determined to proscribe no set of persons whatever,' says
Chesterfield, 'and determined to be governed by none. Had the Papists
made any attempt to put themselves above the law, I should have taken
good care to have quelled them again. It was said my lenity to the
Papists had wrought no alteration either in their religious or their
political sentiments. I did not expect that it would: but surely that
was no reason for cruelty towards them.'

Often by a timely jest Chesterfield conveyed a hint, or even shrouded a
reproof. One of the ultra-zealous informed him that his coachman was a
Papist, and went every Sunday to mass. 'Does he indeed? I will take care
he never drives me there,' was Chesterfield's cool reply.

It was at this critical period, when the Hanoverian dynasty was shaken
almost to its downfall by the insurrection in Scotland of 1745, that
Ireland was imperilled: 'With a weak or wavering, or a fierce and
headlong Lord-Lieutenant--with a Grafton or a Strafford,' remarks Lord
Mahon, 'there would soon have been a simultaneous rising in the Emerald
Isle.' But Chesterfield's energy, his lenity, his wise and just
administration saved the Irish from being excited into rebellion by the
emissaries of Charles Edward, or slaughtered, when conquered, by the
'Butcher,' and his tiger-like dragoons. When all was over, and that sad
page of history in which the deaths of so many faithful adherents of the
exiled family are recorded, had been held up to the gaze of bleeding
Caledonia, Chesterfield recommended mild measures, and advised the
establishment of schools in the Highlands; but the age was too
narrow-minded to adopt his views. In January, 1748, Chesterfield retired
from public life. 'Could I do any good,' he wrote to a friend, 'I would
sacrifice some more quiet to it; but convinced as I am that I can do
none, I will indulge my ease, and preserve my character. I have gone
through pleasures while my constitution and my spirits would allow me.
Business succeeded them; and I have now gone through every part of it
without liking it at all the better for being acquainted with it. Like
many other things, it is most admired by those who know it least.... I
have been behind the scenes both of pleasure and business; I have seen
all the coarse pulleys and dirty ropes which exhibit and move all the
gaudy machines; and I have seen and smelt the tallow candles which
illuminate the whole decoration, to the astonishment and admiration of
the ignorant multitude.... My horse, my books, and my friends will
divide my time pretty equally.'

He still interested himself in what was useful; and carried a Bill in
the House of Lords for the Reformation of the Calendar, in 1751. It
seems a small matter for so great a mind as his to accomplish, but it
was an achievement of infinite difficulty. Many statesmen had shrunk
from the undertaking; and even Chesterfield found it essential to
prepare the public, by writing in some periodical papers on the subject.
Nevertheless the vulgar outcry was vehement: 'Give us back the eleven
days we have been robbed of!' cried the mob at a general election. When
Bradley was dying, the common people ascribed his sufferings to a
judgment for the part he had taken in that 'impious transaction,' the
alteration of the calendar. But they were not less _bornés_ in their
notions than the Duke of Newcastle, then prime minister. Upon Lord
Chesterfield giving him notice of his Bill, that bustling premier, who
had been in a hurry for forty years, who never 'walked but always ran,'
greatly alarmed, begged Chesterfield not to stir matters that had been
long quiet; adding, that he did not like 'new-fangled things.' He was,
as we have seen, overruled, and henceforth the New Style was adopted;
and no special calamity has fallen on the nation, as was expected, in
consequence. Nevertheless, after Chesterfield had made his speech in the
House of Lords, and when every one had complimented him on the clearness
of his explanation--'God knows,' he wrote to his son, 'I had not even
attempted to explain the Bill to them; I might as soon have talked
Celtic or Sclavonic to them as astronomy. They would have understood it
full as well.' So much for the 'Lords' in those days!

After his _furore_ for politics had subsided, Chesterfield returned to
his ancient passion for play. We must linger a little over the still
brilliant period of his middle life, whilst his hearing was spared;
whilst his wit remained, and the charming manners on which he had formed
a science, continued; and before we see him in the mournful decline of a
life wholly given to the world.

He had now established himself in Chesterfield House. Hitherto his
progenitors had been satisfied with Bloomsbury Square, in which the Lord
Chesterfield mentioned by De Grammont resided; but the accomplished
Chesterfield chose a site near Audley Street, which had been built on
what was called Mr. Audley's land, lying between Great Brook Field and
the 'Shoulder of Mutton Field.' And near this locality with the elegant
name, Chesterfield chose his spot, for which he had to wrangle and fight
with the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, who asked an exorbitant sum
for the ground. Isaac Ware, the editor of 'Palladio,' was the architect
to whom the erection of this handsome residence was intrusted. Happily
it is still untouched by any _renovating_ hand. Chesterfield's favourite
apartments, looking on the most spacious private garden in London, are
just as they were in his time; one especially, which he termed the
'finest room in London,' was furnished and decorated by him. 'The
walls,' says a writer in the 'Quarterly Review,' 'are covered half way
up with rich and classical stores of literature; above the cases are in
close series the portraits of eminent authors, French and English, with
most of whom he had conversed; over these, and immediately under the
massive cornice, extend all round in foot-long capitals the Horatian
lines:--

    'Nunc . veterum . libris . Nunc . somno . et . inertibus . Horis.
     Lucen . solicter . jucunda . oblivia . vitea.

'On the mantel-pieces and cabinets stand busts of old orators,
interspersed with voluptuous vases and bronzes, antique or Italian, and
airy statuettes in marble or alabaster of nude or semi-nude opera
nymphs.'

What Chesterfield called the 'cannonical pillars' of the house were
columns brought from Cannons, near Edgeware, the seat of the Duke of
Chandos. The antechamber of Chesterfield House has been erroneously
stated as the room in which Johnson waited the great lord's pleasure.
That state of endurance was probably passed by 'Old Samuel' in
Bloomsbury.

In this stately abode--one of the few, the very few, that seem to hold
_noblesse_ apart in our levelling metropolis--Chesterfield held his
assemblies of all that London, or indeed England, Paris, the Hague, or
Vienna, could furnish of what was polite and charming. Those were days
when the stream of society did not, as now, flow freely, mingling with
the grace of aristocracy the acquirements of hard-working professors;
there was then a strong line of demarcation; it had not been broken down
in the same way as now, when people of rank and wealth live in rows,
instead of inhabiting hotels set apart. Paris has sustained a similar
revolution, since her gardens were built over, and their green shades,
delicious, in the centre of that hot city, are seen no more. In the very
Faubourg St. Germain, the grand old hotels are rapidly disappearing, and
with them something of the exclusiveness of the higher orders. Lord
Chesterfield, however, triumphantly pointing to the fruits of his taste
and distribution of his wealth, witnessed, in his library at
Chesterfield House, the events which time produced. He heard of the
death of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, and of her bequest to him of
twenty thousand pounds, and her best and largest brilliant diamond ring,
'out of the great regard she had for his merit, and the infinite
obligations she had received from him.' He witnessed the change of
society and of politics which occurred when George II. expired, and the
Earl of Bute, calling himself a descendant of the house of Stuart, 'and
humble enough to be proud of it,' having quitted the isle of Bute, which
Lord Chesterfield calls 'but a little south of Nova Zembla,' took
possession, not only of the affections, but even of the senses of the
young king, George III., who, assisted by the widowed Princess of Wales
(supposed to be attached to Lord Bute), was 'lugged out of the
seraglio,' and 'placed upon the throne.'

Chesterfield lived to have the honour of having the plan of 'Johnson's
Dictionary' inscribed to him, and the dishonour of neglecting the great
author. Johnson, indeed, denied the truth of the story which gained
general belief, in which it was asserted that he had taken a disgust at
being kept waiting in the earl's antechamber, the reason being assigned
that his lordship 'had company with him;' when at last the door opened,
and forth came Colley Cibber. Then Johnson--so report said--indignant,
not only for having been kept waiting but also for _whom_, went away, it
was affirmed, in disgust; but this was solemnly denied by the doctor,
who assured Boswell that his wrath proceeded from continual neglect on
the part of Chesterfield.

Whilst the Dictionary was in progress, Chesterfield seemed to forget the
existence of him, whom, together with the other literary men, he
affected to patronize.

He once sent him ten pounds, after which he forgot Johnson's address,
and said 'the great author had changed his lodgings.' People who really
wish to benefit others can always discover where they lodge. The days of
patronage were then expiring, but they had not quite ceased, and a
dedication was always to be in some way paid for.

When the publication of the Dictionary drew near, Lord Chesterfield
flattered himself that, in spite of all his neglect, the great
compliment of having so vast an undertaking dedicated to him would still
be paid, and wrote some papers in the 'World,' recommending the work,
more especially referring to the 'plan,' and terming Johnson the
'dictator,' in respect to language: 'I will not only obey him,' he said,
'as my dictator, like an old Roman, but like a modern Roman, will
implicitly believe in him as my pope.'

Johnson, however, was not to be propitiated by those 'honeyed words.' He
wrote a letter couched in what he called 'civil terms,' to Chesterfield,
from which we extract the following passages:

'When, upon some slight encouragement, I first visited your lordship, I
was overpowered, like the rest of mankind, by the enchantment of your
address; and could not forbear to wish that I might boast myself
_vainqueur du vainqueur de la terre_--that I might obtain that regard
for which I saw the world contending; but I found my attendance so
little encouraged, that neither pride nor modesty would suffer me to
continue it. When I had once addressed your lordship in publick, I had
exhausted all the art of pleasing which a retired and uncourtly scholar
can possess. I had done all that I could; and no man is well pleased to
have his all neglected, be it ever so little.

'Seven years, my lord, have now past, since I waited in your outward
room, or was repulsed from your door, during which time I have been
pushing on my work through difficulties, of which it is useless to
complain, and have brought it, at last, to the verge of publication
without one act of assistance, one word of encouragement, or one smile
of favour: such treatment I did not expect, for I never had a patron
before.... Is not a patron, my lord, one who looks with unconcern on a
man who is struggling for life in the water, and, when he has reached
ground, encumbers him with help? The notice which you have been pleased
to take of my labours, had it been early, had been kind; but it has been
delayed till I am indifferent and cannot enjoy it; till I am solitary
and cannot impart it; till I am known and do not want it. I hope it is
no very cynical asperity not to confess obligations where no benefit has
been received, or to be unwilling that the publick should consider me as
owing that to a patron which Providence has enabled me to do for
myself.'

The conduct of Johnson, on this occasion, was approved by most manly
minds, except that of his publisher, Mr. Robert Dodsley; Dr. Adams, a
friend of Dodsley, said he was sorry that Johnson had written that
celebrated letter (a very model of polite contempt). Dodsley said he was
sorry too, for he had a property in the Dictionary, to which his
lordship's patronage might be useful. He then said that Lord
Chesterfield had shown him the letter. 'I should have thought,' said
Adams, 'that Lord Chesterfield would have concealed it.' 'Pooh!' cried
Dodsley, 'do you think a letter from Johnson could hurt Lord
Chesterfield? not at all, sir. It lay on his table, where any one might
see it. He read it to me; said, "this man has great powers," pointed out
the severest passages, and said, "how well they were expressed."' The
art of dissimulation, in which Chesterfield was perfect, imposed on Mr.
Dodsley.

Dr. Adams expostulated with the doctor, and said Lord Chesterfield
declared he would part with the best servant he had, if he had known
that he had turned away a man who was '_always_ welcome.' Then Adams
insisted on Lord Chesterfield's affability, and easiness of access to
literary men. But the sturdy Johnson replied, 'Sir, that is not Lord
Chesterfield; he is the proudest man existing.' 'I think,' Adams
rejoined, 'I know one that is prouder; you, by your own account, are the
prouder of the two.' 'But mine,' Johnson answered, with one of his happy
turns, 'was defensive pride.' 'This man,' he afterwards said, referring
to Chesterfield, 'I thought had been a lord among wits, but I find he is
only a wit among lords.'

In revenge, Chesterfield in his Letters depicted Johnson, it is said, in
the character of the 'respectable Hottentot.' Amongst other things, he
observed of the Hottentot, 'he throws his meat anywhere but down his
throat.' This being remarked to Johnson, who was by no means pleased at
being immortalized as the Hottentot--'Sir,' he answered, 'Lord
Chesterfield never saw me eat in his life.'

[Illustration: DR. JOHNSON AT LORD CHESTERFIELD'S.]

Such are the leading points of this famous and lasting controversy. It
is amusing to know that Lord Chesterfield was not always precise as to
directions to his letters. He once directed to Lord Pembroke, who was
always swimming 'To the Earl of Pembroke, in the Thames, over against
Whitehall. This, as Horace Walpole remarks, was sure of finding him
within a certain fathom.'

Lord Chesterfield was now admitted to be the very 'glass of fashion,'
though age, and, according to Lord Hervey, a hideous person, impeded his
being the 'mould of form.' 'I don't know why,' writes Horace Walpole, in
the dog-days, from Strawberry Hill, 'but people are always more anxious
about their hay than their corn, or twenty other things that cost them
more: I suppose my Lord Chesterfield, or some such dictator, made it
fashionable to care about one's hay. Nobody betrays solicitude about
getting in his rents.' 'The prince of wits,' as the same authority calls
him--'his entrance into the world was announced by his bon-mots, and his
closing lips dropped repartees that sparkled with his juvenile fire.'

No one, it was generally allowed, had such a force of table-wit as Lord
Chesterfield; but while the 'Graces' were ever his theme, he indulged
himself without distinction or consideration in numerous sallies. He
was, therefore, at once sought and feared; liked but not loved; neither
sex nor relationship, nor rank, nor friendship, nor obligation, nor
profession, could shield his victim from what Lord Hervey calls, 'those
pointed, glittering weapons, that seemed to shine only to a stander-by,
but cut deep into those they touched.'

He cherished 'a voracious appetite for abuse;' fell upon every one that
came in his way, and thus treated each one of his companions at the
expense of the other. To him Hervey, who had probably often smarted,
applied the lines of Boileau--

    'Mais c'est un petit fou qui se croit tout permis,
     Et qui pour un bon mot va perdre vingt amis.'

Horace Walpole (a more lenient judge of Chesterfield's merits) observes
that 'Chesterfield took no less pains to be the phoenix of fine
gentlemen, than Tully did to qualify himself as an orator. Both
succeeded: Tully immortalized his name; Chesterfield's reign lasted a
little longer than that of a fashionable beauty.' It was, perhaps,
because, as Dr. Johnson said, all Lord Chesterfield's witty sayings were
puns, that even his brilliant wit failed to please, although it amused,
and surprised its hearers.

Notwithstanding the contemptuous description of Lord Chesterfield's
personal appearance by Lord Hervey, his portraits represent a handsome,
though hard countenance, well-marked features, and his figure and air
appear to have been elegant. With his commanding talents, his wonderful
brilliancy and fluency of conversation, he would perhaps sometimes have
been even tedious, had it not been for his invariable cheerfulness. He
was always, as Lord Hervey says, 'present' in his company. Amongst the
few friends who really loved this thorough man of the world, was Lord
Scarborough, yet no two characters were more opposite. Lord Scarborough
had judgment, without wit: Chesterfield wit, and no judgment; Lord
Scarborough had honesty and principle; Lord Chesterfield had neither.
Everybody liked the one, but did not care for his company. Everyone
disliked the other, but wished for his company. The fact was,
Scarborough was 'splendid and absent.' Chesterfield 'cheerful and
present:' wit, grace, attention to what is passing, the surface, as it
were, of a highly-cultured mind, produced a fascination with which all
the honour and respectability in the Court of George II. could not
compete.

In the earlier part of Chesterfield's career, Pope, Bolingbroke, Hervey,
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, and, in fact, all that could add to the
pleasures of the then early dinner-table, illumined Chesterfield House
by their wit and gaiety. Yet in the midst of this exciting life, Lord
Chesterfield found time to devote to the improvement of his natural son,
Philip Stanhope, a great portion of his leisure. His celebrated Letters
to that son did not, however, appear during the earl's life; nor were
they in any way the source of his popularity as a wit, which was due to
his merits in that line alone.

The youth to whom these letters, so useful and yet so objectionable,
were addressed, was intended for a diplomatist. He was the very reverse
of his father: learned, sensible, and dry; but utterly wanting in the
graces, and devoid of eloquence. As an orator, therefore, he failed; as
a man of society, he must also have failed; and his death, in 1768, some
years before that of his father, left that father desolate, and
disappointed. Philip Stanhope had attained the rank of envoy to Dresden,
where he expired.

During the five years in which Chesterfield dragged out a mournful life
after this event, he made the painful discovery that his son had married
without confiding that step to the father to whom he owed so much. This
must have been almost as trying as the awkward, ungraceful deportment of
him whom he mourned. The world now left Chesterfield ere he had left the
world. He and his contemporary Lord Tyrawley were now old and infirm.
'The fact is,' Chesterfield wittily said, 'Tyrawley and I have been dead
these two years, but we don't choose to have it known.'

'The Bath,' he wrote to his friend Dayrolles, 'did me more good than I
thought anything could do me; but all that good does not amount to what
builders call half-repairs, and only keeps up the shattered fabric a
little longer than it would have stood without them; but take my word
for it, it will stand but a very little while longer. I am now in my
grand climacteric, and shall not complete it. Fontenelle's last words at
a hundred and three were, _Je souffre d'être._ deaf and infirm as I am,
I can with truth say the same thing at sixty-three. In my mind it is
only the strength of our passions, and the weakness of our reason, that
makes us so fond of life; but when the former subside and give way to
the latter, we grow weary of being, and willing to withdraw. I do not
recommend this train of serious reflections to you, nor ought you to
adopt them.... You have children to educate and provide for, you have
all your senses, and can enjoy all the comforts both of domestic and
social life. I am in every sense _isolé_, and have wound up all my
bottoms; I may now walk off quietly, without missing nor being missed.'

The kindness of his nature, corrupted as it was by a life wholly
worldly, and but little illumined in its course by religion, shone now
in his care of his two grandsons, the offspring of his lost son, and of
their mother, Eugenia Stanhope. To her he thus wrote:--

'The last time I had the pleasure of seeing you, I was so taken up in
playing with the boys, that I forgot their more important affairs. How
soon would you have them placed at school? When I know your pleasure as
to that, I will send to Monsieur Perny, to prepare everything for their
reception. In the mean time, I beg that you will equip them thoroughly
with clothes, linen, &c., all good, but plain; and give me the amount,
which I will pay; for I do not intend, from this time forwards, the two
boys should cost you one shilling.'

He lived, latterly, much at Blackheath, in the house which, being built
on Crown land, has finally become the Ranger's lodge; but which still
sometimes goes by the name of Chesterfield House. Here he spent large
sums, especially on pictures, and cultivated Cantelupe melons; and here,
as he grew older, and became permanently afflicted with deafness, his
chief companion was a useful friend, Solomon Dayrolles--one of those
indebted hangers-on whom it was an almost invariable custom to find, at
that period, in great houses--and perhaps too frequently in our own day.

Dayrolles, who was employed in the embassy under Lord Sandwich at the
Hague, had always, to borrow Horace Walpole's ill-natured expression,
'been a led-captain to the Dukes of Richmond and Grafton, used to be
sent to auctions for them, and to walk in the parks with their
daughters, and once went dry-nurse in Holland with them. He has
belonged, too, a good deal to my Lord Chesterfield, to whom I believe he
owes this new honour, "that of being minister at the Hague," as he had
before made him black-rod in Ireland, and gave the ingenious reason that
he had a black face.' But the great 'dictator' in the empire of
politeness was now in a slow but sure decline. Not long before his
death he was visited by Monsieur Suard, a French gentleman, who was
anxious to see '_l'homme le plus aimable, le plus poli et le plus
spirituel des trois royaumes_,' but who found him fearfully altered;
morose from his deafness, yet still anxious to please. 'It is very sad,'
he said, with his usual politeness, 'to be deaf, when one would so much
enjoy listening. I am not,' he added, 'so philosophic as my friend the
President de Montesquieu, who says, "I know how to be blind, but I do
not yet know how to be deaf."' 'We shortened our visit,' says M. Suard,
'lest we should fatigue the earl.' 'I do not detain you,' said
Chesterfield, 'for I must go and rehearse my funeral.' It was thus that
he styled his daily drive through the streets of London.

Lord Chesterfield's wonderful memory continued till his latest hour. As
he lay, gasping in the last agonies of extreme debility, his friend, Mr.
Dayrolles, called in to see him half an hour before he expired. The
politeness which had become part of his very nature did not desert the
dying earl. He managed to say, in a low voice, to his valet, 'Give
Dayrolles a chair.' This little trait greatly struck the famous Dr.
Warren, who was at the bedside of this brilliant and wonderful man. He
died on the 24th of March, 1773, in the 79th year of his age.

The preamble to a codicil (Feb. 11, 1773) contains the following
striking sentences, written when the intellect was impressed with the
solemnity of that solemn change which comes alike to the unreflecting
and to the heart stricken, holy believer:--

     'I most humbly recommend my soul to the extensive mercy of that
     Eternal, Supreme, Intelligent Being who gave it me; most
     earnestly at the same time deprecating his justice. Satiated with
     the pompous follies of this life, of which I have had an uncommon
     share, I would have no posthumous ones displayed at my funeral,
     and therefore desire to be buried in the next burying-place to
     the place where I shall die, and limit the whole expense of my
     funeral to £100.'

His body was interred, according to his wish, in the vault of the chapel
in South Audley Street, but it was afterwards removed to the family
burial-place in Shelford Church, Nottinghamshire.

In his will he left legacies to his servants.[26] 'I consider them,' he
said, 'as unfortunate friends; my equals by nature, and my inferiors
only in the difference of our fortunes.' There was something lofty in
the mind that prompted that sentence.

His estates reverted to a distant kinsman, descended from a younger son
of the first earl; and it is remarkable, on looking through the Peerage
of Great Britain, to perceive how often this has been the case in a race
remarkable for the absence of virtue. Interested marriages, vicious
habits, perhaps account for the fact; but retributive justice, though it
be presumptuous to trace its course, is everywhere.

He had so great a horror in his last days of gambling, that in
bequeathing his possessions to his heir, as he expected, and godson,
Philip Stanhope, he inserts this clause:--

     'In case my said godson, Philip Stanhope, shall at any time
     hereinafter keep, or be concerned in keeping of, any race-horses,
     or pack of hounds, or reside one night at Newmarket, that
     infamous seminary of iniquity and ill-manners, during the course
     of the races there; or shall resort to the said races; or shall
     lose, in any one day, at any game or bet whatsoever, the sum of
     £500, then, in any the cases aforesaid, it is my express will
     that he, my said godson, shall forfeit and pay, out of my estate,
     the sum of £5,000 to and for the use of the Dean and Chapter of
     Westminster.'

When we say that Lord Chesterfield was a man who had _no friend_, we sum
up his character in those few words. Just after his death a small but
distinguished party of men dined together at Topham Beauclerk's. There
was Sir Joshua Reynolds; Sir William Jones, the orientalist; Bennet
Langton; Steevens; Boswell; Johnson. The conversation turned on Garrick,
who, Johnson said, had friends, but no friend. Then Boswell asked, 'what
is a friend?' 'One who comforts and supports you, while others do not.'
'Friendship, you know, sir, is the cordial drop to make the nauseous
draught of life go down.' Then one of the company mentioned Lord
Chesterfield as one who had no friend; and Boswell said: 'Garrick was
pure gold, but beat out to thin leaf, Lord Chesterfield was tinsel.'
And, for once, Johnson did not contradict him. But not so do we judge
Lord Chesterfield. He was a man who acted on false principles through
life; and those principles gradually undermined everything that was
noble and generous in character; just as those deep under-ground
currents, noiseless in their course, work through fine-grained rock, and
produce a chasm. Everything with Chesterfield was self: for self, and
self alone, were agreeable qualities to be assumed; for self, was the
country to be served, because that country protects and serves us: for
self, were friends to be sought and cherished, as useful auxiliaries, or
pleasant accessories: in the very core of the cankered heart, that
advocated this corrupting doctrine of expediency, lay unbelief; that
worm which never died in the hearts of so many illustrious men of that
period--the refrigerator of the feelings.

One only gentle and genuine sentiment possessed Lord Chesterfield, and
that was his love for his son. Yet in this affection the worldly man
might be seen in mournful colours. He did not seek to render his son
good; his sole desire was to see him successful: every lesson that he
taught him, in those matchless Letters which have carried down
Chesterfield's fame to us when his other productions have virtually
expired, exposes a code of dissimulation which Philip Stanhope, in his
marriage, turned upon the father to whom he owed so much care and
advancement. These Letters are, in fact, a complete exposition of Lord
Chesterfield's character and views of life. No other man could have
written them; no other man have conceived the notion of existence being
one great effort to deceive, as well as to excel, and of society forming
one gigantic lie. It is true they were addressed to one who was to enter
the maze of a diplomatic career, and must be taken, on that account,
with some reservation.

They have justly been condemned on the score of immorality; but we must
remember that the age in which they were written was one of lax notions,
especially among men of rank, who regarded all women accessible, either
from indiscretion or inferiority of rank, as fair game, and acted
accordingly. But whilst we agree with one of Johnson's bitterest
sentences as to the immorality of Chesterfield's letters, we disagree
with his styling his code of manners the manners of a dancing-master.
Chesterfield was in himself a perfect instance of what he calls _les
manières nobles_; and this even Johnson allowed.

'Talking of Chesterfield,' Johnson said, 'his manner was exquisitely
elegant, and he had more knowledge than I expected.' Boswell: 'Did you
find, sir, his conversation to be of a superior sort?'--Johnson: 'Sir,
in the conversation which I had with him, I had the best right to
superiority, for it was upon philology and literature.'

It was well remarked how extraordinary a thing it was that a man who
loved his son so entirely should do all he could to make him a rascal.
And Foote even contemplated bringing on the stage a father who had thus
tutored his son; and intended to show the son an honest man in
everything else, but practising his father's maxims upon him, and
cheating him.

'It should be so contrived,' Johnson remarked, referring to Foote's
plan, 'that the father should be the _only_ sufferer by the son's
villany, and thus there would be poetical justice.' 'Take out the
immorality,' he added, on another occasion, 'and the book
(Chesterfield's Letters to his Son) should be put into the hands of
every young gentleman.'

We are inclined to differ, and to confess to a moral taint throughout
the whole of the Letters; and even had the immorality been expunged, the
false motives, the deep, invariable advocacy of principles of
expediency, would have poisoned what otherwise might be of effectual
benefit to the minor virtues of polite society.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 23: The Countess of Chesterfield here alluded to was the
second wife of Philip, second Earl of Chesterfield. Philip Dormer,
fourth Earl, was grandson of the second Earl by his third wife.]

[Footnote 24: In the 'Annual Register,' for 1774, p. 20, it is stated
that as George I. had left Lady Walsingham a legacy which his successor
did not think proper to deliver, the Earl of Chesterfield was determined
to recover it by a suit in Chancery, had not his Majesty, on questioning
the Lord Chancellor on the subject, and being answered that he could
give no opinion extrajudicially, thought proper to fulfil the bequest.]

[Footnote 25: Lord Mahon, now Earl of Stanhope, if not the most
eloquent, one of the most honest historians of our time.]

[Footnote 26: Two years' wages were left to the servants.]


    THE ABBÉ SCARRON.

  An Eastern Allegory.--Who comes Here?--A Mad Freak and its
      Consequences.--Making an Abbé of him.--The May-Fair of
      Paris.--Scarron's Lament to Pellisson.--The Office of the
      Queen's Patient.--'Give me a Simple Benefice.'--Scarron's
      Description of Himself.--Improvidence and Servility.--The
      Society at Scarron's.--The Witty Conversation.--Francoise
      D'Aubigné's Début.--The Sad Story of La Belle
      Indienne.--Matrimonial Considerations.--'Scarron's Wife will
      live for ever.'--Petits Soupers.--Scarron's last Moments.--A
      Lesson for Gay and Grave.


There is an Indian or Chinese legend, I forget which, from which Mrs.
Shelley may have taken her hideous idea of Frankenstein. We are told in
this allegory that, after fashioning some thousands of men after the
most approved model, endowing them with all that is noble, generous,
admirable, and loveable in man or woman, the eastern Prometheus grew
weary in his work, stretched his hand for the beer-can, and draining it
too deeply, lapsed presently into a state of what Germans call
'other-man-ness.'--There is a simpler Anglo-Saxon term for this
condition, but I spare you. The eastern Prometheus went on seriously
with his work, and still produced the same perfect models, faultless
alike in brain and leg. But when it came to the delicate finish, when
the last touches were to be made, his hand shook a little, and the more
delicate members went awry. It was thus that instead of the power of
seeing every colour properly, one man came out with a pair of optics
which turned everything to green, and this verdancy probably transmitted
itself to the intelligence. Another, to continue the allegory, whose
tympanum had slipped a little under the unsteady fingers of the
man-maker, heard everything in a wrong sense, and his life was
miserable, because, if you sang his praises, he believed you were
ridiculing him, and if you heaped abuse upon him, he thought you were
telling lies of him.

But as Prometheus Orientalis grew more jovial, it seems to have come
into his head to make mistakes on purpose. 'I'll have a friend to laugh
with,' quoth he; and when warned by an attendant Yaksha, or demon, that
men who laughed one hour often wept the next, he swore a lusty oath,
struck his thumb heavily on a certain bump in the skull he was
completing, and holding up his little doll, cried, 'Here is one who will
laugh at everything!'

I must now add what the legend neglects to tell. The model laugher
succeeded well enough in his own reign, but he could not beget a large
family. The laughers who never weep, the real clowns of life, who do
not, when the curtain drops, retire, after an infinitesimal allowance of
'cordial,' to a half-starved, complaining family, with brats that cling
round his parti-coloured stockings, and cry to him--not for jokes--but
for bread, these laughers, I say, are few and far between. You should,
therefore, be doubly grateful to me for introducing to you now one of
the most famous of them; one who with all right and title to be
lugubrious, was the merriest man of his age.

On Shrove Tuesday, in the year 1638, the good city of Mans was in a
state of great excitement: the carnival was at its height, and everybody
had gone mad for one day before turning pious for the long, dull forty
days of Lent. The market-place was filled with maskers in quaint
costumes, each wilder and more extravagant than the last. Here were
magicians with high peaked hats covered with cabalistic signs, here
Eastern sultans of the medieval model, with very fierce looks and very
large scimitars: here Amadis de Gaul with a wagging plume a yard high,
here Pantagruel, here harlequins, here Huguenots ten times more
lugubrious than the despised sectaries they mocked, here Cæsar and
Pompey in trunk hose and Roman helmets, and a mass of other notabilities
who were great favourites in that day, appeared.

But who comes here? What is the meaning of these roars of laughter that
greet the last mask who runs into the market-place? Why do all the women
and children hurry together, calling up one another, and shouting with
delight? What is this thing? Is it some new species of bird, thus
covered with feathers and down? In a few minutes the little figure is
surrounded by a crowd of boys and women, who begin to pluck him of his
borrowed plumes, while he chatters to them like a magpie, whistles like
a song-bird, croaks like a raven, or in his natural character showers a
mass of funny nonsense on them, till their laughter makes their sides
ache. The little wretch is literally covered with small feathers from
head to foot, and even his face is not to be recognized. The women pluck
him behind and before; he dances round and tries to evade their fingers.
This is impossible; he breaks away, runs down the market pursued by a
shouting crowd, is again surrounded, and again subjected to a plucking
process. The bird must be stripped; he must be discovered. Little by
little his back is bared, and little by little is seen a black jerkin,
black stockings, and, wonder upon wonder! the bands of a canon. Now they
have cleared his face of its plumage, and a cry of disgust and shame
hails the disclosure. Yes, this curious masker is no other than a
reverend abbé, a young canon of the cathedral of Mans! 'This is too
much--it is scandalous--it is disgraceful. The church must be respected,
the sacred order must not descend to such frivolities.' The people,
lately laughing, are now furious at the shameless abbé and not his
liveliest wit can save him; they threaten and cry shame on him, and in
terror of his life, he beats his way through the crowd, and takes to his
heels. The mob follows, hooting and savage. The little man is nimble;
those well-shaped legs--_qui ont si bien dansé_--stand him in good
stead. Down the streets, and out of the town go hare and hounds. The
pursuers gain on him--a bridge, a stream filled with tall reeds, and
delightfully miry, are all the hope of refuge he sees before him. He
leaps gallantly from the bridge in among the oziers, and has the joy of
listening to the disappointed curses of the mob, when reaching the
stream, their quarry is nowhere to be seen. The reeds conceal him, and
there he lingers till nightfall, when he can issue from his
lurking-place, and escape from the town.

Such was the mad freak which deprived the Abbé Scarron of the use of his
limbs for life. His health was already ruined when he indulged this
caprice; the damp of the river brought on a violent attack, which closed
with palsy, and the gay young abbé had to pay dearly for the pleasure of
astonishing the citizens of Mans. The disguise was easily accounted
for--he had smeared himself with honey, ripped open a feather-bed, and
rolled himself in it.

This little incident gives a good idea of what Scarron was in his
younger days--ready at any time for any wild caprice.

Paul Scarron was the son of a Conseiller du Parlement of good family,
resident in Paris. He was born in 1610, and his early days would have
been wretched enough, if his elastic spirits had allowed him to give way
to misery. His father was a good-natured, weak-minded man, who on the
death of his first wife married a second, who, as one hen will peck at
another's chicks, would not, as a stepmother, leave the little Paul in
peace. She was continually putting her own children forward, and
ill-treating the late 'anointed' son. The father gave in too readily,
and young Paul was glad enough to be set free from his unhappy home.
There may be some excuse in this for the licentious living to which he
now gave himself up. He was heir to a decent fortune, and of course
thought himself justified in spending it before-hand. Then, in spite of
his quaint little figure, he had something attractive about him, for his
merry face was good-looking, if not positively handsome. If we add to
this, spirits as buoyant as an Irishman's--a mind that not only saw the
ridiculous wherever it existed, but could turn the most solemn and awful
themes to laughter, a vast deal of good-nature, and not a little
assurance--we can understand that the young Scarron was a favourite with
both men and women, and among the reckless pleasure-seekers of the day
soon became one of the wildest. In short, he was a fast young Parisian,
with as little care for morality or religion as any youth who saunters
on the Boulevards of the French capital to this day.

But his stepmother was not content with getting rid of young Paul, but
had her eye also on his fortune, and therefore easily persuaded her
husband that the service of the church was precisely the career for
which the young reprobate was fitted. There was an uncle who was Bishop
of Grenoble, and a canonry could easily be got for him. The fast youth
was compelled to give in to this arrangement, but declined to take full
orders; so that while drawing the revenue of his stall, he had nothing
to do with the duties of his calling. Then, too, it was rather a
fashionable thing to be an abbé, especially a gay one. The position
placed you on a level with people of all ranks. Half the court was
composed of love-making ecclesiastics, and the _soutane_ was a kind of
diploma for wit and wickedness. Viewed in this light, the church was as
jovial a profession as the army, and the young Scarron went to the full
extent of the letter allowed to the black gown. It was only such stupid
superstitious louts as those of Mans, who did not know anything of the
ways of Paris life, who could object to such little freaks as he loved
to indulge in.

The merry little abbé was soon the delight of the Marais. This distinct
and antiquated quarter of Paris was then the Mayfair of that capital.
Here lived in ease, and contempt of the bourgeoisie, the great, the gay,
the courtier, and the wit. Here Marion de Lorme received old Cardinals
and young abbés; here were the salons of Madame de Martel, of the
Comtesse de la Suze, who changed her creed in order to avoid seeing her
husband in this world or the next, and the famous--or infamous--Ninon de
l'Enclos; and at these houses young Scarron met the courtly
Saint-Evremond, the witty Sarrazin, and the learned but arrogant
Voiture. Here he read his skits and parodies, here travestied Virgil,
made epigrams on Richelieu, and poured out his indelicate but always
laughable witticisms. But his indulgences were not confined to
intrigues; he also drank deep, and there was not a pleasure within his
reach which he ever thought of denying himself. He laughed at religion,
thought morality a nuisance, and resolved to be merry at all costs.

The little account was brought in at last. At the age of five-and-twenty
his constitution was broken up. Gout and rheumatism assailed him
alternately or in leash. He began to feel the annoyance of the
constraint they occasioned; he regretted those legs which had figured
so well in a ronde or a minuet, and those hands which had played the
lute to dames more fair than modest; and to add to this, the pain he
suffered was not slight. He sought relief in gay society, and was
cheerful in spite of his sufferings. At length came the Shrove Tuesday
and the feathers; and the consequences were terrible. He was soon a prey
to doctors, whom he believed in no more than in the church of which he
was so great a light. His legs were no longer his own, so he was obliged
to borrow those of a chair. He was soon tucked down into a species of
dumb-waiter on castors, in which he could be rolled about in a party. In
front of this chair was fastened a desk, on which he wrote; for too wise
to be overcome by his agony, he drove it away by cultivating his
imagination, and in this way some of the most fantastic productions in
French literature were composed by this quaint little abbé.

Nor was sickness his only trial now. Old Scarron was a citizen, and had,
what was then criminal, sundry ideas of the liberty of the nation. He
saw with disgust the tyranny of Richelieu, and joined a party in the
Parliament to oppose the cardinal's measures. He even had the courage to
speak openly against one of the court edicts; and the pitiless cardinal,
who never overlooked any offence, banished him to Touraine, and
naturally extended his animosity to the conseiller's son. This happened
at a moment at which the cripple believed himself to be on the road to
favour. He had already won that of Madame de Hautefort, on whom Louis
XIII. had set his affections, and this lady had promised to present him
to Anne of Austria. The father's honest boldness put a stop to the son's
intended servility, and Scarron lamented his fate in a letter to
Pellisson:

    O mille écus, par malheur retranchés,
    Que vous pouviez m'épargner de péchés!
    Quand un valet me dit, tremblant et hâve,
    Nous n'avons plus de bûches dans la cave
    Que pour aller jusqu'à demain matin,
    Je peste alors sur mon chien de destin,
    Sur le grand froid, sur le bois de la grève,
    Qu'on vend si cher, et qui si-tôt s'achève.
    Je jure alors, et même je médis
    De l'action de mon père étourdi,
    Quand sans songer à ce qu'il allait faire
    Il m'ébaucha sous un astre contraire,
    Et m'acheva par un discours maudit
    Qu'il fit depuis sur un certain édit.

The father died in exile: his second wife had spent the greater part of
the son's fortune, and secured the rest for her own children. Scarron
was left with a mere pittance, and, to complete his troubles, was
involved in a lawsuit about the property. The cripple, with his usual
impudence, resolved to plead his own cause, and did it only too well; he
made the judges laugh so loud that they took the whole thing to be a
farce on his part, and gave--most ungratefully--judgment against him.

Glorious days were those for the penniless, halcyon days for the toady
and the sycophant. There was still much of the old oriental munificence
about the court, and sovereigns like Mazarin and Louis XIV. granted
pensions for a copy of flattering verses, or gave away places as the
reward of a judicious speech. Sinecures were legion, yet to many a
holder they were no sinecures at all, for they entailed constant
servility and a complete abdication of all freedom of opinion.

Scarron was nothing more than a merry buffoon. Many another man has
gained a name for his mirth, but most of them have been at least
independent. Scarron seems to have cared for nothing that was honourable
or dignified. He laughed at everything but money, and at that he smiled,
though it is only fair to say that he was never avaricious, but only
cared for ease and a little luxury.

When Richelieu died, and the gentler, but more subtle Mazarin mounted
his throne, Madame de Hautefort made another attempt to present her
_protégé_ to the queen, and this time succeeded. Anne of Austria had
heard of the quaint little man who could laugh over a lawsuit in which
his whole fortune was staked, and received him graciously. He begged for
some place to support him. What could he do? What was he fit for?
'Nothing, your majesty, but the important office of The Queen's Patient;
for that I am fully qualified.' Anne smiled, and Scarron from that time
styled himself 'par la grace de Dieu, le malade de la Reine.' But there
was no stipend attached to this novel office. Mazarin procured him a
pension of 500 crowns. He was then publishing his 'Typhon, or the
Gigantomachy,' and dedicated it to the cardinal, with an adulatory
sonnet. He forwarded the great man a splendidly bound copy, which was
accepted with nothing more than thanks. In a rage the author suppressed
the sonnet and substituted a satire. This piece was bitterly cutting,
and terribly true. It galled Mazarin to the heart, and he was
undignified enough to revenge himself by cancelling the poor little
pension of £60 per annum which had previously been granted to the
writer. Scarron having lost his pension, soon afterwards asked for an
abbey, but was refused. 'Then give me,' said he, 'a simple benefice, so
simple, indeed, that all its duties will be comprised in believing in
God.' But Scarron had the satisfaction of gaining a great name among the
cardinal's many enemies, and with none more so than De Retz, then
_coadjuteur_[27] to the Archbishop of Paris, and already deeply
implicated in the Fronde movement. To insure the favour of this rising
man, Scarron determined to dedicate to him a work he was just about to
publish, and on which he justly prided himself as by far his best. This
was the 'Roman Comique,' the only one of his productions which is still
read. That it should be read, I can quite understand, on account not
only of the ease of its style, but of the ingenuity of its improbable
plots, the truth of the characters, and the charming bits of satire
which are found here and there, like gems amid a mass of mere fun. The
scene is laid at Mans, the town in which the author had himself
perpetrated his chief follies; and many of the characters were probably
drawn from life, while it is likely enough that some of the stories were
taken from facts which had there come to his knowledge. As in many of
the romances of that age, a number of episodes are introduced into the
main story, which consists of the adventures of a strolling company.
These are mainly amatory, and all indelicate, while some are as coarse
as anything in French literature. Scarron had little of the clear wit of
Rabelais to atone for this; but he makes up for it, in a measure, by the
utter absurdity of some of his incidents. Not the least curious part of
the book is the Preface, in which he gives a description of himself, in
order to contradict, as he affirms, the extravagant reports circulated
about him, to the effect that he was set upon a table, in a cage, or
that his hat was fastened to the ceiling by a pulley, that he might
'pluck it up or let it down, to do compliment to a friend, who honoured
him with a visit.' This description is a tolerable specimen of his
style, and we give it in the quaint language of an old translation,
published in 1741:--

'I am past thirty, as thou may'st see by the back of my Chair. If I live
to be forty, I shall add the Lord knows how many Misfortunes to those I
have already suffered for these eight or nine Years past. There was a
Time when my Stature was not to be found fault with, tho' now 'tis of
the smallest. My Sickness has taken me shorter by a Foot. My Head is
somewhat too big, considering my Height; and my Face is full enough, in
all Conscience, for one that carries such a Skeleton of a Body about
him. I have Hair enough on my Head not to stand in need of a Peruke; and
'tis gray, too, in spite of the Proverb. My Sight is good enough, tho'
my Eyes are large; they are of a blue Colour, and one of them is sunk
deeper into my Head than the other, which was occasion'd by my leaning
on that Side. My Nose is well enough mounted. My Teeth, which in the
Days of Yore look'd like a Row of square Pearl, are now of an Ashen
Colour; and in a few Years more, will have the Complexion of a
Small-coal Man's Saturday Shirt. I have lost one Tooth and a half on the
left Side, and two and a half precisely on the right; and I have two
more that stand somewhat out of their Ranks. My Legs and Thighs, in the
first place, compose an obtuse Angle, then a right one, and lastly an
acute. My Thighs and Body make another; and my Head, leaning perpetually
over my Belly, I fancy makes me not very unlike the Letter Z. My Arms
are shortened, as well as my Legs; and my Fingers as well as my Arms. In
short, I am a living Epitome of human Misery. This, as near as I can
give it, is my Shape. Since I am got so far, I will e'en tell thee
something of my Humour. Under the Rose, be it spoken, Courteous Reader,
I do this only to swell the Bulk of my Book, at the Request of the
Bookseller--the poor Dog, it seems, being afraid he should be a Loser by
this Impression, if he did not give Buyer enough for his Money.'

This allusion to the publisher reminds us that, on the suppression of
his pension--on hearing of which Scarron only said, 'I should like,
then, to suppress myself'--he had to live on the profits of his works.
In later days it was Madame Scarron herself who often carried them to
the bookseller's, when there was not a penny in the house. The publisher
was Quinet, and the merry wit, when asked whence he drew his income,
used to reply with mock haughtiness, 'De mon Marquisat de Quinet.' His
comedies, which have been described as mere burlesques--I confess I have
never read them, and hope to be absolved--were successful enough, and if
Scarron had known how to keep what he made, he might sooner or later
have been in easy circumstances. He knew neither that nor any other art
of self-restraint, and, therefore, was in perpetual vicissitudes of
riches and penury. At one time he could afford to dedicate a piece to
his sister's greyhound, at another he was servile in his address to some
prince or duke.

In the latter spirit, he humbled himself before Mazarin, in spite of the
publication of his 'Mazarinade,' and was, as he might have expected,
repulsed. He then turned to Fouquet, the new Surintendant de Finances,
who was liberal enough with the public money, which he so freely
embezzled, and extracted from him a pension of 1,600 francs (about £64).
In one way or another, he got back a part of the property his stepmother
had alienated from him, and obtained a prebend in the diocese of Mans,
which made up his income to something more respectable.

He was now able to indulge to the utmost his love of society. In his
apartment, in the Rue St. Louis, he received all the leaders of the
Fronde, headed by De Retz, and bringing with them their pasquinades on
Mazarin, which the easy Italian read and laughed at and pretended to
heed not at all. Politics, however, was not the staple of the
conversation at Scarron's. He was visited as a curiosity, as a clever
buffoon, and those who came to see, remained to laugh. He kept them all
alive by his coarse, easy, impudent wit; in which there was more
vulgarity and dirtiness than ill-nature. He had a fund of _bonhommie_,
which set his visitors at their ease, for no one was afraid of being
bitten by the chained dog they came to pat. His salon became famous; and
the admission to it was a diploma of wit. He kept out all the dull, and
ignored all the simply great. Any man who could say a good thing, tell a
good story, write a good lampoon, or mimic a fool, was a welcome guest.
Wits mingled with pedants, courtiers with poets. Abbés and gay women
were at home in the easy society of the cripple, and circulated freely
round his dumb-waiter.

The ladies of the party were not the most respectable in Paris, yet some
who were models of virtue met there, without a shudder, many others who
were patterns of vice. Ninon de l'Enclos--then young--though age made no
alteration in _her_--and already slaying her scores, and ruining her
hundreds of admirers, there met Madame de Sévigné, the most respectable,
as well as the most agreeable, woman of that age. Mademoiselle de
Scudéry, leaving, for the time, her twelve-volume romance, about Cyrus
and Ibrahim, led on a troop of Molière's Précieuses Ridicules, and here
recited her verses, and talked pedantically to Pellisson, the ugliest
man in Paris, of whom Boileau wrote:

    'L'or même à Pellisson donne un teint de beauté.'

Then there was Madame de la Sablière, who was as masculine as her
husband the marquis was effeminate; the Duchesse de Lesdiguières, who
was so anxious to be thought a wit that she employed the Chevalier de
Méré to make her one; and the Comtesse de la Suze, a clever but foolish
woman.

The men were poets, courtiers, and pedants. Ménage with his tiresome
memory, Montreuil and Marigni the song-writers, the elegant De Grammont,
Turenne, Coligni, the gallant Abbé Têtu, and many another celebrity,
thronged the rooms where Scarron sat in his curious wheelbarrow.

The conversation was decidedly light; often, indeed, obscene, in spite
of the presence of ladies; but always witty. The hostility of Scarron to
the reigning cardinal was a great recommendation, and when all else
flagged, or the cripple had an unusually sharp attack, he had but to
start with a line of his 'Mazarinade,' and out came a fresh lampoon, a
new caricature, or fresh rounds of wit fired off at the Italian, from
the well-filled cartridge-boxes of the guests, many of whom kept their
_mots_ ready made up for discharge.

But a change came over the spirit of the paralytic's dream. In the Rue
St. Louis, close to Scarron's, lived a certain Madame Neuillant, who
visited him as a neighbour, and one day excited his curiosity by the
romantic history of a mother and daughter, who had long lived in
Martinique, who had been ruined by the extravagance and follies of a
reprobate husband and father; and were now living in great poverty--the
daughter being supported by Madame de Neuillant herself. The
good-natured cripple was touched by this story, and begged his neighbour
to bring the unhappy ladies to one of his parties. The evening came; the
abbé was, as usual, surrounded by a circle of lady wits, dressed in the
last fashions, flaunting their fans, and laughing merrily at his
sallies. Madame de Neuillant was announced, and entered, followed by a
simply-dressed lady, with the melancholy face of one broken-down by
misfortunes, and a pretty girl of fifteen. The contrast between the
new-comers and the fashionable _habituées_ around him at once struck the
abbé. The girl was not only badly, but even shabbily dressed, and the
shortness of her gown showed that she had grown out of it, and could not
afford a new one. The _grandes dames_ turned upon her their eye-glasses,
and whispered comments behind their fans. She was very pretty, they
said, very interesting, elegant, lady-like, and so on; but, _parbleu!_
how shamefully _mal mise!_ The new-comers were led up to the cripple's
dumb-waiter, and the _grandes dames_ drew back their ample petticoats as
they passed. The young girl was overcome with shame, their whispers
reached her; she cast down her pretty eyes, and growing more and more
confused, she could bear it no longer, and burst into tears. The abbé
and his guests were touched by her shyness, and endeavoured to restore
her confidence. Scarron himself leant over, and whispered a few kind
words in her ear; then breaking out into some happy pleasantry, he gave
her time to recover her composure. Such was the first _début_ in
Parisian society of Françoise d'Aubigné, who was destined, as Madame
Scarron, to be afterwards one of its leaders, and, as Madame de
Maintenon, to be its ruler.

[Illustration: SCARRON AND THE WITS--FIRST APPEARANCE OF LA BELLE
INDIENNE.]

Some people are cursed with bad sons--some with erring daughters.
Françoise d'Aubigné was long the victim of a wicked father. Constans
d'Aubigné belonged to an old and honourable family, and was the son of
that famous old Huguenot general, Théodore-Agrippa d'Aubigné, who fought
for a long time under Henry of Navarre, and in his old age wrote the
history of his times. To counterbalance this distinction, the son
Constans brought all the discredit he could on the family. After a
reckless life, in which he squandered his patrimony, he married a rich
widow, and then, it is said, contrived to put her out of the way. He was
imprisoned as a murderer, but acquitted for want of evidence. The story
goes, that he was liberated by the daughter of the governor of the gaol,
whom he had seduced in the prison, and whom he married when free. He
sought to retrieve his fortune in the island of Martinique, ill-treated
his wife, and eventually ran away, and left her and her children to
their fate. They followed him to France, and found him again
incarcerated. Madame d'Aubigné was foolishly fond of her
good-for-nothing spouse, and lived with him in his cell, where the
little Françoise, who had been born in prison, was now educated.

Rescued from starvation by a worthy Huguenot aunt, Madame de Vilette,
the little girl was brought up as a Protestant, and a very stanch one
she proved for a time. But Madame d'Aubigné, who was a Romanist, would
not allow her to remain long under the Calvinist lady's protection, and
sent her to be converted by her godmother, the Madame de Neuillant above
mentioned. This woman, who was as merciless as a woman can be, literally
broke her into Romanism, treated her like a servant, made her groom the
horses, and comb the maid's hair, and when all these efforts failed,
sent her to a convent to be finished off. The nuns did by specious
reasoning what had been begun by persecution, and young Françoise, at
the time she was introduced to Scarron, was a highly respectable member
of 'the only true church.'

Madame d'Aubigné was at this time supporting herself by needlework. Her
sad story won the sympathy of Scarron's guests, who united to relieve
her wants. _La belle Indienne_, as the cripple styled her, soon became a
favourite at his parties, and lost her shyness by degrees. Ninon de
l'Enclos, who did not want heart, took her by the hand, and a friendship
thus commenced between that inveterate Laïs and the future wife of Louis
XIV. which lasted till death.

The beauty of Françoise soon brought her many admirers, among whom was
even one of Ninon's slaves; but as marriage was not the object of these
attentions, and the young girl would not relinquish her virtue, she
remained for some time unmarried but respectable. Scarron was
particularly fond of her, and well knew that, portionless as she was,
the poor girl would have but little chance of making a match. His
kindness touched her, his wit charmed her; she pitied his infirmities,
and as his neighbour, frequently saw and tried to console him. On the
other hand the cripple, though forty years old, and in a state of health
which it is impossible to describe, fell positively in love with the
young girl, who alone of all the ladies who visited him combined wit
with perfect modesty. He pitied her destitution. There was mutual pity,
and we all know what passion that feeling is akin to.

Still, for a paralytic, utterly unfit for marriage in any point of view,
to offer to a beautiful young girl, would have seemed ridiculous, if not
unpardonable. But let us take into account the difference in ideas of
matrimony between ourselves and the French. We must remember that
marriage has always been regarded among our neighbours as a contract for
mutual benefit, into which the consideration of money of necessity
entered largely. It is true that some qualities are taken as equivalents
for actual cash: thus, if a young man has a straight and well-cut nose
he may sell himself at a higher price than a young man there with the
hideous pug; if a girl is beautiful, the marquis will be content with
some thousands of francs less for her dower than if her hair were red or
her complexion irreclaimably brown. If Julie has a pretty foot, a
_svelte_ waist, and can play the piano thunderingly, or sing in the
charmingest soprano, her ten thousand francs are quite as acceptable as
those of stout awkward, glum-faced Jeannette. The faultless boots and
yellow kids of young Adolphe counterbalance the somewhat apocryphal
vicomté of ill-kempt and ill-attired Henri.

But then there must be _some_ fortune. A Frenchman is so much in the
habit of expecting it, that he thinks it almost a crime to fall in love
where there is none. Françoise, pretty, clever, agreeable as she was,
was penniless, and even worse, she was the daughter of a man who had
been imprisoned on suspicion of murder, and a woman who had gained her
livelihood by needlework. All these considerations made the fancy of the
merry abbé less ridiculous, and Françoise herself, being sufficiently
versed in the ways of the world to understand the disadvantage under
which she laboured, was less amazed and disgusted than another girl
might have been, when, in due course, the cripple offered her himself
and his dumb-waiter. He had little more to give--his pension, a tiny
income from his prebend and his Marquisat de Quinet.

The offer of the little man was not so amusing as other episodes of his
life. He went honestly to work; represented to her what a sad lot would
hers be, if Madame de Neuillant died, and what were the temptations of
beauty without a penny. His arguments were more to the point than
delicate, and he talked to the young girl as if she was a woman of the
world. Still, she accepted him, cripple as he was.

Madame de Neuillant made no objection, for she was only too glad to be
rid of a beauty, who ate and drank, but did not marry.

On the making of the contract, Scarron's fun revived. When asked by the
notary what was the young lady's fortune, he replied: 'Four louis, two
large wicked eyes, one fine figure, one pair of good hands, and lots of
mind.' 'And what do you give her?' asked the lawyer.--'Immortality,'
replied he, with the air of a bombastic poet 'The names of the wives of
kings die with them--that of Scarron's wife will live for ever!'

His marriage obliged him to give up his canonry, which he sold to
Ménage's man-servant, a little bit of simony which was not even noticed
in those days. It is amusing to find a man who laughed at all religion,
insisting that his wife should make a formal avowal of the Romish
faith. Of the character of this marriage we need say no more than that
Scarron had at that time the use of no more than his eyes, tongue, and
hands. Yet such was then, as now, the idea of matrimony in France, that
the young lady's friends considered her fortunate.

Scarron in love was a picture which amazed and amused the whole society
of Paris, but Scarron married was still more curious. The queen, when
she heard of it, said that Françoise would be nothing but a useless bit
of furniture in his house. She proved not only the most useful appendage
he could have, but the salvation alike of his soul and his reputation.
The woman who charmed Louis XIV. by her good sense, had enough of it to
see Scarron's faults, and prided herself on reforming him as far as it
was possible. Her husband had hitherto been the great Nestor of
indelicacy, and when he was induced to give it up, the rest followed his
example. Madame Scarron checked the licence of the abbé's conversation,
and even worked a beneficial change in his mind.

The joviality of their parties still continued. Scarron had always been
famous for his _petits soupers_, the fashion of which he introduced, but
as his poverty would not allow him to give them in proper style, his
friends made a pic-nic of it, and each one either brought or sent his
own dish of ragout, or whatever it might be, and his own bottle of wine.
This does not seem to have been the case after the marriage, however;
for it is related as a proof of Madame Scarron's conversational powers,
that, when one evening a poorer supper than usual was served, the waiter
whispered in her ear, 'Tell them another story, Madame, if you please,
for we have no joint to-night.' Still both guests and host could well
afford to dispense with the coarseness of the cripple's talk, which
might raise a laugh, but must sometimes have caused disgust, and the
young wife of sixteen succeeded in making him purer both in his
conversation and his writings.

The household she entered was indeed a villainous one. Scarron rather
gloried in his early delinquencies, and, to add to this, his two sisters
had characters far from estimable. One of them had been maid of honour
to the Princesse de Conti, but had given up her appointment to become
the mistress of the Duc de Trêmes. The laugher laughed even at his
sister's dishonour, and allowed her to live in the same house on a
higher _étage_. When, on one occasion, some one called on him to solicit
the lady's interest with the duke, he coolly said, 'You are mistaken; it
is not I who know the duke; go up to the next storey.' The offspring of
this connection he styled 'his nephews after the fashion of the Marais.'
Françoise did her best to reclaim this sister and to conceal her shame,
but the laughing abbé made no secret of it.

But the laugher was approaching his end. His attacks became more and
more violent: still he laughed at them. Once he was seized with a
terrible choking hiccup, which threatened to suffocate him. The first
moment he could speak he cried, 'If I get well, I'll write a satire on
the hiccup.' The priests came about him, and his wife did what she could
to bring him to a sense of his future danger. He laughed at the priests
and at his wife's fears. She spoke of hell. 'If there is such a place,'
he answered, 'it won't be for me, for without you I must have had my
hell in this life.' The priests told him, by way of consolation, that
'God had visited him more than any man.'--He does me too much honour,'
answered the mocker. 'You should give him thanks,' urged the
ecclesiastic. 'I can't see for what,' was the shameless answer.

On his death-bed he parodied a will, leaving to Corneille 'two hundred
pounds of patience; to Boileau (with whom he had a long feud), the
gangrene; and to the Academy, the power to alter the French language as
they liked.' His legacy in verse to his wife is grossly disgusting, and
quite unfit for quotation. Yet he loved her well, avowed that his chief
grief in dying was the necessity of leaving her, and begged her to
remember him sometimes, and to lead a virtuous life.

His last moments were as jovial as any. When he saw his friends weeping
around him he shook his head and cried, 'I shall never make you weep as
much as I have made you laugh.' A little later a softer thought of hope
came across him. 'No more sleeplessness, no more gout,' he murmured;
'the Queen's patient will be well at last' At length the laugher was
sobered. In the presence of death, at the gates of a new world, he
muttered, half afraid, 'I never thought it was so easy to laugh at
death,' and so expired. This was in October, 1660, when the cripple had
reached the age of fifty.

Thus died a laugher. It is unnecessary here to trace the story of his
widow's strange rise to be the wife of a king. Scarron was no honour to
her, and in later years she tried to forget his existence. Boileau fell
into disgrace for merely mentioning his name before the king. Yet
Scarron was in many respects a better man than Louis; and, laugher as he
was, he had a good heart. There is a time for mirth and a time for
mourning, the Preacher tells us. Scarron never learned this truth, and
he laughed too much and too long. Yet let us not end the laugher's life
in sorrow:

    'It is well to be merry and wise,' &c.

Let us be merry as the poor cripple, who bore his sufferings so well,
and let us be wise too. There is a lesson for gay and grave in the life
of Scarron, the laugher.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 27: _Coadjuteur._--A high office in the Church of Rome.]


    FRANÇOIS DUC DE LA ROCHEFOUCAULT AND THE DUC DE SAINT-SIMON.

  Rank and Good Breeding.--The Hôtel de Rochefoucault.--Racine and
      his Plays.--La Rochefoucault's Wit and Sensibility.--Saint
      Simon's Youth.--Looking out for a Wife.--Saint-Simon's Court
      Life.--The History of Louise de la Vallière.--A mean Act of
      Louis Quatorze.--All has passed away.--Saint-Simon's Memoirs of
      His Own Time.


The precursor of Saint-Simon, the model of Lord Chesterfield, this
ornament of his age, belonged, as well as Saint-Simon, to that state of
society in France which was characterised--as Lord John Russell, in his
'Memoirs of the Duchess of Orleans,' tells us--by an idolatry of power
and station. 'God would not condemn a person of that rank,' was the
exclamation of a lady of the old _régime_, on hearing, that a notorious
sinner, 'Pair de France,' and one knows not what else, had gone to his
account impenitent and unabsolved; and though the sentiment may strike
us as profane, it was, doubtless, genuine.

Rank, however was often adorned by accomplishments which, like an
exemption from rules of conduct, it almost claimed as a privilege.
Good-breeding was a science in France; natural to a peasant, even, it
was studied as an epitome of all the social virtues. '_N'étre pas poli_'
was the sum total of all dispraise: a man could only recover from it by
splendid valour or rare gifts; a woman could not hope to rise out of
that Slough of Despond to which good-breeding never came. We were behind
all the arts of civilization in England, as François de Rochefoucault
(we give the orthography of the present day) was in his cradle. This
brilliant personage, who combined the wit and the moralist, the courtier
and the soldier, the man of literary tastes and the sentimentalist _par
excellence_, was born in 1613. In addition to his hereditary title of
duc, he had the empty honour, as Saint-Simon calls it, of being Prince
de Marsillac, a designation which was lost in that of _De la
Rochefoucault_--so famous even to the present day. As he presented
himself at the court of the regency, over which Anne of Austria
nominally presided, no youth there was more distinguished for his
elegance or for the fame of his exploits during the wars of the Fronde
than this youthful scion of an illustrious house. Endowed by nature with
a pleasing countenance, and, what was far more important in that
fastidious region, an air of dignity, he displayed wonderful
contradictions in his character and bearing. He had, says Madame de
Maintenon, '_beaucoup d'esprit, et peu de savoir_;' an expressive
phrase. 'He was,' she adds, 'pliant in nature, intriguing, and
cautious;' nevertheless she never, she declares, possessed a more steady
friend, nor one more confiding and better adapted to advise. Brave as he
was, he held personal valour, or affected to do so, in light estimation.
His ambition was to rule others. Lively in conversation, though
naturally pensive, he assembled around him all that Paris or Versailles
could present of wit and intellect.

The old Hôtel de Rochefoucault, in the Rue de Seine, in the Faubourg St.
Germain, in Paris, still grandly recalls the assemblies in which Racine,
Boileau, Madame de Sévigné, the La Fayettes, and the famous Duchesse de
Longueville, used to assemble. The time honoured family of De la
Rochefoucault still preside there; though one of its fairest ornaments,
the young, lovely, and pious Duchesse de la Rochefoucault of our time,
died in 1852--one of the first known victims to diphtheria in France, in
that unchanged old locality. There, when the De Longuevilles, the
Mazarins, and those who had formed the famous council of state of Anne
of Austria had disappeared, the poets and wits who gave to the age of
Louis XIV. its true brilliancy, collected around the Duc de la
Rochefoucault. What a scene it must have been in those days, as Buffon
said of the earth in spring '_tout four-mille de vie!_' Let us people
the salon of the Hôtel de Rochefoucault with visions of the past; see
the host there, in his chair, a martyr to the gout, which he bore with
all the cheerfulness of a Frenchman, and picture to ourselves the great
men who were handing him his cushion, or standing near his _fauteuil_.

Racine's joyous face may be imagined as he comes in fresh from the
College of Harcourt. Since he was born in 1639, he had not arrived at
his zenith till La Rochefoucault was almost past his prime. For a man at
thirty-six in France can no longer talk prospectively of the departure
of youth; it is gone. A single man of thirty, even in Paris, is '_un
vieux garçon_:' life begins too soon and ends too soon with those
pleasant sinners, the French. And Racine, when he was first routed out
of Port Royal, where he was educated, and presented to the whole
Faubourg St. Germain, beheld his patron, La Rochefoucault, in the
position of a disappointed man. An early adventure of his youth had
humbled, perhaps, the host of the Hôtel de Rochefoucault. At the battle
of St. Antoine, where he had distinguished himself, 'a musket-ball had
nearly deprived him of sight. On this occasion he had quoted these
lines, taken from the tragedy of '_Alcyonnée_.' It must, however, be
premised that the famous Duchess de Longueville had urged him to engage
in the wars of the Fronde. To her these lines were addressed:--

    'Pour mériter son coeur, pour plaire à ses beaux yeux,
     J'ai fait la guerre aux Rois, je l'aurais faite aux dieux.'

But now he had broken off his intimacy with the duchesse, and he
therefore parodied these lines:--

    'Pour ce coeur inconstant, qu'enfin je connais mieux,
     J'ai fait la guerre aux Rois, j'en ai perdue les yeux.'

