Every youth is a free trader. Don't you remember your own youthful
follies? If you are of the male persuasion, would you have traded your
jack-knife for TOM SMITH'S bull-pup, if there had been a tariff on the
pup. Or, if you are of the feminine persuasibility, would you have
swapped your crying-doll for BETSY JONSES' ring-tailed cat, if the cat
had been compelled to crawl through the custom-house and pay duties?
Besides, don't you remember how often your mother deprived you of a
second cup of tea, on the plea that it would injure your health? Much as
I respect your mamma, I can not refrain from informing you that that
plea was false, and that it was the absence of free trade that deprived
you of a second cup of China whiskey. Then you know that the lump-sugar,
the raisins, the cake, etc., were always locked up in a pantry. All the
result, my dear sir, of an absence of free trade.

Now that you have grown up, the result is the same. You must have your
soup, and (I do not mean to be pathetic) what is soup without salt? You
must travel on the cars, but what are cars without rails? But, alas,
salt and rails are in the black list. What do you care, whether or not
TOM JONES and BILLY BROWN make money out of their salt and iron mines?
You want cheap soup and cheap riding. Then every time that you pay one
hundred dollars for your wife's dry-goods, you have the ecstatic
pleasure of knowing that you are paying fifty dollars because Mr. JOHN
ROBINSON can't make goods as cheap as the English manufacturers.

In the natural state, man is a free trader. When our good Christian
brethren give an Indian a string of beads for a buffalo-skin, the Indian
charges no custom duties. He don't want to keep beads out of his
country. When LOT swapped his wife away for a pillar of salt, the trade
was free. When the Americans traded away good ships and cargoes for
Alabama claims, not a word was said about the tariff. These, however,
are cases in which nature rather gets ahead of civilization.

See the result of the lack of free trade in our country. The brick
manufacturers must be protected, so a heavy tariff was placed on the
foreign article. Our brick men, finding that they had a soft thing,
tried to solve that conundrum which the Israelites gave up: "How do you
make bricks without straw?" They made a patent brick, built the Howard
Museum in Washington, (was it a museum or a college?) the thing tumbled
down, and a Congressional committee sat among its ruins. Poor Gen.
HOWARD is in a muddle, and wishes, from the bottom of his heart, that we
had free trade in bricks.

Then, morally, see the high position of the free trader. Poor men who
must have tea or cigars or English or French manufactures, are never
driven to smuggling, where free trade prevails. The free trader would
even abolish the tariff of two dollars and a half, imposed on human
chattels who land at Castle Garden.

That's all I know about free trade. I thought I knew more. I'm afraid I
haven't illuminated the subject; however, I will turn my lantern next
week on protection.

LOT.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SHOCKING AFFAIR.

_First Heavy Swell._ "WHAT'S THE MATTER, OLD FELLOW?--UNDER THE
WEATHER, EH?"

_Second ditto._ "WORSE THAN THAT. _I've burst my shirt-collar!_"]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE.

(BY ATLANTIC CABLE.)


Your representative's little speech at the great PUNCHINELLO dinner may
be better imagined than described. A few words, however, may give you
its _animus_.

"If," said I, "in this illustrious company, one may indulge in a
Wellerism"--

"Spell it with a _we_, sir, if you please," whispered SAMIVEL, who stood
right behind me.

I resumed. "I have to say, that my feelings at this hour are too many
for me. Perhaps I might add, that the courses have been so also. As my
friend SOYER used to observe when we were together in the Crimea,
astronomical and gastronomical laws are alike fixed. And one of them is,
that the precession of the dinner-plates, and the nutation of the
glasses, do not promote the music of the spheres. But, Mr. PUNCH and
gentlemen, although not one of the heavenly bodies, indeed altogether
terrestrial, one feels, naturally, rounder in his orbit, and a little
more likely to see stars, after such a dinner as this, than before. Do I
not, indeed, see around me now, all the stars of the intellectual
firmament? Are not SIRIUS and ARCTURUS here, in their glory, as well as
ORION and the rest? As my old friend CRISPIN would say, their name is
legion! _I_ would blaze, gentlemen, too, if possible, in honor of the
occasion; but, as I can't Comet, meteors fall in lamentation of my poor
ability.

"The day we celebrate is truly a great one. Since the time of OLAF, the
Northman, our Anglo-Saxon-Celtic race has loved its jesting
philosophers. No fools are they, in fact, even when to that name they
'stoop to conquer.'

  'The wise man's folly is anatomized
  Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.'

"The sundry contemplation of my travels, in which my often rumination
wraps me, is a most humorous sadness.

"But, gentlemen, your walls have, if not ears, tongues, to recall the
glorious humor and wit of our race. HOGARTH looks down upon us. ADDISON
tells us of dear old Sir ROGER de COVERLEY; I am sure he must have been
the grandfather of Mr. PICKWICK. STERNE makes us weep on one side and
smile on the other, at the mention of my UNCLE TOBY; GOLDSMITH, at the
remembrance of himself. And so does TOM HOOD, the prince of humorists.
THACKERAY we all remember; and neither he nor his Vanity Fair will ever
be forgotten. DOUGLAS JERROLD, and JOHN LEECH, too--the only tears they
ever made men shed were at their graves. And who can fail to feel like a
"pendulum betwixt a smile and tear," when he remembers our ARTEMUS WARD?
Over the water now we have some yet; of whom we count "the TWAIN one;"
and we can get up as good BILLINGS-gate as ever went to market. Then,
for right Saxon wit, have we not SAXE himself? And, for the luminous,
PETROLEUM, the ex-postmaster of the Cross-roads?

"I represent a name, gentlemen, new with us, yet old in Europe. You are
well aware that, in Italy"--

"_That_ might 'uv been tuk for granted; as the donkey said ven his dam
called him a hass"--whispered, rather loudly, SAMIVEL, behind me.

Now whether it was the Thames atmosphere that had got into my head, or
whether it was SAM WELLER'S unexpected remark, I am unable, to this day,
to say. But, somehow or other, my speech had, by this time, gone up. So
I went down. If the speech was a rocket, I represented a stick. Perhaps
JENKINS may yet wake up to the importance to the civilization of the
century of reporting in full CHARLES DICKENS' speech, and BULWER'S, and
the rest. If so, I will send them on. PUNCHINELLO, however, was honored
as he deserves, at this dinner. Now for a little serious news.


GREAT BRITAIN.

JOHN SMITH, Esq., (son of the _elder_ Smith,) finds it necessary to
contradict the rumor that he is going to the United States. He is
fearful lest there may, possibly, be another person of the same name in
America; which might cause confusion.

_On dit_ that one of VICTORIA'S daughters was to be engaged to be
married to a young member of the house of ORANGE. But it is believed now
to have been a sour orange.

Rev. Mr. MACKONOCHIE has been warned by the Bishop of London that he
must reform his ritual, in some particulars. The Bishop is especially
incensed at the censer; and waxes censorious about the wax lights. He
insists that Father MACKONOCHIE must use Stearine or Spermaceti.
Moreover, when water is mixed with wine, it must not come from the East
River; and the wine must be red. Blue wine will do if he can find any.

Church parties are much excited about Mr. MIALL'S Church-liberation
scheme. But why so? Will not any Rev. who has a living, say, "Who takes
my living takes away _my all!_" A bad pun; but a good argument. They
should not _miaul_ about it, at any rate.


FRANCE.

PIERRE BONAPARTE has gone to be king of the Feejee Islands. It has been
stipulated that he shall not shoot more than one man in a month; and
part of the tenderloin is to be given always to his Majesty's Prime
Minister.

M. GUERRONIER'S remark in the Senate, April 19th, requires explanation.
He said that "Europe can be tranquil only when France is satisfied." He
was alluding to the necessity of an early supply of copies of
PUNCHINELLO; without which that excitable population can not be kept in
a satisfactory state. I have made arrangements to have them forwarded
accordingly.


GERMANY.

POTOCKIS, new Minister of Public Instruction, has offered his
resignation. The reason is that a deputation of the professors and
teachers called on him to say that it would take their pupils a year to
learn how to spell his name. It is TSCHABUSHNIGG. PRIME.

       *       *       *       *       *

POOR CAPTAIN EYRE.

It is really outrageous to find fault with poor Captain EYRE. If ever a
man had a full and perfect defence to the accusations which are made
against him, EYRE is that man. Not content with offering one excuse, he
offers a large and varied assortment of excuses, any one of which ought
to be quite satisfactory. For example he asserts:

That instead of running into the Oneida, the Oneida ran into him.

That his ship struck the Oneida so lightly that he never knew there had
been any collision.

That he saw the Oneida just after he had run into her, and that she did
not appear to have lost any thing but her skylights.

That he stopped his engines and blew his whistle, in order to show that
he was ready to offer any needed assistance to the Oneida.

That the reason why he did not stop his engines and offer assistance,
was that the collision had so injured his own ship that he thought best
to make at once for the nearest port.

That he never dreamed that any assistance was wanted, and therefore did
not offer it.

That he would have gone to the assistance of the Oneida had not one of
his lady passengers been so frightened by the collision that she begged
him to make all possible speed to land her.

That not a single one of his passengers knew there had been a collision,
so light was the shock of the contact.

That it was only a Yankee ship, any how, and that it is all "blarsted"
nonsense to make a fuss about it.

Captain EYRE has returned to England, and asks, on the above grounds,
that he be reinstated in command of his ship. It would be absurd to
refuse so just a request. His defence could not well be more full unless
he were to strengthen it with an alibi. If Mr. SOLOMON PELL still
pursues the practice of the law, Captain EYRE should at once employ that
eminent barrister to prove an alibi for him. His justification would
then be too conclusive to admit of question.

       *       *       *       *       *

CRITICISM OF THE PERIOD.

[AFTER THE MANNER OF THE "NATION."]

Milton's Paradise Lost.--The demand for a new edition of this cumbrous
piece of blank verse, proves what we have often said, that the want, in
CROMWELLS time, of a literary journal of the character of the Nation has
had a permanent effect upon literature. Had we been in existence when
that obstinate and pedantic old Puritan wrote, we might have suppressed
him. Still, there is no knowing what women and children will not read.
While MILTON'S lines certainly measure generally about the same length,
it is preposterous to call by the name of poetry what could be written
in prose with so little modification. It is true that the same objection
might be applied to HOMER and SHAKSPEARE. The former has the advantage
of being written in Greek, so that very few people can read it.
SHAKSPEARE has a popularity that is partly accounted for by the low
taste of the people who have gone to the theatre to hear SIDDONS rave
and GARRICK declaim, or who will persist in admiring MACREADY and BOOTH.

As to MILTON, we have detected, with the aid of foot-notes to an old
edition, a multitude of the most absolute plagiarisms from various
authors. From the Bible mainly, and also from the Greek and Latin poets,
he has taken nearly all his ideas; and every one of the words he uses
are to be found in the dictionary. Talk of originality, after that! His
conceptions also are sometimes absurd; for instance, the Address to
Light. No one, who has not been stultified by theological nebulosities,
ought to fail to know, as we knew when we first began to go to school,
that a blind man cannot see anything at all. Therefore it is an insult
to the understanding, and paltering with all the rational inductions of
modern science, for an educated writer, stone blind, to say a word about
light.

In fact, the whole plot of the poem flies in the face of the cultivation
of the Nineteenth Century. Such ideas as Paradise, Adam and Eve, and
angels, are getting obsolete. While it is not to be expected that
ordinary persons should have the intelligence or learning of the Editor
and contributors of the Nation, we yet wonder that they are not always
ready to abide by the instruction we are prepared to give them, at the
small price of five dollars a year. Subscriptions received at this
office.

       *       *       *       *       *

INTERIOR ILLUMINATION.

It gives us joy to state that the celebrated Dr. MILIO (of whom we have
never heard before) has invented a means of illuminating men's
interiors. The doctor lives in Russia; and he takes you and throws
inside of you "a concentrated beam of electric light;" and then he sees
exactly what particular pill you want, and he gives it to you, and you
go away (after paying him) exultant! This quite does away with the
necessity of a bow-window in the bosom, so much desired by a certain
ancient philosopher.

Mr. PUNCHINELLO begs leave most respectfully to announce that he has
determined to import, at any expense whatever, one of Dr. MILIO'S
Concentrated Electric Beamers. With this Dr. PUNCHINELLO does not intend
to engage in private practice. His purpose is to throw the light
directly into the Body Politic, whether the B.P. requests him to do it
or not. Dr. P. confidently expects to make some most extraordinary
discoveries of various diseases--of greed, foolish ambition, ossification
of the heart, moral leprosy, chronic stupidity, latent idiocy, and that
very common and often unsuspected complaint usually known as Humbug.
(Humbugna Communis.) His fee in no case will exceed ten cents per week;
and patients WILL BE illuminated by the year.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DREADFUL STATE OF THINGS OUT WEST.

A dispatch received at this office from the office of the Chicago
Tribune states that the utmost public distress is prevailing in St.
Louis. A frightful pestilence is raging, complete anarchy prevails, most
of the merchants have gone into insolvency, and ruin stares St. Louis in
the face in the most aggravating way.

A dispatch from the St. Louis Democrat states that the utmost public
distress is prevailing in Chicago. A frightful pestilence is raging,
complete anarchy prevails, most of the merchants have gone into
insolvency, etc., etc.

A dispatch, from the _Cincinnati Gazette_ states that the utmost public
distress is prevailing in both, St. Louis and Chicago. A frightful
pestilence is raging, complete anarchy prevails, most of the merchants
have gone into insolvency, etc., etc., etc.

The most painful part of the matter, in Mr. PUNCHINELLO'S benevolent
eyes, is that each city appears to be perfectly delighted with the
misfortunes and miseries of both the others. Instead of getting up
subscriptions for each other, they chuckle and crow in a perfectly
fiendish manner. Until they can behave better, we shall postpone the
subscription which we propose to open in their behalf.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PERSONAL GOSSIP.
(From the Daily Press.)
"THE WINNER OF A $25,000 PRIZE IN THE HAVANA LOTTERY
IS A BOOT-BLACK OF BROOKLYN."]

       *       *       *       *       *

A Capital Letter.

  The property-holder who Lets his
  houses at reduced rents.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A TOUCHING INCIDENT IN CONGRESS.

THE RECONCILIATION BETWEEN GENERAL BUTLER AND GENERAL SCHENCK, ON THE
SUBJECT OF THE TARIFF BILL.]

       *       *       *       *       *

COLONEL FISK'S SOLILOQUY.

THE NINTH TEMPTATION.

  Would I were young enough, to go to school,
  Or could but pitch upon some golden rule
  For knowing what I am, and what to do,
  When to the public gaze I am on view.
  I'm Colonel, Admiral, and President,
  A theatre manager, and resident
  Director of the Opera House, and mine
  Are Erie and the Boston steamboat line.
  Of merchant, banker, broker, every shade
  Am I; in fact, a Jack of every trade.
  More varied than the hues of the Chameleon;
  Far heavier than Ossa piled on Pelion
  Are all my duties! Really it's confusing,
  At times, to a degree that's quite amusing.
  When am I this, when that, when which, when what?
  And am I always FISK, or am I not?
  Thus, constantly I get into a fix,
  And one thing with another sadly mix;
  Many a time absurd mistakes I've made
  In giving orders. When I'm on Parade,
  And ought to say, "Fours Right," by Jove! I'm certain
  To holloa out, "Come, hurry up that curtain!"
  Going to Providence the other night,
  I ordered all the hands, "Dress to the Right!"
  I saw my error, and called out again,
  "Hold on! I meant to say, The Ladies' Chain."
  At Matinée the other afternoon,
  When all the violins seemed well in tune,
  I sang out to the Bell Boy, "What's the hitch?
  If the Express is due, you'd better switch!"
  My order seemed the boy to overwhelm--
  "Lubber!" I cried, "why don't you port your helm?"
  I made a speech the other night at mess,
  And what my toast was, nobody will guess;
  It should have been, "The Union"--'twas, "Be cheery,
  Boys! the toast we have to drink is--Erie."
  The boys laughed loudly, being the right, sort,
  And said, "Why, Admiral! you're hard a _port_."
  One time, when GOULD and I were on the cars,
  I thought th' officials of the train were tars;
  Told them to "Coil that rope and clean the scuppers,
  And then go down below and get your suppers."
  This must be changed, or my good name will suffer,
  And folks will say, JIM FISK is but a duffer.
  To feel myself a fool and lose my head,
  Too, takes the gilding off the gingerbread;
  And makes me ask myself the reason why
  On earth I have so many fish to fry?
  The fact is, what I touch must have a risk
  Of failure, or it wouldn't suit JIM FISK,
  I'll conquer this, too--keep a secretary
  To help me out when I'm in a quandary.
  I will not budge! My banner is unfurled,
  Proclaiming FISK the Problem of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Query for Lawyers.

If a man throws a huge stone at his wife's head, would he escape
punishment on the plea that he only meant to Rock her to sleep?

       *       *       *       *       *

A Spring Blossom.

Blossom Rock, in San Francisco Harbor, has just been blown up
with gunpowder. Of course Blossom Rock went "up as a Flower".

       *       *       *       *       *

Justice in the New Territory.

Whatever lack of law there may be in Alaska, PUNCHINELLO is
quite sure that there is Just-ice enough in that domain to satisfy all
demands.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Rumor.

It is rumored that the Fenian Organization have offered Mr. FECHTER
the position of Head Centre, in recognition of the merciless manner
in which he mangles the Queen's English.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE FINANCIAL INQUISITION.

_Grand Inquisitor,_ U. S. GRANT.
_Associate Inquisitors,_ G. S. BOUTWELL, F.E. SPINNER,
JOHN SHERMAN. _Executioner,_ C. DELANO.

ASSOCIATE SHERMAN. "WELL, UNCLE SAM DOES STAND A GOOD DEAL
OF PRESSURE. EXECUTIONER, KEEP PILING THE WEIGHTS ON."]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOW WE SHALL HAVE IT.

It has always been one of the sorrows of our life that we were prevented
(by business) from being present at the building of the Tower of Babel.
To say nothing of the great knowledge which we should have acquired of
the ancient languages, it would have been jolly to have marked the
foreman of the works swearing at the laborers in Syriac, while they
answered him in Hebrew, Chaldee, and the Chinese tongue. However, as a
next best thing, we shall attend the meeting of the American Woman
Suffrage Association, which will be held in Washington during the next
session of Congress. We have as much regard as any body for the drums of
our ears; but for the sake of a new sensation, we shall be willing to
risk them. We can imagine at this moment, the astounding effect of the
Grand Double Palaver! All the Senators and Representatives are either
barking, or bawling, or screaming, or shouting, or yelling in the
Capitol, while, to complete the elocutionary duet, all the American
women are simultaneously indulging the unruly and unbridled member. What
the precise effect will be we don't profess to say; but we confidently
predict some valuable discovery in the science of acoustics.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORTY-FOUR TO FOURTEEN.

[IN WHICH THE YOUNG MEN OF THE PERIOD ARE TAKEN IN HAND.]

Forty-four is going to talk (with a pen) to Fourteen. I am a female; and
forty-four, as just hinted, is my age. Fourteen is also a female--just
the age I was once. How I recollect that day! I was full of romance and
hope; now I've no romance, little hope, and some wrinkles. It is a fine
thing to be fourteen. I should like to go back there, and make a long
visit. But that can't be. How much I wish it could! If only there were
life-renewers as well as hair-renewers! They called me pretty at
fourteen--said I had pretty ways, (one of them was one hundred and
thirty-five avoirdupois,) and would certainly be a belle. But I proved
too much for that. One hundred and seventy-five cut off all hope. I
sighed, ate nothing, studied poetry, did a good deal of melancholy by
moonlight and otherwise, but nothing came of it. I made myself as
agreeable as possible; but it was the old story--I was too much for
'em--I mean the young men of the period. I dressed and gave parties. I
took lessons in singing of Sig. Folderol, and in dancing of Mons.
Pigeonwing, and could sing cavatinas and galop galops with the best of
them. Ma said I was an angel, and Pa declared I was perfect. But none of
the young men said so. My dear Fourteen, it may be just so with you.
Your ma and pa may say you are angelic and perfect; but where's the use
of it, if nobody else can be made to see it? I tried my best to catch
the young men in my net. But, provoking things, they wouldn't be caught.
Between ourselves--mind, don't blab it out--young men are the greatest
noodles that were ever put upon the face of the earth. I never yet saw
one that could be depended upon to stand by. I am sure, as you know, no
one ever stood by me--when there was a parson at hand. At fourteen I
didn't much care where they stood, if it wasn't on my corns. Twenty
years later I shouldn't have been so particular. But I don't much mind
now, bless you! _You_ wont at forty-four. There's nothing to these young
men. All talk, pretence, audacity, and paper collar, I assure you. I've
studied all of them. They are the same now as then. Human nature, you
know, my dear Fourteen, is the same yesterday, to-day, and week after
next. I used to think it wasn't; now I know it is. These young
men--monsters that they are--will pour the nectar of compliments over
your face, and the acid and canker of abuse down your back; and all in
the same breath, if they get a chance. Pray have an eye and an ear out
for them. If you go to Long Branch, or Newport, or Saratoga, or the
White Mountains this summer, just look out for them. They are dreadful
creatures at home in the cities, but doubly dreadful at these resorts.
You are young, simple, unsophisticated. I was at your age. But I soon
got over such weaknesses. You must very soon, or be a ninny. "Simple,"
"artless," "unsophisticated," and such terms mean simply softness.
Whatever else you are, or are not, don't be soft. The mistake of my
fruitless life has been that I believed, in other years, all that was
told me by the other sex. They said to my face that I was a beauty; at
Mr. Jones's, they said I was a fright. They said I sang like a Patti; at
Brown's, I screeched like an owl. They said I danced like Terpsichore;
at Smith's, they declared I wabbled round like any other lame duck. They
said my taste in dress was the pink of perfection; at the Duzenbury's, I
was scandalously deficient in every thing of the sort. It's a way the
young men of that day had with all the girls; and they go the same vile
way now. Pray don't have any thing to do with them. I don't, and I
wouldn't for the world. Folks say I'm prejudiced against em; but it
isn't so--I hate 'em. It is healthy to hate what is hateful. It is
healthy to hate a bundle of broadcloth, kerseymere, buttons, and brass,
and it's my delight by day and dream by night. I'm forty-four--you're
fourteen. I've seen the world--you haven't. You look through rosy
glasses; I through the clear, naked eye. My advice to you on the young
men question is this: Discount nine words in every ten spoken to you as
absolute trash--the gush of mere evaporative sentiment. If you are
called pretty, graceful, accomplished, neat in dress, comely in person,
that your eyes sparkle like diamonds, and your lips are poetic, with
whole volumes of such, just make up your mind that there are plenty of
fools around trying to make a sillier one than themselves. It may seem
very fine for the moment, but it will realize something very different
afterward. Suppose you are _not_ caught up? All the better. I'm
forty-four, independent, free, a slave to no man nor monkey. Better
live, to write your own tale than be the abject one to another. Better
be forty-four and yourself, than a cipher belonging to some body else.
Far better beware of the young men than be worn by them. At least so
thinks and says

FORTY-FOUR.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW RAILWAY PROJECT.

While every one agrees that a railway running through the city of
New-York, and transporting passengers with rapidity from one end of the
island to the other, is an absolute necessity, no one has yet hit upon a
plan which satisfies the public. The Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals objects to the Elevated Road, on the ground (though
it is in the air) that the cars will continually run off the track, and,
falling on the horses and dogs in the street below, crush them to a
fatal jelly. The Arcade plan is objectionable to the shop-keepers,
inasmuch as it will change the great thoroughfare into a street
consisting exclusively of cellars, thereby driving the buyers elsewhere.
Conservative people, who like old things, naturally dislike the
Pneumatic Railway, and vehemently assert that "they'll be blowed if they
travel over it," which will undoubtedly prove to be true. Evidently a
new plan must be devised if every body is to be satisfied. That plan
PUNCHINELLO rather flatters himself that he has invented.

It does not seem to have yet occurred to any one that we are not
necessarily shut up to the single plan of fitting a railway to the city.
Why can we not fit the city to the railway? Every body remembers that
when the Mountain wouldn't come to MOHAMED, that eminent preacher went
to the mountain. Here we have a precedent worth following, To build any
sort of railway in New-York will take time and money. Why, then, should
we do it when there are plenty of nice railways already built in every
part of the country? There is a very nice railway completed and in
running order from Pokertown, in Montana territory, to Euchrebend, just
across the line in Idaho. All we have to do is to box up our buildings,
together with the Central Park, the sewers, the docks, and the Tammany
Hall General Committee, and express them through to Pokertown. The city
can then be set up on each side of the Pokertown and Euchrebend Railway,
and then we shall have the desired state of things--a railway running
through the heart of our city. This plan is both novel and easy. At all
events it is easy of execution in comparison with the Arcade plan, and
it presents no features to which any one can reasonably object. Drawings
of the city as it will appear when this plan has been carried out are
now in process of publication, and will soon be for sale at this office.
(N. B.--Shares in the Pokertown and Euchrebend Railway, and lost along
the route of that admirable road, also for sale on application to the
gentleman whose able pen presents this scheme to our readers.)

       *       *       *       *       *

"Curses Come Home," etc.

The gay young men of New-York are said to be terribly addicted to the
use of _absinthe_. They pick up the vice in Paris, and hence arises the
singular paradox that, even after they return home, they still continue
to be Absinthees.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Logical Sequence.

Paper made from wood cannot be claimed as a modern invention, for Log
books, as every body knows, have been used by mariners since ever so
long ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: MODERN MATRIMONY.

_Young Wife._ "YES, DEAR, MY HUSBAND IS ALL I COULD WISH HIM TO BE."

_Husband (who is making bread in the back room)._ "I WISH I COULD SAY AS
MUCH FOR HER."]

       *       *       *       *       *

ABOUT A BLOCK.

A "COUNTRYMAN" writes to us, asking whether the extension of "Murderer's
Block" is among the current city improvements, He says that, on recently
visiting this city, he had great difficulty in determining the exact
locality of the sanctuary in question. Some said it was in the Eighth
Ward; others located it in the Seventeenth. A policeman in East Houston
street, in reply to the query, "Which is Murderer's Block?" waved his
hand with a gesture indicative of unlimited space, and said, "You are on
it." Not pleased with the impeaching tone of this reply, our informant
made his way to another ward, where he put the same question to the
first policeman who came along. Without giving him a direct reply, the
officer winked, shifted his quid of tobacco so as to display his Check
to full advantage, and pointed with his thumb over his shoulder at
indefinite city "slums" behind him. Let the "Countryman" understand
that, as things are at present, he may stand almost any where in the
city and be within a marble-shot of "Murderer's Block." Perhaps
Superintendent JOURDAN is quite aware of this.

       *       *       *       *       *

Neptunian.

Is it correct to speak of the waters of
the Black Sea as the colored element?

       *       *       *       *       *

SONG OF THE RETURNED SOLDIER.

[WITH REMARKS BY PUNCHINELLO.]

    I'll hang my harp on the willow-tree,

