"It is about six years since their parents died, both in one week:
their father was buried on the Tuesday, and their mother died on the
Friday.  These orphans were born three days after their father's
death, and their mother did not live another day.  My husband and I
were then living as peasants in the village.  We were neighbors of
theirs, our yard being next to theirs.  Their father was a lonely
man; a wood-cutter in the forest.  When felling trees one day, they
let one fall on him.  It fell across his body and crushed his bowels
out.  They hardly got him home before his soul went to God; and that
same week his wife gave birth to twins--these little girls.  She
was poor and alone; she had no one, young or old, with her.  Alone
she gave them birth, and alone she met her death."

"The next morning I went to see her, but when I entered the hut,
she, poor thing, was already stark and cold.  In dying she had
rolled on to this child and crushed her leg.  The village folk came
to the hut, washed the body, laid her out, made a coffin, and buried
her.  They were good folk.  The babies were left alone.  What was to
be done with them? I was the only woman there who had a baby at the
time.  I was nursing my first-born--eight weeks old.  So I took
them for a time.  The peasants came together, and thought and
thought what to do with them; and at last they said to me: "For the
present, Mary, you had better keep the girls, and later on we will
arrange what to do for them."  So I nursed the sound one at my
breast, but at first I did not feed this crippled one.  I did not
suppose she would live.  But then I thought to myself, why should
the poor innocent suffer? I pitied her, and began to feed her.  And
so I fed my own boy and these two--the three of them--at my own
breast.  I was young and strong, and had good food, and God gave me
so much milk that at times it even overflowed.  I used sometimes to
feed two at a time, while the third was waiting.  When one had
enough I nursed the third.  And God so ordered it that these grew
up, while my own was buried before he was two years old.  And I had
no more children, though we prospered.  Now my husband is working
for the corn merchant at the mill.  The pay is good, and we are well
off.  But I have no children of my own, and how lonely I should be
without these little girls! How can I help loving them! They are the
joy of my life!"

She pressed the lame little girl to her with one hand, while with
the other she wiped the tears from her cheeks.

And Matryona sighed, and said: "The proverb is true that says, 'One
may live without father or mother, but one cannot live without God.'"

So they talked together, when suddenly the whole hut was lighted up
as though by summer lightning from the corner where Michael sat.
They all looked towards him and saw him sitting, his hands folded on
his knees, gazing upwards and smiling.


X

The woman went away with the girls.  Michael rose from the bench,
put down his work, and took off his apron.  Then, bowing low to
Simon and his wife, he said: "Farewell, masters.  God has forgiven
me.  I ask your forgiveness, too, for anything done amiss."

And they saw that a light shone from Michael.  And Simon rose, bowed
down to Michael, and said: "I see, Michael, that you are no common
man, and I can neither keep you nor question you.  Only tell me
this: how is it that when I found you and brought you home, you were
gloomy, and when my wife gave you food you smiled at her and became
brighter? Then when the gentleman came to order the boots, you
smiled again and became brighter still? And now, when this woman
brought the little girls, you smiled a third time, and have become
as bright as day? Tell me, Michael, why does your face shine so, and
why did you smile those three times?"

And Michael answered: "Light shines from me because I have been
punished, but now God has pardoned me.  And I smiled three times,
because God sent me to learn three truths, and I have learnt them.
One I learnt when your wife pitied me, and that is why I smiled the
first time.  The second I learnt when the rich man ordered the boots,
and then I smiled again.  And now, when I saw those little girls,
I learn the third and last truth, and I smiled the third time."

And Simon said, "Tell me, Michael, what did God punish you for? and
what were the three truths? that I, too, may know them."

And Michael answered: "God punished me for disobeying Him.  I was an
angel in heaven and disobeyed God.  God sent me to fetch a woman's
soul.  I flew to earth, and saw a sick woman lying alone, who had
just given birth to twin girls.  They moved feebly at their mother's
side, but she could not lift them to her breast.  When she saw me,
she understood that God had sent me for her soul, and she wept and
said: 'Angel of God! My husband has just been buried, killed by a
falling tree.  I have neither sister, nor aunt, nor mother: no one
to care for my orphans.  Do not take my soul! Let me nurse my babes,
feed them, and set them on their feet before I die.  Children cannot
live without father or mother.' And I hearkened to her.  I placed
one child at her breast and gave the other into her arms, and
returned to the Lord in heaven.  I flew to the Lord, and said: 'I
could not take the soul of the mother.  Her husband was killed by a
tree; the woman has twins, and prays that her soul may not be taken.
She says: "Let me nurse and feed my children, and set them on their
feet.  Children cannot live without father or mother."  I have not
taken her soul.' And God said: 'Go-take the mother's soul, and learn
three truths: Learn What dwells in man, What is not given to man,
and What men live by.  When thou has learnt these things, thou shalt
return to heaven.' So I flew again to earth and took the mother's
soul.  The babes dropped from her breasts.  Her body rolled over on
the bed and crushed one babe, twisting its leg.  I rose above the
village, wishing to take her soul to God; but a wind seized me, and
my wings drooped and dropped off.  Her soul rose alone to God, while
I fell to earth by the roadside."


XI

And Simon and Matryona understood who it was that had lived with
them, and whom they had clothed and fed.  And they wept with awe and
with joy.  And the angel said: "I was alone in the field, naked.  I
had never known human needs, cold and hunger, till I became a man.
I was famished, frozen, and did not know what to do.  I saw, near
the field I was in, a shrine built for God, and I went to it hoping
to find shelter.  But the shrine was locked, and I could not enter.
So I sat down behind the shrine to shelter myself at least from the
wind.  Evening drew on.  I was hungry, frozen, and in pain.
Suddenly I heard a man coming along the road.  He carried a pair of
boots, and was talking to himself.  For the first time since I
became a man I saw the mortal face of a man, and his face seemed
terrible to me and I turned from it.  And I heard the man talking to
himself of how to cover his body from the cold in winter, and how to
feed wife and children.  And I thought: "I am perishing of cold and
hunger, and here is a man thinking only of how to clothe himself and
his wife, and how to get bread for themselves.  He cannot help me.
When the man saw me he frowned and became still more terrible, and
passed me by on the other side.  I despaired; but suddenly I heard
him coming back.  I looked up, and did not recognize the same man;
before, I had seen death in his face; but now he was alive, and I
recognized in him the presence of God.  He came up to me, clothed
me, took me with him, and brought me to his home.  I entered the
house; a woman came to meet us and began to speak.  The woman was
still more terrible than the man had been; the spirit of death came
from her mouth; I could not breathe for the stench of death that
spread around her.  She wished to drive me out into the cold, and I
knew that if she did so she would die.  Suddenly her husband spoke
to her of God, and the woman changed at once.  And when she brought
me food and looked at me, I glanced at her and saw that death no
longer dwelt in her; she had become alive, and in her, too, I saw God.

"Then I remembered the first lesson God had set me: 'Learn what
dwells in man.' And I understood that in man dwells Love! I was glad
that God had already begun to show me what He had promised, and I
smiled for the first time.  But I had not yet learnt all.  I did not
yet know What is not given to man, and What men live by.

"I lived with you, and a year passed.  A man came to order boots
that should wear for a year without losing shape or cracking.  I
looked at him, and suddenly, behind his shoulder, I saw my comrade--
the angel of death.  None but me saw that angel; but I knew him, and
knew that before the sun set he would take that rich man's soul.
And I thought to myself, 'The man is making preparations for a year,
and does not know that he will die before evening.' And I remembered
God's second saying, 'Learn what is not given to man.'

"What dwells in man I already knew.  Now I learnt what is not given
him.  It is not given to man to know his own needs.  And I smiled
for the second time.  I was glad to have seen my comrade angel--
glad also that God had revealed to me the second saying.

"But I still did not know all.  I did not know What men live by.
And I lived on, waiting till God should reveal to me the last
lesson.  In the sixth year came the girl-twins with the woman; and I
recognized the girls, and heard how they had been kept alive.
Having heard the story, I thought, 'Their mother besought me for the
children's sake, and I believed her when she said that children
cannot live without father or mother; but a stranger has nursed
them, and has brought them up.' And when the woman showed her love
for the children that were not her own, and wept over them, I saw in
her the living God and understood What men live by.  And I knew that
God had revealed to me the last lesson, and had forgiven my sin.
And then I smiled for the third time."


XII

And the angel's body was bared, and he was clothed in light so that
eye could not look on him; and his voice grew louder, as though it
came not from him but from heaven above.  And the angel said:

"I have learnt that all men live not by care for themselves but by love.

"It was not given to the mother to know what her children needed for
their life.  Nor was it given to the rich man to know what he himself
needed.  Nor is it given to any man to know whether, when evening
comes, he will need boots for his body or slippers for his corpse.

"I remained alive when I was a man, not by care of myself, but
because love was present in a passer-by, and because he and his wife
pitied and loved me.  The orphans remained alive not because of
their mother's care, but because there was love in the heart of a
woman, a stranger to them, who pitied and loved them.  And all men
live not by the thought they spend on their own welfare, but because
love exists in man.

"I knew before that God gave life to men and desires that they
should live; now I understood more than that.

"I understood that God does not wish men to live apart, and
therefore he does not reveal to them what each one needs for
himself; but he wishes them to live united, and therefore reveals to
each of them what is necessary for all.

"I have now understood that though it seems to men that they live by
care for themselves, in truth it is love alone by which they live.
He who has love, is in God, and God is in him, for God is love."

And the angel sang praise to God, so that the hut trembled at his
voice.  The roof opened, and a column of fire rose from earth to
heaven.  Simon and his wife and children fell to the ground.  Wings
appeared upon the angel's shoulders, and he rose into the heavens.

And when Simon came to himself the hut stood as before, and there
was no one in it but his own family.


Three Questions


It once occurred to a certain king, that if he always knew the right
time to begin everything; if he knew who were the right people to
listen to, and whom to avoid; and, above all, if he always knew what
was the most important thing to do, he would never fail in anything
he might undertake.

And this thought having occurred to him, he had it proclaimed
throughout his kingdom that he would give a great reward to any one
who would teach him what was the right time for every action, and
who were the most necessary people, and how he might know what was
the most important thing to do.

And learned men came to the King, but they all answered his
questions differently.

In reply to the first question, some said that to know the right
time for every action, one must draw up in advance, a table of days,
months and years, and must live strictly according to it.  Only
thus, said they, could everything be done at its proper time.
Others declared that it was impossible to decide beforehand the
right time for every action; but that, not letting oneself be
absorbed in idle pastimes, one should always attend to all that was
going on, and then do what was most needful.  Others, again, said
that however attentive the King might be to what was going on, it
was impossible for one man to decide correctly the right time for
every action, but that he should have a Council of wise men, who
would help him to fix the proper time for everything.

But then again others said there were some things which could not
wait to be laid before a Council, but about which one had at once to
decide whether to undertake them or not.  But in order to decide
that, one must know beforehand what was going to happen.  It is only
magicians who know that; and, therefore, in order to know the right
time for every action, one must consult magicians.

Equally various were the answers to the second question.  Some said,
the people the King most needed were his councillors; others, the
priests; others, the doctors; while some said the warriors were the
most necessary.

To the third question, as to what was the most important occupation:
some replied that the most important thing in the world was science.
Others said it was skill in warfare; and others, again, that it was
religious worship.

All the answers being different, the King agreed with none of them,
and gave the reward to none.  But still wishing to find the right
answers to his questions, he decided to consult a hermit, widely
renowned for his wisdom.

The hermit lived in a wood which he never quitted, and he received
none but common folk.  So the King put on simple clothes, and before
reaching the hermit's cell dismounted from his horse, and, leaving
his body-guard behind, went on alone.

When the King approached, the hermit was digging the ground in front
of his hut.  Seeing the King, he greeted him and went on digging.
The hermit was frail and weak, and each time he stuck his spade into
the ground and turned a little earth, he breathed heavily.

The King went up to him and said: "I have come to you, wise hermit,
to ask you to answer three questions: How can I learn to do the
right thing at the right time? Who are the people I most need, and
to whom should I, therefore, pay more attention than to the rest?
And, what affairs are the most important, and need my first attention?"

The hermit listened to the King, but answered nothing.  He just spat
on his hand and recommenced digging.

"You are tired," said the King, "let me take the spade and work
awhile for you."

"Thanks!"  said the hermit, and, giving the spade to the King, he
sat down on the ground.

When he had dug two beds, the King stopped and repeated his
questions.  The hermit again gave no answer, but rose, stretched out
his hand for the spade, and said:

"Now rest awhile-and let me work a bit."

But the King did not give him the spade, and continued to dig.  One
hour passed, and another.  The sun began to sink behind the trees,
and the King at last stuck the spade into the ground, and said:

"I came to you, wise man, for an answer to my questions.  If you can
give me none, tell me so, and I will return home."

"Here comes some one running," said the hermit, "let us see who it is."

The King turned round, and saw a bearded man come running out of the
wood.  The man held his hands pressed against his stomach, and blood
was flowing from under them.  When he reached the King, he fell
fainting on the ground moaning feebly.  The King and the hermit
unfastened the man's clothing.  There was a large wound in his
stomach.  The King washed it as best he could, and bandaged it with
his handkerchief and with a towel the hermit had.  But the blood
would not stop flowing, and the King again and again removed the
bandage soaked with warm blood, and washed and rebandaged the wound.
When at last the blood ceased flowing, the man revived and asked for
something to drink.  The King brought fresh water and gave it to
him.  Meanwhile the sun had set, and it had become cool.  So the
King, with the hermit's help, carried the wounded man into the hut
and laid him on the bed.  Lying on the bed the man closed his eyes
and was quiet; but the King was so tired with his walk and with the
work he had done, that he crouched down on the threshold, and also
fell asleep--so soundly that he slept all through the short summer
night.  When he awoke in the morning, it was long before he could
remember where he was, or who was the strange bearded man lying on
the bed and gazing intently at him with shining eyes.

"Forgive me!"  said the bearded man in a weak voice, when he saw
that the King was awake and was looking at him.

"I do not know you, and have nothing to forgive you for," said the King.

"You do not know me, but I know you.  I am that enemy of yours who
swore to revenge himself on you, because you executed his brother
and seized his property.  I knew you had gone alone to see the
hermit, and I resolved to kill you on your way back.  But the day
passed and you did not return.  So I came out from my ambush to find
you, and I came upon your bodyguard, and they recognized me, and
wounded me.  I escaped from them, but should have bled to death had
you not dressed my wound.  I wished to kill you, and you have saved
my life.  Now, if I live, and if you wish it, I will serve you as your
most faithful slave, and will bid my sons do the same.  Forgive me!"

The King was very glad to have made peace with his enemy so easily,
and to have gained him for a friend, and he not only forgave him,
but said he would send his servants and his own physician to attend
him, and promised to restore his property.

Having taken leave of the wounded man, the King went out into the
porch and looked around for the hermit.  Before going away he wished
once more to beg an answer to the questions he had put.  The hermit
was outside, on his knees, sowing seeds in the beds that had been
dug the day before.

The King approached him, and said:

"For the last time, I pray you to answer my questions, wise man."

"You have already been answered!"  said the hermit, still crouching
on his thin legs, and looking up at the King, who stood before him.

"How answered? What do you mean?"  asked the King.

