Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Margaret Macaskill and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. X, No. 289.] SATURDAY, DECEMBER 22, 1827. [Price 2d.


Bushy Park.

[Illustration:]
Among the suburban beauties of the metropolis, and as an attraction for
home-tourists, Bushy is entitled to special notice, independent of its
celebrity as the retreat of royalty--it being the residence of _His
Royal Highness the Duke of Clarence_, an accurate portrait of whom will
be presented, to our readers with the usual _Supplementary Number_ at
the close of the present volume of the MIRROR.

_Bushy Park_ is an appendage to the palace and honour of Hampton Court;
and though far from assimilating to that splendid pile, it is better
fitted for rural enjoyment, whilst its contiguity to the metropolis
almost gives it the character of _rus in urbe_.[1] The residence is a
handsome structure, and its arrangement is altogether well calculated
for the indulgence of royal hospitality--a characteristic of its present
distinguished occupant, as well as of that glorious profession, to the
summit of which his royal highness has recently been exalted. The park,
too, is well stocked with deer, and its rangership is confided to the
duke. The pleasure grounds are tastefully disposed, and their beauty
improved by the judicious introduction of temples and other artificial
embellishments, among which, a naval temple, containing a piece of the
mast of the Victory, before which Nelson fell, and a bust of the noble
admiral, has been consecrated to his memory by the royal duke, with
devotional affection, and the best feelings of a warm heart.

[1] The Duke is a good economist of time; for what with excellent cattle
and the glory of Macadamized roads, his R.H. comes to town in the
morning, transacts his official business at the Admiralty, and
frequently returns to Bushy to dinner.

The park is a thoroughfare, and the circumstances by which this public
claim was established are worthy of record, as a specimen of the justice
with which the rights of the community are upheld in this country. The
_village Hampden_, in the present case, was one Timothy Bennet, of whom
there is a fine print, which the neighbours, who are fond of a walk in
Bushy Park, must regard with veneration. It has under it this
inscription:--"Timothy Bennet; of Hampton Wick, in Middlesex, shoemaker,
aged 75, 1752. This true Briton, (unwilling to leave the world worse
than he found it,) by a vigorous application of the laws of his country
in the cause of liberty, obtained a free passage through Bushy Park,
which had many years been withheld from the public." Regeneration (or
the renewal of souls) is, however, a shoemaker's _forte_.

The above engraving of Bushy is copied from an elegant coloured view,
drawn by Ziegler, and published by Griffiths, of Wellington-street,
Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FUGITIVE.

A SCOTCH TALE.

_(For the Mirror.)_

It was now abute the gloaming when my ain same Janet (heav'n sain her
saul) was sitting sae bieldy in a bit neuk ayant the ingle, while the
winsome weans gathering around their minnie were listing till some auld
spae wife's tale o' ghaists and worriecows; when on a sudden some ane
tirled at the door pin.

"Here's your daddie, bairns," said the gudewife ganging till the door;
but i' place o' their daddie, a tall chiel wrappit i' a big cloak,
rushed like a fire flaught into the bield, and drappit doun on the
sunkie ewest the ingle droghling and coghling.

"What's your wull, friend?" said Janet, glowering on him a' i' a gliff,
"the gudeman's awa."

"Save me, save me," shrieghed the stranger, "the sleuth hounds are at my
heels."

"But wha may ye be, maister," cried the dame, "I durstna dee your
bidding while Jamie's frae the hause."

"Oh, dinna speir, dinna speir mistress," exclaimed the chiel a' in a
curfuffle, "ainly for the loe of heav'n, hide me frae the red coats
whilk are comin' belive--O God, they are here," he cried, as I entered
the shealing, and uttering a piercing skirl, he sprung till the wa', and
thrawing aff his cloak, drew his broad claymore, whilk glittered
fearsome by the low o' the ingle.

"Hauld, hauld, 'tis the gudeman his nainsell," shreighed Janet, when the
stranger drapping the point o' the sword, clingit till my hand, and
while the scauding tear draps tricklit adoun his face prigged me to fend
him.

"Tak' your certie o' that my braw callant," said I, "ne'er sail it be
tauld o' Jamie Mc-Dougall, that he steeked his door again the puir and
hauseless, an the bluidy sleuth hounds be on ye they'se find it ill
aneugh I trow to get an inkling o' ye frae me, I'se sune shaw 'em the
cauld shouther."

Sae saying, I gared him climb a rape by whilk he gat abune the riggin o'
the bield, then steeking to the door thro' whilk he gaed, I jimp had
trailed doun the rape, when in rinned twa red coat chiels, who couping
ilka ane i' their gait begun to touzle out the ben, and the de'il gaed
o'er Jock Wabster.

"Eh, sirs! eh, sirs!" cried I, "whatna gaits' that to steer a bodie, wad
ye harry a puir chiel o' a' his warldly gear, shame till ye, shame till
ye, shank yoursell's awa."

"Fusht, fusht, fallow," cried ane o' the churls, "nane o' your bourds
wi' us, or ye may like to be the waur aff; where is the faus loon? we
saw him gae doun the loaning afore the shealing, and here he maun needs
be."

"Aweel, sirs," I exclaimed, "ye see there isna ony creatur here, our
nainsell's out-taken; seek again an ye winna creed a bodie; may be the
bogle is jumpit into the pot on the rundle-tree ower the ingle, or
creepit into the meal ark or aiblins it scoupit thro' the hole as ye cam
in at the door. Ye may threep and threep and wampish your arms abute, as
muckle as ye wuss, ye silly gowks, I canna tell ye mair an I wad."

"May be the Highland tyke is right, cummer, (said one o' the red coats)
and the fallow is jumpit thro' the bole, but harkye maister gudeman, an
ye hae ony mair o' your barns-breaking wi us, ye'se get a sark fu' o'
sair banes, that's a'."

"Hear till him, hear till him, Janet," said I, as the twa southron
chiels gaed thro' the hole, trailing their bagganets alang wi' 'em;
"winna the puir tykes hae an unco saft couch o' it, think ye, luckie, O
'tis a gude sight for sair e'en to see 'em foundering and powtering i'
the latch o' the bit bog aneath."

"Nane o' your clashes e'enow, gudemon," said she, "but let the callant
abune gang his gate while he may."

"Ye're aye cute, dame," I cried, thrawing the bit gy abune, and in a
gliffing, doun jumpit the chiel, and a braw chiel he was sure enough,
siccan my auld e'en sall ne'er see again, wi' his brent brow and buirdly
bowk wrappit in a tartan plaid, wi' a Highland kilt.

"May the gude God o' heaven sain you," he said "and ferd you for aye,
for the braw deed ye hae dreed the day; tak' this wee ring, gudemon, and
tak' ye this ane, gudewife, and when ye look on this and on that, I rede
ye render up are prayer to him abune for the weal o' Charles Edward,
your unfortunate prince."

Sae speaking, he sped rath frae the bield, and was sune lost i' the
glunch shadows o' the mirk night.

Mony and mony a day has since rollit ower me, and I am now but a dour
carle, whose auld pow the roll o' time hath blanched; my bonnie Janet is
gone to her last hame, lang syne, my bairns hae a' fa'en kemping for
their king and country, and I ainly am left like a withered auld trunk,
waiting heaven's gude time when I sall be laid i' the mouls wi' my
forbears.

Abune--above.

Aiblins--perhaps.

Bagganet--bayonet.

Barns-breaking--idle frolic.

Belive--immediately.

Ben--inner apartment of a house that contains but two.

Bield--hut.

Bieldy--snug.

Bole--cottage window.

Bourds--jeers.

Brent-brow--smooth open forehead.

Buirdly-bowk--athletic frame.

Clashes--idle gossip.

Couping--overturning.

Cummer--comrade.

Curfuffle--agitation.

De'il gaed o'er Jock Wabster--everything went topsy-turvy.

Dour carle--rugged old man.

Dreed the day--done this day.

Droghling and coghling--puffing and blowing.

Ewest--nearest.

Fire flaught--flash of lightning.

Forbears--forefathers.

Fusht--tush.

Gared--made.

Gliff--fright.

Gliffing--very short time.

Gloaming--twilight.

Glowering--gazing.

Gy--rope.

Glunch--gloomy.

Harry--plunder.

Ingle--fire.

Ill--difficult.

Ilka--every.

Kemping--striving.

Laid i' the mouls--laid in the grave.

Low--flame.

Loaning--lane.

Luckie--dame.

Latch--mire.

Mirk--dark.

Out-taken--excepting.

Pow--head.

Powtering--groping.

Prigged--earnestly entreated.

Rath--quick.

Rede--pray.

Riggin--roof.

Sain--bless.

Sark fu' o' sair banes--sound beating.

Scoupit--scampered.

Shank yoursell's awa--take yourselves off.

Shealing--rude cottage.

Show 'em the cauld shouther--appear cold and reserved.

Skirl--shrill cry.

Sleuth-hounds--blood-hounds.

Speir--ask.

Steiked--shut.

Steer--injure.

Sunkie--low stool.

Threep--threaten.

Tirled at the door pin--knocked at the door.

Touzle out--ransack.

Tyke--dog.

Wampish--toss about.

Worriecows--hobgoblins.

Wuss--wish.

A G.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE INDIAN MAIDEN'S SONG,

BY WILLIAM SHOBERL.

The youth I love is far away.
  O'er forest, river, brake, and glen;
And distant, too, perchance the day,
  When I shall see him once again.

Nine moons have wasted[1] since we met,
  How sweetly, then, the moments flew!
Methinks the fairy vision yet
  Portrays the joy that ZEMLA knew.

In list'ning to the tale of strife,
  When Shone AZALCO'S prowess bright,
The strange adventures of his life,
  That gave me such unmix'd delight.

That dream of happiness is past!
  For ever fled those magic charms!
The cruel moment came at last,
  That tore AZALCO from my arms!

What bitter pangs my bosom rent,
  When he my sight no longer bless'd!
To some lone spot my steps I bent,
  My secret sorrows there confess'd.

My sighs, alas! were breath'd unheard,
  Could aught on earth dispel my grief?
Nor smiling sun, nor minstrel bird,
  Can give this aching heart relief.

Since he I love is far away,
  O'er forest, river, brake, and glen,
And distant, too, perchance the day,
  When I shall see him once again.


[1] "Till now some nine moons wasted."--SHAKSPEARE.


       *       *       *       *       *


MERRY CHRISTMAS!

_(For the Mirror.)_

"Do you look for ale and cakes here, you rude rascals?"

SHAKSPEARE'S _Henry the Eighth._


Since, my dear readers, even in this season of busy festivity I can
spare a few moments to write for your gratification, I venture to hope
you will spare a few to read for mine.

And so here we are, once again on tiptoe for a merry Christmas and a
happy new year. My good friends, especially my fair friends, permit me
to wish you both. Yes, Christmas is here--Christmas, when winter and
jollity, foul weather and fun, cold winds and hot pudding, good frosts
and good fires, are at their meridian! Christmas! With what dear
associations is it fraught! I remember the time when I thought that word
cabalistical; when, in the gay moments of youth, it seemed to me a
mysterious term for every thing that is delightful; and such is the
force of early associations, that even now I cannot divest myself of
them. Christmas has long ceased to be to me what it once was; yet do I
even now hail its return with pleasure, with enthusiasm. But, alas! how
differently is it viewed, not only by the same individual at different
periods of life, but by different individuals of the same age; by the
rich and poor, the wretched and the happy, the pampered and the
penniless!

To proceed to the object of this paper, which is simply to throw
together a few casual hints, connected with the period. I would beg my
reader's attention, in the first place, to an odd superstition,
countenanced by Shakspeare, and which, if he happens to lie awake some
night, (say with the tooth-ache--what better?--for that purpose I mean,)
he will have an opportunity of verifying. The passage which contains it
is in _Hamlet_ and exhibits at once his usual wildness of imagination,
and a highly praiseworthy religious veneration for the season. Where the
ghost vanishes upon the crowing of the cock, he takes occasion to
mention its crowing all hours of the night about Christmas time. The
last four lines comprise several other superstitions connected with the
period:--

It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say, that ever 'gainst that season comes,
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long.
And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad:
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike;
No fairy takes; no witch hath power to charm;
So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.


It is to be lamented that the hearty diet, properly belonging to the
season, should have become almost peculiar to it; the _Tatler_
recommends it throughout the year. "I shall begin," says Steele, "with a
very earnest and serious exhortation to all my well-disposed readers,
that they would return to the food of their forefathers, and reconcile
themselves to beef and mutton. This was the diet which bred that hardy
race of mortals who won the fields of Cressy and Agincourt. I need not
go so high up as the history of Guy, earl of Warwick, who is well known
to have eaten up a dun cow of his own killing. The renowned king Arthur
is generally looked upon as the first who ever sat down to a whole
roasted ox, which was certainly the best way to preserve the gravy; and
it is farther added, that he and his knights sat about it at his round
table, and usually consumed it to the very bones before they would enter
upon any debate of moment. The Black Prince was a professed lover of the
brisket; not to mention the history of the sirloin, or the institution
of the order of Beefeaters, which are all so many evident and undeniable
proofs of the great respect which our warlike predecessors have paid to
this excellent food. The tables of the ancient entry of this nation were
covered thrice a day with hot roast-beef; and I am credibly informed by
an antiquary, who has searched the registers in which the bills of fare
of the court are recorded, that instead of tea and bread and butter
which have prevailed of late years, the maids of honour in queen
Elizabeth's time were allowed three rumps of beef for their breakfast!"

Now this is manly, and so is the diet it advises; I recommend both to my
readers. Let each determine to make one convert, himself that one. On
Christmas day, let each dine off, or at least have on his table, the
good old English fare, roast beef and plum-pudding! and does such beef
as our island produces need recommendation? What more nutritive and
delicious? and, for a genuine healthy Englishman, what more proper than
this good old national English dish? Let him whose stomach will not bear
it, look about and insure his life--I would not give much for it. It
ought, above all other places, to be duly honoured in our officers'
mess-rooms. As Prior says,


"If I take Dan Congreve right,
Pudding and beef make Britons fight."


So, then, if beef be indeed so excellent,
we shall not much wonder that Shakspeare
should say,


--"A pound of man's flesh
Is not so estimable or profitable.
As flesh of mutton, beeves, or goats!"


The French have christened us (and I think it no disreputable
_sobriquet_) Jack Roastbeef, from a notion we cannot live without
roast-beef, any more than without plum-pudding, porter, and punch;
however, the notion is palpably erroneous. We are proving more and more
every day--to our shame be it spoken!--that we can live without it. At
least do not let it be said we can pass a Christmas without it, merely
to make way for turkeys, fricassees, and ragouts! "Oh, reform it
altogether!"

       *       *       *       *       *

England was always famous among foreigners for the celebration of
Christmas, at which time our ancestors introduced many sports and
pastimes unknown in other countries, or now even among ourselves. "At
the feast of Christmas," says Stowe, "in the king's court, wherever he
chanced to reside, there was appointed a lord of misrule, or master of
merry disports; the same merry fellow made his appearance at the house
of every nobleman and gentleman of distinction; and, among the rest, the
lord mayor of London and the sheriffs had their lords of misrule, ever
contending, without quarrel or offence, who should make the rarest
pastime to delight the beholders." Alas! where are all these, or any
similar, "merry disports" in our degenerate days? We have no "lords of
misrule" now; or, if we have, they are of a much less innocent and
pacific character. Mr. Cambridge, also, (No 104, of the _World_) draws a
glowing picture of an ancient Christmas. "Our ancestors," says he,
"considered Christmas in the double light of a holy commemoration and a
cheerful festival; and accordingly distinguished it by devotion, by
vacation from business, by merriment and hospitality. They seemed
eagerly bent to make themselves and every body about them happy. With
what punctual zeal did they wish one another a merry Christmas! and what
an omission would it have been thought, to have concluded a letter
without the compliments of the season! The great hall resounded with the
tumultuous joys of servants and tenants, and the gambols they played
served as an amusement to the lord of the mansion and his family, who,
by encouraging every art that conduced to mirth and entertainment,
endeavoured to soften the rigour of the season, and to mitigate the
influence of winter. How greatly ought we to regret the neglect of
mince-pies, which, besides the idea of merry-making inseparable from
them, were always considered as the test of schismatics! How zealously
were they swallowed by the orthodox, to the utter confusion of all
fanatical recusants! If any country gentleman should be so unfortunate
in this age as to lie under a suspicion of heresy, where will he find so
easy a method of acquitting himself as by the ordeal of plum-porridge?"
This alludes to the Puritans, who refused to observe Christmas, or any
other festival of the church, either by devotion or merriment. And I
regret to say there are certain modern "fanatical recusants," certain
modern Puritans, as schismatical in this particular as their gloomy
precursors. Mr. Cambridge then proceeds "to account for a revolution
which has rendered this season (so eminently distinguished in former
times) now so little different from the rest of the year," which he
thinks "no difficult task." The reasons he assigns are, the decline of
devotion, and the increase of luxury, the latter of which has extended
rejoicings and feastings, formerly peculiar to Christmas, through the
whole year; these have consequently lost their raciness, the appetite
for amusement has become palled by satiety, and the relish for it,
reserved formerly for this particular season, is now no longer peculiar
to it, having been already dissipated and exhausted. Another cause he
assigns is, "the too general desertion of the country, the great scene
of hospitality." Now this was written just fifty-three years ago, and as
all the causes assigned for the declension of this grand national
festivity up to that period are incontrovertible, and have been
operating even more powerfully ever since, they will sufficiently
account for the still greater declension observable in our days. And the
declension appears to me to consist in this,--there is more gastronomy
and expanse, but less heartiness and hospitality; and these latter are
the only legitimate characteristics of Englishmen. Be they then
restored, this very Christmas, to the English character; the opportunity
is fast approaching--be it employed.

I know nothing better to conclude with than a good old Christmas carol
from _Poor Robin's Almanack_ for 1695, preserved in Brand's _Popular
Antiquities_, to which work I refer those of my readers who may require
further information on the subject of Christmas customs and
festivities:--

  Now, thrice welcome, Christmas!
    Which brings us good cheer;
  Mince-pies and plum-pudding--
    Strong ale and strong beer;
  With pig, goose, and capon,
    The best that may be:
  So well doth the weather
    And our stomachs agree.

  Observe how the chimneys
    Do smoke all about;
  The cooks are providing
    For dinner no doubt.
  But those on whose tables
    No victuals appear,
  O may they keep Lent
    All the rest of the year!

  With holly and ivy,
    So green and so gay,
  We deck up our houses
    As fresh as the day;
  With bays and rosemary,
    And laurel complete,--
  And every one now
    Is a king in conceit,

  But as for curmudgeons
    Who will not be free,
  I wish they may die
    On a two-legged tree!

  WILLIAM PALIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the proof that we are not _unseasonable, here are in this
sheet--_Merry Christmas! the Turks_, (of a darker hue;) _Exhibitions; a
Consolatory "Population" Scrap; Hints for Singing_ after a good master;
_a Bunch of Facts on Turnips; a column on Liston_--that living limner of
laughter; and other _seasonables_.


       *       *       *       *       *

MANNERS & CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS.

No. XVII.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE TURKS.

_(For the Mirror.)_

The Turks have a manly and prepossessing demeanour; being generally of a
good stature, and remarkably well formed in their limbs. The men shave
their heads, but wear long beards, and are extremely proud of their
mustaches, which are usually turned downwards, and which give the other
features of the face a cast of peculiar pensiveness. They wear turbans,
sometimes white, of an enormous size on their heads, and never remove
them but when they go to repose. Their breeches, or drawers, are united
with their stockings, and they have slippers, which they never put off
but when they enter a mosque, or the house of a great man. Large shirts
are worn, and over them is a vest tied with a sash; the outer garment
being a sort of loose gown. Every man, in whatever station he is,
carries a dagger in his sash. The women's attire much resembles that of
the other sex, only they have a cap on their heads, something like a
bishop's mitre, instead of a turban. Their hair is beautiful and long,
mostly black, but their faces, which are remarkably handsome, are so
covered when they walk out, that nothing is to be seen but their eyes.
The ladies of the sultan's _haram_ are lovely virgins, either captives
taken during war, or presents from the governors of provinces. They are
never allowed to stir abroad except when the grand signior removes; and
then they are put into close chariots, signals being made at certain
distances that no man may approach the road through which the ladies
pass, on pain of death. There are a great number of female _slaves_ in
the sultan's haram, whose task it is to wait on the ladies, who have,
besides, a black eunuch for their superintendant.

There are three colleges in Turkey where the children of distinguished
men are educated and fitted for state employments. The children are
first approved by the grand signior before they are allowed to enter
these seminaries; and none dare come into his majesty's presence who are
not handsome and well-made. Silence is first taught them, and a becoming
behaviour to their superiors; then they are instructed in the Mahometan
faith, the Turkish and Persian languages, and afterwards in the Arabic.
At the age of twenty-one they are taught all manner of manly exercises,
and above all, the use of arms. As they advance to proficiency in these,
and other useful arts, and as government places become vacant, they are
preferred; but it is to be observed, that they generally attain the age
of forty before they are thought capable of being entrusted with
important slate affairs.

Those who hold any office under the grand signior are called his slaves;
the term slave, in Turkey, signifying the most honourable title a
subject can bear. The grand signior is commonly supposed among his own
people, to be something more than human; for he is not bound by any laws
except that of professing and maintaining the Mahometan religion. A
stranger desiring to be admitted into his majesty's presence, is first
examined by proper persons, and his arms taken from him; he is then
ushered before the royal personage between two strong supporters, but is
not even then permitted to approach near enough to kiss the sultan's
foot.[1] This custom, which is observed by every sultan, originated in
the following manner:--Amurath I. having obtained a great victory over
the Christians, was on the field of battle with his officers viewing the
dead, when a wounded Christian soldier, rising from among the slain,
came staggering towards him. The king, supposing the man intended to beg
for his life, ordered the guards to make way for him; but drawing near,
he drew a dagger from under, his coat, and plunged it into the heart of
the great king, who instantly died.

[1] The ceremony of kissing the foot, as well as the hand, of a
sovereign, is yet observed in the east.

In Turkey, no man marries a deformed wife for the sake of a fortune, as
with us; beauty and good sense, to their credit be it spoken, are the
only inducements to matrimony among the Turks. But they are an indolent
people, and are much averse to improving their country by commerce,
planting, or building; appearing to take delight in letting their
property run to ruin. Alexandria, Tyre, and Sidon, which once commanded
the navigation and trade of the whole world, are at present in the
Turks' possession, but are only very inconsiderable places. Indeed,
observes a judicious author, it is well for us that the Turks are such
an indolent people, for their situation and vast extent of empire, would
enable them to monopolize the trade of the world if they attended to it.
They appear to possess very little genius or inclination for the
improvement of _arts and sciences_ although they live in countries which
were once in the possession of the classic Greeks; but seem to prefer a
slothful mode of life to an active one, continually sauntering away their
time, either among women, or in taking coffee and smoking. Being men of
great taciturnity, they very seldom disturb a stranger with questions; and
a person may live in their country a dozen years, without having twenty
words addressed to him, except on important business. They seldom
travel, and have very little wish to be informed of the state of their
own, or any other country; when a minister of state is turned out of his
place, or strangled, (which is a frequent custom,) they coldly observe
that there will be a new one, without inquiring into the reason of the
disgrace of the former. The doctrine of predestination prevails, and
they therefore think it wicked to endeavour to avoid their fate;
frequently entering houses where they know the plague is raging.

