The importance of this appeal was at once recognised by the churches,
and as an immediate consequence the "Board of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions" was formed, a society which has grown until it is now one of
the greatest missionary organisations in the world. Judson went on a
visit to England in order to expedite matters, and to consult with the
officials of the London Missionary Society. After some delay, caused by
the capture of the vessel in which he was sailing by a French privateer,
he reached London and saw the directors. They agreed to support him and
his companions should the American Board be unable to do so, and with
this assurance Judson returned to America.

He now made Miss Hasseltine a formal offer of marriage, and she knew
that if she accepted she must of course accompany him abroad. For a time
she not unnaturally hesitated. She was asked to do what no American
woman had before attempted, and the life of a foreign missionary seemed
full of unknown horrors. It meant to leave home and probably never to
see friends or native land again, to be worn out in the unhealthy
climate of some tropical land, to suffer "every kind of want and
distress, degradation, insult, persecution, and, perhaps, a violent
death." Friends, with few exceptions, advised her to decline, and public
opinion was strongly opposed to such a "wild, romantic undertaking" as a
woman going out to the heathen. "O Jesus," she prayed in her perplexity,
"direct me, and I am safe; use me in Thy service, and I ask no more. I
would not choose my position of work or place of service; only let me
know Thy will, and I will readily comply!"

After some weeks of hesitation she definitely made up her mind. "I have
at length come to the conclusion," she wrote, on October 28, 1810, "that
if nothing in Providence appears to prevent, I must spend my days in a
heathen land. God is my witness that I have not dared to decline this
offer that has been made me."

Her decision surprised many of her acquaintances. "I hear," said one
lady to another, "that Miss Hasseltine is going to India. Why does she
go?" "Why, she thinks it her duty. Would you not go if you thought it
your duty?" "But," replied the first speaker emphatically, "_I would not
think it my duty_."

On February 6, 1812, an ordination service was held at the Tabernacle
Church in Salem, when Adoniram Judson and four others were set apart for
foreign missionary work. On the previous day he and Ann Hasseltine had
been made man and wife at Bradford; and a few days later Mr. and Mrs.
Judson, accompanied by Mr. Newell and his wife, set out in the brig
_Caravan_ for Calcutta.


CHAPTER II.

THE ROAD TO RANGOON.

After a four months' voyage the missionary party reached Calcutta, and
there they received a warm welcome from Dr. Carey and his
fellow-workers. They were invited to the missionary headquarters at
Serampore, a spot some few miles from Calcutta, in possession of the
Danish Government, where the Baptist missionaries resided in order to
avoid the interference of the English authorities. At that time the
British rulers of India were opposed to all missionary work, and
discouraged it by every means in their power. Foreign preachers were not
allowed to reside in India even for a few weeks, and English
missionaries were not suffered to remain unless they could obtain
special permission from the East India Company. The American
missionaries had not been many days in India before they discovered
this. They were summoned from Serampore to Calcutta, and there formally
commanded, in the name of the Company, to leave India at once and return
to America. To do this would have ruined all their plans, so they asked
and obtained permission to go instead to the Isle of France (Mauritius),
whither a vessel was about to sail. But as it would only accommodate Mr.
and Mrs. Newell, the Judsons perforce remained in Calcutta waiting for
another ship.

They were allowed to stay in peace for a couple of months; but when the
authorities learnt that they had not yet departed, an urgent order was
issued, commanding that they should be immediately sent to England in
one of the East India Company's vessels. There seemed no possibility of
their evading the order this time, but they learned that another vessel
was just going to set out for the Isle of France. Unfortunately it was
impossible for them now to obtain permission to go there; but the
captain of the vessel, on hearing the circumstances, offered to take
them without leave. So they quietly got on board. But on the second day
of their journey down the river a Government dispatch arrived, ordering
the pilot to stop the vessel, as it had among its passengers persons
who had been ordered to go to Europe. In consequence of this demand Mr.
and Mrs. Judson were at once hurried on shore, and the ship went on
its way.

They were landed at the village of Fultah, and here they remained for
four days, not knowing what to do. If they returned to Calcutta they
would be at once sent to England, and they could not remain where they
were for any time without discovery and arrest. Every day their
perplexity increased. The sight of a boat coming down the river or a
stranger entering the village would fill them with alarm, for they
expected at any moment to be seized by Government agents sent after
them. At the end of the fourth day relief came in a most unexpected way.
A letter was handed to Mr. Judson containing an official permit for them
to go on to the Isle of France in the vessel from which they had a few
days before been removed. How this permit was obtained, or who had sent
it to them, they could never discover; and there was no time then to
speculate on the matter. The ship was now at least seventy miles away,
in the Saugur Roads, and had probably already set out to sea. In the
hope that it might possibly have been delayed in starting, and that they
might catch it, they at once started down the river in boats. After
being rowed all night and all next day, they found on reaching the roads
that they were in time, as owing to the absence of some of the crew the
vessel had been delayed. It may be imagined how thankfully they found
themselves once more on board.

Before leaving Calcutta an important change had taken place in Mr. and
Mrs. Judson's views about the question of infant baptism. While on the
voyage from America, Mr. Judson, knowing that he would come in contact
with the Baptist missionaries at Serampore, had studied the subject in
order to be able to defend his position to them. The result had been
that doubts had gradually arisen in his mind as to the correctness of
his own point of view, and he spoke on the subject to his wife. She
deprecated any hasty action, but they both resolved to give careful
attention to the matter. Every consideration of human interest would
have led them to cling to their old belief, for, as Mrs. Judson pointed
out, "If her husband should renounce his former sentiments he must
offend his friends at home, hazard his reputation, and, what was still
more trying, be separated from his missionary companions."

"I hope that I shall I be disposed to embrace the truth," she wrote,
"whatever it may be. It is painfully mortifying to my natural feelings to
think seriously of renouncing a system which I have been taught from
infancy to believe and respect ... We must make some very painful
sacrifices. We must be separated from our dear missionary associates,
and labour alone in some isolated spot. We must expect to be treated
with contempt and cast off by many of our American friends--forfeit the
character we have in our native land, and probably have to labour for
our support where we are stationed."

After prayerful consideration they both applied to Carey for baptism,
much to the surprise of the great English missionary, who had known
nothing of their struggles. This step necessarily involved their
separation from the Congregational Board of Commissioners who had sent
them out, and there was then no American Baptist Missionary Society to
which they could look for help; but Mr. Judson wrote to the American
Baptist churches stating what he had done, and appealing to them to
support him in his labours. The Baptists soon afterwards responded to
his appeal by forming a Missionary Union, and they appointed Mr. and
Mrs. Judson two of their agents. Thus was Mr. Judson an important though
indirect instrument in causing another great American denomination to
throw itself into the work of evangelising the world.

The first news that Mrs. Judson heard on reaching the Isle of France was
that Mrs. Newell, her companion from America, had died a few weeks
previously, before even being allowed to commence the work to which she
had dedicated her life. The governor of the island had been warned about
the coming of the Americans, and advised "to keep an eye on them;" but
he gave them a warm welcome, and expressed a hope that they would settle
in the place and work among the natives and the soldiers. But the Isle
of France hardly seemed to offer a sufficiently extensive field for
their energies, and there were other places more in need of their
services. Mr. and Mrs. Judson specially wished to go to Burmah, where,
with a population of many millions, there was hardly a single Christian
teacher. But the character of the people and of the government was such
that any strangers going among them must take their lives in their
hands, Notwithstanding this they determined, after due inquiry, to go to
Penang, and thence to attempt to find access to the country. It was
necessary first to go to Madras, in order to find a vessel which would
take them eastwards. But on arriving at Madras they found that it would
be impossible to procure a passage to Penang; so they took passage in a
ship that was going to Rangoon, and after some adventures reached the
field of their future work in July, 1813. "We cannot expect to do much
in such a rough, uncultivated field," wrote Mrs. Judson, "yet if we may
be instrumental in clearing away some of the rubbish and preparing the
way for others, it will be sufficient reward."


CHAPTER III.

PREPARATION TIME.

Mr. and Mrs. Judson might well have been excused had they hesitated to
settle in Rangoon, for the prospects before them in that place were
anything but hopeful. The Emperor of Burmah was an absolute monarch, and
rumour gave him the credit of being unjust, tyrannical, grasping,
capricious and cruel. The people were described as "indolent,
inhospitable, deceitful and crafty;" and in spite of the natural wealth
of the land the majority of the inhabitants were miserably poor. This
was largely due to the fact that all property was held on the most
uncertain tenure, everything being liable to be seized at any time by
the emperor or by some of his officials.

More than one unsuccessful attempt had been made to form a missionary
settlement in Rangoon previous to the arrival of the Judsons. Preachers
had been sent out from Serampore, and by the London Missionary Society;
but none of them had been able to occupy the field for any length of
time. When the Judsons arrived there was only one other Christian
teacher in Burmah, Mr. Felix Carey, who was then at Ava, the residence
of the emperor. Mrs. Carey, a native of the country, was staying at
Rangoon, in a house built by the Serampore Baptist missionaries, and she
welcomed the new-comers to her home, where they stayed for some months.

The first work to which the Judsons set themselves was the study of the
Burmese tongue. This was a task of extreme difficulty, for the only part
of the language put into writing which would help them was a small
portion of a grammar and six chapters of St. Matthew's Gospel, which had
been translated by Mr. Felix Carey. Even with all the aids at present in
use, Burman is anything but easy to acquire. It has been called the
"round O language," on account of each word being made up of a number of
small circles; and to an untrained eye the words seem almost exactly
alike. "The letters and words are all totally destitute of the least
resemblance to any language we have ever met with," Mr. Judson wrote to
a friend in Salem, "and these words are not fairly divided and
distinguished as in Western writing by breaks, and points, and capitals,
but run together in one continuous line, a sentence or paragraph seeming
to the eye but one long word; instead of clear characters on paper, we
find only obscure scratches on palm leaves, strung together and called a
book. We have no dictionary and no interpreter to explain a single word,
and must get something of the language before we can avail ourselves of
the assistance of a native teacher.... It unavoidably takes several
years to acquire such a language in order to converse and write
intelligibly on the truths of the Gospel."

Mr. and Mrs. Judson obtained a native teacher, and settled down to a
daily struggle with their task. The man was at first unwilling to have
Mrs. Judson as a pupil, thinking it below his dignity to instruct a
woman: but when he saw that she was determined to persevere he abandoned
his opposition. As the teacher knew no English and the pupils knew no
Burman, progress was of necessity very slow. "Our only mode of
ascertaining the names of objects which met our eye," wrote Mrs. Judson,
"was by pointing to them in the presence of our teacher, who would
immediately speak the names in Burman; we then expressed them as nearly
as possible by the Roman character, till we had sufficiently acquired
the power of the Burman."

In order to get more in contact with the people, they left Mr. Carey's
hospitable roof and took up their residence in the centre of the town.
This obliged Mrs. Judson to commence housekeeping on her own account,
and consequently she had less time to devote to study; yet to her
surprise she made faster progress now than she had ever done before. She
thus described her daily life, in a letter home: "We are busily employed
all day long. Could you look into a large open room, which we call a
verandah, you would see Mr. Judson bent over his table covered with
Burman books, with his teacher at his side, a venerable-looking man in
his sixtieth year, with a cloth wrapped round his middle and a
handkerchief on his head. They talk and chatter all day long with hardly
any cessation.

"My mornings are busily employed in giving directions to the servants,
providing food for the family, etc. At ten my teacher comes, when, were
you present, you might see me in an inner room at one side of my study
table, and my teacher the other, reading Burman, writing, talking, etc.
I have many more interruptions than Mr. Judson, as I have the entire
management of the family. This I took on myself for the sake of Mr.
Judson's attending more closely to the study of the language; yet I have
found, by a year's experience, that it is the most direct way I could
have taken to acquire the language, as I am frequently obliged to speak
Burman all day. I can talk and understand others better than Mr. Judson,
though he knows more about the nature and construction of the language."

It was impossible to do any direct evangelistic work until the language
had been more fully mastered, and Mrs. Judson was continually spurred on
in her studies by the desire to speak to the natives about the Lord
Jesus Christ. "O Thou Light of the world," she prayed, as she realised
more fully the ignorance of the people, "dissipate the thick darkness
which covers Burmah, and let Thy light arise and shine!"


CHAPTER IV.

A HEAVY AFFLICTION.

[Illustration: Ann Hasseltine Judson]

When Mrs. Judson had been in Rangoon six months she was taken somewhat
seriously ill, and it was deemed advisable that she should go to Madras,
both for the sea voyage and in order to obtain skilled Medical advice,
which could not be had in Rangoon. She met with nothing but kindness all
the way. The Viceroy granted her special permission to take a native
woman as her attendant, a thing which was deemed a very great favour
indeed, as no native woman was usually allowed to leave the country. The
captain of the vessel in which she sailed refused to accept any money
for the passage; and when she sent the physician who attended to her
seventy rupees in payment for his advice, he returned them with an
expression of pleasure in having been of any service to her. She went
back to Rangoon renewed in health, and a few months later she became the
mother of a little boy.

For a short time the baby was the treasure of the mission-house. In
their loneliness and separation from all friends, the hearts of the
father and mother went out to their little one, and he became even more
to them than an only child usually is to its parents. The Burmans
regarded him as quite a curiosity, for he was the only purely white
infant in the place. The baby would lie quietly for hours on a mat in
the study, while his parents were poring over their books, and when work
was done they would throw the palm leaves on one side, take up the boy,
and carry him in state around the house and garden. His presence seemed
to light up the home with a new and sacred joy; but he was not to be
there long. When he had completely twined himself around his parents'
hearts he was taken away, for after a few days' illness he died when
only eight months old.

This sore affliction was the means of drawing out much sympathy from
many of the natives. The chief wife of the Viceroy had been greatly
attracted by the little lad when he was alive, and on hearing of his
death she paid a visit of condolence to his parents, accompanied by her
official attendants, numbering some two hundred people. "Why did you not
send me word, that I might come to the funeral?" she asked, smiting her
breast and showing every sign of sorrow. The heart-broken mother replied
that her grief was so great that she did not think of it, and the Burman
lady then did her best to comfort her, and strove with warm, womanly
sympathy to make her forget her loss.


CHAPTER V.

SOWING TIME.

For three years Mr. and Mrs. Judson devoted themselves solely to the
study of Burman, and did not even attempt any directly evangelistic
work, beyond the opportunity afforded by casual conversation with a few
individuals. They well knew that any impatient attempts to push forward
the work would probably result in closing the country against
Christianity for many years to come.

It was not without heavy hearts that they saw the years passing away and
nothing apparently being done. They had half expected, before leaving
America, that it would require little more than a plain proclamation of
the Gospel to win converts; but a short experience of the reality of
missionary life showed them that the work was not so easy as had been
imagined. The people were careless and indifferent, and no permanent
impressions seemed to be produced upon their minds. They would listen
politely while the missionaries pleaded with them for Christ, and then
would lightly dismiss the matter with the remark that all religions
were good.

One reason why preaching had not been attempted was because Mr. and Mrs.
Judson felt it would be well at first to devote their energies more
especially to the printing and circulation of Christian literature. In
Burmah almost every man could read, and it would be possible to reach
far more through the printed page than by public speaking. A portion of
a gospel had been translated by Mr. Felix Carey, but this was lost in a
wreck, so Mr. Judson started a fresh translation of the New Testament,
and prepared one or two tracts. In 1815 he wrote to Dr. Carey, asking if
he could print some Burmese tracts at the Serampore press; the doctor
replied that it would be far better for Judson to start a press of his
own in Rangoon, and in order that he might do so he sent him a complete
outfit, including a press, a supply of type, and other necessary stock.

When the printing press reached Rangoon, there came with it two new
helpers, Mr. and Mrs. Hough, sent out by the American Baptist Missionary
Society. Mr. Hough had been a printer before leaving America, and so he
was able to render practical assistance almost from the day of his
arrival, by taking charge of the printing department. Two small tracts
were issued as quickly as possible, one a Summary of Christian Doctrine,
and the other a catechism; and Mr. Judson hurried on with his
translation of the New Testament. The printing of these was the first
thing of the kind that had ever been done in Burmah, and the
missionaries rejoiced that the art of printing should be introduced into
the country directly through Christianity.

Their first serious inquirer was brought to them through these tracts.
One day in March, 1817, a man, evidently of good position, came to the
mission-house and astonished Mr. Judson with the question, "How long a
time will it take me to learn the religion of Jesus?" The surprised
missionary replied that it all depended on whether God gave him light
and wisdom, and asked how he came to know anything of Jesus. Had he been
there before? "No." Had he seen any writings concerning Jesus? "I have
seen two little books." "Who is Jesus?" Judson asked, to test his
knowledge. "He is the son of God who, pitying creatures, came into the
world and suffered death in their stead." "Who is God?" "He is a being
without beginning or end, who is not subject to old age or death, but
always is."

Mr. Judson was delighted beyond measure to hear these words proceed
from the lips of a Burman. He handed him a tract and catechism, but
these the man had read, and specially wanted another book. Judson had
told him that he was preparing another book, but had not got it ready
yet. "Have you not a little of that book done which you would be
graciously pleased to give me?" the man asked; and Judson, thinking it
better not to let the opportunity pass by, gave him two half sheets
which had been already printed, and which contained the first five
chapters of Matthew.

The man did not come again to them for some time, but they learned that
he was appointed governor of some villages a distance away. The
following January he had to visit Rangoon, and once more called at the
mission-house. Mr. Judson was away just then, having gone for a short
time to India, but Mrs. Judson had a long talk with him, and asked him
if he had yet become a disciple of Jesus. "I have not yet," he replied,
"but I am thinking and reading in order to become one. I cannot yet
destroy my old mind, for if I see a handsome cloth or handkerchief I
still desire them. Tell the great teacher when he returns, that I wish
to see him, though I am not a disciple of Christ." He requested more
books and then left.

Up to this time the rulers had been most friendly, but in 1818 a little
event occurred which indicated to the missionaries what might at any
time happen. The former Viceroy had left, and a new one was appointed in
his stead. It was the time when Mr. Judson was away in India, and one
morning Mr. Hough received a command, written in most threatening
language, ordering him to at once appear at the court-house to give an
account of himself. He went, and was ordered to come next day for
examination, and the officials assured him that, "If he did not tell all
the truth about his situation in the country, they would write it with
his heart's blood."

For two days he was subjected to a severe cross-examination, and the
officials seemed to delight in annoying and threatening him in every
possible way. He could not appeal to the Viceroy, for he was not
sufficiently acquainted with the language; so the native teacher drew up
a petition, and Mrs. Judson herself presented it to the Viceroy. He
received it kindly, and at once gave orders that Mr. Hough was not to be
troubled further. They afterwards found out that the thing had been
arranged by the minor officials, in order to extort money from the
missionaries.

Before Mr. Judson returned a severe epidemic of cholera broke out in
Rangoon, and Mr. Hough was very anxious to take his wife and Mrs. Judson
out of the place and go back to India. It was a trying and troubled
time, and all missionary-work was necessarily at a standstill. Mrs.
Judson was very reluctant to leave Burmah, and for long refused to
depart; she had not heard from her husband for many months, and did not
know on what day he might return. But Mr. Hough was so persistent that
she at last consented, and allowed her luggage to be taken on board a
vessel, she herself following. But at the last moment, when the ship was
on the point of sailing, she felt that she could not leave, and ordered
her things to be taken back to the city again. Mr. and Mrs. Hough went
on, and she was left alone, but within a few days her husband returned,
and her greatest trouble was over.


CHAPTER VI.

INQUIRERS AND CONVERTS.

Soon after the retirement of Mr. Hough, two other missionaries and their
wives came out to Rangoon, and the Judsons felt it was time to commence
a more aggressive work. A little house of public worship, or zayat, was
erected in one of the main roads and opened to all who liked to come in.
The work had to be done very quietly, in order not to arouse the
opposition of the Government, for there was much uncertainty at the time
about the course the officials would take should any converts be made.
When the zayat was finished, Mr. Judson called together some of the
people living around, and held his first public service in the Burmese
tongue. From this time meetings were held several times a week, and
during the day Mr. Judson would sit in the house, talking and arguing
with all who chose to come in to him.

Every Wednesday evening, at seven o'clock, Mrs. Judson met a class of
women, numbering generally from twelve to twenty. To these she would
read the Scriptures and talk in a simple way about God. "My last meeting
was very animating," she said when describing one of these classes, "and
the appearance of the females (thirteen in number, all young married
women) very encouraging. Some of them were inquisitive, and after
spending two hours seemed loth to go. One said she appeared to herself
like a blind person just beginning to see. And another said she believed
in Christ, prayed to Him daily, and asked what else was necessary to
make her a real disciple of Christ. I told her she must not only say
that she believed in Christ, but must believe with all her heart. She
again asked what were some of the evidences of believing with the heart.
I told her the manner of life would be changed, but one of the best
evidences she could obtain would be when others came to quarrel with her
and use abusive language, if, so far from retaliating, she felt a
disposition to bear with, to pity, and to pray for them. The Burman
women are particularly given to quarrelling, and to refrain from it
would be most decided evidence of a change of heart."

During the daytime, while Mr. Judson was talking with any man who
called, Mrs. Judson would sit in another part of the place and see all
the women visitors. By this plan she was enabled to preach the Gospel to
many. What time she could spare from this work she now devoted to a
study of Siamese. A number of people in Rangoon knew only that language,
so she learned it sufficiently well to be able to converse with them,
and to translate a gospel and several tracts into their tongue.

In 1819 the hearts of the missionaries were cheered by a native, Moung
Hau, coming out and openly professing Christianity--the first fruit
gathered after seven years of labour. Many had partly accepted their
teachings, and had been evidently impressed by their message; but up to
that time no real, definite converts had been made.

Moung Hau soon showed that a real work of grace was progressing in his
heart. He told the missionaries that he had found no other Saviour but
Jesus Christ, from all the darkness and uncleanness and sins of his
whole life, that he could look nowhere else for salvation, and that
therefore he proposed to adhere to Christ for ever. "It seems almost too
much to believe that God has begun to manifest His grace to the
Burmans," the members of the little mission band said one to another;
but the sincerity of Moung Hau was such that they could not doubt it,
and after a time of probation he was publicly baptized.

There were signs that this convert was only the first of an abundant
harvest. In the autumn of the same year, two more men requested baptism,
but this time the rite had to be performed privately, for the Viceroy
had begun openly to avow himself hostile to Christianity. Dark rumours
of persecution were heard, and one inquirer was summoned before the
authorities and warned to beware of what he did. So serious did matters
become that public preaching had for a time to be abandoned, and many
inquirers ceased their visits to the mission-house, and were heard of
no more.

The missionaries thought that if they could only appeal to the Emperor,
and obtain his permission to carry on their work, all might be well
again; so after much deliberation Messrs. Judson and Colman went on a
journey to the royal city of Ava, and obtained an audience of the
Emperor. They humbly requested that his subjects might be permitted to
become Christians without incurring the wrath of the authorities; but
when the monarch heard their petition he treated it with open disdain,
and they had to return to Rangoon saddened and disappointed
beyond measure.

The news that nothing must be expected from the Government but
persecution seemed to give strength to the three converts and to several
really earnest inquirers. When the missionaries spoke of going to
another part of Burmah, where they could have more liberty, their
disciples implored them to remain. "It is useless to remain under
present circumstances," Mr. Judson said. "We cannot open the zayat; we
cannot have public worship; no Burman will dare to examine this
religion, none can be expected to embrace it." "Teacher," one of the
converts replied, "my mind is distressed; I can neither eat nor sleep
since I find you are going away. I have been around among those who live
near us, and I find some who are even now examining the new religion. Do
stay with us a few months. Do stay till there are eight or ten
disciples; then appoint one to be teacher of the rest." Many others said
the same, and at last it was decided that Mr. and Mrs. Judson were to
remain in Rangoon, while Mr. and Mrs. Colman, the other missionaries
there at the time, should move to Chittagong, a place near at hand under
British protection, and try to form a station there.

Within a few weeks after this, several who had long been inquirers came
and requested baptism, although they were well aware that by doing so
they were making themselves liable to death by most horrible torture.
One man, a prominent native in good circumstances, and well known as a
great orator and metaphysician, who had for a long time been arguing
with Mr. Judson about Christianity, now openly declared himself a
follower of Jesus. Others did the same, and God seemed to reward His
servants by showing them such results from their labours as they had
hardly hoped ever to obtain.

The threats of persecution for a time ceased, and the prospects of the
mission improved in every way. By early in 1821 the number of baptized
disciples had increased to nearly twenty, and among them were several
professional men of great influence in the city and some women. Many
others, although not professed disciples, showed by their acts that they
sympathised with the Christians and would do what they could for them.

In December, 1821, Dr. Price, a medical missionary, arrived with his
wife from America, and soon afterwards Mr. and Mrs. Hough returned.
Though the missionaries were left in comparative peace, they well knew
that severe measures might at any time be taken against them. Every now
and then there came rumblings of the threatened storm, and one of the
chief converts was obliged to flee from the city on account of
proceedings being started against him for his change of faith.

A few months before the arrival of Dr. Price, Mrs. Judson had so broken
down in health that her husband decided to send her to America for the
long sea voyage. She first went to England, where she received a warm
welcome from many Christians, and then she proceeded to the United
States, where she spent the winter. Medical men in America were
unanimous in advising her not to return to the East, as they said her
state of health was such that she would probably die before long if she
went there. But nothing could keep her back from what she felt to be the
post of duty. "I cannot prevail on myself to be any longer from Rangoon
than is absolutely necessary for the preservation of my life," she said;
so in June, 1823, she started on the return journey, accompanied by
another missionary and his wife.


CHAPTER VII.

PRISONERS OF WAR.

When Mrs. Judson reached Calcutta on her return voyage to Rangoon, she
was informed that war might break out at any time between England and
Burmah, and was strongly advised not to attempt to go on. But she was
determined to rejoin her husband at once, and finding that a vessel
would start for Rangoon in a few days, she took a passage in it. She was
not to stay long in Rangoon, however, for the Emperor had ordered Dr.
Price and Mr. Judson to take up their residence in Ava. Dr. Price was
already there, and Mr. Judson had only stayed at Rangoon to meet his
wife, on the understanding that he should set out for the capital as
soon as possible.

The missionaries attempted to carry on their work at Ava in the same way
as they had previously done at Rangoon, but the public mind was in too
excited a state just then to permit of much progress being made. The
Emperor had for some time treated the English Government with open
disdain, and had collected an army together for the avowed purpose of
invading Bengal. He even caused a pair of golden fetters to be made, to
bind the Governor-General of India when he should be led as captive to
Ava. But before the Emperor could carry out his plan, the English took
the initiative and invaded his country. He was confident of victory, but
information was soon brought to him that the English had captured
Rangoon, and this was followed by news of various other English
victories.

The foreign residents at Ava naturally felt that their position there
was somewhat precarious. At first the Emperor assured them that "as they
had nothing to do with the war, they should not be molested;" but when
tidings of English triumphs followed one another in rapid succession,
the attitude of the natives grew more and more menacing.

Some Englishmen formerly in the employ of the Court were seized, and
their belongings examined. In the account book of one of them were
items recording certain sums having been paid to Mr. Judson. This money
had been given to him in exchange for circular bankers' orders, sent
from America; but the Emperor did not understand this. He concluded that
Judson had been paid to be an English spy, and at once gave orders for
the arrest of both the missionaries.

The scene can best be described in Mrs. Judson's own words. "On the 8th
of June, just as we were preparing for dinner, in rushed an officer
holding a black book, with a dozen Burmans, accompanied by one whom,
from his spotted face, we knew to be an executioner, and a 'son of the
prison.' 'Where is the teacher?' was the first inquiry. Mr. Judson
presented himself. 'You are called by the King,' said the officer--a
form of speech always used when about to arrest a criminal. The spotted
man instantly seized Mr. Judson, threw him on the floor, and produced
the small cord, the instrument of torture. I caught hold of his arm.
'Stay,' said I, 'I will give you money.' 'Take her too,' said the
officer, 'she also is a foreigner.' Mr. Judson, with an imploring look,
begged they would let me remain till further orders. The hardened
executioner drew tight the cords, bound Mr. Judson fast, and dragged him
off I knew not whither. In vain I entreated the spotted face to take the
silver, and loosen the ropes; but he spurned my offers and immediately
departed."

Mr. Judson was hurried away to the death prison, and his wife found
herself a captive in her own house. She was exposed to many insults from
the guard of soldiers set over her, and for three days she was unable to
go out. Then, by a judicious bribe, she obtained a certain measure of
liberty. She at once went to the governor of the city and sought to
obtain the release of her husband. This could not be gained, but she
purchased permission to see him. He crawled to the door of the prison,
as fast as his trebly-bound limbs would allow, and spoke for a minute to
her; but before they could exchange many words Mrs. Judson was
peremptorily ordered away by the jailer.

The Government officials came again to the mission-house and seized all
the silver they could find in it; but Mrs. Judson had received warning
of their visit, and before they arrived had hid as much money as she
could. Had she not done this, she and her husband must inevitably have
starved during the following months. As it was, she had something now
with which to mollify the officials, and she succeeded in getting her
husband and Dr. Price taken out of the common prison for a time, and
placed in an open shed.

Day by day she worked incessantly, petitioning every one of influence,
from the Queen downwards, for her husband's release. Many sympathised
with her, but one and all declared themselves unable to do anything. The
governor of the city, who had chief control of the prison, happily
became their friend, and did all he dared for them. Three times he was
informed by a near relative of the Emperor, that if he would cause all
the white prisoners to be privately put to death it would be pleasing to
the monarch; but every time he managed to avoid doing it.

For seven months Mrs. Judson strove daily on her husband's behalf, and
spent what time she could with him in the gaol. "Sometimes," she said,
"I could not go into the prison till after dark, when I had two miles to
walk in returning to the house. Oh, how many times have I returned from
that dreary prison at nine o'clock at night, solitary and worn out with
fatigue and anxiety, and endeavoured to invent some new scheme for the
release of the prisoners."

After her husband had been in prison for some months, she gave birth to
a little daughter, and for a few weeks was unable to get about to look
after the captives as before. During this time news came to Ava of
further great defeats of the Burmese troops, and the treatment of the
captives was at once made harsher. They were again shut in the inner
prison, among all the common malefactors of the place, and were each
bound with five pairs of fetters. The hottest season of the year had now
arrived, and the situation of the prisoners was far more terrible than
any words can describe. The room in which they were confined was
occupied by about a hundred native criminals; there was no ventilation
beyond that afforded by the cracks in the walls, and the continual
stench and heat were almost unbearable. As soon as she could get about,
Mrs. Judson built herself a small bamboo hut by the gate of the prison,
and lived there, to be as near as possible to her husband. After he had
been a month in this black hole Mr. Judson was taken ill with fever, and
after much entreaty she was permitted to move him to a little bamboo
cell by himself, and to go in daily to feed him and to give
him medicine.


CHAPTER VIII.

"THROUGH MUCH TRIBULATION."

The darkest hour had not yet come! Two or three days after she had
secured the removal of her husband from the common prison, he and all
the white men were suddenly seized and hurried out of the city. Mrs.
Judson was engaged elsewhere at the time, and for some hours she was
unable to learn where the prisoners had been taken; but a servant who
had seen them leave gave her a clue, and she at once followed it up. She
deposited her books and medicines with the friendly governor, and set
out with her babe on her arm, and two orphan children she had adopted by
her side, seeking her husband. After a wearisome journey she found him
in a wretched prison at Oung-pen-la, almost dead from weakness and the
torture he had undergone on his forced march, and was greeted with the
pathetic words, so illustrative of Adoniram Judson's utter
unselfishness, "Why have you come? I hoped you would not follow, for you
cannot live here." The prison was placed in a lonely spot, far away from
any village. There was no accommodation for Mrs. Judson, and no food
could be obtained near at hand. She was refused permission to build
herself a little hut, but the jailer found her a small, dirty store-room
in his own house, and here she and the three children lived for the next
six months. Day by day she searched for food, not only for her husband,
but for the other white prisoners; and though worn out with pain and
sorrow, cheered them, looked after their every want, and continually
applied to the officials for some improvement in their lot. The untold
privations she was suffering soon told on a frame that had never been
very strong. Her two adopted children were taken with small-pox, and
when they had partly recovered the baby was also attacked. Mrs. Judson
had now to look after them in addition to her other work, and would
often spend the day attending to the prisoners, and the night in nursing
the children. The watchings and fatigue at last broke her down, and for
two months she was unable to leave her bed. She had for most of the time
no attendant except a common Bengalee cook, but this man proved an
invaluable aid. He worked almost without ceasing, nursing Mrs. Judson,
searching for provisions, and feeding the prisoners. The little baby was
in a most deplorable state. It had no nurse, Mrs. Judson could not feed
it on account of her fever, and the only way it existed was by her
husband obtaining permission from the jailer to go out for a short time
each day, carry the child around the village, and beg a little
nourishment for it from those mothers who had young children. "I now
began to think the very afflictions of Job had come upon me," wrote Mrs.
Judson. "When in health I could bear the various trials and vicissitudes
through which I was called upon to pass; but to be confined with
sickness, and unable to assist those who were so dear to me, when in
distress, was almost too much for me to bear; and had it not been for
the consolations of religion, and an assured conviction that every
additional trial was ordered by infinite love and mercy, I must have
sunk under my accumulated sufferings."

Meanwhile the English army was daily coming closer and closer to the
capital, and Mr. Judson was taken out of prison and sent down to the
Burmese camp, to act as translator in the negotiations which were going
on between the two forces. The victorious British general, Sir Archibald
Campbell, ordered the Burmese to pay a heavy war indemnity, and to cede
a large part of their territory to the English; and he also stipulated
that all foreign prisoners who wished should be handed over to him.
Consequently the Judsons found themselves once more free, after a year
and seven months' imprisonment, and were made the honoured guests of the
English general.

But the relief came too late, for Mrs. Judson's constitution was
completely undermined by the privations she had endured. She and her
husband settled in Amherst, a new town in British Burman territory, and
hopefully looked forward to carrying on a useful work there. They had
not been many months in the place before Mrs. Judson had a bad attack of
fever, at a time when her husband was away helping the English general.
She seemed temporarily to get better, but she had no strength left to
resist the disease, and gradually sank. "The teacher is long in coming,
and the new missionaries are long in coming," she murmured in a moment
of relief from her delirium. "I must die alone, and leave my little one;
but as it is the will of God I acquiesce in His will. I am not afraid of
death; but I am afraid I shall not be able to bear these pains. Tell the
teacher the disease was most violent, and I could not write; tell him
how I suffered and died; tell him all that you see; and take care of the
house and things until he returns." For most of the time she lay
unconscious, and on October 24, 1827, after about sixteen days of
illness, and at the age of thirty-seven, she passed away before her
husband could return. Soon afterwards her baby followed her.

And so went home one of the noblest women who have laboured in the
mission field. Her brave spirit, her undaunted trust in God and in the
power of prayer upheld her, when the courage of the bravest men would
have failed. Not a little of the remarkable success of the work of God
in Burmah is due to the indomitable perseverance and the wise devotion
to God and to her husband of Ann Judson; and wherever the Gospel is
preached, that also which this woman hath done shall be spoken of for a
memorial of her.

Was her life thrown away? Were the labours and sufferings she had bodily
undergone wasted? Not so. The story of her life has been and still is a
precious heritage for the whole Church militant, a lesson which ever
appeals to Christians to rouse themselves from self-seeking and
apathetic lives, and consecrate their talents to the Master's use.
Though she was taken up higher, the work in Burmah did not stop, and
before many years had passed, hundreds and thousands of the people among
whom she had laboured were professing to serve the true God; so true is
it that "the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church."

FRED. A. McKENZIE.


MARY LOUISA WHATELY.

[Illustration]

I.

PARENTAGE AND CHILDHOOD.

Mary Louisa Whately came of a distinguished family. Her father, Dr.
Richard Whately, for many years Archbishop of Dublin, was one of the
most remarkable and prominent men of the first half of the nineteenth
century, a voluminous writer, a strenuous thinker, and a statesmanlike
ecclesiastic. Her mother, Elizabeth, daughter of Mr. W. Pope of
Uxbridge, was, says Miss E.J. Whately, a woman of "grace and dignity of
character, delicacy of mind and sensitive refinement, which were united
with high powers of intellect and mental cultivation and a thirst for
knowledge seldom exceeded." [1] She was an ardent Christian, and devoted
herself to works of beneficence and Christian service among the poor, as
far as her delicate health would allow.

[Footnote 1: _Life of Archbishop Whately_, by his daughter, vol. 1. p.
43.]

Mary was born at Halesworth in Suffolk, of which parish her father was
then the rector, on August 31, 1824. The following year her father was
appointed Principal of St. Alban Hall, and removed with his family to
Oxford. In 1831 he accepted the Archbishopric of Dublin, and thus at the
age of seven Dublin became, what it remained for thirty years, Mary
Whately's home. She was the third of a family of five, four girls and
one boy, who all inherited something of their mother's delicacy of
constitution and a good share of their father's strength of intellect
and character. They were near enough to each other in age to share one
another's studies and games, and, living a very retired life, depended
largely on each other for companionship. For a portion of the year they
resided in the archiepiscopal palace in Dublin. But on account of the
many social demands made on him in the city, the place became
distasteful to Dr. Whately, and he engaged a charming country residence
called Redesdale, some four or five miles out of town. Here he resided
the larger portion of the year, living a quieter life than was possible
in the city, and driving into Dublin on most mornings to attend to his
official duties. In the intervals of study and the discharge of public
duty he devoted himself to his garden, in the cultivation of which he
displayed much skill and ingenuity. Redesdale was the children's home,
though the life there was occasionally varied by a stay in London (where
their father usually spent a few weeks each spring to attend the House
of Lords), at Tunbridge Wells, where they had relatives, or at the
seaside, and later by visits to the Continent.

The Archbishop had very decided views on the training and education of
children, and his wife also, as her _English Social Life_ shows, had
thought much on the subject. One of the Archbishop's rules was that
children should never learn anything by rote. "When Mrs. Whately and I
first married," he observed on one occasion, "one of the first things we
agreed on was, that should Providence send us children, we would never
teach them anything they did not understand. 'Not even their prayers, my
lord?' asked the person addressed. 'No, not even their prayers,' he
replied." [1] Mary's education was conducted mainly by a governess, under
the superintendence of her parents. Her brother, Archdeacon Whately,
thus refers to her early life: "Our life in Ireland was on the whole a
very retired one. For the greater part of our sojourn there we saw very
little society, nor had my sisters a sufficient vent for a craving,
which in some of them was very strong, for social intercourse and active
work.... In early life she showed the germs of that vigour and energy of
character for which she was afterwards so distinguished. In all our
youthful games she was fond of taking the lead, and generally succeeded
in obtaining it.... Like most young persons of a sanguine and
imaginative temperament, she lived very much in an ideal future of her
own creation.... It was well for my sister that we were not allowed in
our younger days to read any unwholesome trash in the way of fiction. We
were not indeed unduly restricted in works of imagination, but we read
nothing which was foolish or sensational, and a higher taste than the
taste for mere stories was cultivated in us. Mary Whately had a strong
predilection for works of travels, history, and adventures. Perhaps
these tastes were a foreshadowing of her future destiny, and prepared
her for it." [2] Her sister adds, "Mary was from her earliest years
ardent and impulsive, hot-tempered and generous. She was quick at
lessons, and possessed of a retentive memory, though the active brain
and lively imagination made schoolroom routine somewhat irksome
to her." [3]

[Footnote 1: _Life of Archbishop Whately_, by his daughter, vol. 1. p. 62.]
[Footnote 2: _The Fireside_ for 1889, pp. 817, 818.]
[Footnote 3: _Life of Mary J. Whately_, by E.J. Whately, p. 10.]


II.

THE BEGINNINGS OF CHRISTIAN LIFE AND SERVICE.

Dr. and Mrs. Whately gave their children a careful religious and moral
training, and sought to instil into their minds the highest motives for
right doing, and to set before them a high standard of conduct. Mrs.
Whately early associated her daughters with herself in visiting among
the poor in the village of Stillorgan, which adjoined the grounds of
Redesdale, and in teaching in the village school. The poor of Dublin
also were not forgotten, and especially at Christmas time Mary shared
with her mother in the distribution of gifts among the deserving poor in
the city, and in the entertainment of many of them in the servants' hall
of the palace.

It is not known, perhaps she could not herself tell, exactly at what
period the light of the Gospel first dawned upon her heart, but a
subsequent time at which her spiritual life was much deepened and
intensified was very marked. In 1849 the health of her brother broke
down, and he was ordered by the physicians to spend the winter on the
Continent. Mary accompanied him. They went first to Nice, but the
climate disagreeing with them, they passed on to Florence and Pisa, and
subsequently spent some time among the Waldensian valleys. This tour was
in many ways a preparation for Mary's future life. She took lessons in
painting, which was to be the chief recreation of her later years; she
attained some proficiency in Italian, which led her a few years
afterwards to engage in mission work among the poor Italians in Dublin;
and her visit to the Waldensian valleys gave her her first insight into
evangelical work abroad. But most important of all, she became
acquainted with M. Meille, a young Waldensian pastor, and his wife,
through her intercourse with whom her religious convictions became
intensified and her spiritual horizon widened. When she returned to
Dublin the great Irish famine was still continuing. The distribution of
food and other efforts to relieve the distress were occupying the
attention of all philanthropic persons. Mrs. Whately had become actively
engaged in this work, and she and her daughters henceforward took a more
prominent part in aggressive Christian work than they had hitherto done.
Famine relief paved the way for greatly extended effort to spread Gospel
knowledge among the Roman Catholic population. Industrial and Bible
schools, refuges, and other Christian institutions sprang up in various
parts of the country. Protestant missions to Roman Catholics were
greatly extended. In this work Mary Whately found opportunity for the
expression of her deepened spiritual experience. She taught in the
adult classes at the Townsend Street Mission Hall joined her sisters and
other ladies in founding a ragged school for boys--the first in
Ireland--and afterwards in instituting a work among destitute girls,
which issued in the Luke Street Girls' Home where hundreds of poor girls
were taught to live respectable and Christian lives. These various forms
of Christian service gave her tact and experience in dealing with the
poor, which proved invaluable in her subsequent work in Egypt. As her
sister says, "The Irish Church Mission work was the preparatory training
to which she always especially looked back with thankfulness. The
admirable manner of teaching and explaining Scripture employed in their
schools she felt to have been the most valuable education for her
subsequent life-work." [l]

[Footnote 1: _Life of Mary L. Whately_, by E.J. Whately, p. 15.]

In 1856, as she was in ill health, it was recommended that she should
spend the winter in a warmer climate. Egypt was chosen, and, accompanied
by a friend, she landed at Alexandria and proceeded to Cairo, where she
remained several months. This was her first acquaintance with what was
to be the land of her adoption. Before returning home in the spring of
1857 she made a prolonged tour in Syria and Palestine. She took much
note of the mission work carried on in various places, and so greatly
interested was she in the work among Jewesses then carried on in
Jerusalem that she had some thoughts of giving it for a time her
personal assistance.


III.

FIRST EFFORTS IN CAIRO.

The year 1860 was one of sorrow and bereavement to Mary Whately. She
lost first her youngest sister, then her mother. Under the strain of
nursing and sorrow her own health was seriously affected, and she was
ordered by the doctors to spend the winter in a warmer climate. Her
thoughts recurred to Egypt and her former pleasant sojourn there;
accordingly she selected Cairo as her residence, purposing in her heart
to make an attempt to bring the Gospel within reach of the Moslem women
and girls. Egypt was then very different from what it is now. Railways
were but just beginning to make their appearance, the Suez Canal was not
yet cut, European customs, now so prevalent, had scarcely begun to
invade the age-long usages of the upper classes. English residents in
Cairo and tourists up the river were alike few in number. Few outside
influences had been brought to bear on the Mohammedan population to
moderate their extreme bigotry and hatred of anything called
_Christian_--a word which they invariably associated with the picture
and image worship of the members of the Greek or Roman Church with whom
they had come in contact, or with the irreligious pleasure-seeking of
tourists, or travellers by the overland route to India. The Copts, or
descendants of the early Egyptian Christians, were almost without
exception buried in the profoundest ignorance of the Scriptures and of
Christian truth, given over to superstitious beliefs and practices, and
destitute of any real spiritual life. Education for boys was of the most
primitive character; for girls it was never thought of, nor had any
educational effort ever been made for them during the twelve centuries
which had elapsed since the rise of Mohammedanism. Christian missionary
operations were almost non-existent. The American Presbyterians had
recently commenced missionary effort, but their work was mainly, as it
still is, among the Copts, and they had not yet opened a station in
Cairo. Since 1827 indeed the Church Missionary Society had maintained a
missionary--sometimes two--in Cairo, but their work had not issued in
the formation of a Protestant Christian Church.

"It was laid on my heart," says Mary Whately, "to try and do something
for the girls and women of the land, especially those of the Moslem
poorer classes, far the most numerous, of course. The only schools
hitherto opened for the children of the land had no scholars except from
the Copts or native Christians; others were considered quite out of
reach, and many of my friends endeavoured to dissuade me from an attempt
which was sure to end in failure, as they said. However, it seemed best
to make an effort, at all events. But it was begun in prayer, and
therefore difficulties and delays did not greatly discourage me." [l]

[Footnote 1: _Life of Mary L. Whately_, pp. 21, 25.]

Mary Whately, accompanied by a cousin, resided for a time with Mrs.
Lieder, of the Church Missionary Society. But in order to open a school
she had to engage a house for herself; and after great difficulties one
was secured in a suitable position. It was but a comfortless abode, and
only rude furniture and inefficient domestic help were obtainable. But
Miss Whately held outward comforts in light regard. Even in later days,
when she had built for herself a capacious and comfortable house, it was
furnished in the simplest, even rudest fashion, and all her personal
expenses were cut down to the lowest possible point, that she might have
the more to spend the work to which she gave both her heart and her
life. As as she was settled in her new house she endeavoured to make
acquaintance of her neighbours.

Miss Whately was but just beginning to learn Arabic, and the only
assistants she could get for starting her school were a Syrian
matron--who could speak but a few words of English and read with
difficulty the New Testament--and her daughter of thirteen. Accompanied
by the Syrian matron, Miss Whately went out into the surrounding lanes
and invited the women to send their little girls to her to be taught to
read and sew. She met with many curt refusals and received many
fallacious promises; but when at last, in February 1861, a start was
made, nine little girls were present the first morning "No recruiting
sergeant," she says, "was ever so pleased with a handful of future
soldiers, for it was beating up for recruits for the Lord." [1] The
numbers gradually increased, though from time to time they were
seriously affected by the spreading of malicious reports and the
opposition of bigoted relatives and the only way to keep up the
attendance was to go round visiting to obtain recruits, and to cultivate
an acquaintance with the parents of the old scholars. In three months
the children had been reduced to some sort of order, taught the alphabet
and the way to sew; they could repeat a few texts, and sing a few hymns
with some approach to sweetness. But perhaps of more importance still,
they had learned to love and obey their teacher. Before her return to
England for the summer she took them for an early morning feast in the
public gardens of Cairo: and when the simple repast was finished, while
"the little ones danced and waved boughs in a perfect ecstacy of
merriment," the elder girls, she says, "seemed to find no pleasure so
great as following us about, pointing to the flowers, and frequently
throwing their arms round us, exclaiming, 'I love thee! I love thee
much!' with eyes really overflowing with affection. How often had it
been said 'You can make nothing of Moslem girls!' but the key of love is
wonderfully powerful, and equally so in every land in opening the doors
of young hearts." [2]

[Footnote :1 _Bagged Life in Egypt_, new ed., p. 29.]
[Footnote :2 _Ibid_., p. 110.]

Meanwhile the beginnings of other Christian work had been made by Miss
Whately. In the early mornings she would drive or ride a few miles out
of the city, and seating herself near to some hamlet would enter into
conversation with the women and girls, and seek to instil into their
dark minds some drops of divine truth. Much of her time also was spent
in visiting the poorer women of the city.

When, at the end of May, both the heat of the climate and family claims
necessitated her return home, she placed her little school under the
care of a teacher whom the Society for Promoting Female Education in the
East provided.

The following winter was passed with some friends at Pau. After a trip
to the north of Spain she spent another summer at home. In the autumn
of 1862 she again arrived in Cairo, to re-open her school, which had for
some time been suspended through the departure of the teacher. Many of
her former scholars, hearing of her return, came to give her a very
hearty greeting, and were willing to come back to school, bringing their
younger sisters with them. They had, however, forgotten nearly all they
had learned, and were at first very unruly. No assistance beyond that of
an ignorant woman to help keep order and teach a little sewing was
obtainable, while Miss Whately's still imperfect acquaintance with
Arabic increased the difficulties which are everywhere experienced in
the conduct of a ragged school. The younger children were especially
difficult to deal with. The parents of the Mohammedan children objected
to the use of pictures, being accustomed to see them the objects of
reverence on the part of the Copts and other Eastern Christians, while
the Coptic children were inclined to worship them. Amusing songs in
Arabic, suitable for young children, there were none; and when a little
marching about was attempted for the sake of variety, the mothers said,
"We send our children to _learn_, and you teach them to _play_! If that
is what they go to school for, they may as well be at home." [1] After a
time a young woman was found who could do a little teaching. Miss
Whately had to continue to give all the religious instruction herself.
Yet, despite the many difficulties, the school was firmly established
and continued to make slow but steady progress.

[Footnote 1: _Among the Huts_, p. 269.]

When her scholars were about to start for the "school-treat" to which
reference has been made, a little boy, looking on with envious eyes, had
exclaimed in a piteous voice, "I wish I were a girl." [1] "It was indeed
a triumph," says Miss Whately, "to the little school that it caused an
Egyptian boy even for a moment to wish himself a girl." Other boys had
expressed their desire to come to school; so, as the 'girls' school did
not meet on Sundays, Miss Whately started a Sunday class for boys. This
was all it was possible for her to do by herself. But just at that time
she became acquainted with one who, with other members of his family,
was henceforth to be closely associated With all her work in Egypt. This
was Mansoor Shakoor, a young Christian Syrian of good family and
education, who, after working for some years as teacher and evangelist
in Syria, had become agent in Cairo for the Moslem Mission Society,
recently established in England. First of all Yousif Shakoor, brother of
Mansoor, came to help her in work.[2] Later Mansoor also entered her
employ, and she maintained both the brothers from her private resources.
Thus she was provided with devoted and efficient helpers. Under their
superintendence a regular school for boys was established, and when in
1863 she again returned to England she left the charge of all her work
in their hands. On the 8th of October in that year Archbishop Whately
died, and Mary Whately's Irish home being broken up, she determined
henceforth to fix her permanent abode in Cairo. She now hired another
house near to her own residence for the accommodation of the
increasing schools.

[Footnote 1: _Ragged Life in Egypt_, new ed., p. 167.] [Footnote 2:
_Life of Mansoor Shakoor_, pp. 58, 59.]

Very few English people can stand the intense heat of the Egyptian
summer, and Mary Whately being disinclined in 1864 to come so far as to
England, spent a short time instead in Syria. When she returned to Cairo
she took with her to educate and train Fereedy Naseef, the young cousin
and betrothed of Mansoor Shakoor. For this young girl there sprang up in
Mary Whately's heart a deep and warm affection; she called her and
treated her as her daughter, and both before and after her marriage in
the summer of 1868 she resided under Miss Whately's roof. When in 1872
her husband died, she still remained, and Miss Whately shared with her
the care and training of her young son and daughter, while she in return
gave great assistance in the conduct and work of the mission.


IV.

MISSION WORK IN CAIRO AND ON THE NILE.

Is it possible to convert Moslems to Christianity? are they ready to
receive it? No one perhaps is more competent to answer these questions
than Mary Whately, and this is what she says: "To say, as has been
sometimes rashly declared, that the Moslems are ready to receive
Christianity, and that the faith of the false prophet is crumbling away,
is what I would not venture for a moment to assert. But I can state as a
fact, that in the neighbourhood of Cairo the peasant population both men
and women, are willing, and many of them eager to _listen_ to the Word
of God when it is brought before them judiciously and discreetly, as
well as with kindness and zeal." [1]

[Footnote 1: _More about Rugged Life in Egypt_, p. 210.]

Subsequent experience confirmed this view, and more than twenty years
later she remarks "It is necessary to be discreet in dealing with
Mohammedans, for if the spirit of bitterness is once aroused, the door
is shut, for the time at least, against good influences." [1] To awaken
to an experience of vital religion the ignorant, superstitious, and
spiritually lifeless Copts is a difficult task; to bring to personal
faith in Christ the bigoted Moslems is more difficult still. "A Moslem's
religion," she says, "is twined up with his political, social, domestic
life so minutely, that the whole rope, as it were, has to untwisted
before he can be free from error, and the very admixture of truth in
their book makes it harder in some respects to refute than if, like the
heathen doctrines, it was all wrong throughout. Perhaps the intense
self-righteousness of Moslems is after all the hardest point about them;
their notion that in the end all who are Islam are safe strengthens
them in this belief." [2] Nevertheless, the points of contact between the
Mohammedan faith and the Christian a wise teacher can use as pegs to
hang Christian teaching upon; and this Mary Whately's previous
experience among the ignorant and bigoted Roman Catholics of Ireland
enabled her to do with much tact. When peasants said to her, "Your book
is Christian--we don't like Christian books," she would explain that it
was God's book, and that the Koran did not forbid it to be read; and
that she wanted to tell them about Seidna Eessa (the Lord Jesus), whom
Mohammed acknowledged to be a prophet. In this way many an initial
difficulty would be overcome, and the reading, with simple explanation,
of stories from the Gospels would elicit the response, "The words are
good," and the request for the gift of a New Testament.

[Footnote 1: _Life of Mary L. Whately_, p. 109.]
[Footnote 2: _A Glimpse behind the Curtain_, p. 117.]

[Illustration: Mary L. Whately]

As soon as Miss Whately had settled in Egypt she began visiting the
poorer women of Cairo. Usually she was received with courtesy, and when
she became known, with gratitude; and though this work was arduous and
consumed much time, through it an entrance was made for the Gospel into
many homes. Into the houses of the rich she penetrated but seldom,
partly because her work lay in other directions, and partly because
these were occupied by numerous slave-wives, who, being chiefly
Circassians or Georgians, spoke Turkish, and did not understand Arabic.
In earlier years Miss Whately did all the visiting herself, and her
books bear abundant testimony to the skill with which she could turn the
conversation to spiritual matters; in later years she was much assisted
in it by Mrs. Shakoor and by a Bible-woman whom she employed.

Mansoor and Yousif Shakoor engaged in similar work among men. They often
found men at the coffee-houses willing to listen to the reading of the
Scriptures. When this was put a stop to through the opposition of the
Moslem priests, a book depot was opened, which did good service for some
years. Evening meetings were also established, but these were attended
almost exclusively by Copts, though occasionally a Moslem would brave
the real danger of being present at a Christian service.

Beside the early morning rides to which reference has been made, which
afforded opportunities for religious conversation, Miss Whately would
occasionally stay for a week or two at some farmhouse or by the seaside,
and find opportunities of teaching the people around something of the
Gospel. The following is an incident connected with this work in the
country: "At an open spot just outside the village a barber was shaving
a peasant's head, and, as usual, a group were assembled near him
chatting and smoking. Mr. Shakoor took advantage of this and resolved
to join the party of men, and get into conversation, while I went a
little further in search of some women. I soon found four or five with
some little girls, all sitting upon a dust-heap! They looked very dirty,
as well they might, but I remembered 'who can raise up the beggar from
the dung-hill and make him to sit among princes.' I saluted the poor
women in a friendly way, and though looking astonished they replied
civilly. After a little chat and a few questions on both sides, I asked
if they had ever heard about our first parents, Adam and Eve, and how
sin came into the world. They just knew the names, but no more, and were
pleased to listen while I related the story. Before I had finished, an
old woman who had come up interrupted me. A young man who was standing
near and listening, desired her not to interrupt the lady, for he could
see she was learned, and 'thou art ignorant,' he added, with more truth
than politeness. 'But you are not well placed here,' he said, pointing
to the heap on which they were seated. 'Come to the roof of my house, my
mother will show you the way, and these women can come too if they
like.' I acceded to this courteous invitation, and followed the mother
and son up the mud-brick steps leading to the rude terrace; and though
anything but clean, it was a great improvement on what we had left, and
with genuine kindliness the old woman brought out an old but
well-preserved carpet and spread it for me. The others had followed, and
sat round to hear what the stranger could have to read to them. They
really seemed interested, though sometimes interrupting me with remarks
not at all to the purpose. I managed to bring them back to the stories I
read, of course choosing the simplest possible, and trying to explain a
little as we went." [1]

[Footnote 1: _Among the Huts_, pp. 181-184.]

Miss Whately would occasionally make an excursion into the desert,
making the acquaintance of the wild Bedouin tribes, and reading to them
the Scriptures. "Lady," once said a Bedouin, lifting the curtain of a
tent in which she and her sister were seated, "I saw your horse at the
water, and my comrade and I are come to hear some of your book." They
listened attentively while she read to them the ninth chapter of
John's Gospel.

An important part of her work was the missionary tours which she made
each year in the winter or early spring. The first of these journeys was
in 1861, the last within a few weeks of her death. The spiritual
condition of those she visited is thus described by Miss Whately: "The
mass of the peasants are little, if at all, different from what they
were in the days of Pharaoh. Instead of praying to gods of stone and
revering brutes, it is true they now call on the Almighty, but know
scarcely anything about Him, neither His Word nor His laws. Much of the
religion of the _fellah_ consists in prostrations, and his _spontaneous_
prayers are usually invocations to dead men, as we see with Nile boatmen
and other labourers; when in a fatiguing work, they call on the 'Lord
Hosseen or Zeid,' &c. to 'stretch out a hand and help.' Buffaloes and
sheep are frequently sacrified at the shrines of sheiks of reputed
sanctity, or at the mosque dedicated to Lady Zeynab. A pilgrimage to
Mecca and the performance of certain ceremonies there are supposed to
cleanse the pilgrim from sin. The Copts (who form the minority of the
population) have always preserved their veneration for Scripture, but
neglected it, and were extremely ignorant, till in some degree aroused
by the efforts of missionaries to seek more after education, and to read
more of the Word of God." She proceeds thus to describe the work among
these people: "On our yearly Nile excursion we had great cause for
encouragement, both among the Copts and the far more numerous Moslems.
The coast of the river is dotted with numbers of villages--some almost
large enough to be considered towns, boasting a few houses with windows,
a mosque, and a small primitive school; others are mere hamlets,
consisting of mud huts crowded closely together, and built in and out of
the palm-trees. We brought to several of these places both medicine for
the sick and books for those who desired them, and were heartily
welcomed as the peasants' friends; indeed every year the welcome grows
warmer. Dr. Azury, the skilful medical man of the Mission, has always
numerous patients; and after their bodily ailments have been attended
to, they and their friends and neighbours assemble on the shore to hear
him read from the Bible. Mrs. Shakoor and myself are at the same time
occupied in visiting the poor women in their homes or in reading and
speaking to troops of both men and women in the open air. When we are
going to leave, the boat is besieged by men and lads asking for Bibles
or portions of Scripture, which are given to those only who can read.
The last sight as we sail away is often that of a circle gathered round
one who reads aloud to those who cannot read for themselves." [1]

[Footnote 1: _Report of the English-Egyptian Mission_ for 1887.]


V.

PROGRESS OF THE SCHOOLS.

The boys' school, which had begun with a few ragged Moslem children in a
room which was little better than a stable, increased rapidly. In 1870
the pupils numbered one hundred and sixty in daily attendance. About
half were Moslems, the rest Copts and Syrians, with one or two little
negro slaves or bronzed Nubians. Many were very poor, but some belonged
to the middle classes, and there were even a few from wealthy families,
who would ride to school on donkeys from distant quarters of the town.
The two brothers Shakoor devoted much of their time to the
superintendence of the school, and taught all the higher branches, being
assisted in writing, spelling, &c., by several native teachers. The
girls' school advanced less rapidly, because of the early marriages,
which usually withdrew the pupils about the age of twelve, and because
girls were more wanted at home than boys. In 1870 there were about a
hundred names on the roll, with an average attendance of seventy
or eighty.

It was long Miss Whately's desire to acquire a piece of land on which to
build suitable school premises. Her desire was gratified when in 1869
the Khedive, Ismail Pasha, at the kind suggestion of the Prince of
Wales, made her a grant of the freehold of nearly an acre of land, just
outside the old wall of Cairo, the only condition being that the
building erected on it should have a handsome front, as it would face a
main road. Considerable delay was experienced in getting the necessary
papers for making the possession secure, and it was not till 1871 that
the building was erected. Mansoor Shakoor, who had considerable
knowledge of architecture, designed it, and superintended all the
details of its erection. By its side, and separated from it only by a
garden, Miss Whately put up a house for herself, that she might be
always close to her work. About one fourth of the cost was contributed
by those who in Cairo and in England took an interest in the work of the
school, but Miss Whately herself contributed the remainder of the
outlay, amounting to about four thousand pounds.[1]

[Footnote: 1 Letter from Mary L. Whately, _The Christian_, June 15,
1882.]

In consequence of the extension of the work, and because this large
outlay had seriously diminished her resources, Miss Whately depended
largely on the gifts of others for means to carry on her work. After the
addition of a medical mission in 1879, the expenses of the work amounted
to some £1200 or £1300 a year, a sum which, of course, it was quite out
of her power personally to provide. £200 of this was derived from an
annual grant from the Egyptian, Government, and about £150 from paying
pupils, while occasionally grants were received from several English
societies. The new schools soon became one of the "sights" of Cairo, and
the English and American tourists who visited them contributed
considerably to the funds, while the rest of the money required was
collected in England, mainly through the efforts of members of Miss
Whately's family and the honorary secretary of her English committee.
But the difficulty of securing sufficient funds to carry on her work
efficiently was always one of Mary Whately's chief burdens, and she was
often obliged to make up deficiencies herself. During her occasional
visits to England, which latterly occurred only once in two or three
years, she was largely occupied in addressing public and drawing-room
meetings on behalf of her work.

But to return. The new school buildings were opened in January 1872.
"All the friends and acquaintances who took any interest in education,
whether natives or Europeans, were invited to be present. The school
hall, a large and beautiful room, though very simple and without any
architectural ornaments, was adorned for the occasion with wreaths of
green leaves, berries, and flowers, such as an Egyptian winter offers in
abundance; and a table spread in an inner room with fruit and sweets to
regale the children, while coffee and sherbet were handed among the
visitors. Mr. Shakoor then spoke to the parents and friends of the
scholars, telling them how the building had been made for God's glory
and the good of the children in time and in eternity, and that with a
good secular education the knowledge of God's revealed Word in the Old
and New Testament was given to all of them." [1] Four months later
Mansoor Shakoor died, an irreparable loss to the mission, and four years
later his brother Yousif followed him.

[Footnote 1: _Life of Mansoor Shakoor,_ p. 98.]

From the opening of the new buildings the schools advanced rapidly. It
was soon found that the simple teaching of reading and writing to the
boys would not attract scholars, but to secure the advantage of
instruction in English and French, geography, history, and accounts,
many parents would send their boys, who were thus brought under
Christian influence. The extent to which this prevailed may be judged
from the testimony of the schoolmaster, that "of the boys brought up
under his tuition, not one had, so far as he could find, taken more than
one wife," which showed a great breaking away from the traditions of
Mohammedanism.[1]

[Footnote 1: _The Christian_, June 29, 1888.]

The girls received a simpler education, but with both boys and girls the
daily reading and explanation of the Scriptures in Arabic held a
prominent position, the Bible being the principal reading book in use.
"Nor is the teaching of those things that concern salvation confined
strictly to the time spent in reading Scripture. A few questions, or a
remark in the course of a secular lesson, often shows them what is the
most important of all matters in our minds. Nothing positively
controversial is taught; that is to say, no contemptuous expressions
about the religion of any of the children are allowed, and the plainest
truths of the Gospel specially set forward; but occasionally something
comes into the lesson which shows to an intelligent learner the vanity
of the superstitions around them." [1]

[Footnote 1: _Among the Huts_, p. 116.]

The policy of employing Egyptians or Syrians as teachers was frequently
challenged by people in England, and vigorously defended by Miss
Whately. "The schools are under my personal superintendence," she wrote
in 1885, "receiving not only daily supervision, but examination from me,
and I never gave up the teaching of any part of Scripture into other
hands, until I had truly converted as well as educated teachers as
assistants." [1]

[Footnote 1:_The Times_, Aug. 15, 1885.]

In 1879 pupils had to be refused for want of room, and from that time
till her death the scholars numbered nearly seven hundred.

The period of the Arabi rebellion in 1882 was a severe testing time.
Though deliverance came at the eleventh hour, and Cairo was spared, "the
inhabitants," writes Miss Whately in her report for that year, "lived
for months in a sickening anxiety which can hardly be realized by those
who only know the general facts from the papers." Not only Jews and
Christians, but Moslems who remained faithful to the Khedive were
threatened with torture and death. Miss Whately stayed at her post long
after nearly all the Europeans had fled, and only left when the English
Consul informed her that he would be no longer responsible for her
safety. "The superintendent of the Mission Boys' School remained in
Cairo at great personal risk, to keep things together as much as
possible. The schools were not closed till the bombardment of
Alexandria, when the excited mobs in the streets made it unfit for
children to be abroad, and it soon afterwards was necessary to take away
the board with the notice of the 'British Schools,' &c." The school
buildings were used as a refuge for the homeless and persecuted, both
foreigners and Egyptians. A list of buildings doomed to pillage included
the Mission House. "The second day after the entrance of the victorious
army, the superintendent opened the school. The pupils flocked back by
degrees. At first some of the children of _Arabists_ hung back, but
began to follow the rest after a time." Miss Whately had the joy of
knowing that in the time of extremest danger many young Coptic girls,
formerly her pupils, when urged to pretend to turn Moslems to save their
lives, had replied, "No! if we die, we die in the faith of the
Messiah." [1]

[Footnote 1:_Report of English Egyptian Mission for_ 1882.]

Yet the same year a night school for youths of the better classes was
established. Several years previously Miss E.J. Whately had founded in
connection with the school a branch for the education of the children of
European parents in Cairo. After the rebellion these were much less
numerous, and the branch, henceforth known as the Levantine School, was
chiefly attended by Jewesses, Armenians, Syrians, and others of Eastern
race, who paid for the education they received. Among them it did good
service. Subsequently small branch mission schools were established in
Gizeh and other places.


VI.

THE MEDICAL MISSION.

Sympathy with the sick poor around her for whom no medical aid was
available, early led Mary Whately to dispense simple remedies and
especially to distribute medicine to relieve the terribly prevalent
ophthalmia. In this she attained considerable skill, and though her
nerves were more susceptible than others often thought, she bore bravely
the contact with dirt and the sight of suffering which these labours
entailed. "She loved to relate," says her sister, "what affectionate
gratitude was called out by these acts. The Egyptians are very sensible
to kindness, and she never forgot how a poor mason, whose hand, injured
by the fall of some part of a wall, she had daily dressed, afterwards
recognising her as he passed by her garden railing, saluted her with the
words, 'May Allah ever hold your hand, O lady!' This kindness it was
that won her a way among the poor of the city. In lanes and streets
where she had been met by pelting with dust and cries of 'Cursed
Nazarene!' she was now met by the salutation, 'Blessed be thy hands and
feet, O lady!' or similar words of welcome. 'Sitt Mariam' (literally
Lady Mary) became a household word in many mouths." [1]

[Footnote 1: _Life of Mary L. Whately_, p. 62.]

Miss Whately perceived that medical mission work--of which none whatever
had been attempted in Cairo--would form an excellent introduction to
Christian work among the adult population. In 1878 therefore she engaged
Dr. Azury, a skilful Syrian doctor, who had been trained in the American
Medical College at Beyrout, and who had lately married Mrs. Shakoor's
sister. Almost before the necessary premises could be secured numerous
sufferers applied for treatment. At first a small wooden room was built
by Miss Whately on her premises as a waiting room for the patients and
dispensary for the doctor; and during the first three years over four
thousand patients were cured or relieved, and many operations performed,
some of which restored sight to the blind. In 1881 a suitable building
for this branch of the Mission was erected, containing two airy waiting
rooms, one for women and children and the other for men, a consulting
room in which the doctor saw his patients, and two separate rooms, each
containing a bed or two for the reception of cases that needed constant
care. In the waiting rooms Mary Whately might be found almost any
morning reading the Bible and talking to the patients waiting their
turn to see the doctor. No compulsion was used, but an attentive hearing
was usually obtained, while a psalm or some story from the New Testament
was read and explained. As the same people would often come every day or
two for several weeks, something like continuous teaching could be
given. In this work Mary Whately greatly delighted. In any difficult
case, says a friend (_Sunday at Home_, 1889, p. 406), "'Sitt Mariam'
would take her place in the surgery, ready with a kind word and
practical assistance." An instance of the good done by the mission is
given by the same writer. "A young woman came one day weeping bitterly;
she was one of the wives of a sheik of a village some miles away, and
she was almost blind. Her husband had told her that she was no longer of
use to him, and he should divorce her. She was in a pitiable state of
distress. The doctor, by God's help, was able to cure the poor young
wife completely. She returned to her village in deepest thankfulness,
and was taken back into favour by her lord and master. Some time
afterwards she returned again, this time bringing a tall turbaned man
with her, who proved to be her husband; he was the sufferer this time,
and the good and forgiving wife had persuaded him to come and see the
doctor to whom she owed so much. After some time the man was cured, and
during his bodily treatment we may be sure that his soul was not
forgotten. He showed his gratitude by sending many from his village to
the Medical Mission; so that the seed was sown broadcast."


VII.

LITERARY EFFORTS.

Mary Whately, though she belonged to a book-writing family, aspired to
no literary fame. Her ten books were all the outcome of her work in
Egypt, and were written to awaken interest in it, and in some cases to
secure funds for it. She was, as a girl, the "story-teller" of the
family, and among her companions secured a reputation for her powers of
narration. This gift she turned to good account.

"It was at her father's suggestion and by his advice that her first
book, _Ragged Life in Egypt_, was published. A friend staying in the
house had been reading to him a series of letters Mary had written her,
describing her first settlement for the winter in Cairo, the
commencement of her school, her visits among the poor, etc. He listened
with much pleasure and attention, and on his daughter entering the room
a few minutes afterwards, he said, 'Mary, you ought to publish these
papers!' Her first answer was, 'Oh! people are tired of Egypt! they have
had so many books of travels there and so many details!' 'Yes,' he
rejoined, 'but yours will be new; you have reached a stratum lower than
any foreign visitor has yet done.' This determined her to publish; and
the book was finished and brought out immediately. In 1863 the same
friend read to the Archbishop during his last illness the manuscript of
the second part, _More about Ragged Life in Egypt_. On the morning on
which the reading was finished, he took his gold pen from his pocket,
and giving it to her said, 'I shall never use this again, Mary; take it,
and go on.'" [1]

[Footnote 1: _Life of Mary L. Whately_, pp. 55-57.]

In 1871 she published a further account of Egyptian life and of her
mission work, under the title, _Among the Huts in Egypt_. Meanwhile in
1867 she had contributed to the _Leisure Hour_, and afterwards issued as
a volume, _The Story of a Diamond_. Another story, _Lost in Egypt_, was
written in 1881. In 1873 Miss Whately published a biography of Mansoor
Shakoor, and in 1881 she wrote _Letters from Egypt for Plain Folks at
Home_. In 1878 she published a story called _Unequally Yoked_,
illustrating the miserable lives of English women who have been
persuaded to marry Mohammedans, and in 1872 she wrote _A Glimpse Behind
the Curtain_, a story of life in the harems of Cairo. Her last book
appeared in 1888 with the title, _Peasant Life on the Nile_. With
changed names and in a slightly veiled form, it recounts the history of
some who received spiritual blessing through her mission work. All her
books are written in a simple unaffected style, and reveal an unrivalled
acquaintance with Oriental character and the Egyptian mode of life. Most
of them are illustrated by engravings from her own sketches.


VIII.

RESULTS.

Writing in 1861 Miss Whately said, "The reaping time is not yet." [1] Ten
years later she writes: "It is a missionary's duty to sow beside all
waters, and to lose _no_ opportunity, even if his chance of doing good
be but small. The sower of the seed has need of much patience; and
though he need not actually be _expecting_ and looking for
disappointment, as that would paralyse his efforts for good, he must yet
be prepared for it." [2] In this spirit of patience and perseverance Mary
Whately carried on her work, and though her work was largely pioneering,
she was not without encouragement. Her hand was the first to begin to
break down the wall of ignorance, prejudice, and bigotry which had for
centuries shut in the people of Egypt. She convinced thousands that the
Christian book is a good book, and Christian men and women good people,
despite the evidence to the contrary of so many in Egypt who bear the
Christian name but do not live the Christian life. The sentiments of the
people are leavened by thousands among them who in youth passed through
her schools, and there acquired an acquaintance with Scripture truth.
"Youths employed under Government, on the railways or in mercantile
houses, who have received with the secular education which has secured
their positions, a thorough knowledge of the Bible as its condition,
continually greet her after they have quite outgrown her
recollection." [3] The teachers in later years were chiefly composed of
those who had been pupils in the schools, and of whose conversion she
had no doubt. Thousands of poor sufferers were relieved by the Medical
Mission, thousands of homes made happier by the visits of herself and
her assistants. Many of the Scriptures distributed on her Nile journeys
were kept and read, and found afterwards in most unlikely places.

[Footnote 1: _More about Ragged Life_, p. 199.] [Footnote 2: _Among the
Huts_, p. 151.] [Footnote 3: _Lost in Egypt_, preface.]

In 1870 Miss Whately was able to tell of the first of her scholars of
whose conversion she could feel sure. In 1878 she writes of two little
boys, pupils in her school, who read the Bible at home to their old
nurse, a slave woman, during the illness which terminated in her death.
So simply did she receive the truth, that she declined to see the Mollah
or reader of the Koran, saying, "No, no, I want no one but Him whom the
boys tell me about; the boys' Saviour is my Saviour." [1] In _Peasant
Life on the Nile_ Miss Whately gives several instances of Copts who
through her efforts refused to turn Moslems, and of others who became
Christians in deed and in truth.

[Footnote 1: _Letters from Egypt_, pp. 117, 118.]

Instances of blessing on the work of the Mission might be multiplied.
Nevertheless the difficulty of bringing a Mohammedan to an open avowal
of Christianity always remained extremely great. Converts to
Christianity always incurred the risk of secret poisoning. Yet in the
report for 1888, penned by Miss Whately only a few weeks before her
death, she says, "The seed sown in past years is evidently taking root;"
and the accounts for that year contain the significant entry, "Clothes
for poor convert on his baptism, £2." She also gratefully acknowledged
that the reading of the books of her lending-library, largely supplied
by the Religious Tract Society, had reached more Mohammedans than any
other Christian agency.


IX.

TWILIGHT.

Like the twilight in the land of her adoption, the twilight of Mary
Whately's life was very brief. Her sun went down while it was yet day.
Her last years were among her busiest. She would rise very early, often
watching from her balcony the dawn break, and then would take a ride in
the fresh morning air, or go out into her garden, for, as with her
father, gardening was her delight. After a simple breakfast she would be
usually found in the dispensary by nine o'clock, reading and talking to
the patients. When they had all been cared for, she would teach her
Scripture class in the Levantine school, and afterwards visit the other
schools, or attend to some of her domestic duties. After a short rest in
the heat of the day, the remainder of the afternoon would be occupied
with receiving or paying visits, and the short evening before retiring
early to rest, when free from various forms of mission work, with
painting or reading. When burdened with the difficulties of the work,
she would often exclaim, "Why tarry the wheels of His chariot?" and the
coming of the Lord was ever the object of her lively anticipation.

In the summer of 1888 she paid her last visit to England, taking also a
tour in Switzerland, which she greatly enjoyed. Early in the autumn she
returned to Cairo, where she was joined by her elder sister, who
frequently spent the winter with her. In February she made preparations
for her usual Nile trip. After the boat had been engaged and paid for,
she caught a cold, and was urged to defer the journey; but as this would
have caused extra expense, she declined. The excitement of the work,
which, on account of the doctor being unable through ill health to
accompany her, was unusually heavy, kept her up for the time, but on her
return to Cairo she had to retire to bed. Bronchitis set in, and in a
few days the gravest was feared. A relapse discovered weakness of the
heart, and on the morning of Saturday, March 9, 1889, her spirit fled.
Then was there, as of old, "a grievous mourning" among "the Egyptians."
No need was there to employ professional mourners to make a wailing; the
teachers and scholars, and the hundreds of poor men and women who had
learned to love her, wept aloud for her. Her body was laid to rest in
the English cemetery in Cairo, but she herself rested from her labours
among those of whom she wrote:--

     "Oh! they've reached the sunny shore
          Over there;
      They will never hunger more;
      All their pain and grief is o'er;
          Over there.

      Oh! they've done the weary fight
          Over there;
      Jesus saved them by His might;
      And they walk with Him in white;
          Over there."

      W.R. Bowman


AGNES JONES[1]

[Footnote 1: The extracts are made, by kind permission of Messrs.
Nisbet & Co., from _Agnes Jones_, by her sister.]


CHAPTER I.

YOUTHFUL DAYS.

A chance visitor to the Liverpool Workhouse on Brownlow Hill might be
lost in wonder at its vastness, as he looked at its streets of large
buildings and was told of its more than four thousand inhabitants. He
would scarcely imagine that those bare-looking groups of buildings
possess an historic interest. Yet to the Christian philanthropist it is
holy ground, for there, in willing sacrifice for others, were spent the
last years of the life of that saintly woman who gave the death-blow to
the old system of pauper nursing and all its attendant evils. But we are
looking at the stream as it enters the limitless ocean of eternity. We
can do that again by-and-by. Let us turn now rather to the beginning of
that stream of life and trace it onwards.

Agnes Elizabeth Jones was born at Cambridge on the 10th of November,
1832, the 12th Regiment, of which her father was the lieutenant-colonel,
having arrived there only a few days before.

When Agnes was about five years of age, her father's regiment, which had
previously been quartered at Cork, was ordered to Mauritius. The
wonderfully varied and beautiful scenery of this little island--a tiny
gem set in the heart of the Indian Ocean--with its curiously shaped
mountains, and tropical trees and plants, made a wonderful impression on
the mind of the child, and although she was only eleven years old when
she left, she always cherished the memory of it.

But it was not only that her mind was roused to a keen appreciation of
the beauties around her during her residence in Mauritius. The higher
part of her nature, chiefly through the faithful teaching of one of the
French pastors on the island, was also touched, and in the young heart
there arose the longing to be safely folded in the arms of the Good
Shepherd. A sentence in one of his sermons haunted her night and
day:--"And now, brethren, if you cannot answer me, how will you at the
last day answer the Great Searcher of hearts?" An arrow shot at a
venture, it pierced her heart, and although she did not yet yield
herself fully to God, she never entirely lost the desire to be His, even
when apparently outwardly indifferent. We may well thank God for His
servant's earnest ministry, for had he been less faithful, the whole
course of that life, which was to prove so valuable in the service of
the Lord, might have been changed.

From Madagascar, five hundred and fifty miles from Mauritius, yet its
next-door neighbour westwards in the silver sea, there came, when Agnes
was yet but seven years old, the tidings of a fearful persecution of the
Christians. The letters received at that time told of indescribably
dreadful sufferings for Christ's sake, and the sight of the Malagasy
refugees who fled to Mauritius, fired her young soul with the desire to
become a missionary. This desire, however, in her exceeding reserve, she
kept to herself. God had other purposes for her, and it was amongst her
own country people, and not in the foreign field, that He called her
to labour.

After the return of her parents from Mauritius, the greater part of four
years was spent in a beautiful spot at the foot of the hills of the
Donegal Highlands on the banks of Lough Swilly, one of the loveliest of
the Irish lakes. This period is spoken of by her sister as one in which
she appeared utterly indifferent to spiritual things, yet some entries
in her journal indicate an intense longing after a higher life. They
certainly show that she knew the sinfulness of her own heart and the
weakness of her resolutions, and that, in common with so many reserved
natures, while hiding the true state of her feelings from others, she
was much given to introspection and inclined to magnify her faults. Such
reserved natures do not "wear their heart on their sleeve," and it
should be a comfort to parents and teachers who are anxiously watching
children to know that "things are not always what they seem," and that
many a child who seems altogether careless is in reality not far from
the kingdom.

In January, 1848, when a little over fifteen, she was sent to school at
Stratford-on-Avon, and remained there until her father's death in 1850.
The good discipline of this school and the wise guidance of her teachers
had a most wholesome effect on the development of her character, and the
steady, indomitable perseverance in the face of difficulties which so
marked her after-life distinguished her then. By her painstaking and
close attention she made up for her want of quickness in learning. Hence
she never forgot what she had once learned.

The actual time of her conversion seems to have been during the period
that she resided with her mother and sister in Dublin. To the earnest
man of God whose ministry they attended, the preparation of the younger
members of his flock for admission to the Lord's Supper was no
perfunctory task. He introduced her, with others of his candidates, to
one of his helpers as "anxious inquirers." So shy and reserved was Agnes
that she said but little, yet this lady remarked of her:--"In the class
her intense appetite for the living bread was so apparent, that I often
felt myself speaking to her only, her calm gentle eyes fixed on me, as
God helped me to speak."

It is impossible for those who have definitely accepted Christ's
salvation, and who truly realise His love to perishing sinners, to be
idlers in His vineyard. We are therefore not surprised to find her soon
at work, her own particular plot being in the ragged school. Her needy
little scholars were a great interest to her. She always showed the
greatest sympathy and devotion to them, and while caring for their souls
did not forget their bodily needs. Even when on a holiday she sought and
found work amongst the poor. Indeed, distress of any kind always
appealed to her heart.

There are some Christians who are very active in the outside world, but
who forget that the first duty of a child of God is to "show piety at
home." It was not so with Agnes Jones, for it was in the home that the
beauty of her life was most visible, and it was in the family circle
that the affection and unselfishness of her character shone most
conspicuously. Others, indeed, could plainly see the development of the
Christ-life in her, but she herself, dwelling as she did in the presence
of her Lord, was prone to judge herself harshly. Thus, with every moment
occupied, she charged herself with being lazy and negligent.

The first step towards the great work of her life was taken while on a
visit to the Continent in 1853. During the May meetings in Paris, there
was one held on behalf of the Oeuvre des Diaconesses, one of the
branches of the Institution at Kaiserswerth on the Rhine, founded by
Pastor Fliedner. This she attended, and was then first made acquainted
with that work, which became of great interest to her, an interest which
was much strengthened by a visit to Kaiserswerth itself about two months
later. "As we drove away," she writes, "my great wish was that this
might not be my last visit to Kaiserwerth.... That visit was, I believe,
a talent committed to our care; may it not be buried."

So full was she of the conviction that by seeing more of the work at
Kaiserswerth she would be the better fitted for her beloved work in
Ireland, that she proposed that she should go there for a week. To her
great joy her mother concurred in the proposal, and earnestly did Agnes
pray that this visit might be blessed and sanctified by God to
His glory.

She was charmed with all that she heard and saw at Kaiserswerth, with
the love which was so manifest in all, with the intensity of purpose,
the perfect obedience, the beautiful order, the incessant work without
fuss or bustle, and above all with the spirit of prayer, which pervaded
the whole institution. Her journals show how strong was her desire to
return there for training, for she believed that "as we use means to fit
us for any earthly profession, so are we bound to use every means which
will enable us to adorn our Christian profession." Her friends, however,
knew nothing of her wishes. They were told only in the ears of her God.


CHAPTER II.

AT WORK IN THE VINEYARD.

For some time after her return from the Continent, Agnes Jones resumed
her former work in Dublin, labouring more energetically than ever. In
1856, however, she and her mother returned to Fahan, the old home on the
shore of Lough Swilly, always a favourite spot with her, not only
because of the beauty of its scenery, but also because her beloved
father was there laid to rest.

To the Christian who is ever on the watch opportunities for service are
never lacking, and Agnes soon found her hands full. Did a child fall
into the fire--a very common accident in that district--she must be
fetched, for so gentle yet so firm was her touch in dressing wounds that
the fame of her skill had spread for miles, and she was sent for from
far and near, to Protestants and Roman Catholics alike. Was some one
dying, still it was she who must come to smooth the pillow and speak the
words of life.

The spiritual side of her work she never lost sight of, but made the
rest subservient to this, as a means to an end, always reading the Bible
if allowed, and following the reading by a simple but practical and
faithful explanation. She was indeed "instant in season" and out of
season. In all weathers she might be seen speeding along the lonely
mountain roads, setting off soon after breakfast, to be at work the
whole day, with the exception of the early dinner-time, and often not
returning until after dark. She was tempted, as every other worker is,
to relax her energies and to stay at home if the weather were bad, or if
she were not feeling well; but instead of yielding, she would, if a bad
headache came on, start off the earlier, that she might not lose the
chance of a visit through the pain increasing. Yet her duties at home
were never neglected. Rather than omit them, she would rise at five,
that she might anticipate the wants of others, and save her
mother trouble.

Agnes herself, in her intense humility, considered that she was an
unsuccessful worker, and was inclined to condemn herself for lack of
zeal and earnestness. But her work was a great joy to her, and
especially did she love her happy talks with some of the aged Christians
amongst the sixty families she regularly visited.

He is a rash soldier who ventures into the battle without a weapon tried
and proved, and he can only be an unsuccessful Christian worker who does
not make the Word of God the rule and guide of his life. To Agnes Jones
the Bible was a constant study. She was a most earnest student of God's
Word, and delighted to meditate upon it. In her journal she
writes:--"What should I be without my Bible?" And again, realising the
truth of the promise, "He that watereth shall be watered also himself,"
she says:--"God's Word often comes home more strongly to my own heart as
I read to the poor, and try to make a few simple remarks." Little wonder
is it that, knowing and loving His Word as she did, Christ was to her a
very personal Saviour and Friend. Her one longing was for more and more
likeness to Him.


CHAPTER III.

FOREIGN TRAINING.

However strong and good our wishes may be, it is never safe to force on
their accomplishment. They are never the losers who wait God's time, and
the wisest course of all is the one which Agnes Jones pursued, of
telling her wishes to God, and then, in perfect submission to His will,
leaving the issue with Him.

It was not until seven years after her visit to Kaiserswerth that the
way was made open for her to return there. This step had been suggested
by her mother five years previously, but the filial spirit was so strong
in her that, although she eagerly desired a more thorough training for
God's service, she felt that her mother stood first, and refused to
leave her alone. Now the case was different, and she gladly seized the
opportunity. Still she was nervously fearful lest after all she should
not be following the guiding pillar.

It was in the autumn of 1860 that she arrived at Kaiserswerth, where she
immediately entered heartily into the work. Her intention was to stay
for only a month, or at the most six weeks; but after she had been there
but a short time, the pastor so strongly represented the great advantage
it would be to her to spend the whole winter in the institution, that
she felt constrained to write for her mother's permission to do so. As
ever, she was full of prayer for God's guidance, and that whatever was
done might be only for His glory. Her mother leaving the choice entirely
with her, she decided to remain, believing that the training would be
of inestimable use to her in her future work.

The Deaconesses' Institution at Kaiserswerth had a very small beginning.
Pastor Fliedner, having heard of Mrs. Fry's work amongst female
prisoners, was filled with longing to follow her example, and received
two discharged prisoners, whose friends had refused them, with the
object of giving them the chance of retrieving their character. He set
them to work under the personal supervision of himself and his wife. The
work soon increased, and assistance was needed. To the penitentiary were
added an orphanage, a training-school, a hospital, and a lunatic asylum.
More and more workers were drawn in, and at the time of Agnes Jones's
first visit there were fifteen branches of the institution in different
parts of the world. This number by the time of her second visit had
increased to fifty.

The deaconesses as novices passed through every department of the work,
and received a thorough training in both nursing and household work, the
pastor wisely considering that if, when in visiting the poor, they could
render them practical help, their words would prove far more effective.
Much was made of Bible study, both public and private, and this, as well
as the _Stille Stunde_ (quiet hour), a half-hour daily set apart for
prayer and meditation, could not but tend to give a spiritual tone to
the whole work. Agnes revelled in all this, and found great happiness in
the daily routine, in spite of much which was, perhaps, somewhat
needless drudgery, such as sweeping and dusting her room, washing up
after meals, and even black-leading stoves. She had, however, well
learned the lesson that no action can be mean to the Christian if it
come in the way of duty. Sometimes, indeed, it seemed a waste of
strength to spend so much of the day in manual work, especially work
which so injured her hands that for some time she was obliged to keep
them poulticed, and was thus unable to assist in the hospital. Still she
was, as she said herself, "as happy as the day is long, and it does not
seem half long enough," in spite of a longing sometimes "for home sights
and voices."

Soon after her arrival at Kaiserswerth, fourteen sick boys were given
into her care for twelve hours a day. This was no easy task,
particularly when she was left in sole charge of them, some being too
far recovered to lie in bed, and needing to be kept at lessons or work.
As the weeks rolled by, her work was changed, and in addition to other
employment, she instructed a number of classes in English, both in the
training-school and among the deaconesses. As for herself, she was daily
becoming more proficient in German, and in a very short time was able
easily to follow the sermon. This was a great enjoyment to her, as she
much valued the truly evangelical teaching at Kaiserswerth.

At the end of three months of steady work, she spent a few days with an
uncle and aunt who were staying at Bonn, but the gay boarding-house life
contrasted so unfavourably with the happy Christian fellowship at
Kaiserswerth, that she was thankful to return to her duties, playfully
writing:--"The nun will not soon again leave her cell, for it was with
very nun-like feelings she met the world again." Yet she was no
misanthrope. She did not bring to God a heart which had tried earth's
pleasures and had found them wanting, nor a life jaded with pursuing
them. From the first, she had cast aside the love of worldly things, and
had chosen to be wholly the Lord's.

During the latter part of her stay at Kaiserswerth, her duties lay
entirely in the hospital. In January she wrote:--"My duties are in the
children's hospital, all ages from two to twelve. It is a new life for
me in a nursery of sick children, and a busy one too, for every moment
they want something done for them."

A month or so later she was appointed superintendent of the boys'
hospital, a post of peculiar responsibility and difficulty. It was one,
too, from which she shrank, holding the mistaken idea that she possessed
no powers of government. Certainly it was a position to tax the
patience, for the children were not too ill to be noisy and disobedient,
or even sometimes to unite in open rebellion, while the task was not
rendered easier by the necessity of speaking in a foreign tongue.

Altogether she had a very busy life. She rose at 5.O A.M. every day, and
kept hard at work, with the exception of the intervals for meals and the
_Stille Stunde_ (quiet hour), until night. "The cleaning and keeping my
dominion in order is such a business," she writes. "Sweeping and washing
the floor of the three rooms every morning, two stoves which must be
black-leaded weekly, each taking an hour, weekly cleaning of windows,
tins, dinner-chests, washing-up of bandages, &c., besides the washing-up
after each of our five meals, keeps one busy." She must have been strong
in those days, for she wrote:--"I come over from the other house every
morning at six, the ground white and windows frozen over; often at three
in the afternoon the water outside is still frozen, yet night or morning
I never put on bonnet or handkerchief, unless when I go out for a walk."

From the first the hospital patients with their varied needs were a
great interest to her. Now it is a dying man, beside whom she has to
watch, longing to minister words of comfort, yet unable to do so,
fearing that her then want of fluency in the language might trouble him
in his weakness. Yet as she heard the poor man's cry, "Lieber Heiland,
hilf mir" (Dear Saviour, help me), her prayers, too, rose for him to the
compassionate Saviour. Now it is a little boy with a bad back, terrible
sores, and a racking cough, who would let no one else touch him. "Every
night," she says, "I used to pray with Otto after they were all in bed,
and he used to put his poor little arm round my neck as I knelt beside
him; but last night (the night before he died) he said of himself, 'I
will only now pray that Jesus may take me to heaven, and that I may soon
die,' and as I had put my face near him to hear, he said, 'Lay your
cheek on mine, it does me so much good.'"

We have seen quite enough of Agnes Jones by this time to know that she
never shrank from a duty, however repulsive. Her love for her Master,
and her desire to serve others for His sake, preserved her from any
fastidiousness. In spite of her sensitive and sympathetic nature she
could bear to witness the most painful operations without flinching, for
she kept before her mind the ultimate good which would accrue from the
present suffering.

One day news reached Kaiserswerth of the deplorable condition of one of
the English hospitals in Syria. Sick and well, it was stated, were
crowded together in a place where rubbish of every kind was thrown, an
insanitary condition anywhere, but especially so in an Eastern climate.
Helpers, they said, were much needed. Agnes longed to step into the
breach, and in a letter to her mother she says:--"The English send
plenty of money, but hands are wanting. It is no new thought with me
that mine are strong and willing; I would gladly offer them. Could my
own mother bear to think of her child for the next few months as in
Syria instead of Germany? It is but temporary, and yet an urgent case.
My favourite motto came last Sunday, 'The Lord hath need;' if He has
need of my mother's permission to her child He will enable her to give
it. This is but the expression of a wish, and if my own mother were to
be made too anxious by the granting it, let it be as if unasked by her
own Agnes."

Her standard of filial obedience was indeed a high one, though no higher
than the standard of God's Word. Before this, in asking permission to
remain longer at Kaiserswerth, she had written to her mother:--"Your
wishes shall be my guide, now and for the future, as long as I am
blessed with such a loving counsellor. I trust my present training in
obedience will not be lost in reference to home."

Although she thought the whole training at Kaiserswerth invaluable she
wrote long after:--"I believe all I owe to Kaiserswerth was comprised in
the lesson of unquestioning obedience." Those who would rule must first
learn to obey, and certain it is that she would never have been fitted
to be afterwards the head of a large institution hundreds to care for
and govern, had she not so truly imbibed the spirit of obedience.

While she had a profound admiration for Kaiserswerth, she could still
see that the life of a deaconess, shielded though it is from the world,
is not exempt from danger. Some fancy that the life of a deaconess, or
of any one similarly set apart, must be much more free from temptation
than that of any ordinary person. "I think," she wrote, "every one is as
much called on as a deaconess is to work for Him who first loved us; but
if this does not constrain us as Christians, neither will it as
deaconesses, and certainly the 'Anstalt' (Institution) is a world in
which the Martha-spirit may be found as well as in the outer world.
There are many most deeply taught Christians here, many whose faces
shine, but I should say, comparing my home life (but few have such a
home) with that of the deaconesses here, I should say that, in many
positions here, there are more, not only daily but hourly temptations."

The fact that nursing was her vocation had for a long time been dawning
on her mind, but the way to go to Syria did not seem open, and the Lord
had other work for her. Almost by the same post there arrived two
letters, one from Mrs. Ranyard, so well known as the originator of the
London Bible Mission, suggesting that she should go and help her in the
great work of superintending and training the Bible women, the other
from a philanthropic gentleman, unfolding a plan for a proposed nurses'
home in connection with an infirmary, and asking if she, after a few
months' special training, would become its superintendent. Thus, while
one door was shut, two others unexpectedly opened to her.

But which should she enter? This was the question which she prayerfully
debated. She wished to lay out her life to the best interest for God,
and both schemes had special attractiveness to her; the one, because of
its intensely spiritual work; the other, because of her love for
nursing, and the boundless possibilities for good there might be in
training nurses. She feared, however, that as superintendent of the
nurses' home she might be fettered in more definite Christian work. She
felt she must be left in no uncertainty on this point. In her letter
replying to the gentleman who had written to her, she said:--"You sent
me the ground plan of the building, but I would ask, is its foundation
and corner stone to be Christ and Him crucified, the only Saviour? Is
the Christian training of the nurses to be the primary, and hospital
skill the secondary object? I ask not that all should be of one
Christian denomination, but what I do ask is that Jesus, the God-man,
and His finished work of salvation for all who believe on Him, should be
the basis, and the Bible the book of the institution. If this be your
end and aim, then will I gladly pass through any course of training to
be fitted to help in your work."

Soon after writing this letter she bade farewell to Kaiserswerth. Her
plan was to go first to London to consult with Miss Nightingale and
other friends as to her future. The seven months in Germany had been
most happy ones, and she was ever thankful for the time she had spent
there. She fully saw the great need of Christian training institutions.
In those days the Evangelical Protestant churches, unlike the Romanists,
who for many centuries had largely availed themselves of it, were not
alive to the importance of the ministry of women. There were no
institutions in England where Christian women could be trained to work
for Christ, that work of all others the most important, and some, to
secure the training they longed for, and could not get elsewhere, had
even entered Roman Catholic sisterhoods. Times are changed now, thank
God, and although there is still the need of more, there are many
institutions where Christian women can be thoroughly and efficiently
trained for service of different kinds at home and abroad.


CHAPTER IV.

IN LONDON SLUMS.

As we have already seen, Agnes Jones distrusted her power to rule. This
fact, added to her mother's dislike to her entering a hospital
determined her, for the present at least, to join Mrs. Ranyard in the
work of the Bible Mission, for she knew that while she would be
relieving her friend of some of the burden of her work she would have
ample opportunities of discovering whether she were fitted to govern.

She was soon busy in many ways, in mothers' meetings, Bible classes,
industrial kitchens, dormitories, refuges, and in visiting with the
Bible women. In every department of that varied work she was most
helpful to Mrs. Ranyard, even taking the whole charge of the mission for
two months while the latter was absent in Switzerland. She found her
knowledge of German very useful, and turned it to the best account on
several occasions when she met with German immigrants.

In the narrow courts and lanes of London, unthought of and unheeded by
the busy throng, she found many of the Lord's jewels who, though poor in
this world's goods and sick in body, were yet rich in faith and strong
in soul. One of these, a woman who for thirty-two years had been a
terrible sufferer, would whisper, "Blessed Jesus, in everything
suitable. Just the Saviour suitable for me." Another, whom she several
times mentions in her letters, and to whom she delighted to minister as
a nurse, a poor cripple who had only the use of her thumb, and who from
lying eighteen years in one position had terrible bed-sores, could yet
say, "I am ashamed to talk of my suffering when I think of all Jesus
suffered for me."

[Illustration:]

Her happy work in London was brought to a premature conclusion by a
telegram announcing that her sister was ill of fever in Rome, followed
by another begging her to go to her at once. A journey thither was not
such an easy one then as it is now, but, after arranging all her work so
as to give Mrs. Ranyard as little trouble as possible, Agnes bravely
undertook it. A heavy storm was encountered at Marseilles, where she
embarked for Italy, and this delayed her arrival in Rome, so that on
reaching there she found her sister out of danger. A cousin, however,
who had formed one of the party, had fallen ill of the same fever, and
needed careful nursing, so that she found her hands full, and, as the
recovery of both invalids was slow, she determined to give up her London
work, and devote herself to them.

Some months were spent in Italy; but her strength, which had been
greatly tried by the work in London, again becoming enervated, and her
nursing duties being at an end, she proposed that she should go to
Switzerland and visit the deaconesses' institutions there. This plan she
carried out, and visited several of the Swiss institutions, which she
considered compared unfavourably with Kaiserswerth, both in organisation
and spiritual tone. She visited besides some of those in Germany, and at
Mannedorf had the joy of spending several days with that wonderful woman
of faith, Dorothea Trudel.

All her experience had now gone to prove that her special gift was
hospital work, and on rejoining her mother she definitely laid before
her her wish to devote herself to the work of nursing, and with her
consent entered into a correspondence with Miss Nightingale with the
idea of entering St. Thomas's Hospital as a Nightingale probationer.

It is very clear that all through her life she was satisfied to be doing
the "next thing," whatever that next thing should be which was pointed
out to her by the guiding of God's Holy Spirit. She never ran counter to
her mother's wishes, knowing that no blessing could be expected when the
command, "Honour thy father and thy mother," was not observed; but when
home no longer needed her, she was glad to enter the larger field to
which God had opened the way.


CHAPTER V.

HOSPITAL WARDS.

It has been said that "every woman is by nature more or less a nurse,"
but like most sayings it is by no means always true. Many who possess
the gentleness and sympathy which are so necessary in nursing the sick,
yet lack the ready nerve, deftness, and promptitude. Who has not beheld
the sad spectacle of women anxious to help, yet helpless because of
their ignorance and want of training? That will be a happy day when a
course of training in nursing, though it be but a short one, is
considered a necessary part of every woman's education. Miss Nightingale
truly says, "There is no such thing as amateur nursing ... Three-fourths
of the whole mischief in women's lives arises from their excepting
themselves from the rule of training considered needful for man."

Agnes Jones was a "born nurse;" but although she had had many
opportunities both at Fahan and at Kaiserswerth of developing her
talent, she would not attempt to teach others what she had not
thoroughly grasped herself. The post in Liverpool, of Superintendent of
the Training School of Nurses for the Poor, was still open to her and,
in spite of her fear that she lacked the capacity to govern, had many
attractions for her, and so she said, "I determined at least to try, to
come to St. Thomas's Hospital, and to see whether in so great a work as
that of training true-hearted, God-fearing nurses, there were not some
niche for me. If every one shrinks back because incompetent, who will
ever do anything? 'Lord, here am I, send me.'"

Let no one think that the resolve cost her nothing. As a matter of fact
it meant giving up a great deal, but to follow in the steps of Him who
freely gave up all for us, she cheerfully surrendered her lovely Irish
home for the dreary walls of a London hospital, where her companions
were, as a rule, neither Christians in the true sense of the word, nor
her equals in society. Yet who that knows the Lord Jesus as "a living
bright reality" can talk of sacrifice? To know the need of the Lord's
poor was sufficient for her, and she counted nothing too much to give up
joyfully for Him and His. Nor was this choice, which she felt to be a
life-choice, a thought but of yesterday. Not long after she went to
Kaiserswerth she had, as she herself writes, "much watching of a poor
dying man; sitting alone by him in that little room, day after day, it
went to my heart to hear some of his requests refused, and to see the
food given him, so unfitted to his state. And I sat there and thought,
'If these be the trials of the sick in an institution conducted on
Christian principles, oh, how must it be in those institutions in our
own land, where no true charity is in the hearts of most of the heads or
hands that work them!' and I then and there dedicated myself to do what
I could for Ireland, in its workhouses, infirmaries, and hospitals." She
felt too, that although she could do good service for her Lord in
ordinary Christian work, she could do still better if, possessing as she
did a God-given talent for nursing, she could, like her Master, both
speak a "word in season" and minister to the needs of the body.

So St. Thomas's was entered, entered with the hope and prayer that both
amongst nurses and patients God would use her. And use her He did, as He
does all who cry, "Lord, what wilt Thou have me do?" and then watch for
the opportunity to do it. It was not long before she sought and gained
permission to establish a Bible class for the other Nightingale nurses,
which proved a great blessing to several of them. In her ward, too, she
was often able to speak a word for Christ to the patients.

She was very happy in her busy life, writing, "I am so growingly happy
in it, and so fond of nay work." Of its importance she became more and
more convinced, and in a letter written from Barnet, where she was
spending a few happy days with her friends, Mr. and Mrs. Pennefather,
she says:--"_My work_, I more and more feel it, for the worst things
only make me realise how Christian and really good nurses are needed."

But it was to Ireland that her thoughts ever turned, and it was of work
in Ireland that she was thinking even while training in London For by
this very training she hoped to be the better fitted for work in her own
beloved country. "Ireland is ever my bourn," she wrote. And again:--"My
heart is ever in Ireland, where I hope ultimately to work."

After a year at St. Thomas's, and a short visit home, she returned to
London to take the superintendence of a small hospital in connection
with the Deaconesses' Institution in Burton Crescent. Here she had all
the nursing to do, as there were but few patients, and she had great joy
in ministering to them. "I trust," she writes in a letter to her aunt,
"I am gaining a quiet influence with my patients; they are my great
pleasure." And again: "I am very happy here among my patients, and often
feel God has sent me here; I have two revival patients; one had found
peace before she came, the other is seeking it, and to both I can talk.
Then I have a poor woman with cancer, who likes me to speak of Jesus,
whom I believe she truly loves; so you see I am not without work."

A short time at this hospital, and a few months as superintendent at the
Great Northern Hospital, ended her work in London. The work at the
latter tried her much both in body and mind, for not only did the whole
responsibility of it rest upon her shoulders, but owing to the
inexperience of her assistants, most of the nursing devolved on her as
well. One patient who was critically ill she was obliged for six weeks
to nurse entirely both by night and day. Nervous debility was the
natural consequence of such overwork, and a deafness from which she had
suffered at Kaiserswerth so much increased that the doctor ordered her
to rest. That was not immediately possible, as there was no one to take
her place, and when at last a successor had been found, and she was able
to return home, she was so weary both in body and mind that she failed
to find her usual delight in the loveliness of Fahan. A few weeks' stay,
however, in the bracing air near the Giant's Causeway restored her to
her wonted health.

The winter was passed at her home, resting quietly in preparation for
the work in Liverpool, of which the offer has been already mentioned. In
the spring of 1865 she left for ever the old familiar spot with its
beautiful hills and glens, and its cottages, to many of whose inmates
she had been the means of bringing comfort and peace; Liverpool, with
its needy poor and its many difficult problems, claiming her for the
last three years of her life.


CHAPTER VI.

AMONGST THE PAUPERS.

In the year 1698, William III. stated in a speech that:--"Workhouses,
under a prudent and good management, will answer all the ends of charity
to the poor, in regard to their souls and bodies; they may be made,
properly speaking, nurseries for religion, virtue, and industry." But
could the good king who anticipated so many advantages from workhouses
have only seen our poor law institutions a hundred and fifty or sixty
years later, he would have been pained to learn how far they had fallen
short of his sanguine expectations. The sick and helpless were entrusted
to the care of women who, being paupers themselves, and of a low class,
and being for the most part in the workhouse through loss of character,
were found to be almost incapable of training. Rough they were, and in
many cases brutal as well, while their roughness and brutality were
intensified by the free use of intoxicants. Their language was terrible,
and not only did they quarrel constantly amongst themselves, but fights
were of frequent occurrence.

To endure such treatment and to witness such scenes was the daily lot of
a sick pauper, who knew also that when dead he would have little better
than the burial of a dog, since it was the common custom in many
workhouses to bury corpses naked, with no covering but a few shavings
thrown over the body. Little wonder was it that the poor, when overtaken
by age or disease, shrank from the thought of entering a place which to
them seemed worse than a prison, choosing rather to die without
attention than to be treated in such a barbarous manner.

It seems strange that it was so long after a great reformation had been
wrought in the management of our prisons that any one was found to lift
up a voice in behalf of the much enduring inmates of our workhouses.
There seemed to be no one who could spare a thought for the thousands of
sick and poor in these institutions. But it was the old story of "out of
sight, out of mind," for if only the evil had been apparent our English
nation with its love of justice would have seen it righted long before.
Workhouses were to be found all over the land, yet the public seemed not
at all curious, much less interested, in the question whether they were
properly managed or not. The guardians were often ignorant men, and were
very slow to admit visitors, perhaps from a foreshadowing suspicion of
the exposure which was in store for them, and the consequent necessity
and expense of change, so that we need not wonder that the opposition
which was called forth when first the evils of the workhouse system were
exposed was tremendous, and that the task of awakening real interest
seemed well nigh hopeless.

In the Liverpool Workhouse the state of things was no worse than in many
others, and in many respects it was not so bad. There was a good
committee, and therefore there was nothing like the wholesale starvation
and cruelty which existed in too many other workhouses There was also
some measure of thoughtful care for the sick ones, for Agnes Jones in a
letter written after her first visit, says:--"There seemed care for the
patients too; a few plants and flowers, _Illustrated News_ pictures on
the walls, and a 'silent comforter' in each ward, not the utterly
desolate look one often meets in such places." Still, there were no
trained nurses, and it was impossible for any committee, however
zealous, to counteract all the evils of pauper nursing. The need for
reform was great, and happily for Liverpool and for the country at
large, there were not only eyes to see the need, but a mind which had
grasped the only solution of the difficulty, and a large and sympathetic
heart which prompted the hand to open wide the purse to accomplish it,
for Mr. William Rathbone, ever foremost in all schemes for ameliorating
the condition of the poor and needy, had long been alive to the
necessity of substituting for pauper nurses trained paid ones. He it was
who not only suggested the change, but offered himself to bear the whole
expense of the scheme for three years, feeling assured that by that time
the guardians would be so convinced of its practical good that they
would adopt it permanently.

Having obtained the committee's consent to the trial of his plan, Mr.
Rathbone offered the post of lady superintendent to Agnes Jones, then at
the Great Northern Hospital in London. After consultation with Miss
Nightingale and Mrs. Wardroper, the Lady Superintendent of St. Thomas's
Hospital, and receiving their approval and also the promise of twelve
Nightingale nurses from St. Thomas's for her staff, she accepted it.
Still there was a delay of some months, which was partly due to the
nurses' need of further training, and partly to the imperative necessity
that she should have entire rest in order to recruit the strength which
had been so sorely overtaxed at the Great Northern Hospital. She did not
therefore enter on her duties until March 31, 1865. Even then she began
her new and untried work in much trembling and with great distrust of
herself, though her trust in her Saviour never failed. "It often seems
strange," she wrote, "that I, who have so little self-reliance, and
would like every step directed, am obliged to take such an independent
position; and yet I have been so led that I could not help it, and I
only trust I may be more and more led to look to the guidance of the
ever-present and all-wise Heavenly Friend."

After her arrival she was still obliged to wait some weeks for the
advent of her staff, consisting of twelve Nightingale nurses and four
probationers. But although she was not yet in possession of the reins of
government, and so was debarred from doing anything in the way of
nursing, she was yet allowed free access to the wards, being only
prohibited to speak on religion to the Roman Catholic patients. So the
intervening time was not lost, for she found many opportunities of
bringing cheer and comfort to sad and weary hearts and of pointing lost
ones to the sinner's Saviour. Agnes Jones was not one of those who
are always

     "Seeking for some great thing to do,"

and ignoring the many small opportunities of service which lie ready to
hand. She was quite content, since the larger field was not yet open to
her, to occupy a smaller one. In a letter to her aunt she wrote very
characteristically:--"I am trying and succeeding more and more in fixing
my eyes on all the little things we shall be able to do. I believe in
this is our safety, doing the daily _littles_ as opportunity is given,
and leaving the issue with God. It is the _individual_ influence we
shall have, the individual relief and the individual help for mind and
body, that will be ours. If it is His will, He can make others see the
many littles as one great whole, or they may see nothing done, while we
have the comfort of the littles we know have been done."

The nurses and probationers arrived in the middle of May, and then work
began in good earnest. The post of lady superintendent was by no means a
sinecure. At 5.30 every morning she might have been seen unlocking the
doors for the kitchen-women. She was often round the wards at 6.0, and
all through the busy day until 11.0 at night she was kept fully
employed, giving out stores, superintending her nurses, presiding at
meals, and visiting patients, besides all the hundred-and-one duties and
calls which fall to one in the like position. Her unselfishness was as
conspicuous as ever, and she never thought of sparing herself in any
way, her joy being to make the lives of others bright and happy.

The patients were quick to discover the benefits of the new _régime_.
Instead of the old system of roughness and neglect, they found now a
very different order of things, as nurses, perfectly trained, with soft
voice and gentle footfall, passed from bed to bed, ministering to the
sick and dying. Interesting and helpful books for those who were well
enough to read found their way into the wards. Flowers--for Agnes
Jones, who loved intensely all God's works in Nature, had great faith in
the ministry of flowers--were there to give brightness in the midst of
depressing surroundings. Visits from friends were rendered more easy.
Christmas was made happy with special festivities. Indeed, she seemed
always to be planning something to cheer the sick under her care. She
very soon began Sunday evening Bible readings in the wards where there
were only Protestant patients. Many crowded in, even Romanists, whom she
was not allowed to invite, and listened with rapt attention, the
late-comers slipping off their shoes, lest they should disturb her.
After nearly two years' work, she commenced daily evening Bible
readings, having an attendance of from twenty to thirty, while on the
Sunday evening there were often more than a hundred.

It was no wonder that such devotion met with a ready response from the
sad and friendless, and that her loving sympathy evoked love from the
seemingly unloving.

Let us follow her as she passes through the wards. A thorough lady,
quiet and self-possessed, she commands respect from even the roughest,
and all look up with eager expectancy, hoping for just one word from
her. Here is an old man, whose brightening face shows how welcome are
her visits. As she stops we hear him murmur, "I never had a friend in
all my life till I came here. You are my only friend." Another, who is
drawing very near to the gates of death, taking her hand in his,
says:--"I want to take leave of you--I never told you before, but do you
remember speaking of the 'Gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord?' I got that gift then." And when she has gone, a poor
man may be heard saying to the nurse:--"The lady can never know what she
has done for me ... I think I am in heaven when she comes."

Her nurses were thoroughly one with her. How could they be otherwise
when she was so thoughtful and considerate for them? Before introducing
them to their wards, she commended them to God in prayer, asking His
blessing on them and their work. She had a Bible reading for them, but,
not content with speaking to them collectively, she would frequently
talk to them individually of the Saviour she so loved. Although she
never passed over their faults, they were sure of her ready sympathy in
their troubles, and as they poured them into her ear she would say,
"Have you told Jesus so?"

The success of the work was an astonishment to all. The patients could
at first scarcely understand why the nurses did not swear at them like
their former ones. The police wondered as they saw women able to deal
with those whom they had found utterly untameable; while the committee
were so pleased with the success of the experiment, that, a year before
the specified time, they decided permanently to adopt the system of
trained nurses.

But such work was not without its trials. During the first year there
was great difficulty with the ex-pauper women who were being trained,
many who seemed to be doing well returning to their drunken habits.
Dirt, disorder, insubordination, and grumbling had to be contended with.
The vilest sins were practised even by children, and so shameful was the
conduct of many of the inmates that Agnes Jones said, "I can only
compare it to Sodom, and wonder how God stays His hand from smiting."

The isolation from home and friends was a trial in itself, while her
anxiety about her work was so great that she scarcely allowed herself a
holiday. A further trouble was that from morning till night she was
never alone. It is small cause for wonder that with such a terrible
strain, overtaxed nerves and strength should result in depression, a
fact only revealed by her journals, for to others she was ever bright,
and it was often said of her, "She is like a sunbeam."

A life lived at high pressure cannot long continue without failing
partly or altogether, and the end came at last. In the beginning of 1868
there was much fever and sickness of various kinds, there being three
hundred patients above the normal number, while the nursing staff was
reduced by illness. A nurse, who had been ill with bronchitis, developed
symptoms of typhus, and Agnes Jones, fearing that her life might be
sacrified, were she removed to the fever wards, gave up her bedroom to
her, sleeping herself on the floor of her sitting-room. She was soon
attacked by the same disease. For a week she progressed very favourably.
Then dangerous symptoms showed themselves, and finally inflammation of
both lungs.

Many were the touching inquiries from the patients of "How is the lady?"
Nurses and friends watched anxiously the terrible progress of the
disease. Much prayer was made, but the Lord had need of His servant, who
had been so faithful to the trust committed to her here, for a more
perfect service; and at the age of thirty-five she passed away
peacefully into the brightness of His presence in the early morning of
February 19, 1868, the beginning to her of a glorious day which should
know no twilight gloom.

On the following Friday, when the coffin was carried into the hall, and
placed in its case ready for removal across the Irish Channel, the
landing and stairs were filled with patients who had crept there from
the wards to see the last of one who had brought so much happiness into
their wretched lives. And when she was carried to her last resting-place
in the picturesque churchyard of Fahan, within sound of the rippling
waters of Lough Swilly, she was followed, as was fitting, by nearly the
whole population, many of whom could thank God for blessing which she
had been the means of bringing to them.

Until the resurrection morning she might be hidden from the eyes of
those who loved her; but none who knew her could ever forget her. Hear
the testimony of one of the workhouse officials to the writer, more than
twenty-five years after, when the question, "Do you remember Miss
Jones?" was asked. "Remember her? I should think I do. I could never
forget her. She used to have a Bible class on Sunday afternoons and on a
week-day evening in that little vestry belonging to the church. She
began it for the nurses, but there were only about fifteen of them then,
and so she used to let us officers go as well if we liked. I used to
love it, for it was beautiful to see her sitting there so homely and
nice, and then she used to pray with us and expound the Scriptures. Oh,
it was a real help, I can tell you! But it was a wonder to me how she
lived those last few weeks of her life. You see the cholera broke out,
and there was a lot of fever besides, typhus and different sorts, and
she could never rest for looking after and caring for them all. Why,
I've seen her in those wards there myself between two and three o'clock
in the morning. Ah! she was a Christian, she was. Saint was the word for
her, for if ever there was a saint upon this earth, it was Miss Jones.
She seemed to me to live in heaven, and heaven was in her and about her
and all around her."

     "Only a tender love,
        Stilling the restless moan,
      Soothing the sufferer,
        Cheering the lone.

       *       *       *       *       *

      Only a woman's heart;
        Yet she forgot her care,
      Finding on every side
        Burdens to bear.

       *       *       *       *       *

      Humbly she walked with God,
        Listening to catch His voice,
      And 'twas His work for her,
        Not her own choice.

      And when that work was done,
        Life's quiet evening come,
      What then awaited her?
        Only a tomb?

      Nay, but a mansion fair
        Near to the great white throne,
      And the dear Master's word
        Saying, 'Well done.'"

      ELLEN L. COURTENAY.


ELIZABETH, DUCHESS OF GORDON.

I.

EARLY DAYS.

Just a hundred years ago there was born one who in a marked degree
endeavoured to do her duty in that state of life to which it had pleased
God to call her. That state of life was a very exalted one, with many
opportunities of doing good. The Duchess of Gordon had many talents
given to her for improvement, and she was not unmindful of the
stewardship with which she was entrusted. Her rank and wealth were held
as trusts for her Master's use.

Dr. Moody Stuart tells us in his interesting and graphic memoir of the
last Duchess of Gordon[1], from which the following incidents are taken
(by kind permission of both author and publishers), that Elizabeth
Brodie was born in London on the 20th of June, 1794. Her father was
Alexander Brodie, a younger son of Brodie of that ilk. Amongst her
ancestors there were many remarkable men, some remembered for their
faithful service of their heavenly as well as of their earthly King. The
memory of one has passed down to posterity in the phrase "the Good Lord
Brodie." His diaries reveal a life lived in great humility and special
nearness to his Lord. Those around him found in him not only a
benevolent neighbour but also a faithful instructor in the highest
learning. His delight was to visit the sick, and to declare the love of
Christ whenever he had the opportunity. He longed for his children to be
great in grace, rather than in worldly distinction. His wish for them is
expressed in the words he left on record, that he would not be detained
"one hour from glory, to see those come of him in chief honour and place
in the world."

[Footnote 1: _Life and Letters of Elizabeth, last Duchess of Gordon_, by
Rev. A. Moody Stuart, D.D. Messrs. J. Nisbet & Co., London.]

The mother of Elizabeth Brodie was a member of the family of Wemyss, a
granddaughter of the Earl of Wemyss. Her father had acquired a large
fortune in India, and returned home to the large estates in
Kincardineshire which he had purchased. The little girl had soon to
experience the greatest loss that can befall a child. When she was only
six years old her mother died, leaving her alone with her father. The
next two years were spent with maiden aunts at Elgin, where she enjoyed
a liberty which was bracing to both mind and body. School life began
early. When she was only eight years old, she was sent to a boarding
school in London, one special object being to eradicate the broad Scotch
from her lip and thought. At school she became a great favourite with
both teacher and companions, already exercising that power of winning
attachment which was a feature all through her life. At the same time
she is described as having "a very independent spirit." In matters
indifferent she was ever yielding in her disposition; but it was
impossible to move her from any principle she had deliberately adopted.
Courage was another characteristic that early manifested itself. Her
groom, who had served her forty years, delighted to recall instances of
her fearlessness. On one occasion, when her party were crossing the Spey
in a pony-chaise in a boat, the bridge having been carried down by the
floods, her companion asked, "Isn't this dangerous, duchess?" "I never
see danger," was the quiet reply.

When she was about sixteen Miss Brodie left school. The winters were now
spent in Bath, the summers in Scotland. She had launched into the
society of the world, and to a great extent she did as they did. One
reproof she received made a lasting impression. It was from the lips of
a little child who was exceedingly fond of her. Miss Brodie had joined
others in playing cards on the Sabbath. The next day, contrary to all
custom, the child kept away from her, and when asked to sit on her knee,
gave a flat refusal, adding the reason, "No, you are bad; you play cards
on Sunday." Her answer and resolution were ready: "I was wrong, I will
not do it again." And those who heard her and knew her character were
quite sure she would not do it again.


II.

MARCHIONESS OF HUNTLY.

Elizabeth Brodie was still very young when she entered upon the duties
and trials of married life. Between the house of Brodie and the house of
Gordon there had been a standing feud. About the middle of the
seventeenth century the youthful and impetuous Lord Lewis Gordon had
made a raid upon the property of the Laird of Brodie. He burned to the
ground the mansion and all that was connected with it, the family
escaping to the house of a cousin. This Lewis Gordon became third
Marquis of Huntly, and was the ancestor of one who made a better
conquest, the gallant Marquis of Huntly, who sought and won the hand of
Miss Brodie. They were married at Bath on the 11th of December, 1813.
The union thus formed was never afterwards regretted. When, fifteen
years later, he experienced great losses of property, his sorrow found
expression in these words, "All things are against me: I've been
unfortunate in everything, except a good wife." What that wife did for
him in spiritual as well as temporal comfort, the sequel will show.

The Marquis of Huntly was a thorough man of the world at the time of his
marriage. And for a time his wife joined him in the fashionable circle
in which he found his chief pleasure. Both in London and in Geneva,
where they spent the greater part of the first portion of their married
life, she became very popular. But she soon realised that true joys were
not to be found in the mere attractions of society. For some years her
life cannot be described otherwise than as unprofitable. One instrument
used by God for her awakening was a Highland servant. This girl was
grieved to see that the interest of her mistress was absorbed by the
things of time, which left no room for the contemplation of the things
of eternity. She ventured to make a wise and well-weighed remark. It was
a word fitly spoken, and did not fail in its purpose. The young lady's
eyes were further opened by what she saw of the sins of the worldly
circle in which she moved. She began to realise the sentiment of her
ancestor, the good Lord Brodie:--"God can make use of poison to expel
poison: in London I saw much vanity, lightness, and wantonness." His
aspiration was also soon echoed from her own heart--"Oh, that the seeing
of it in others may cure and mortify the seeds of it in myself!" She
could not help observing the shameless vice that passed unrebuked, by
many hardly noticed. The observation gave a shock to her sensitive soul.
Her distress was great, and in her distress she turned to the right
quarter. She sought solace in the Bible. That hitherto neglected Book
enchained her attention, and she became a most diligent searcher into
its hidden truths. Some of the gay friends of the society in which she
moved found her occupied in this Bible reading. It supplied them with a
new amusement, telling how the attractive marchioness had become a
"Methodist." Hers was not the nature to be turned aside from its purpose
by a taunt. "If for so little I am to be called a Methodist, let me have
something more worthy of the name." Such was her reflection, and her
Bible reading was continued with renewed earnestness.

In the course of that reading the work of the Holy Spirit was impressed
upon her attention. The promise met her eyes, "If ye, being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?" "From that
time," she records, "I began to pray for the Holy Spirit." To the end of
her life she increasingly realised and brought others to realise the
paramount importance of the personal work of the Holy Spirit. Lady
Huntly could not now join in the pursuits of the world as she had
formerly done. Her husband did not fully sympathise with the change in
her views, but he saw enough of the sinful emptiness of mere gaiety to
make him refrain from insisting upon her taking part in its pursuits.
More than this, he gave every facility to her for carrying out her
wishes, even when he could not understand the spirit which was
their motive.

When in Geneva, after her Bible reading had begun, she found a very
helpful friend in Madame Vernet. "If any one is to be called my
spiritual mother," she said, "it is Madame Vernet of Geneva." That good
Christian unfolded to her plainly the plan of salvation, showing her
first her lost condition, and then the way of redemption by Jesus
Christ. Lady Huntly was also helped by her intercourse in Paris with
Lady Olivia Sparrow and others who frequented her house for the sake of
the religious society.

On her return from Paris the winter was passed at Kimbolton Castle, the
seat of her brother-in-law, the Duke of Manchester. That place was
memorable in her spiritual history. "I knew Christ first," she
afterwards said, "if I really know Him, at Kimbolton; I spent hours
there in my dressing-room in prayer, and in reading the Bible, and in
happy communion with Him." Lady Huntly referred to this period of her
spiritual life in these terms, some one having made the remark that deep
conviction of sin is almost invariably the beginning of the work of God
in the soul: "I did not quite agree with that statement, and do not
think it is by any means always the case. In my own case I believe that
for two years I was a saved sinner, a believer in Jesus Christ, and yet
that during all that time I did not see the exceeding sinfuluess of sin.
I believed in a general way that I was a sinner, who deserved the
punishment of a righteous God; I believed that whosoever came to Jesus
Christ should he saved; but I had no deep sense of sin, of my sin. Since
then I believe that I have passed through almost every phase of
Christian experience that I have ever read or heard of; and now I have
such a sight of my own utter vileness and unworthiness, that I feel that
the great and holy God might well set His heel on me, so to speak, and
crush me into nothing." This sense of absolute unworthiness was always a
feature of her life. "A useless log" was the term she applied
to herself.

One means of profit which Lady Huntly much enjoyed was her intercourse
with a friend of bygone days, Miss Helen Home. They were now both
walking in the same way. The Bible readings at the house of Miss Home
were felt to be of great service.

Lady Huntly soon introduced family prayer in her home. She felt that if
God was to be heartily served, His altar must be set up in the house. At
first she gathered together her servants and any lady visitors in the
house. But later, as we shall see, the whole establishment took part.


III.

DUCHESS OF GORDON.

The old Duke of Gordon, Lord Huntly's father, died in the summer of
1827. The subject of this biography became Duchess of Gordon, a title
which involved increased responsibilities and increased anxieties.
Happily she realised her position, and determined, by the help of God,
to show more clearly that, in whatever rank of life she was, she was
striving to be a faithful servant of her Heavenly Master. She felt that
she must confess Christ more boldly, that she must be more decided for
Him, however much this profession might appear singular in her
recently-acquired rank.

A short time before leaving Huntly for Gordon Castle, she explored the
old Huntly Castle with a party of friends. The duchess was at the time
greatly bowed down by a sense of the responsibility of her changed life.
There were certain inscriptions round the ceiling of a great hall in the
old castle. No one could make them out. But whilst the duchess was
standing alone in deep thought, her companions having gone off to
examine other curiosities, the sun burst out from a cloud through one of
the broken window mullions and shone brightly on the opposite wall, and
in the light of his rays she read:--

     TO. THAES. THAT. LOVE. GOD. AL. THINGIS. VIRKIS. TO THE. BEST.

"It was," she used to say, "a message from the Lord to my soul, and came
to me with such power that I went on my way rejoicing." Ever after this
text was a favourite one. She always looked upon it as peculiarly her
own. Very practical was her reading of God's Word. She, indeed, expected
to find in it a word from Him. Just at the time of her setting out for
her new home she read as usual her daily portion in Bogatsky's _Golden
Treasury_. Through two leaves of the book being stuck together, she had
missed the portion appointed for the day before. But now it presented
itself to her eye--and no less surely to her heart: "Have not I
commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither
be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou
goest." Her comment was, "That was another message from the Lord, that
put strength into me."

Many years afterwards she wrote: "It was this day sixteen years that the
text in Bogatsky was given to me from Joshua 1. 9, and truly I have
found the goodness of the Lord with me, and everything temporal that I
committed to Him He has indeed kept. It is really most wonderful when I
see trials and trouble all around me, to see how everything I prayed for
regarding my own home has been accomplished; and shall I not trust Him
for my soul, and for all that guidance I so greatly need in all that He
would have me to do? Surely He will guide me in spiritual as well as in
temporal things; and the more I cease from man, and from any child of
man, the more I shall be enabled to live simply to His glory." Another
sixteen years passed. The duchess was within a few days of her death.
She heard that a young man was in anxiety about his preparation for the
ministry. "He looks to difficulties; give him for a New Year's message
from me, Joshua 1. 9: 'Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a
good courage; neither be thou dismayed.' These words were given to me
after Duke Alexander's death, and from that day onward they have been a
help to me."


IV.

GOOD WORKS AT GORDON CASTLE.

The duchess did not write a regular diary. But for one week in the first
year of her residence at Gordon Castle such a record was kept. Extracts
from it may serve to give some insight into her thoughts and life. The
reader will be struck with the marked self-humiliation which was so
characteristic of this child of God. "I desired to have resolution to
commence and continue a journal, that I might obtain a clearer view of
my own heart, which I know, alas! to be deceitful above all things and
desperately wicked. Well may I say with Job, 'I abhor myself and repent
in dust and ashes.'" "A day lost though well begun; more peace, more
clear belief, but, alas! not less indifference, not less hardness of
heart; great idleness; after breakfast little or nothing done. O Lord,
deliver me from pride and vanity, and make me a humble and devoted
follower of the meek and lowly Jesus. He indeed is our peace." "Another
unprofitable day; but when, alas! is any day otherwise with me?" "Sins
of the week: unbelief proceeding from pride of reason, selfishness,
carelessness, hardness of heart, vanity, evil speaking." These extracts
are sufficient to show that there was a very severe introspection--a
very real shrinking from sin, and sense of unworthiness. Some of the
faults she lamented seemed to others remarkably absent in the duchess
Evil speaking, for example, was about the last thing she could be
accused of. There was no one more careful of the character of those with
whom she had to do.

This short diary also shows her busily occupied in attending to members
of her household, ministering to one maid, who was sick, instructing
another in the _Shorter Catechism_. Happy was the household that had
such a mistress at its head!

In 1830 William IV. came to the throne. The Duchess of Gordon was
selected by Queen Adelaide as Mistress of the Robes at the Coronation.
The Queen bestowed upon her many marks of favour and friendship. But the
promotion to the highest honours of the Court was not allowed to
militate against her soul's welfare. The service of the King of kings
was always put first.

It is needless to say that the duchess was always a regular attendant at
God's house. For thirty years she made a practice of taking copious
notes of the sermons. The notes were copied out carefully during the
week. This note-taking--sometimes a slight embarrassment to the
preacher--was a great help to the hearer. As at least two sermons a week
were thus noted, there must have been a great mass of manuscript before
the thirty years were expired. Amongst those whose sermons she much
enjoyed were Mr. Howels of Long Acre, Mr. Harington Evans, and Mr.
Blunt, of Chelsea.

Good works were promoted by the duke and duchess at the cost of much
self-denial. The duke's predecessor had left the estates heavily
burdened. The consequence was that they were put under trust, only a
limited income being allowed to the duke. This made contributions to
charitable objects less ample than they would otherwise have been. But
generous help was bestowed that cost the givers something to give. The
duchess set her heart on building and endowing a chapel in connection
with the Church of England. To render this possible the duke proposed to
sell some of his horses. For the same purpose the duchess left a golden
vase valued at £1200 to be sold. To quote her own words to explain what
resulted from this charitable idea: "The Duchess of Beaufort, hearing of
my vase, thought of her diamond ear-rings, which she got me to dispose
of for a chapel in Wales, and her diamonds made me think of my jewels;
and as the duke had always been most anxious for the chapel, he agreed
with me that stones were much prettier in a chapel wall than round one's
neck, and so he allowed me to sell £600's worth, or rather what brought
that, for they cost more than double. The chapel is going on nicely, and
I have still enough jewels left to help to endow it, if no other way
should open. I do think I may with confidence hope for a blessing on
this. It is no sacrifice to me whatever, except as it is one to the
duke, who is very fond of seeing me fine, and was brought up to think
it right."

The strict observance of family prayer has already been referred to. A
room had been fitted up in the castle as a little chapel. The duke was
always present, and now, in the absence of the chaplain and the duchess,
used to conduct the prayers himself. In later years, when the widow
returned to Huntly Lodge, exactly at half-past nine in the morning and
evening the household assembled for prayers. Both indoor and outdoor
servants were first gathered together. The butler then came to the
duchess, and in words which we are assured were never varied by one
syllable or accent during the twenty-seven years of her grace's
widowhood and his own stewardship, announced, "They're all assembled." A
brief blessing was asked, a psalm or hymn read, the organ led the voice
of praise, a passage of Scripture was read and frequently explained. A
prayer followed, in which the duchess wished that the Queen should never
be forgotten.

Very faithfully the duchess sought to do her duty in bringing the
interests of religion before those with whom she had to do, especially
those of her own household. "But you do not know the difficulty I have
in speaking to any one who does not meet me half way. I think if I could
see my way clearly, I might get over this painful shyness, which I then
know would be want of faith. But I cannot see that, situated as I am, it
is my duty; and moreover, I _fancy_ I have not the talent, and it is not
one which I have to account for; for I have so often done more harm than
good, even when I have prayed to be directed; indeed, I trust I have not
often had to speak without that prayer.... Oh! I do pray for more zeal
for souls, more true sense of their infinite value; for I think if I
felt it as I _see_ it, I should do more."


V.

THE HEAVY BLOW.

In the summer of 1835 the duke and duchess made a tour on the Continent.
Even amidst all the movements and difficulties connected with hotel
life, family prayers were not neglected. Every morning before starting
they assembled together to ask God's blessing. The duchess on this tour
had daily opportunities of reading the Bible with her husband. She was
very anxious about his soul's welfare. His testimony to his old friend,
Colonel Tronchin, at Geneva, was very significant. "Tronchin, I am a
very changed man to what you once knew me, and I owe it all to my dear
wife." She herself writes with reference to the duke--"He has done and
said many things since he came here which almost give me hope that the
Spirit of God is really at work, and that he begins to experience
something of the blessedness of those who fear the Lord."

The greatest trial in her life was now approaching the duchess. He who
had been her support and joy for so many years was to be taken from her.
On the 27th of May, 1836, she was told by the doctors that the duke had
only a short time to live. The terrible news was of course overwhelming,
but she knew whither to turn. "I had not realised till then the
hopelessness of the case. I retired to another room and fell on my
knees; and as if they had been audibly uttered, these words were
impressed upon my heart, 'Thy Maker is thy Husband; the Lord of hosts is
His name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; the God of the whole
earth shall He be called,' and I rose up to meet the trial in His
strength." The next day the duke died. Full proof was given of the
sufficiency of God to support His servants in their darkest hours. Two
days afterwards she wrote--"I must tell you of the blessed consolation I
have in thinking of the perfect peace which my beloved husband enjoyed
uninterruptedly, and the presence of the Comforter from the Father and
the Son to my own soul. Pray for me. Although I feel indeed in the
wilderness, yet like her who was led there, I would desire to lean on
the arm of the Beloved One, who has truly given to me 'the valley of
Achor for a door of hope,' and who is a very present help in time of
trouble. The comfort I have is at present almost without alloy. It is
only when earthly things pull me from my resting-place that I see the
desolation of all earthly joys; and yet I am not excited, out as the
Lord has enabled me to stay my mind on Him, He has kept me in perfect
peace." When the beloved remains were removed into their last
resting-place in Elgin Cathedral, she dedicated herself afresh to God.
"When the coffin was lowered into that vault, I felt as if God had
shoved under my feet all that was most dear to me, the only one on earth
to whose love I was entitled, and that now I must live to
Himself alone."

After her husband's death her wish was to return at once to Huntly
Lodge, where she had spent the first years of her married life, and
which was now hers by the marriage settlement. But a lease which the
tenant was unwilling to resign prevented this for a time. Accordingly
she made up her mind to travel abroad for some months. During the
winter of 1836 she lived at Pau. The return home was made the following
summer. Naturally she dreaded coming back to the now desolate home--the
same place, but all so changed. But God was good, and the grace
sufficient for the day was given. "_Huntly Lodge, 31st August_,
1837.--The Lord has been better to me than all my fears. Wagstaff (the
duke's factor), accompanied by both Mr. Bigsby (of the English Chapel at
Gordon Castle) and Mr. Dewar (minister of Fochabers), received me. My
heart was so full of the Lord's goodness, that there was no room for
bitterness; and after a few moments alone, I could not rest till we had
thanked our tender Father; Mr. Bigsby was the organ of our thanksgiving.
The three gentlemen, Annie (Sinclair), and I joined in prayer then, and
at night with all the people of house, stable, and farm; this morning
Mr. Dewar's prayer was very much what I needed. My blessed Lord Jesus is
very present, and I know I cannot come to my Father without Him. Oh,
pray that I may be more and more awakened, and never fall asleep again.
Oh, for the quickening grace of the Holy Spirit to realise continually
that blessed presence! 4th _Sept_.--My heart is full of thankfulness and
wonder as to myself. I dreaded above all things the bitterness of
desolation on my return here; and behold the Lord made His presence so
manifest that I am now, as in times past, rejoicing in His
unmerited love."


VI.

WIDOWHOOD AT HUNTLY LODGE.

The arrangements at Huntly Lodge were now, of course, entirely in the
hands of the widowed duchess. Essentially the motto which was the
principle of the establishment was, "As for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord." It was a matter of some doubt with her whether she
should keep up the style natural to her rank, or let the Lodge and
retire into a humbler life. After carefully and prayerfully weighing the
matter, her decision was that "position is stewardship," and that it was
her duty not to despise the high estate to which God had been pleased to
call her, but to consecrate it to His service. This determination was a
wise one. Her light was placed so that many could see its steady and
bright burning.

The whole house was ruled in strict order, marked quietness and
simplicity prevailing. We are told that everything throughout the day
was conducted with the exactness of clockwork. The duchess rose soon
after six o'clock. The family met at breakfast at nine. Exactly at
half-past nine, as we have seen, both morning and evening, the house
assembled for family prayers. After breakfast one of the first
occupations of the duchess was to visit her old bedridden maid, to
minister to her in things both temporal and spiritual. At noon she had a
daily reading of the Bible in her room. The reading was interspersed
with conversation, and followed by prayer. She seemed to be never tired
of these spiritual exercises. The later hours of the day were occupied
with reading and other pursuits until five o'clock, when she would again
visit her invalid maid. In dealing with the poor the duchess was not
only generous but discriminating. She spared no trouble in inquiring
into the eases of distress before her. We are told that the list of two
hundred persons whose families she regularly relieved had before her
death increased to three hundred. The post was also often used as the
means of dispensing her anonymous charity. One reason why she was so
anxious to have a thoroughly capable chaplain was that he might
thoroughly examine into the deserts of applicants for help. It was not
pecuniary assistance only that was sought from the duchess. Her kindly
counsel was much valued. To quote her own words, "Though I do so need
advice and wisdom in my own matters, the most extraordinary people think
proper to consult me about the most extraordinary things, and I cannot
lose the opportunity of giving the only Christian advice they may be in
the way of receiving. May the Lord help me; oh, how constantly do I
need help!"

The Sabbath day was indeed a holy day at Huntly Lodge. Everything that
could be done the day before was done. No fire was lighted in the
drawing-room on the Sunday, with, as we are informed, the double object
of saving unnecessary labour, and "to present no inducement for visitors
to meet together for idle conversation." The doors of the house were
locked during the hours of service, one, or at most two, servants
staying at home. No letters were received or posted on the Sabbath.
There were no arrivals nor departures of guests on that day. On a
certain Sunday morning at breakfast the duchess was surprised to hear a
carriage-and-four brought round to the door. Her immediate "What is
that?" was answered by the appearance of a young English nobleman who
had come to bid her good-bye. "Oh no," she said, "not on the Sabbath."
Affectionately she persuaded him to remain until the next day. Away from
home, on the Continent and elsewhere, she was careful that the day
should be strictly observed. So great was her interest in Sabbath
observance that she wrote a little tract on the subject.

The duchess used to delight in surrounding herself at Huntly Lodge with
those who were specially set apart for the service of God. The ministers
from time to time assembled there, first gathering together for prayer
and conference, and then in a more open meeting, at which the duchess
and her friends were present, and finally at family worship.

Schools for the poor were munificently founded by the Duchess of Gordon.
The schools at Huntly, which were commenced in 1839, were finished in
1843. They consisted of infant schools, schools for older boys and
girls, and also an industrial school for training fifty girls for
service. When living in Edinburgh, she built large schools in the
destitute district of Holyrood. The lady of Huntly was indeed a worthy
precursor in the great work of general education. One excellent plan of
religious instruction she adopted in her own household. A weekly class
was formed of her female domestics, She had prepared a large number of
questions. To each of the class she gave each week a slip of paper
containing one question. This was to be answered before the next
meeting. There was no one in the establishment who could help feeling
that the mistress took the deepest interest in him or her.


VII.

ANXIETIES AND REST.

The Duchess of Gordon had been brought up an Episcopalian. But when in
May, 1843, the great Disruption took place, when four-hundred and
seventy-four ministers of the Church of Scotland took up their cross for
Christ, resigning their earthly livings for conscience sake, the duchess
was deeply moved by this heroic act of self-denial, and eventually,
after much thought and prayer, she joined the Free Church, becoming a
member of Free St. Luke's Church. She had left the Church of England,
but she loved and honoured it to the end of her life. "I have not time
for entering into my reasons for separating from the Church of England,
but they were purely conscientious; and I believe I could never be a
blessing to the little body of English Episcopalians, if acting against
my conscience. They want God's blessing, not man's help; the latter
without the former is a curse. Put not your trust in any child of man.
But I am not against those dear friends, and can feel myself more at
liberty to help them now than before, because I am now acting openly in
all things. May the Lord Jesus enable you to look to Him, and to feel
and say with Luther, 'Lord, I am Thy sin, Thou art my righteousness.'"

The first occasion on which the duchess partook of the Communion in
connection with the Free Church at Huntly was a memorable event. The
people assembled in large numbers. By the kindness of the Lady of
Huntly provision was made for the visitors within the precincts of the
old castle, military tents being erected for the purpose. Her own
account of the scene may well be given. "_Huntly Lodge, Aug_. 5,
1847.--Now to tell of a time I hope never to forget. Friday was the fast
day; Professor M. Laggan preached in the morning, and Mr. Moody Stuart
in the evening. For Sabbath, Dr. Russell, who arrived on Friday
afternoon, assisted to arrange a pulpit and two tents in the court of
the old castle, one for the elements, the other for our party. Oh! it
was indeed a communion: the Lord was there evidently set forth before
us, and not only set forth, but present. God the Sovereign and Judge,
God the Creator, without whom nothing was made that is made, is God the
Saviour, Immanuel, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.
There seemed truly nothing of man's making between us and the living
God; a realisation of being God's creatures, God's redeemed children,
formed for Himself, for His own glory. Mr. Dewar preached the
action-sermon, after which Mr. M.S. fenced the tables, and addressed us,
and served the first table. He told me he never so realised the oneness
of Jehovah in Three Persons. If we had seen the Heavenly Dove
overshadowing us, and heard the voice saying, 'This is My beloved Son,
hear ye Him,' we should have been doubtless overwhelmed; but could
hardly have had a more real sense of the presence of Him who made the
heavens and the earth, the trees, the grass, and the new creature in
Christ Jesus. Mr. Dewar served two tables and gave the concluding
address; and Mr. Moody Stuart again preached in the evening on Isa. 1.
18: 'Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.'
Many were much affected, and the place was so beautiful! I hope the
weather will permit our having the tents pitched again."


VIII.

GOOD WORKS ABROAD.

After the duke's death, his widow paid frequent visits to the Continent.
Pau was a specially favourite resort. There she found both English and
French Protestants worshipping in places utterly inadequate for the
purpose. She generously purchased a site for a church to be used by both
congregations, the lower storey being fitted up for a French Protestant
school. She also liberally subscribed towards the erection of the
church. Her good works at this place were not few. Having heard that a
man living near had broken his leg, she drove off at once to visit him,
and repeated her visits weekly. A Bible was given to him, and the result
was that his first journey on his crutches was to the Protestant service
at Pau. He was convinced that in the teaching of the Protestants alone
there was safety. The next day the children were withdrawn from the
Roman Catholic school. The excitement was great, and no little
persecution and pecuniary loss ensued to the new converts. The duchess
began her Protestant school at Pau with eight pupils. She also had Bible
classes from time to time, one being for Roman Catholic girls. A Sabbath
evening service was held by the duchess for her French servants.

The story of Manuel Fuster, a Spanish refugee, is an interesting one. He
had been destined by his parents for the priesthood. But having fallen
into destitute circumstances, the duchess's butler had shown him
kindness and given him some work to do for the house. Full of gratitude,
when her grace passed through the courtyard, he fell down on his knees
to thank her. She told him that that homage should be paid only to the
Most High. At this interview and at many others she spoke to him about
his soul's salvation. A French Bible was given to him before she left.
On her return to Pau the next year, he was found breaking stones by the
roadside, a conversation proving that he was quite a changed man. In the
end he did good Christian service as a colporteur in France.

In 1847 the duchess was advised to winter in the south of Europe.
Frequent attacks of bronchitis had made this course advisable. She took
up her residence at Cannes, having prospects of being useful there. And
her hope of being useful was very substantially realised. "_Cannes,
Dec_. 1847.--Constant occupation, and many, many new opportunities of
meeting with the Lord's people, and speaking of the glad tidings of
great joy, have caused the delay in writing. I now know what fine
climate is, and the country and views are beautiful; but above all there
is a field of usefulness that we could not have at Nice, and an open
door for the Gospel. Altogether, no tongue can tell the goodness of the
Lord to us. He is letting me get glimpses both of His love and His glory
in the face of Jesus Christ, such as I have never had before; and all
this with such peace in outward circumstances! Is it not marvellous? You
need not be alarmed about my 'exposition' on Saturday; I feel too deeply
my own incapacity to attempt anything beyond what I should say to an
infant school at home. The people who come to it are either the families
of the servants I employ, or of the children taught by Annie Sandilands.
We live as quietly as possible; Lord Brougham sends me the newspaper and
bouquets of flowers; other friends lend Caroline their ponies, and do
all kind things. Some young English girls come here once a week to a
Bible class, and we have meetings every other evening at the chapel at
home." The parting from her little flock at Cannes was a painful
experience. "Our children were first broken-hearted, and after we were
gone were roaring so that nothing could pacify them but Monsieur Bettets
taking them all into the drawing-room and praying with them. Those
chiefly affected were little Italians, and indeed they seem to have much
warmer feelings."

The course of events in the life of the duchess in Scotland seems to
have been very even and not very full of startling incidents during the
last years of her life. Her personal piety was matured, and her works of
usefulness were multiplied. She much delighted in the ministry of Dr.
Rainy, who left Huntly in 1853, after a sojourn there of four years. "I
wish much you had heard our three last sermons from Mr. Rainy; I never
heard any more useful, striking and impressive. I was particularly
struck by the way he brought out the necessity of taking up the cross in
these days, in a real giving up of self, self-love, self-righteousness,
self-pleasing."




IX.

QUICKENED SPIRITUAL LIFE.

The year 1859 is remembered as a season of remarkable quickening of
spiritual life in America and Ireland, and later in Scotland. Such a
movement could not fail to attract the attention of the Duchess of
Gordon who, living so entirely in the presence of the Spirit, was able
to realise the workings around her. Huntly Lodge was always ready to
receive any who were busied with the spread of the good tidings. Mr.
MacDowall Grant, Mr. Brownlow North, and Mr. Reginald Radcliffe were
amongst the evangelists who were welcome visitors, as they went about
their work of love. In January, 1859, and in the following months, there
were impressive gatherings of ministers who met to bring themselves to
the attainment of a nearer walk with God, and to strive for the
awakening of their people. In January, 1860, there was a conference on a
still larger scale, twenty-four ministers staying at the Lodge, whilst
others found hospitality elsewhere. There was an unmistakable quickening
on all sides. It was suggested to the duchess by Mr. Duncan Matheson,
who had been her missionary in the district for some years, that a great
assembly might be gathered together for two or three days in one of her
parks. The matter was carefully weighed by one who shrunk from anything
like undue novelty or unsound sensationalism. But when once she was
convinced that it was God's way she hesitated no longer. What the world
would think was a light consideration with her. Invitations were sent by
the duchess to ministers and laymen of all denominations in England
and Scotland.

The spot chosen was the Castle Park; the date, the Wednesday and
Thursday of the third week in July. There was provision made for
accommodating the expected guests in the Lodge itself and all the
adjoining houses. The duchess filled her schools with stores for the
ministers and their families, and all whom they might choose to invite.
No expense of thought or labour was spared. But there was one thing that
might have rendered all the careful arrangements of no avail. The rain
had been falling for weeks, and there seemed no prospect of its
cessation. Happily the fears were disappointed. From the time the people
began to assemble until after the forenoon train on the last day had
carried away the last of those who had lingered to the close of the
assembly, there was not a drop of rain. The great day of the gathering
was especially bright. It seemed as if God the great Creator were
specially smiling on this effort for His glory and the everlasting
welfare of His creatures. The place chosen for the gathering was most
suitable, there being two or three places like amphitheatres on which
the hearers could sit. Everything had been arranged so carefully by
those whose hearts were thoroughly in the work that the duchess was able
to note after the great gathering was over--"Truly there was not one
thing out of place or unseemly." Eternity will unfold the results. The
assembly was characterised "by much freedom and power in the speakers,
by refreshing and lively joy and thanksgiving in the Lord's people, by
the awakening of many of the dead, and by holy liberty granted to those
that were bound." The number at this meeting in 1860 was about 7000.
Meetings of a similar character were held in the three following years.
In one or more of these the number reached 10,000. About the last of the
great assemblies, the duchess wrote--"_ August_, 1863. I cannot but
wonder to see these meetings increasing in numbers and interest every
year; not as a rendezvous for a pleasant day in the country, but really
very solemn meetings, where the presence of the Lord is felt, and the
power of His Spirit manifested. I trust that I have been somewhat
awakened by the preaching of our own minister, which has been very
striking indeed."




X.

THE END IS PEACE.

At the beginning of 1861 the duchess was brought almost to death's door.
To use the words of her biographer, "She was visited with a severe and
all but fatal illness, which was inscribed by the Lord's own hand with
all the characters of the believer's death-bed, except that He brought
her up again from the gates of the grave, and prolonged her precious
life for three years more." So alarming was the illness that she made
all arrangements for her departure hence. Various remembrances were set
aside for her relatives and friends, and directions were given that
certain letters should be written for the promotion of the welfare of
some whose interest she had at heart.

On the evening of her attack she asked her friend to repeat the hymn

     "One there is above all others,
            Oh, how He loves!"

She then observed that she had been depressed for some time with a sense
of her many sins, but that the Lord was now giving her tranquil and
joyful rest. She often spoke of the manner in which her soul was
comforted, and that never-forgotten night. It is thus described by Dr.
Moody Stuart, who was for many years her close friend: "There was
nothing of the nature of a dream or trance; but as she lay sleepless,
there appeared as if really before her eyes a white scroll unrolled,
glistening with unearthly brightness, and with floods of vivid light
ever flowing over it. Written at the head of the scroll, in large bright
letters of gold, she read this inscription:--'THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.' All her darkness was dispelled in a moment; with the
glorious words, the Spirit imprinted on her heart and conscience the
fresh seal of the pardon of all her sins; she believed and knew that the
Lord Jesus Christ was of God made unto her 'righteousness,' and that His
blood had made her whiter than snow. Her soul entered in a moment into
perfect rest; the peace of God that passeth all understanding now kept
her heart and mind through Christ Jesus; and she rejoiced in the full
assurance that for her to die that night was to depart and be for ever
with the Lord."

Day after day passed on, and she still lived. All her thoughts and words
were about her Lord and the spiritual welfare of those around her. Her
servants were a special care to her. As she was not allowed to see them
individually, she sent them a message that they must not be content with
trusting in a general way to the mercy of God, but that each of them
must be found in the Lord our Righteousness if they would be saved.
Throughout the illness her mind was kept in perfect peace, being
emphatically stayed upon her Lord. One can well understand how prayers
would be offered up for her by many that the valued life might be
spared, if it were God's will.

During the time of her slow and partial recovery she occupied herself
with learning hymns. She laid up a store which became in later months a
great source of comfort to her. The hymn which she first committed to
memory was one of her chief favourites:--

     "A mind at perfect peace with God."

The second verse she specially valued:--

     "By nature and by practice far,
        How very far from God;
      Yet now by grace brought nigh to Him,
        Through faith in Jesus' blood."

As we have said recovery was only slow and partial. She tried to learn
the lesson designed in this lengthening out of her earthly sojourn. "I
thought my life was spared," she said, "to give the opportunity of
devoting for a longer period my influence and substance to the cause of
Christ, but I see now a deeper meaning in it. There is more personal
holiness to be attained, more nearness to Christ, and more joy hereafter
through a deeper work here in my heart."

Her old habit of early rising had of course to be abandoned. But the
hours of the early morning were well spent, especially in meditation and
intercessory prayer. As an example of the things that occupied her mind,
we may quote words spoken to her maid as she entered the room: "I awoke
very early this morning, and have been very happy and busily engaged. My
thoughts have been much occupied with three things all so different, yet
each needing God's help to-day. The first is the Queen's visit to
Aberdeen to inaugurate the Prince Consort's memorial; the second is Mr.
M.'s prayer meeting in London in a hall that had been a dancing-saloon
in his parish; and (referring to a young man formerly in her service,
but then studying for the ministry) the third is John's College
examination."

At the end of 1863 the duchess expressed a strong wish that the
ministerial conference at Huntly Lodge should be resumed. A meeting was
held on the 13th of the following January. As she heard what had
transpired she remarked, "I liked the meeting, and had only one thing to
find fault with: some of the gentlemen prayed for me as if I was
something, and I am nothing. I must speak about that before the next
meeting." She invited all to meet again on the 10th of the following
month. She little thought that they would indeed meet on that day, but
only to lay her remains to rest. The 10th of February was to be her
funeral day.

The fatal illness was of very short duration, and gave her little
opportunity of thought. She was sorrowing over her inability to think
when the words were given to her: "I am poor and needy yet the Lord
thinketh upon me." "Yes, that's it," was her reply; "In Thy strong arms
I lay me down." She was quoting from the following hymn, which she
frequently repeated to her friends, and which she said more than any
other expressed the present state of her feelings:--

     "I only enter on the rest,
        Obtained by labour done;
      I only claim the victory
        By Him so dearly won.

      And, Lord, I seek a _holy_ rest,
        A victory over sin;
      I seek that Thou alone should'st reign
        O'er all, without, within.

      In quietness then, and confidence,
        Saviour, my strength shall be,
      And '_take_ me, for I cannot _come_,'
        Is still my cry to Thee.

      In Thy strong hand I lay me down,
        So shall the work be done;
      For who can work so wondrously
        As an Almighty One?

      Work on, then, Lord, till on my soul
        Eternal Light shall break;
      And in Thy likeness perfected,
        I 'satisfied' shall wake."

On the evening of the 29th of January the duchess attempted to ask for
something. Miss Sandilands repeated the words, "My Beloved is mine, and
I am His." "Yes," she answered. This emphatic token of assent to a truth
which was essentially her own by appropriation was the last attempt she
made to speak. She fell asleep at half-past seven on the Sabbath
evening, the 31st of January, 1864. She went to the land where time is
no more, in her seventieth year, just reaching the allotted term of
life, as she had certainly in no ordinary degree performed its
allotted work.

There was no need of hired mourners at her funeral. The depth of real
grief was unprecedented. The sad procession was composed of many
hundreds of mourners, and of nearly seven hundred children from her
schools. The whole district was desolate and bereaved. The man was only
speaking what many another was thinking when he said, "This is the
greatest calamity that ever befell this district; of a' the dukes that
reigned here there was never one like her; there's none in this
neighbourhood, high or low, but was under some obligation to her, for
she made it her study to benefit her fellow-men; and what crowds o' puir
craturs she helped every day. And then for the spiritual, Huntly is
Huntly still, in a great degree, but the gude that's been done in it is
a' through her."

All that was mortal of this mother in Israel was laid to rest in Elgin
Cathedral. That noble fane contained the remains of no one more loved
than she. "I can't understand how people should love me," she used to
say. Others could understand it. And now that they could love her in
person no longer, they love her memory.

S.F. HARRIS, M.A., B.C.L.