The Bohea tea to be taken out of what was refused by the buyers last
sale; but particular care to be taken that none under the degree of
middling, or good middling, nor any damaged chests are sent, to be
marked & invoiced, not according to the King's numbers, but the
Company's, to be reweighed, by thus marking them, each bed will be kept
separate, and there will not only be no pretence abroad for finding
fault, as from No. to No., will be exactly of the same quantity, having
been packed from the said heap or pile at Canton, and since examined in
England. But the taste of the Americans will also be better known, that
is, whether they prefer a fresh middling tea, provided it is not
absolutely faint, or a strong, rough tea. A certain quantity of each of
these kinds to be sent to each place, that either may not have the
advantage over the other, by having teas of a superior quality, their
respective qualities to be remarked in the invoices. A small assortment
of about a dozen or twenty small chests of Hyson, Souchong, Congou, and
each specie of Singlo tea, viz.: Twankey, Skin and First Sort, to be
sent to each place, with proper remarks thereon in the respective
invoices, each of these species to be taken out of some bed or break of
teas now laid down, or intended so to be, for next September sale,
regard being had to their respective qualities, and to be taken out of
such beds or breaks, which shall be sufficiently large, not only to
supply each Colony with its quantity, but also to leave a considerable
part thereof to be sold at the ensuing sale, by which means the Company
may hereafter compare the prices to the same parcel of tea sells for,
not only at each Colony, but also at their own sales, which can no
otherwise be done, as each of these species, going under the same
general denomination of Hyson, Souchong, Congo and Singlo, vary almost
100 pr cent. in the price they sell for, according to quality, & not 10
pr cent. in the purchase.

As it would be a great object with the Company to introduce, if
possible, the consumption of Singlo tea into America, that being a kind
of tea which spoils by age, much more than Bohea, and also that of which
they are much more considerably overloaded with, and further, such an
introduction would have this advantage also, that the foreign countries
could not soon rival us, not being themselves importers of any
considerable quantity of this specie of tea. It should be recommended to
the agents, to endeavour all they can, at such introduction, which it is
conceived may be brought about, at least in some degree, from the
experience of the consumption here in England, which will appear to have
constantly gained ground proportionally, as its price at the Company's
sales has approached nearer to Bohea tea, and in the present situation
of this branch of the Company's trade, it might easily be made appear,
it would be for their advantage, even to sell it in America, at the
quoted price of Bohea, by which means they might be relieved from the
disagreeable alternative of selling it here under prime cost, or keeping
a greater quantity unsold in their warehouses, until it is spoiled by
age.


                                       London, Aug^t 5^th 1773.
                                   St. Paul's Churchyard, N^o. 55.

Sir:

I am favored with yours of yesterday's date, and agreeable to your
request, I shall immediately communicate the information therein
contained, to Richard Clarke, Esqr., & Sons, Merchants, in Boston, New
England, which is the house with which I am connected, and who I flatter
myself will acquit themselves of the trust the Hon'ble the Court of
Directors have been pleased to repose in them.

I would also beg leave to solicit part of the freight of the tea for a
vessel which I shall possibly have ready in ten days, provided it will
agree with the time you propose to ship them.

                         I am, sir,
                                   Your most hum. serv^t
                                                      JONATHAN CLARKE.

Mr. Wm. Settle, 17^th Aug^t

  Wm., Cap^t Joseph Royal
  Loring, will be ready in 5 days.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

The Committee of Warehouses desire you will inform them whether you have
a constant trader to Boston or South Carolina ready to sail, as the East
India Com^y intend to export teas to both those Colonies, and are
desirous of giving you the preference of the freight.

                              I am, sir,
                                     Your most obedi^t ser^t
                                                            WM. SETTLE.

East India House, 5^th Aug^t 1773.

  To George Hayley, Esq^r.
    Thos. Lane, Esq^r.
    Alex. Champion, Esq^r.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

The deputy chairman of the East India Com^y desires you would point out
to the Com^tee of Warehouses what sorts of tea and quantity of each are,
in your opinion, proper to be sent to Boston & South Carolina, to make
up to the former of those places, an export equal to 300 large chests of
Bohea tea, and the latter a quantity equal to 200 large chests Bohea.

Mr. Holbrook says if you can be with him this morning, you will expedite
his business very much, as the Com^tee have directed him to make ready
for shipping immediately.

                            I am, sir,
                                      Your most hum. serv^t
                                                          WM. SETTLE.

    East India House, 6^th Aug^t 1773.
  Mr. Wm. Settle.


MR. PALMER'S ASSORTMENT OF TEAS FOR AMERICA.

                                  So.      New
                      Boston.  Carolina.  York.  Philadelphia.  Total.

  Bohea,   l. ch^ts.     268       182      568        568        1586
  Congo, sm^l   d^o.       20        10       20         20          70
  Singlo,       d^o.      80        50       80         80         290
  Hyson,        d^o.      20        10       20         20          70
  Souchong,     d^o.      10         5       10         10          35


WEIGHT OF TEA EXPORTED TO AMERICA.

                                   lbs.
  Bohea,                         562,421
  Singlo,                         22,546
  Hyson,                           5,285
  Souchong,                        2,392
  Congou,                          6,015
                                  ------
                   Total lbs.,   598,659


The Hayley, James Scott, is now ready to sail, & I mean to dispatch her
15^th Aug^t. The Dartmouth, James Hall,[38] will be here about 14 days
longer. These two are constant traders to Boston.

I have no connection with the Carolina trade, but I understand the
London, Curling, belonging to Greenwood & Higginson, is now ready for
sailing, and is a constant trader. Mr. Settle will please to inform the
Com^tee of the above & thereby oblige,

                                 His humble servant,
                                               GEORGE HAYLEY.

East India H^o 10 Aug^t 1773.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO GREY COOPER, Esq^r., or JN^O. ROBINSON, Esq^r.

Sir:

By order of the Court of Directors of the United East India Comp^y, I
transmit you the enclosed petition, with their request that you will be
pleased to lay the same before the Right Hon'ble the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury.

               I am, very respectfully, sir,
                           Your most obed^t & hum. ser^t
                                               PETER MITCHELL, Sec^y.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE RIGHT HON'BLE THE LORDS COMMISSIONERS OF HIS MAJESTY'S TREASURY.

_The humble Petition of the United Company of Merchants of England
trading to the East Indies._

_Sheweth:_

That by an Act passed in the last session of Parliament, it is among
other things enacted, "That it shall and may be lawful for the
Commissioners of his Majesty's treasury, or any three or more of them,
or the High Treasurer for the time being, to grant a licence or licences
to the said United Company, to take out of their warehouses such
quantity or quantities of tea as the said Commissioners of the Treasury,
or any three or more of them, or the High Treasurer for the time being,
shall think fit, without the same having been exposed to sale in this
kingdom, and to export such tea to any of the British colonies or
plantations in America, or to foreign parts discharged from the payment
of any of the customs or duties whatsoever."

That the said United Com^ny have agreed to export to the British
colonies or plantations in America a quantity of teas, equal in weight
to 1700 large chests of Bohea tea, which quantity will not in the whole
exceed six hundred thousand pounds weight. And your petitioner having in
the affidavit hereunto annexed shewed unto your lords^ps that after the
taking out of their warehouses the said quantities of teas so intended
to be exported, that there will be left remaining in the warehouses of
the said United Company a quantity of tea not less than ten millions of
pounds weight, as by the said Act is directed.

Your petitioners therefore pray your lordships to grant them a licence
to take out of their warehouses the quantities of teas above mentioned,
not exceeding in the whole six hundred thousand pounds weight, without
the same having been exposed to sale in this kingdom, and to export such
tea discharged from the payment of any customs or duties whatsoever.

By order of the Court of Directors of the said Company.

                                                    P. MITCHELL, Sec^y.

East India Ho. 19^th April, 1773.


LICENCE TO EXPORT TEA.

After our hearty commendations. Whereas, the united company of merchants
of England trading to the East Indies, have, by the annexed petition,
humbly prayed us to grant them, in pursuance of an Act passed the last
session of Parliament, a licence to take out of their warehouses a
quantity of teas, equal in weight to one thousand seven hundred large
chests of Bohea tea, which quantity will not in the whole exceed six
hundred thousand pounds weight, without the same having been exposed to
sale in this kingdom, and to export such tea discharged from the payment
of any customs or duties whatsoever, to the British colonies or
plantations in America. And it appearing to us by the annexed affidavit,
that there will be left remaining in their warehouses a quantity of tea
not less than ten millions of pounds weight, as by the said Act is
provided and directed. Now we, having taken the said application and the
several matters and things therein set forth into our consideration, do
think fit to comply with the request of the said petitioners. And in
pursuance of the powers given unto us by the said Act, we do hereby
authorise, permit and grant licence to the said Company to take out of
their warehouses the said quantity of tea, not exceeding in the whole
six hundred thousand pounds weight, without the same having been exposed
to sale in this kingdom, and to export such teas discharged from the
payment of any customs or duties whatsoever, to any of the British
colonies or plantations in America. Nevertheless, you are therein to
take especial care, that all and every the rules, regulations &
restrictions and orders directed by the said recited Act, relating to
the exportation of such teas, or any ways concerning the same, be in
all and every respect fully obeyed and observed. And for so doing, this
shall be as well to you as to the said Company, and to all other
officers & persons whatsoever herein concerned, a sufficient warrant.

[Illustration: LORD NORTH.]

Given under our hands and seals at the Treasury Chambers, Whitehall, the
20^th day of August, one thousand seven hundred and seventy three; in
the thirteenth year of the reign of our sovereign lord, George the
Third, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and so forth.

                                                               NORTH.
                                                           C. TOWNSHEND.
                                                           C.J. FOX.

To our very loving friends the Commissioners, for managing His Majesty's
Revenues of Customs and Excise, now and for the time being, and to all
other officers and persons herein concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

_East India Company, Licence to Export Teas_

Hon'ble Sirs:

We have the ship Eleanor, James Bruce, about 250 tons, (a constant
trader,) which we intend for Boston, and should be much obliged for the
freight of the teas you intend exporting to that place.

We have no ship bound to South Carolina, but are much obliged for the
preference given us. We are, sirs,

                         Your most h'ble sert^s.
                                              LANE, SON & FRASER.

Nicholas Lane, 6^th Aug^st 1773.

The Hon'ble the Court of Directors, &c., &c.

John Dorrien, Esq^r. recommends for Boston, the Beaver, Capt^n Coffin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

I wrote you under date of the 5^th inst^t that you would be pleased to
inform the Committee of Warehouses, whether you had a constant trader
ready to sail for Boston or South Carolina, but should have said to
Boston only. I am therefore to desire the favor of an answer whether you
have a constant trader ready for that colony.

                                          I am, &c., &c.,
                                                        WM. SETTLE.

  East India H^o. Aug^t 10, 1773.
  Alex. Champion, Esq^r.


Sir:

In answer to your esteemed of the 5^th and 10^th current, am obliged by
the favor intended, but at present have only one ship under my care
bound to Boston, who will depart in a very few days, but she is not a
constant trader. It is not, therefore, in my power to accept of the
offer.

                                I am, sir,
                                         Your most hum. serv^t.
                                            ALEXANDER CHAMPION.

  Bishopgate Street, Aug^t 10, 1773.

Mr. Wm. Settle.


Hon'ble Sir:

Being informed you have some teas to ship to America, I have now a
vessel, British built, burthen about 160 tons, which should be glad to
lett to your honors for the above purpose.

   I am, with due regard, hon'ble sirs,
                               Your most obed^t servt^t,
                                                       THOS. WALTERS.

  Carolina Coffee House,
    Birchen Lane, 17^th Aug^t 1773.

  The Elizabeth, John Scott, for any part of America.

  To the Hon'ble Directors of
    the East India Company.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Abraham Dupies, in Gracechurch Street, will become obligated for
Richard Clarke & Sons, of Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gentlemen:

I have a vessel in this port, which will be ready to return to America
in a few days, therefore take the opportunity to acquaint you that I am
willing to take on board her 600 chests of tea, either for New York or
Philadelphia, at the a customary freight given from hence to those
places.

                    I am, gentl^n your most hum. servant,
                                                       JOSEPH CABOT.

    Threadneedle Street, 24 Aug^t 1773.
  To the Hon'ble Committee of Warehouses.


                                                 London, Aug^t 26, 1773.

Sir:

We pray you to inform the Com^tee of Warehouses for the Hon'ble the East
India Company that we have a ship, _river built_, called the Nancy,
commanded by Captain Colville, compleately fitted and ready to receive
the tea for New York, which we beg leave to recommend to the Committee.
We are, sir,

                  Your most obedient and humble servants,
                                                        JOHN BLACKBURN.
                                                        PIGOU & BOOTH.
                                                        WM. KELLY & CO.

Mr. Wm. Settle.


Sir:

Please to acquaint the Hon'ble Committee of Warehouses, that we have
taken up the Polly, Cap^t Ayres, for Philadelphia, to carry the
Company's tea to that port, which vessel lays at Princes Stairs,
Rotherhith, and was built at Ipswich, in the year 1765. She is now ready
to take in.

                           We are, sirs,
                                  Your most h'ble serv^ts.
                                                       PIGOU & BOOTH,
                              For selves & GEORGE BROWNE,
                                SAMUEL WHARTON & GILBERT BARKLEY.

    Mark Lane, 31st Aug^t 1773.
  Mr. Wm. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

Your remarks to the bond offered you, relative to the 600 chests of tea,
which are to be exported to New York, have been laid before the
Committee of Warehouses, and they are of opinion that the said bond is
according to the agreement made with the several gentlemen for the
different Colonies, and the merchants who are concerned for the tea to
Boston, have executed their bonds agreeable thereto, and Messrs.
Wharton, Pigou & Barkley have agreed also to execute on Thursday
morning. Therefore, I am to desire you to inform me whether you will
please likewise to execute the said bond.

                            I am, sir,
                                   Your most h'ble serv^t
                                                         WM. SETTLE.

  East India House, 31^st Aug^t 1773.

  To John Blackburn, Esq^r.
    William Kelly, Esq^r.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

As the several gentlemen mentioned in your polite note of this day have
executed the bond, I shall with pleasure follow their example, and on
Thursday next I propose waiting on you for that purpose. I am sir,

                                      Your most h'ble serv^t
                                                        JOHN BLACKBURN.

    Scot's Yard, 31st Aug^t 1773.
  Mr. Wm. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir:

Last evening I had the pleasure to receive your favor of yesterday,
relative to the bond which I am to sign for New York, and the objections
made to its draught by Mr. Blackburn, Pigou and myself, which at the
time appeared resonable to us, but as others have signed in the form
shewn to me, I don't mean to be particular, and therefore shall conform,
relying on the honor of the Com^tee in all future matters.

Tomorrow I am indispensably obliged to go out of town shall return on
Saturday next, wait on you, & execute the bond. I am, sir,

                    Your most obedi^t & most hum. serv^t
                                                        WM. KELLY.

    Crescent, Sep. 1^st 1773.
  Mr. Wm. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Freight of 568 whole, & 130 half chests of Tea, shipped on the Polly,
Cap^t Sam^l Ayres, for Philadelphia:_

                                         feet.
  568 chests con^g for freight,         8748.6
  130 quarter d^o.       d^o             656.9
                                        ------
                                        9405.3
                                        ------

  9405.3 at 1s. 6d. pr foot, Philadelphia currency, is £705 7 10-1/2

              tons.
  Primage on 235-1/3 at 2s. sterl^g pr ton, is £23 10 3

_Freight of Tea on the London, to South Carolina:_

           feet.
  182   chests measure 2644.3 at 1s. pr foot     £132 4 3
   75     d^o.   d^o.   345.9  d^o.                17 5 9
  ----                                           --------
  257                                            149 10 0
        Primage, 5 pr cent                         7 10 0
                                                 --------
                                                 £157 0 0

_Freight of Tea shipped on the William, for Boston:_

                    feet.
  58 chests measure 585.11, at 1s. 4d. pr foot,   £39 1 3 L.M.
                            Primage,                1 9 6 sterl^g.

_Freight of 698 chests Tea on the Nancy, for New York:_

                      feet.
  698 chests measure 9264.8, at 2s. 3d. pr foot, is
  Currency,                                         £1042 5 4
  Sterling, £30 8 2    Primage, 5 pr ct.               52 2 3
                                                     --------
                                                    £1094 7 7
                                                     --------


_Freight of 114 chests Tea on the Eleanor, for Boston:_

                     feet.
  114 chests measure 1383.4, at 1s. 4d.        £92 4 5 L.M.
                     Primage,                   £3 9 0


_Freight of 112 chests Tea on the Beaver, for Boston:_

                     feet.
  112 chests measure 1375, at 1s. 4d., is     £91 13 10 L.M.
      34-1/2 tons at 2s. pr ton primage,       £3 17  0

Whitehall, Dec^r 17^th 1773.

Lord Dartmouth presents his compliments to Mr. Wheler, and requests the
favor to see him at his office, at Whitehall, on Monday morning next, at
eleven o'clock, on the subject of some advices Lord Dartmouth has lately
received from America, respecting the importation of tea from England.

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTER TO SUNDRY AMERICAN MERCHANTS.

Sir:

The Com^tee of Warehouses of the E.I. Com^y desire you would please to
inform them whether you have receiv^d any advices from _Boston_ relative
to the said Com^ys exportation of tea to that colony, and if you have,
to communicate the purport thereof to the Committee. I am, sir,

                                  Your most obe. ser^t
                                                       WM. SETTLE.

East India House, 20^th Dec^r 1773.

  To Mr. Wm. Palmer,}
  Brook Watson,     }   _Boston._

  Wm. Greenwood,   }
  J^o. Nutt,       }    _South Carolina._

  Jn^o. Blackburn, }
  Wm. Kelly,       }    _New York._

  Fred^k Pigou, Jun^r.  _New York & Philadelphia._

  Geo. Browne,    }
  Sam^l Wharton,  }     _Philadelphia._


LETTER TO SUNDRY AMERICAN MERCHANTS.[39]

Sir:

The Comm^tee of Warehouses desire the favor of an answer under your hand
to my letter of yesterday, relative to the exportation of tea to
_Boston_. I am, sir,

  Your most obd^t servant,

  WM. SETTLE.

East India House, 21^st Dec^r 1773.

  Brook Watson, Esq^r. _Boston._
  Wm. Greenwood, Esq^r. }
  John Nutt, Esq^r.     } _South Carolina._
  John Blackburn, Esq^r. _New York._
  Geo. Browne, Esq^r. _Philadelphia._

       *       *       *       *       *


LETTERS FROM SUNDRY AMERICAN MERCHANTS,

WITH ENCLOSURES OF ADVICES FROM THE SEVERAL COLONIES.

_BOSTON._

_From Mr. Palmer._

Mr. Palmer has received no material advices from Boston since the
consignment has taken place, but has letters of as late a date from
thence as the 3^d of Novem^r, one of which mentions there was no tea
then to be bought.

East India House, 21st Dec^r 1773

                                      Garlick Hill, 22d Decem^r 1773.

_To the Hon'ble the Committee of Warehouses, East India House._

Gent^m:

In compliance with your request, we send you enclosed extracts from the
letters which we have lately received from Boston relative to the Com^ys
teas sent there.

                          We are, gent^m
                                    Your most hum. serv^ts
                                                    WATSON & RASHLEIGH.


_Extract of a Letter dated Boston, 18^th Octo^r., 1773:_

"But what difficulties may arise from the disaffection of the merchants
and importers of tea to this measure of the India Company, I am not yet
able to say. It seems at present to be a matter of much speculation, and
if one is to credit the prints, no small opposition will be made
thereto. However, I am in hopes it will be otherwise, and taking it for
granted that the tea should arrive, and no obstacle happen to prevent
its being landed and disposed of, agreeably to the instructions of the
Company, then I am to add that you may be assured I shall strictly
conform to the instructions which I may jointly receive respecting it,
paying all due regard to the contents of your letter.

"I know not how to write more fully hereon until the tea arrives, and
what may possibly be the consequences attending it. My friends seem to
think it will subside; others are of a contrary opinion."


_Extract of a Letter dated Boston, 30 Oct^r., 1773:_

"I omitted a letter to you in particular when I wrote to your house the
10^th inst., because I thought it was probable, both from the contents
of your letter then received, as well as from the public reports, that
the tea you mention as coming from the India Com^y might every day be
expected to arrive, as you say 4 Aug^t they intended shipping 300 chests
immediately, but by my letter, this day received by a vessel from
London, it is not to be sent.

"I perceive by the prints, that the clamour is still continued against
this measure of the India Company, and seems to be pursued with rather
more warmth in some of the Southern Colonies than in this. For my own
part I am not sufficiently skilled in politicks to see the pernicious
consequences which 'tis said must arise therefrom. If they would prevent
the Tea Act being enforced, or the payment of the revenue arising
therefrom to Government, methinks they should either not import any tea,
or rather not consume any, and then the end would be answered at once.
But while there is such a vast quantity exported every year by so
considerable a number of persons, who all pay the duty thereof on its
arrival, I do not see why every importer, nay, every consumer thereof,
do not as much contribute to inforce the Tea Act as the India Comp^y
themselves, or the persons to whom they may think proper to consign
their tea for sale. Nor can I but be of opinion that the uneasiness is
fomented, if not originated, principally by those persons concerned in
the Holland trade, and thereby introduce large quantities of tea, which,
paying no duty, by that means they can afford to undersell those who do
pay it, and this trade, I am informed, is much more practiced in the
Southern Governments than this way.

"To what lengths the opposition to this tea's being brought or landed,
or disposed of, may be carried, must be left to time to determine."


_Extract of a Letter dated Boston, 4 Nov^r., 1773:_

"Thus far I had wrote you with intentions to forward by first
conveyance, when I found there was to be a muster of the people, to
demand that the persons who are to be employed as agents for disposing
of the tea which may come from the India Company, would resign their
commissions & swear (under Liberty Tree) to return the tea by the same
or first vessels for London, &c. You will be fully acquainted of their
unreasonable proceedings. After the time had elapsed which was fixed
upon for the gentlemen to appear and resign, on their not complying with
the order, they marched down in a body to Mr. Clarke's store, where we
were, and not receiving such an answer as they demanded, they began an
attack upon the store and those within, breaking down doors, flinging
about mud, &c., for about an hour, when they began to disperse, and a
number of gentl^n, friends of those agents coming to their assistance,
they left the store and went upon change, but met with no further
insult, tho' there is much threatening. As the tea is not arrived, and
it is uncertain when it may, I purpose to write you again speedily.

"In the interim, I am, &c."


SOUTH CAROLINA.

_Letter from Mr. Greenwood._

Sir:

In answer to your letter of the 20^th inst., I beg you would be pleased
to inform the Com^tee of Warehouses that I have yet received no advices
from South Carolina, relative to the Comp^y's exportation of tea. When I
do, they may depend I will take the earliest opportunity to communicate
the same to them.

                                  I am, sir,
                                           Your most obe^t serv^t
                                                          WM. GREENWOOD

    Queen Street, 22^d Dec^r., 1773.
  Mr. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *

_From Mr. Nutt._

Gentlemen:

In compliance with your desire, intimated to me by Mr. Settle,
respecting any information received from South Carolina, concerning the
teas exported by the East I. Com^y to that Colony, I have the honor to
acquaint you that the vessel in which they were shipped did not sail
from England before the 18^th October, and the latest dates from thence
are only the 1^st Nov^r., so that we cannot expect for some time to
hear of her arrival. I have the honor to be, gent^n.,

                                   Your most obed^t hum. serv^t.,
                                                             JOHN NUTT.

    Broad Street, 22^nd Decem^r, 1773.
  To the Com^tee of Warehouses, &c., &c., &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


_NEW YORK._


_Letter from Mr. Blackburn._

Sir:

I am honored with your two letters of the 20^th & 21st curr^t, desiring
me to inform the Com^tee of Warehouses if I have received any advices
from New York relative to the Com'^s exportation of tea to that Colony.

The vessel wherein the tea was shipped was not arrived when the last
letters were dispatched from thence, consequently no precise judgment
can be formed whether or not it would be permitted to be landed; but I
flatter myself from the disposition of the principal gentle^n of New
York, who are men of moderation, candour and prudence, and as firmly
attached to the Government and laws of this Kingdom as any of his
Majesty's subjects; that they will, by their example and influence, be
able to suppress every riot and disturbance occasioned by the opposers
of this measure.

I expect a ship from New York, which was to depart about the 26^th
Novem^r, by which I shall receive some fresh intelligence relative to
this business, and if I should be furnished with any advices that regard
the interest of the Company, I shall not fail to wait on the Directors
immediately. I have the honor to be, sir,

                                   Your most obed^t & hum. ser^t
                                                         JOHN BLACKBURN.

    Scots Yard, 22^nd Dec^r, 1773.
  Mr. Wm. Settle.


_Extract of a Letter from a merchant in New York, to Wm. Kelly, of
London, dated 5^th Nov^r, 1773:_

"The introduction of the East India Company's tea is violently opposed
here, by a set of men who shamefully live by monopolizing tea in the
smuggling way."


_Extract of a Letter from Abraham Lott, Esq^r., of New York, to Wm.
Kelly,[40] of London, dated New York, 5^th Nov^r., 1773, & received with
the above mentioned Extract of Mr. Kelly, 22^d Dec^r., 1773:_

"Herewith you will receive several papers relating to the importation of
the India Com^y's tea. If it comes out free of a _duty here_ on
importation, things I believe may go quiet enough, tho' you will
observe much is said against it even on that supposition. But if it
should be subject to a duty here, I am much in doubt whether it will be
safe, as almost every body in that case speaks against the admission of
it, so that, altho' I am well assured that the Governor will not suffer
the laws to be trampled on, yet there will be no such thing as selling
it, as the people would rather buy so much poison, than the tea with the
duty thereon, calculated (they say) to enslave them and their posterity,
and therefore are determined not to take what they call the nauseous
draft. A little time will determine how matters will terminate, that is,
if the tea comes out. If it does, I hope it may come free of duty, as by
that means much trouble and anxiety will be saved by the agents. I do
assure you they have all been very uneasy, tho' at the same time
determined to do their duty, but in the most prudent & quiet manner. It
is now two o'clock, P.M., when I received the paper signed Cassius, in
which you will find Mr. L---- R----de handsomely complimented, and
yourself severely handled, on a supposition that you should have spoken
words to the import, as asserted in the paper. Mr. R----e's name is not
mentioned, but there is no doubt but he is the person alluded to, as
upon the arrival of the London ships, who refused to bring the tea. It
was currently reported that he had wrote his partner nearly in the same
words as mentioned in the paper. You are the best judge of the truth of
the assertion, but whether true or not, his conduct is ungenerous and
mean. If the paper speaks truth, that he was offered part of the
consignment of tea, he must be a man of great influence to have so great
an offer made him, when so many other people of weight were applying for
it and could not obtain it."

       *       *       *       *       *


_From Mr. Fred^k Pigou, Jun^r._

Sir:

Please to acquaint the Com^tee of Warehouses of the Hon'ble the East
India Company, that from the advices I have received from
_Philadelphia_, I should be of opinion the tea sent to that place will,
if landed, meet with much difficulty in being disposed of.

At New York, I am of opinion it will meet with less opposition, and may
possibly be sold in that city. It would have been fortunate if the New
York vessel could have arrived as soon or before the Philadelphia ship.

                     I am, sir, your most hum. serv^t
                                                   FRED'K PIGOU, Jun^r.

    Mark Lane, 21st Dec^r., 1773.
  To Mr. Settle.


_PHILADELPHIA._


_Letter from Mr. Geo. Browne._

Sir:

The advice I have from my brother at Philadelphia, relative to the
Com^y's consignment of tea, is, that it was very doubtful how it would
be received there, the measure being looked upon in an unfavorable view
in general. He had only just received an account (from another hand) of
his being nominated one of the agents, and refers me to the public
prints for an account of the resolutions entered into by the people in
opposition to it. I am, sir,

                                  Your most obedi^t ser^t
                                                         GEO. BROWNE.

Mr. Settle.

       *       *       *       *       *


_From Mr. Sam^l Wharton._

Sir:

I understand that Mr. Walpole, of Lincolns Inn Fields, had received some
advices from my brother, respecting the teas sent to Philadelphia. I
applied to him for them, and he requested that I would send them to you,
with what intelligence I had myself received. I am, sir,

                                      Your very hum. serv^t
                                                         SAMUEL WHARTON.

    Argyle Street, Decem^r 23, 1773.
  Mr. Settle.


_Extract of a Letter from Thomas Wharton,[41] Esq^r. of Philadelphia,
dated Oct. 5, 1773, to Sam^l Wharton, in London:_

"I have closely attended to the course of your arguments, and think they
are of great weight, but you know it is impossible always to form a true
judgment from what real motives an opposition springs, as the smugglers
and London importers may both declare that this duty is stamping the
Americans with the badge of slavery, and notwithstanding the Directors
of the East India Company have a just right to send their teas where
they think proper, yet the Americans allege they may and ought to refuse
to purchase and use it.

"A little time after the ship's arrival we shall know what is to be
done, and I expect we shall before that time have a conference with the
agents from New York, _which I proposed_, that our conduct might be
uniform, and as much as possible answer the end of _our appointment_."


_Extracts of two Letters from Tho^s. Warton, Esq^r., of Philadelphia,
dated Oct. 5 and Oct. 30, 1773, to the Hon'ble Tho^s. Walpole, of
London:_

"About a week before the arrival of the September mail, a letter reached
this city, informing us that particular persons (tho' not all of them
the proper ones) were nominated agents for the East India Directors.
This gave the inhabitants a knowledge of the intention of the Directors,
and some persons immediately declared, that as the duty was still
retained, that, tho' small, yet it as implicitly fixed the power and
established the badge of slavery, as if it had been greater. The same
sentiments, I am told, are expressed in letters from New York. At
present, therefore, it is impossible to say what measures the people
will take on this occasion, but I should expect they will not hinder the
tea being landed, if they insist on its not being sold, till the duty is
taken off by Act of Parliament, or the East India Directors satisfy the
Commissioners of the Customs in London. For, notwithstanding, it may
justly be urged that the Directors of the East India Comp^y have a right
to export their teas to North America, yet, as it is said, the
inhabitants have also a right of judgment respecting the purchase and
consumption. I should expect, that if the opposition takes place, it
will rest with _their_ adherence to an engagement of this kind.

"I can have no doubt that the India Com^y would find their sales
lucrative, and that an extension of trade would certainly take place, by
comprehending the articles of pepper, spices, and silks in their
exports; great quantities of the two first articles have certainly been
introduced in the Continent from Holland and thro' the West Indies, and
therefore it is that I apprehend the London merchants are mistaken when
they say they already ship as much as the Continent can consume, for
through them are imported only such quantities of spices, &c., as the
merchant here can vend, after the run goods are sold, they being
imported cheaper than those from England, are naturally first sold. But
if the East India Company should think proper to extend their trade, I
cannot doubt it would in a great measure put a stop to the importation
from Holland and the Dutch Islands, and large sums would annually pass
from America to London for those commodities. But perhaps little more
should be said until it is known in what manner our fellow countrymen
shall view this scheme of trade."


                                          "Philadelphia, Oct. 30, 1773.

