The loss, in 1745, of the friends of his youth was an important
turning point in the King's mental life. With these unselfish,
honorable men almost everything died which had made him happy in his
intercourse with others. The intimacies into which he now entered as a
man were all of another kind. Even the best of the new acquaintances
received perhaps his occasional confidence, but never his heartfelt
friendship. The need for stimulating intellectual intercourse
remained, and became even stronger and more imperative, for in this
too he was unique; he never could dispense with cheerful and
confidential companions, with light, almost reckless conversation,
flitting through all shades of human moods, thoughtful or frivolous,
from the greatest questions of the human race down to the little
events of the day. Immediately after his accession he had written to
Voltaire and invited him to his court. He had first met the Frenchman
in 1740 on a journey near Wesel. Soon after, Voltaire had come to
Berlin for a few days, at heavy expense. He had even then impressed
the King as a jester, but Frederick felt nevertheless an infinite
respect for the talent of the man. Voltaire was to him the greatest
poet of all times, the master of ceremonies of Parnassus, where the
King himself was so anxious to play a part. Frederick's desire to have
this man in his train became stronger and stronger. He regarded
himself as his pupil; he wished to have all his verses approved by the
master; among his Brandenburg officials he pined for the wit and
spirit of the elegant Frenchman, and finally, his vanity as a
sovereign was concerned--he wanted to be a prince of the _beaux
esprits_ and philosophers, as he had become a glorious leader of
armies. After the second Silesian war his intimates were mostly
foreigners. After 1750 he had the pleasure of seeing the great
Voltaire also as a member of his court. It was no misfortune that this
unworthy man endured for only a few years his sojourn among the
barbarians.

During these ten years, from 1746 to 1756, Frederick acquired literary
independence, and that importance as a writer which is not yet
sufficiently appreciated in Germany. As to his French poetry, a German
can only judge imperfectly. He was a facile poet, who was easily
master of every mood in metre and rhyme, but from the point of view
of a Frenchman, he never completely overcame in his lyric poetry the
difficulties of a foreign language, however diligently his confidants
revised his work. He even lacked, it seems to us, the uniform
rhetorical spirit, that style which in Voltaire's time was the first
mark of a born poet. The effect of beautiful and noble sentiments, in
splendid phraseology, is spoiled by trivial thoughts and commonplace
expressions in the next line. Nor was the development of his taste
sufficiently assured and independent. In his esthetic judgment he was
quick, both to admire and to condemn; in reality, he was much more
dependent upon the opinion of his French acquaintances than his pride
would have admitted. What was best, moreover, in French poetry at that
time--the return to Nature and the struggle of the beauty of reality
against the fetters of an antiquated conventionalism--remained to him
a sealed book. For a long time he looked upon Rousseau as an eccentric
vagabond, and upon the conscientious and accurate spirit of Diderot
even as shallow. And yet it seems to us that there often appear in his
poems, especially in the light improvisations which he made to please
his friends, a wealth of poetical detail and a charming tone of true
feeling, which at least his model Voltaire might have envied.

Frederick's history of his times is, like Cæsar's _Commentaries_, one
of the most important documents of historical literature. True, like
the Roman general, like all practical statesmen, he stated facts as
they are reflected in the soul of a participant. He does not give due
value to everything or full justice to everybody, but he knows
infinitely more than is revealed to one at a distance, and he wrote of
some of the motives underlying the great events, not without
prejudice, yet with magnanimity toward his opponents. Writing at times
without the enormous reference material which a professional historian
must collect about him, he was occasionally deceived by his memory and
his judgment, though both were very reliable. He was, moreover,
composing an apology for his house, his politics, his campaigns; and,
like Cæsar, he sometimes ignores facts or interprets them as he wishes
them to go down to posterity; but his love of truth and the frankness
with which he treats his house and his own actions are no less
admirable than his sovereign calm and the ease with which he soars
above events, in spite of the little rhetorical embellishments which
were due to the taste of his time.

His many-sidedness is as astonishing as his productiveness. One of the
greatest military writers, a historian of importance, a clever poet,
and at the same time a popular philosopher, a practical statesman,
even a writer of very free and easy anonymous pamphlets, and sometimes
a journalist, he was always ready to take up his pen for anything that
inspired him and aroused his passions or enthusiasm, or to attack, in
verse or prose, any one who provoked or annoyed him--not only the pope
and the Empress, the Jesuits and the Dutch journalists, but also old
friends if they seemed lukewarm to him,--which he could not
endure,--or if they actually threatened to break with him. Never since
Luther has there been such a belligerent, relentless, untiring writer.
As soon as he put pen to paper he was like Proteus, everything: sage
or intriguer, historian or poet, whatever the situation demanded,
always an active, fiery, intellectual--sometimes also an
ill-mannered--man, with never a moment's thought of his royal
position. Whatever he liked he praised in poems or eulogies: the noble
doctrines of his own philosophy, his friends, his army, religious
liberty, independent investigation, tolerance, and popular education.

The conquering power of Frederick's mind had reached out in all
directions. When ambition inspired him to victory it seemed as if
there were no obstacle that would check him. Then came the years of
trial--seven years of terrible, heartrending cares--the great period,
in which the heaviest tasks that ever a man accomplished were laid
upon his rich, ambitious spirit, in which almost everything perished
which was his own possession, joy and happiness, peace and selfish
comfort; in which also many pleasing and graceful characteristics of
the man were to disappear, that he might become the self-sacrificing
prince of his people, the foremost servant of his State, and the hero
of a nation. No lust of conquest made him take the field this time; it
had long been plain to him that he was fighting for his own life and
that of his State. But his determination had grown only the stronger.
Like the stormwind he purposed to dash into the clouds which were
collecting from all sides about his head, and to break up the
thunderbolts through the energy of an irresistible attack, before they
were discharged. He had never been conquered up to this time. His
enemies had been beaten every time he had fallen upon them with his
terrible instrument--the army. Herein lay his only hope. If his
well-tried power did not fail him now, he might save his State.

But in the very first conflict with his old enemy, the Austrians, he
saw that they, too, had learned from him and were changed. He exerted
his strength to the utmost, and at Kollin it failed him. The 18th of
June, 1757, is the most momentous day in Frederick's life. There
happened on that day what twice more in this war snatched victory from
him--the general had underestimated his enemy and had expected the
impossible from his own brave army. After a short period of
stupefaction Frederick arose with new strength. Instead of an
aggressive war, he had been forced to wage a desperate war of defense.
His foes attacked his little country from all sides. He entered upon a
death struggle with every great power of the Continent, master of only
four million men and a defeated army. Now his talent as general showed
itself as he escaped the enemy after defeats and again attacked in the
most unexpected quarters and beat them, faced first one army and then
another, unsurpassed in his dispositions, inexhaustible in expedients,
unequaled as leader of troops in battle. So he stood, one against
five--Austrians, Russians, French, any one of whom was his superior in
strength, and at the same time against the Swedes and the Imperial
troops. For five years he struggled thus against armies far larger
than his own--every spring in danger of being crushed merely by
numbers, every autumn free again. A loud cry of admiration and
sympathy ran through Europe; and among those who gave the loudest
praise, although reluctantly, were his most bitter enemies. Now, in
these years of changing fortune, when the King himself experienced
such bitter vicissitudes of the fortune of war, his generalship was
the astonishment of all the armies of Europe. How, always the more
rapid and skilful, he managed to establish his lines against his
opponents; how so often he outflanked in an oblique position the
weakest wing of the enemy, forced it back, and put it to rout; how his
cavalry, which, newly organized, had become the strongest in the
world, dashed in fury upon the foe, broke their ranks, scattered their
battalions: all this was celebrated everywhere as a new advance in
military art, and the invention of surpassing genius. The tactics and
the strategy of the Prussian army came to be for almost half a century
the ideal and model for all the armies of Europe. It was the unanimous
opinion that Frederick was the greatest general of his time, and that
there had been few leaders since the beginning of history who could be
compared with him. It seemed incredible that the smaller numbers so
often conquered the greater, and even when defeated, instead of being
routed, faced the enemy, who had hardly recovered from his injuries,
as threatening and fully equipped as before. Today we praise not only
the field operations of the King, but also the wise prudence with
which he handled his supplies. He knew very well how much he was
limited by having to consider the commissariat, and the thousands of
carts in which he had to take with him the provisions and the daily
supplies of the soldiers; but he also knew that this method was his
only salvation. Once, when after the battle of Rossbach he made the
astonishing march into Silesia--one hundred and eighty-nine miles in
fifteen days--he, in the greatest danger, abandoned his old method. He
made his way through the country as other armies did at that time,
and quartered his men upon the people. But he wisely returned at once
to his old plan. For as soon as his enemies learned to imitate this
free movement, he was certainly doomed. When the old militia in his
ancient provinces rose to arms again, helped to drive out the Swedes,
and bravely defended Colberg and Berlin, he accepted their assistance
without objection; but he took pains not to encourage a guerilla war;
and when his East Frisian peasantry revolted independently against the
French and were severely punished by them for it, he told them with
brutal frankness that it was their own fault, for war was a matter for
soldiers; the business of the peasants and citizens should be
uninterrupted industry, the payment of taxes, and the furnishing of
recruits. He well knew that he was lost if a people's war in Saxony
and Bohemia should be aroused against him. This readiness, indicative
of the cautious general, to restrict himself to military forms, which
alone made the contest possible for him, may be reckoned among his
greatest qualities.

Louder and louder became the cry of sorrow and admiration with which
Germans and foreigners watched this death-struggle of the lion at bay.
As early as 1740 the young King had been praised by the Protestants as
the champion of freedom of conscience and enlightenment, against
intolerance and the Jesuits. When, a few months after the battle at
Kollin, he completely defeated the French at Rossbach, he became the
hero of Germany. A glad cry of joy broke out everywhere. For two
hundred years the French had done great wrong to the divided country;
now the German national idea began to revolt against the influence of
French culture, and the King, who himself greatly admired Parisian
poetry, had effectively routed the Parisian generals with German
musket balls. It was such a brilliant victory, such a humiliating
defeat of the hereditary enemy, that everywhere in Germany there was
hearty rejoicing. Even where the soldiers of a State were fighting
against King Frederick, the people at home in city and country
rejoiced at the blows he dealt in good old German fashion. And the
longer the war lasted, the more active became the faith in the King's
invincibility, and the higher rose the confidence of the Germans. For
the first time in long, long years they now had a hero of whose
military glory they could be proud--a man who accomplished what seemed
more than human. Innumerable anecdotes about him ran through the
country. Every little touch about his calmness, good humor, kindness
to individual soldiers, and the loyalty of his army, traveled hundreds
of miles. How, in danger of death, he played the flute in his tent,
how his wounded soldiers sang chorals after the battle, how he took
off his hat to a regiment--he has often been imitated since--all this
was reported on the Neckar and the Rhine, was printed, and listened to
with merry laughter and tears of emotion. It was natural that poets
should sing his praise. Three of them had been in the Prussian army:
Gleim and Lessing, as secretaries of Prussian generals, and Ewald von
Kleist, a favorite of the younger literary circles, as an officer,
until the bullet struck him at Kunersdorf. But still more touching for
us is the loyal devotion of the Prussian people. The old provinces,
Prussia, Pomerania, Brandenburg, and Westphalia, were suffering
unspeakably by the war, but the proud joy of having a share in the
hero of Europe often lifted even humble men above their own
sufferings. Citizens and peasants took the field as militiamen again
and again for years. When a number of recruits from the province of
Cleves and the county of Ravensberg deserted after a lost battle and
returned home, the deserters were declared perjurers by their own
fellow-countrymen and relatives, were excluded from the villages and
driven back to the army.

Foreign opinion was no less enthusiastic. In the Protestant cantons of
Switzerland there was as warm sympathy with the King's fate as if the
descendants of the Rütli men had never been separated from the German
empire. There were people there who were made ill by vexation when the
King's cause was in a bad way. It was the same in England. Every
victory of the King aroused wild joy in London. Houses were
illuminated and pictures and laudatory poems offered for sale. In
Parliament Pitt announced with admiration every new deed of the great
ally. Even at Paris, in the theatres and salons, people were rather
Prussian than French. The French derided their own generals and the
clique of Madame de Pompadour. Whoever was on the side of the French
arms, so Duclos reports, hardly dared to give expression to his views.
In St. Petersburg, the grand duke Peter and his party were such good
Prussians that they grieved in secret at every reverse of Frederick's
cause. The enthusiasm penetrated even to Turkey and to the Khan of
Tartary; and this respectful admiration of a whole continent outlasted
the war. When Hackert, the painter, was traveling through the interior
of Sicily, a gift of honor of wine and fruit was offered him by the
city council because they had heard that he was a Prussian, a subject
of the great King for whom they wished thereby to show their
reverence; and Muley Ismail, the emperor of Morocco, released without
any ransom the crew of a ship belonging to a citizen of Emden, whom
the Berbers had brought prisoner to Mogador, sent them in new clothes
to Lisbon, and assured them that their King was the greatest man in
the world, that no Prussian should be a prisoner in his land, and that
his cruisers would never attack the Prussian flag.

Poor oppressed soul of the German people! Long years had passed since
the men between the Rhine and the Oder had felt the joy of being
esteemed above others among the nations of the earth! Now by the magic
of one man's power everything was transformed. The German citizen,
awakened as from an anxious dream, looked out upon the world and
within to his own heart. Men had long vegetated quietly, without a
past in which they could rejoice, without a great future in which they
could hope. Now all at once they felt that they, too, had a share in
the honor and the greatness of the world; that a king and his people,
all of their blood, had given to the German national idea a golden
setting, and to the history of civilization a new meaning. Now they
were experiencing the struggles, ventures, and victories of a great
man. Work on in your study, peaceful thinker, fantastic dreamer! You
have learned over-night to look down with a smile upon foreign ways
and to expect great things of your own talent. Try to realize, now,
what flows from your heart!

But while the youthful power of the people shook its wings with
enthusiastic warmth, how did the great prince feel who was struggling
ceaselessly against his enemies? The inspiring cry of the people rang
in his ears as a feeble sound. The King heard it almost with
indifference. His heart grew calmer and colder. To be sure, passionate
hours of sorrow and heart-rending cares came to him over and over
again. He kept them hidden from his army; his calm face became harder,
his brow more deeply furrowed, and his expression more rigid. Only
before a few intimates he opened his heart from time to time, and then
for a moment the sorrow of the man who had reached the limits of human
possibilities broke forth.

Ten days after the battle of Kollin his mother died. A few weeks
afterward he drove in anger his brother August Wilhelm from the army,
because he had not been strong enough to lead it. The next year this
brother died "of sorrow," as the officer of the day announced to the
King. Shortly after he received the news of the death of his sister at
Bayreuth. One after another his generals fell by his side, or lost the
King's confidence, because they were not equal to the superhuman tasks
of this war. His veterans, the pride of his heart, hardened warriors,
seasoned in three fierce wars, who, dying, stretched out their hands
toward him and called his name, were crushed in entire companies about
him, and what came to fill the broad gaps that death incessantly
mowed in his army were young men, some good material, but many
worthless. The King made use of them as he did of others, more
sternly, more severely. His glance and his word gave courage and
devotion even to the inferior sort, but still he knew that all this
was not salvation. His criticism became brief and cutting, his praise
rare. So he lived on; five summers and winters came and went; the work
was gigantic; his thinking and scheming was inexhaustible, his eagle
eye scrutinized searchingly the most remote and petty circumstances,
and yet there was no change, and no hope anywhere. The King read and
wrote in leisure hours just as before; he composed verses and kept up
a correspondence with Voltaire and Algarotti, but he was prepared to
see all this come soon to an end--a swift and sudden one. He carried
in his pocket day and night something which could make him free from
Daun and Laudon. At times the whole affair filled him with disdain.

The letters of the man from whom Germany dates a new epoch in its
intellectual life deserve to be read with reverence by every German.
When you find him writing to Frau von Camas, "For the last six years I
have felt that it is the living, not the dead, for whom one should be
sorry," if you are shocked by the gloomy energy of his determination
you must beware of thinking that in it the power of this remarkable
spirit found its highest expression. It is true that the King had some
moments of desperation when he longed for death by the enemy's bullet
in order not to be forced to use the capsule which he carried in his
pocket. He was indeed fully determined not to ruin the State by living
as a captive of Austria; to this extent what he writes is terribly
true. But he was also of a poetic temperament, a child of the century
which so longed for great deeds and found such immense satisfaction in
the expression of exalted feelings. He was, to the bottom of his
heart, a German with the same emotional needs as, for instance, the
infinitely weaker Klopstock and his admirers. The consideration and
resolute expression of his final resolve made him freer and more
cheerful at heart. He wrote to his sister at Bayreuth about it in the
momentous second year of the war; and this letter is especially
characteristic, for his sister also was determined not to survive him
and the downfall of his house; and he approved this decision, to
which, by the way, he gave little attention in his gloomy satisfaction
at his own reflections. The two royal children had once secretly
recited, in the house of their stern father, the parts of French
tragedies; now their hearts beat again in the single thought of
freeing themselves by a Catonian death from a life full of
disappointment, confusion, and suffering. But when the excited and
nervous sister fell seriously ill, Frederick forgot all his Stoic
philosophy, and clinging fast to life with a passionate tenderness,
worried and mourned over her who was the dearest to him of his family.
When she died, his poignant grief was perhaps increased by the feeling
that he had interfered in too tragic a manner with a tender woman's
life. Thus, even in the greatest of all Germans born in the first half
of the eighteenth century, poetic feelings, and the wish to appear
beautiful and great, were strangely mingled with the serious realities
of life. Poor little Professor Semler who, while under the deepest
emotion, still studied his attitudes and worked over his polite
phrases, and the great King, who in cool expectation of the hour of
his death, still wrote of suicide in beautifully balanced
periods--both were sons of the same age, in which pathos, which had
not yet found worthy expression in art, luxuriated like climbing
plants about the realities of life. But the King was greater than his
philosophy. In reality he never lost his courage, nor the persistent,
defiant vigor characteristic of the old Germans, nor the secret hope
which a man needs in every difficult task.

And he held out. The forces of his enemies grew weaker, their generals
were worn out, and their armies were scattered. Finally Russia
withdrew from the coalition. This, and the King's last victories,
turned the balance. He had won. He had not only conquered Silesia, but
vindicated its possession for his Prussian kingdom. But while his
people rejoiced, and the loyal citizens of his capital prepared a
festive reception for him, he shunned their merrymaking and withdrew
silent and alone to Sans Souci. He said that he wished to spend his
remaining days in peace, living for his people.

In the first twenty-three years of his reign he had struggled
and fought to maintain his power against the world. Twenty-three
years more he was destined to rule peacefully over his people as
a wise, stern patriarch. He guided his State with the greatest
self-denial, though with insistence on his own ways, striving for
the greatest things, but yet in full control even of the smallest.
Many of his ideas have been left behind by the advance of modern
civilization--they were the result of the experiences of his youth
and early manhood. Thought was to be free; every man to think what he
pleased, but to do his duty as a citizen. He himself subordinated his
comfort and his expenditures to the welfare of the State, meeting the
whole expense of the royal household with some two hundred thousand
thalers; thinking first of the advantage of his people and last of
himself. His subjects, in their turn, he felt should bear cheerfully
whatever duties and burdens he imposed upon them. Every one was to
remain in the station in which birth and education had placed him. The
noblemen were to be landholders and officers; to the citizens belonged
the towns, trade, manufacturing, instruction, and invention; to the
peasant, the land and the menial work. But in his sphere each one was
to be prosperous and happy. Equal, strict, ready justice for every
one; no favors to the highborn and rich--rather, in case of doubt, the
humble should have the preference. To increase the number of useful
men; to make every activity as profitable and as perfect as possible;
to buy as little as possible abroad; to produce everything at home,
exporting the surplus--these were the leading principles of his social
and economic theories. He exerted himself incessantly to increase the
acreage of arable land, and to provide new places for settlers. Swamps
were drained, lakes drawn off, dikes thrown up. Canals were dug and
money advanced to found new factories. At the instigation and with the
financial support of the government cities and villages were rebuilt,
more solid and sanitary than they had been before. The farmers' credit
system, fire insurance societies, and the Royal Bank were founded.
Everywhere public schools were established. Educated people were
brought in from abroad; the government officials everywhere were
required to be educated, and regulated by examination and strict
inspection. It is the duty of the historian to enumerate and praise
all this, if also to mention some unsuccessful attempts of the King,
which were inevitable owing to his endeavor to control everything
himself.

The King cared for all his lands, and by no means least for his child
of sorrow, the newly won Silesia. When he conquered this great
district it had a few more than a million inhabitants. They realized
vividly the contrast between the easy-going Austrian management and
the precise, restless, stirring rule of Prussia. In Vienna the
catalogue of prohibited books had been larger than at Rome; now bales
of books came incessantly from Germany into the province, reading and
buying were astonishingly free, even printed attacks upon the
sovereign himself. In Austria it was the privilege of the aristocracy
to wear foreign cloth. When the father of Frederick the Great of
Prussia had forbidden the importation of cloth, he had first of all
dressed himself and his princes in domestic goods. In Vienna no office
had been considered aristocratic if it implied anything but a nominal
function; all the actual work was a matter for subordinates. A
chamberlain stood higher than a veteran general or minister. In
Prussia even the highest born was little esteemed if he was not useful
to the State, and the King himself was a most exact official, who
watched and scolded over every thousand thalers saved or spent. Any
one in Austria who left the Catholic Church was punished with
confiscation of property and banishment; under the Prussians anybody
could leave or join any church--that was his own affair. Under the
imperial rule the government had been, on the whole, negligent if it
had been forced to occupy itself with any matter; the Prussian
officials had their noses and their hands in everything. In spite of
the three Silesian wars the province grew to be far more prosperous
than it had been under the Empire. Up to this time a hundred years had
not been sufficient to wipe out the visible traces of the Thirty
Years' War. The people remembered well how in the cities the heaps of
rubbish from the time of the Swedish invasions had lain about, and
between the remaining houses there were patches of waste ground
blackened by fire. Many small cities still had log houses in the old
Slavic style, with thatched or shingled roofs, patched up shabbily
from time to time. In a few decades the Prussians removed the traces
not only of former devastations, but also of the recent Seven Years'
War. Frederick laid out several hundred new villages, had fifteen
good-sized towns rebuilt in regular streets--largely with funds from
the royal treasury--and had compelled the landed proprietors to
restore several thousand farms which they had abolished as individual
holdings, and install upon them tenants with rights of succession.
Under the Empire the taxes had been lower, but they had been unfairly
distributed and had fallen chiefly upon the poor, the nobility being
exempt from the greater part of them. The collection was imperfect,
much was embezzled or poorly applied; relatively little came into the
imperial treasury. The Prussians, on the contrary, divided the country
into small districts, appraised every acre of land, and in a few years
abolished almost all exemptions. The outlying country now paid its
land taxes and the cities their excise duties. So the province bore
the double burden with greater ease, and no one but the privileged
classes grumbled; and with all this, it could maintain forty thousand
soldiers, whereas formerly there had been in the province only about
two thousand. Before 1740 the nobility had lived _en grand seigneur_.
All who were Catholic and rich lived in Vienna. Everybody else who
could raise enough money betook himself to Breslau. Now the majority
of landholders lived on their estates, the poverty-stricken nobles
disappeared, the nobility knew that the King honored them if they
looked after the cultivation of the land, and that the new master
showed cold contempt to those who neither managed their estates nor
filled civil or military positions. Formerly lawsuits had been endless
and expensive, hardly to be carried through without bribery and
sacrifice of money. Now it was observed that the number of lawyers
decreased, so quickly came the decisions. Under the Austrians, to be
sure, the caravan trade with the East had been greater; the people of
the Bukowina and Hungary, and also the Poles, turned elsewhere and
were already looking toward Trieste; but in place of this, new
manufacturing industries arose; wool and textiles, and in the mountain
valleys a flourishing linen industry. Many found the new era
uncomfortable, many were really incommoded by its severity; but few
dared to deny that on the whole things had been greatly improved.

But another thing in the Prussian system was astonishing to the
Silesians, and soon gained a secret power over their minds. This was
the Spartan spirit of devotion on the part of the King's servants,
which appeared so frequently even among the humblest officials; for
instance, the revenue collectors, never popular even before the
introduction of the French system. In this case they were retired
subaltern officers, veteran soldiers of the King, who had won his
battles for him and grown gray in powder smoke. They sat now by the
gates smoking their pipes; with their very small pay they could
indulge in no luxuries; but they were on the spot from early morning
until late at night, doing their duty skilfully, precisely and
quickly, as old soldiers are wont to do. Their minds were always on
their service; it was their honor and their pride. For years to come
old Silesians from the time of the great King used to tell their
grandchildren how the punctuality, strictness, and honesty of the
Prussian officials had astonished them. In every district
headquarters, for instance, there was a tax collector. He lived in his
little office, which was perhaps also his bedroom, and collected in a
great wooden bowl the land taxes, which the village officials brought
into his room monthly on an appointed day. Many thousand thalers were
entered on the lists, and were delivered, to the last penny, to the
great main treasuries. The pay too of such a man was small. He sat and
collected and stowed in purses until his hair became white and his
trembling hands were no longer able to manage the two-groschen pieces.
And it was the pride of his life that the King knew him personally,
and if he ever drove through the place would silently look at him from
his great eyes, while the horses were being changed, or, if he was
very gracious, give him a slight nod. With respect and a certain awe
the people looked upon even these subordinate servants of the new
principle, and the Silesians were not alone in this. Something new had
come into the world in general. It was not a mere figure of speech
when Frederick called himself the foremost servant of his State. As he
had taught his wild nobility on the battlefield that it was the
highest honor to die for the Fatherland, so his untiring, faithful
care forced upon the soul of the least of his servants in the distant
border towns the great idea of the duty of living and working first of
all for the good of his King and his country.

When the province of Prussia was forced, in the Seven Years' War, to
do homage to Empress Elizabeth, and remained for several years
incorporated in the Russian Empire, the officers of the district found
means nevertheless to raise money and grain for their King in secret,
and in spite of a foreign army and government. Great skill was used to
accomplish the transportation. There were many in the secret, but not
a traitor among them. In disguise they stole through the Russian lines
at the risk of their lives, although they knew that they would reap
small thanks from the King, who did not care for his East Prussians at
all. He spoke contemptuously of them, and showed them unwillingly the
favors which he bestowed on the other provinces. His face turned to
stone whenever he learned that one of his young officers was born
between the Memel and the Vistula, and after the war he never trod on
East Prussian soil. But this conduct did not disturb the East
Prussians in their admiration. They clung with faithful love to
their ungracious lord, and his best and most enthusiastic eulogist was
Emanuel Kant.

Life in the King's service was serious, often hard--work and
deprivation without end. It was difficult even for the best to satisfy
the strict master; and the greatest devotion received but curt thanks.
If a man was worn out he was likely to be coldly cast aside. There was
work without end everywhere: something new, something beginning, some
scaffolding of an unfinished structure. To a foreign visitor this life
did not seem at all graceful; it was austere, monotonous, and rude,
with little beauty or carefree cheerfulness. And as the King's
bachelor household, his taciturn servants, and the submissive
intimates under the trees of the quiet garden, gave a foreign guest
the impression of a monastery, so in all Prussian institutions he
found something of the renunciation and the discipline of a great busy
monastic brotherhood.

For something of this spirit had been transmitted even to the people
themselves. Today we honor in this an undying merit of Frederick II.,
for this spirit of abnegation is still the secret of the greatness of
the Prussian State, and the final and best guarantee of its
permanence. The artfully constructed machine which the great King had
set up with so much intelligence and effectiveness was not to last
forever; twenty years after his death it broke down; but in the fact
that the State did not perish with it, that the intelligence and
patriotism of the citizens were able of their own accord to establish
under his successors a new life on a new basis, we see the secret of
Frederick's greatness.

Nine years after the close of the last war which was fought for the
possession of Silesia, Frederick increased his domain by a new
acquisition, not much less in area, but thinly populated--the Polish
districts which have since become German territory under the name of
West Prussia.

If the King's claims to Silesia had been doubtful, all the acumen of
his officials was now needed to make a show of some uncertain right to
portions of the new acquisition. About this the King himself was
little concerned. He had defended before the world with almost
superhuman heroism the occupation of Silesia. This province was united
to Prussia by streams of blood. In the case of West Prussia the craft
of the politician did the work almost alone, and for a long time the
conqueror lacked in public opinion that justification for his action
which, as it seems, is given by the horrors of war and the capricious
fortune of the battlefield. But this last acquisition of the King's,
though wanting in the thunder of guns and the trumpets of victory, was
yet, of all the great gifts which the German people owe to Frederick
II., the greatest and most abounding in fortunate consequences.
Through several hundred years the Germans had been divided and hemmed
in and encroached upon by neighbors greedy for conquest; the great
King was the first conqueror who again pushed the German boundaries
toward the east. A hundred years after his great ancestor had in vain
defended the fortresses of the Rhine against Louis XIV., Frederick
gave the Germans again the explicit admonition that it was their duty
to carry law, education, liberty, culture, and industry into the east
of Europe. His whole territory, with the exception of a few Old Saxon
districts, had been originally German, then Slavic, then again won
from the Slavs by fierce wars or colonization; never since the
migrations of the Middle Ages had the struggle ceased for the broad
plains east of the Oder; never since the conquest of Brandenburg had
this house forgotten that it was the warden of the German border.
Whenever wars ceased the politicians were busy. The Elector Frederick
William had freed Prussia, the territory of the Teutonic Knights, from
feudal allegiance to Poland. Frederick I. had boldly raised this
isolated colony to a kingdom. But the possession of East Prussia was
insecure. It was not the corrupt republic of Poland which threatened
danger, but the rising power of Russia. Frederick had learned to
respect the Russians as enemies; he knew the soaring ambition of
Empress Catherine, and as a prudent prince seized the right moment.
The new territory--Pomerelia, the _voivodeship_ (administrative
province) of Kulm and Marienburg, the bishopric of Ermeland, the city
of Elbing, a portion of Cujavia, a portion of Posen--united East
Prussia with Pomerania and Brandenburg. It had always been a border
land. Since the early times people of different races had crowded into
the coasts of the Baltic: Germans, Slavs, Lithuanians, and Finns. From
the thirteenth century the Germans had made their way into this
Vistula country as founders of cities and agriculturists: Teutonic
Knights, merchants, pious monks, German noblemen and peasants. On both
sides of the Vistula arose the towers and boundary stones of German
colonies--supreme among them the magnificent city of Danzig, the
Venice of the Baltic, the great seaport of the Slavic countries, with
its rich St. Mary's Church and the palaces of its merchant princes;
and beyond it on another arm of the Vistula, its modest rival, Elbing:
farther up, the stately towers and broad avenues of Marienburg; near
it the great princely castle of the Teutonic order, the most beautiful
architectural monument of Northern Germany; and in the Vistula valley,
on a rich alluvial soil, the old prosperous colonial estates: one of
the most productive countries of the world, protected against the
devastations of the Slavic stream by massive dikes dating back to the
days of the Knights. Still farther up were Marienwerder, Graudenz,
Kulm, and in the low lands of the Netze, Bromberg, the centre of the
German border colonies among a Polish population. Smaller German towns
and village communities were scattered through the whole territory,
and the rich Cistercian monasteries of Oliva and Peplin had been
zealous colonizers. But in the fifteenth century the tyrannical
severity of the Teutonic order had driven the German cities and
landowners of West Prussia to an alliance with Poland.

The Reformation of the sixteenth century won the submission not only
of the German colonists but of three-quarters of the nobility in the
great republic of Poland; and toward 1590 about seventy out of a
hundred parishes in the Slavic district of Pomerelia were Protestant.
It seemed for a short time as if a new commonwealth and a new culture
were about to develop in the Slavic East--a great Polish State with
German elements in the cities. But the introduction of the Jesuits
brought an unsalutary change. The Polish nobility returned to the
Catholic Church: in the Jesuit schools their sons were trained to
proselytizing fanaticism, and from that time on the Polish State
declined, conditions becoming worse and worse.

The attitude of the Germans in West Prussia was not uniform toward the
proselytizing Jesuits and Slavic tyranny. A large proportion of the
immigrant German nobles became Catholic and Polish; the townsmen and
peasants remained for the most part obstinately Protestant. So there
was added to the conflict in language conflict in religious creed, and
to race hatred a religious frenzy. In this century of enlightenment
the persecution of Germans in these districts became fanatical. One
church after another was torn down, the wooden ones set on fire, and
after the church was burned the village had lost its right to a
parish: German preachers and school teachers were driven out and
disgracefully maltreated. "_Vexa Lutheranum dabit thalerum_" ("harry a
Lutheran and he will give up a thaler") was the usual motto of the
Poles against the Germans. One of the greatest landowners in the
country, a certain Unruh of the Birnbaum family, the starost of
Gnesen, was sentenced to die, after having his tongue pulled out and
his hands chopped off, because he had copied from German books into a
notebook sarcastic remarks about the Jesuits. There was no more
justice, no more safety. The national party of the Polish nobility, in
alliance with fanatic priests, persecuted most passionately those whom
they hated as Germans and Protestants. All sorts of plunder-loving
rabble collected on the side of the "patriots" or "confederates." They
collected into bands, overran the country in search of plunder, and
fell upon the smaller towns and German villages, not only from
religious zeal, but still more from the greed of booty. The Polish
nobleman Roskowsky wore boots of different colors, a red one to
indicate fire, and a black one for death. Thus he rode, levying
blackmail, from one place to another, and in Jastrow he had the hands,
the feet, and finally the head of the Protestant preacher Willich cut
off and thrown into a swamp. This happened in 1768.

Such was the condition of the country just before the Prussian
occupation. It was a state of things that might perhaps be found now
in Bosnia, but would be unheard of in the most wretched corner of
Christian Europe.

While still only a boy of twelve in the palace in Berlin, Frederick
the Great had been reminded by his father's anger and sorrow that the
kings of Prussia had a duty as protectors toward the German colonies
on the Vistula. For in 1724 a loud call from that quarter for help had
rung through Germany, and the bloody tragedy at Thorn became an
important subject of public interest and of diplomacy. During a
procession which the Jesuits were conducting through the city, some
Polish nobles of the Jesuit college had insulted some citizens and
schoolboys, and the angered populace had broken into the Jesuit school
and college and inflicted damage. This petty street-riot had been
brought up in the Polish parliament, sitting as a trial court, and the
parliament, after a passionate speech by the leader of the Jesuits,
had condemned to death the two burgomasters of the city and sixteen
citizens; whereupon the Jesuit party hastened to put to death the head
burgomaster, Rössner, and nine citizens, in some cases with barbarous
cruelty. The church of St. Mary was taken from the Protestants, the
clergymen driven out, and the school closed. King Frederick William
had tried in vain at the time to help the unfortunate city. He had
prevailed upon all the neighboring powers to send stern notes, and had
felt himself bitterly grieved and humiliated when all his
representations were disregarded; now after fifty years his son came
to put an end to this barbarous disorder, and to unite again with
Prussia this land which before the Polish sovereignty had belonged to
the Teutonic order.

[Illustration: FREDERICK THE GREAT ON A PLEASURE TRIP
_From the Painting by Adolph von Menzel_]

Danzig, to be sure, indispensable to the Poles, maintained itself
through these decades of disorder in aristocratic seclusion. It
remained a free city under Slavic protection, for a long time
suspicious of the great King and not well disposed toward him. Thorn
also had to wait twenty years longer in oppression, separated from the
other German colonies, as a Polish border city. But the energetic
assistance of the King saved the country and most of the German towns
from destruction. The Prussian officials who were sent into the
country were astonished at the desolation of the unheard-of situation
which existed but a few days' journey from their capital. Only certain
larger towns, in which the German life had been protected by strong
walls and the old market traffic, and some sheltered country
districts, inhabited exclusively by Germans (such as the lowlands near
Danzig, the villages under the mild rule of the Cistercians of Oliva,
and the prosperous German places of the Catholic Ermeland), were left
in tolerable condition. Other towns lay in ruins, as did most of the
farmsteads of the open country. The Prussians found Bromberg, a German
colonial city, in ruins; and it is even yet impossible to determine
exactly how the city came into that condition. In fact, the
vicissitudes which the whole Netze district had undergone in the last
nine years before the Prussian occupation are completely unknown. No
historian, no document, no chronicle, gives reports of the destruction
and the slaughter which must have raged there. Evidently the Polish
factions fought between themselves, and crop failures and pestilence
may have done the rest. Kulm had preserved from an earlier time its
well-built walls and stately churches, but in the streets the
foundation walls of the cellars stood out of the decaying wood and
broken tiles of the crumbled buildings. There were whole streets of
nothing but such cellar rooms in which wretched people lived. Of the
forty houses of the main market-place twenty-eight had no doors, no
roofs, no windows, and no owners. Other cities were in a similar
condition.

The majority of the country people also lived in circumstances which
seemed pitiable to the King's officers, especially on the borders of
Pomerania, where the Wendish Cassubians dwelt. Whoever approached a
village there saw gray huts with ragged thatch on a bare plain without
a tree, without a garden--only the wild cherry-trees were indigenous.
The houses were built of poles daubed with clay. The entrance door
opened into a room with a great fireplace and no chimney; heating
stoves were unknown. Seldom was a candle lighted, only pineknots
brightened the darkness of the long winter evenings. The chief article
of the wretched furniture was a crucifix with a holy water basin
below. The filthy and uncouth people lived on rye porridge, often on
herbs which they cooked like cabbage in a soup, on herrings, and on
brandy, to which women as well as men were addicted. Bread was baked
only by the richest. Many had never in their lives tasted such a
delicacy; few villages had an oven. If the people ever kept bees they
sold the honey to the city dwellers, they also trafficked in carved
spoons and stolen bark; in exchange for these they got at the fairs
their coarse blue cloth coats, black fur caps, and bright red
kerchiefs for the women. Looms were rare and spinning-wheels were
unknown. The Prussians heard there no popular songs, no dances, no
music--pleasures which even the most wretched Pole does not give up;
stupid and clumsy, the people drank their wretched brandy, fought, and
fell into the corners. And the country nobility were hardly different
from the peasants; they drove their own primitive plows and clattered
about in wooden shoes on the earthen floors of their cottages. It was
difficult even for the King of Prussia to help these people. Only the
potato spread quickly; but for a long time the fruit-trees which had
been planted by order were destroyed by the people, and all other
attempts at promoting agriculture met with opposition.

Just as poverty-stricken and ruined were the border districts with a
Polish population. But the Polish peasant in all his poverty and
disorder at least kept the greater vivacity of his race. Even on the
estates of the higher nobility, of the starosts, and of the crown, all
the farm buildings were dilapidated and useless. Any one who wished to
send a letter must employ a special messenger, for there was no post
in the country. To be sure, no need was felt of one in the villages,
for most of the nobility knew no more of reading and writing than the
peasants. If any one fell ill, he found no help but the secret
remedies of some old village crone, for there was not an apothecary in
the whole country. If any one needed a coat he could do no better than
take needle in hand himself--for many miles there was no tailor,
unless one of the trade made a trip through the country on the chances
of finding work. If any one wished to build a house he must provide
for artisans from the West as best he could. The country people were
still living in a hopeless struggle with the packs of wolves, and
there were few villages in which every winter men and animals were not
decimated. If the smallpox broke out, or any other contagious disease
came upon the country, the people saw the white image of pestilence
flying through the air and alighting upon their cottages; they knew
what such an apparition meant: it was the desolation of their homes,
the wiping out of whole communities; and with gloomy resignation they
awaited their fate. There was hardly anything like justice in the
country. Only the larger cities maintained powerless courts. The
noblemen and the starosts inflicted their punishments with
unrestrained caprice. They habitually beat and threw into horrible
dungeons not only the peasants but the citizens of the country towns
who were ruled by them or fell into their hands. In the quarrels which
they had with one another, they fought by bribery in the few courts
which had jurisdiction over them. In later years that too had almost
ceased. They sought vengeance with their own resources, by sudden
onslaughts and bloody sword-play.

It was in reality an abandoned country without discipline, without
law, without masters. It was a desert; on about 13,000 square miles
500,000 people lived, less than forty to a square mile. And the
Prussian King treated his acquisition like an uninhabited prairie. He
located boundary stones almost at his pleasure, then moved them some
miles farther again. Up to the present time the tradition remains in
Ermeland, the district around Heilberg and Braunsberg, with twelve
towns and a hundred villages, that two Prussian drummers with twelve
men conquered all Ermeland with four drumsticks. And then the King in
his magnificent manner began to build up the country. He was attracted
by precisely these run-down conditions, and West Prussia henceforth
became, as Silesia had been before, his favorite child, which with
infinite care, like a dutiful mother, he washed and brushed, provided
with new clothes, forced into school and good behavior, and never let
out of his sight. The diplomatic negotiations about the conquest were
still going on when he sent a troop of his best officials into the
wilderness. The territory was subdivided into small districts, in the
shortest possible time the whole land area was appraised and equitably
taxed, each district provided with a provincial magistrate, with a
court, and with post-offices and sanitary police. New parishes were
called into life as if by magic, a company of 187 school teachers was
brought into the country--the worthy Semler had chosen and drilled
part of them--and squads of German artisans were got together, from
the machinist down to the brickmaker. Everywhere was heard the bustle
of digging, hammering, building. The cities were filled with
colonists, street after street rose from the ruins, the estates of the
starosts were changed into crown estates, new villages of colonists
were laid out, new agricultural enterprises ordered. In the first year
after the occupation the great canal was dug, which in a course of a
dozen miles or so unites the Vistula by way of the Netze with the Oder
and the Elbe. A year after the King issued the order for the canal he
saw with his own eyes laden Oder barges 120 feet long enter the
Vistula, bound east. Through the new waterway broad stretches of land
were drained and immediately filled with German colonists. Incessantly
the King urged on, praised, and censured. However great the zeal of
his officials was, it was seldom able to satisfy him. In this way, in
a few years, the wild Slavic weeds which had sprung up here and there
even over the German fields were brought under control, and the Polish
districts, too, got used to the orderliness of the new life; and West
Prussia showed itself, in the wars after 1806, almost as stoutly
Prussian as the old provinces.

While the gray-haired King planned and created, year after year passed
over his thoughtful head. His surroundings became stiller and more
solitary; the circle of men whom he took into his confidence became
smaller. He had laid aside his flute, and the new French literature
appeared to him shallow and tedious. Sometimes it seemed to him as if
a new life were budding under him in Germany, but he was a stranger to
it. He worked untiringly for his army and for the prosperity of his
people; the instruments he used were of less and less importance to
him, while his feeling for the great duties of his crown became ever
loftier and more passionate.

But just as his seven years' struggle in war may be called superhuman,
so now there was in his work something tremendous, which appeared to
his contemporaries sometimes more than earthly and sometimes inhuman.
It was great, but it was also terrible, that for him the prosperity of
the whole was at any moment the highest thing, and the comfort of the
individual so utterly nothing. When he drove out of the service with
bitter censure, in the presence of his men, a colonel whose regiment
had made a vexatious mistake on review; when in the swamp land of the
Netze he counted more the strokes of the 10,000 spades than the
sufferings of the workmen who lay ill with malarial fever in the
hospitals he had erected for them; when he anticipated with his
restless demands the most rapid execution, there was, though united
with the deepest respect and devotion, a feeling of awe among his
people, as before one whose being is moved by some unearthly power. He
appeared to the Prussians as the fate of the State, unaccountable,
inexorable, omniscient, comprehending the greatest as well as the
smallest. And when they told each other that he had also tried to
overcome Nature, and that yet his orange trees had perished in the
last frosts of spring, then they quietly rejoiced that there was a
limit for their King after all, but still more that he had submitted
to it with such good-humor and had taken off his hat to the cold days
of May.

With touching sympathy the people collected all the incidents of the
King's life which showed human feeling, and thus gave an intimate
picture of him. Lonesome as his house and garden were, the imagination
of his Prussians hovered incessantly around the consecrated place. If
any one on a warm moonlight night succeeded in getting into the
vicinity of the palace, he found the doors open, perhaps without a
guard, and he could see the great King sleeping in his room on a camp
bed. The fragrance of the flowers, the song of the night birds, the
quiet moonlight, were the only guards, almost the only courtiers of
the lonely man. Fourteen times the oranges bloomed at Sans Souci after
the acquisition of West Prussia--then Nature asserted her rights over
the great King. He died alone, with but his servants about him.

He had set out in his prime with an ambitious spirit and had wrested
from fate all the great and magnificent prizes of life. A prince of
poets and philosophers, a historian and general, no triumph which he
had won had satisfied him. All earthly glory had become to him
fortuitous, uncertain and worthless, and he had kept only his iron
sense of duty incessantly active. His soul had grown up and out of the
dangerous habit of alternating between warm enthusiasm and sober
keenness of perception. Once he had idealized with poetic caprice some
individuals, and despised the masses that surrounded him. But in the
struggles of his life he lost all selfishness, he lost almost
everything which was personally dear to him; and at last came to set
little value upon the individual, while the need of living for the
whole grew stronger and stronger in him. With the most refined
selfishness he had desired the greatest things for himself, and
unselfishly at last he gave himself for the common good and the
happiness of the humble people. He had entered upon life as an
idealist, and even the most terrible experiences had not destroyed
these ideals but ennobled and purified them. He had sacrificed many
men for his State, but no one so completely as himself.

Such a phenomenon appeared unusual and great to his contemporaries; it
seems still greater to us who can trace even today in the character of
our people, in our political life, and in our art and literature, the
influence of his activities.

       *       *       *       *


THE LIFE OF THEODOR FONTANE

By WILLIAM A. COOPER, A.M.

Associate Professor of German, Leland Stanford Jr. University


Theodor Fontane was by both his parents a descendant of French
Huguenots. His grandfather Fontane, while teaching the princes of
Prussia the art of drawing, won the friendship of Queen Luise, who
later appointed him her private secretary. Our poet's father, Louis
Fontane, served his apprenticeship as an apothecary in Berlin. In 1818
the stately Gascon married Emilie Labry, whose ancestors had come from
the Cevennes, not far from the region whence the Fontanes had
emigrated to Germany. The young couple moved to Neu-Ruppin, where they
bought an apothecary's shop. Here Theodor was born on the thirtieth of
December, 1819.

Louis Fontane was irresponsible and fantastic, full of _bonhomie_, and
an engaging story teller. He possessed a "stupendous" fund of
anecdotes of Napoleon and his marshals, and told them with such charm
that his son acquired an unusual fondness for anecdotes, which he
indulges extensively in some of his writings, particularly the
autobiographical works and books of travel. The problem of making both
ends meet seems to have occupied the father less than the
gratification of his "noble passions," chief among which was card
playing. He gambled away so much money that in eight years he was
forced to sell his business and move to other parts. He purposely
continued the search for a new business as long as possible, but
finally bought an apothecary's shop in Swinemünde.

His young wife was passionate and independent, energetic and
practical, but unselfish. To her husband's democratic tendency she
opposed a strong aristocratic leaning. Their ill fortune in Neu-Ruppin
affected her nerves so seriously that she went to Berlin for treatment
while the family was moving.

In Swinemünde the father put the children in the public school, but
when the aristocratic mother arrived from Berlin she took them out,
and for a time the little ones were taught at home. The unindustrious
father was prevailed upon to divide with the mother the burden of
teaching them and undertook the task with a mild protest, employing
what he humorously designated the "Socratic method." He taught
geography and history together, chiefly by means of anecdotes, with
little regard for accuracy or thoroughness. Though his method was far
from Socratic, it interested young Theodor and left an impression on
him for life. His mother confined her efforts mainly to the
cultivation of a good appearance and gentle manners, for, as one might
perhaps expect of the daughter of a French silk merchant, she valued
outward graces above inward culture, and she avowedly had little
respect for the authority of scholars and books.

After a while an arrangement was made whereby Theodor shared for two
years the private lessons given by a Dr. Lau to the children of a
neighbor, and "whatever backbone his knowledge possessed" he owed to
this instruction. A similar arrangement was made with the private
tutor who succeeded Dr. Lau. He had the children learn the most of
Schiller's ballads by heart. Fontane always remained grateful for
this, probably because it was as a writer of ballads that he first won
recognition. If we look upon the ballad as a poetically heightened
form of anecdote we discover an element of unity in his early
education, and that will help us to understand why the technique of
his novels shows such a marked influence of the ballad.

"How were we children trained?" asks Fontane in _My Childhood Years_.
"Not at all, and excellently," is his answer, referring to the lack of
strict parental discipline in the home and to the quiet influence of
his mother's example.

[Illustration: _Permission Berlin Photo Co, New York_
THEODOR FONTANE    HANNS FECHNER]

Among the notable events of the five years Theodor spent in
Swinemünde, were the liberation of Greece, the war between Russia and
Turkey, the conquest of Algiers, the revolution in France, the
separation of Belgium from Holland, and the Polish insurrection.
Little wonder that the lad watched eagerly for the arrival of the
newspapers and quickly devoured their contents.

In Swinemünde the family again lived beyond their means. The father's
extravagance and his passion for gambling showed no signs of
abatement. The mother was very generous in the giving of presents, for
she said that what money they had would be spent anyhow and it might
as well go for some useful purpose. The city being a popular summer
resort, they had a great many guests from Berlin during the season,
and in the winter they frequently entertained Swinemünde friends.

Theodor left home at the age of twelve to begin his preparation for
life. The first year he spent at the gymnasium in Neu-Ruppin. The
following year (1833) he was sent to an industrial school in Berlin.
There he lived with his uncle August, whose character and financial
management remind one of our poet's father. Theodor was irregular in
his attendance at school and showed more interest in the newspapers
and magazines than in his studies. At the age of sixteen he became the
apprentice of a Berlin apothecary with the expectation of eventually
succeeding his father in business. After serving his apprenticeship he
was employed as assistant dispenser by apothecaries in Berlin, Burg,
Leipzig, and Dresden. When he reached the age of thirty he became a
full-fledged dispenser and was in a position to manage the business of
his father, but the latter had long ago retired and moved to the
village of Letschin. The Fontane home was later broken up by the
mutual agreement of the parents to dissolve their unhappy union. The
father went first to Eberswalde and then to Schiffmühle, where he died
in 1867; the mother returned to Neu-Ruppin and died there in 1869.

The beginning of Theodor's first published story appeared in the
_Berliner Figaro_ a few days before he was twenty years of age. The
same organ had previously contained some of his lyrics and ballads.
The budding poet had belonged to a Lenau Club and the fondness he had
there acquired for Lenau's poetry remained unchanged throughout his
long life, which is more than can be said of many literary products
that won his admiration in youth. He also joined a Platen Club, which
afforded him less literary stimulus, but far more social pleasure.
During his year in Leipzig he brought himself to the notice of
literary circles by the publication, in the _Tageblatt_, of a
satirical poem entitled _Shakespeare's Stocking_. As a result he was
made a member of the Herwegh Club, where he met, among others, the
celebrated Max Müller, who remained his life-long friend. After a year
in Dresden Fontane returned to Leipzig, hoping to be able to support
himself there by his writings. He made the venture too soon. When he
ran short of funds he visited his parents for a while and then went to
Berlin to serve his year in the army (1844). He was granted a furlough
of two weeks for a trip to London at the expense of a friend. In
Berlin he joined a Sunday Club, humorously called the "Tunnel over the
Spree," at the meetings of which original literary productions were
read and frankly criticised. During the middle of the nineteenth
century almost all the poetic lights of Berlin were members of the
"Tunnel." Heyse, Storm, and Dahn were on the roll, and Fontane came
into touch with them; he and Storm remained friends in spite of the
fact that Storm once called him "frivolous." Fontane later evened the
score by classing Storm among the "sacred kiss monopolists." The most
productive members of the Club during this period (1844-54) were
Fontane, Scherenberg, Hesekiel, and Heinrich Smidt. Smidt, sometimes
called the Marryat of Germany, was a prolific spinner of yarns, which
were interesting, though of a low quality. He employed, however, many
of the same motives that Fontane later put to better use. Hesekiel was
a voluminous writer of light fiction. From him Fontane learned to
discard high-sounding phrases and to cultivate the true-to-life tone
of spoken speech. Scherenberg, enthusiastically heralded as the
founder of a new epic style, confined himself largely to poetic
descriptions of battles.

When Fontane joined the "Tunnel" the particular _genre_ of poetry in
vogue at the meetings was the ballad, due to Strachwitz's clever
imitations of Scottish models. Fontane's lyrics were too much like
Herwegh's to win applause, but his ballads were enthusiastically
received. One, in celebration of Derfflinger, established his standing
in the Club, and one in honor of Zieten brought him permanently into
favor with a wider public; these poems were composed in 1846. Two
years later he read two books that for a long time determined his
literary trend--Percy's _Reliques of Ancient English Poetry_ and
Scott's _Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_. He began to write ballads
on English subjects and one of them, _Archibald Douglas_, created a
great sensation at the "Tunnel" meeting and has ever since maintained
its place among the best German poems. Its popularity is partly due to
the fact that it was so appropriately set to music by Carl Löwe. When
Fontane returned to Berlin in 1852, after a summer's absence in
England, he felt estranged from the "Tunnel" and ceased attending the
meetings. Two noblemen members, von Lepel and von Merckel, who had
become his friends, introduced him to the country nobility of the Mark
of Brandenburg, which enabled him to make valuable additions to his
portfolio of studies later drawn upon for his novels, among others,
_Effi Briest_.

In 1847 Fontane passed the apothecary's examination by a "hair's
breadth" and soon found employment in Berlin. In the March Revolution
(1848) he played a comical rôle, but was subsequently elected a
delegate to the first convention to choose a representative. For a
year and a quarter he taught two deaconesses pharmacy at an
institution called "Bethany." When that employment came to an end he
decided that the hoped-for time had finally arrived to give up the
dispensing of medicines and earn his living by his pen. Some of his
new ballads were accepted by the _Morgenblatt_, and a volume of
verses, dedicated to his fiancée, found a publisher. When news arrived
of the victory of Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein at Idstedt (1850) he
set out for Kiel to enlist in the army. In Altona he received a letter
offering him a position in the press department of the Prussian
Ministry of the Interior. He accepted immediately and at the same time
wrote to Emilie Kummer, to whom he had been engaged for five years,
proposing that they should be married in October. She hastened to
secure an apartment in Berlin and furnish it, and the wedding was
celebrated on the sixteenth of October. Fontane thought he had entered
the harbor of success, but he lost his ministerial position in six
weeks and was again at sea. He had, however, a companion ready to
share his trials and triumphs, and their union proved to be very
happy.

In the summer of 1852 he was sent by the Prussian Ministry to London
to study English conditions and write reports for the government
journals, _Preussische Zeitung_ and _Die Zeit_. In 1855 he was again
sent to England, and this time his journalistic engagement lasted for
four years. Accounts of his experiences are contained in _A Summer in
London_ (1854) and _Beyond the Tweed_ (1860). From 1860 to 1870 he was
on the staff of the _Kreuzzeitung_ and during this time served as a
war correspondent in the campaigns of 1864, 1866, and 1870-71. While
accompanying the army in France he was seized with a desire to visit
the home of Joan of Arc at Domrémy, and was captured, taken for a spy,
and imprisoned for a time on the island of Oléron in the Atlantic
Ocean. An interesting account of his experiences is given in _Prisoner
of War_ (1871). During his years in England he had taken advantage of
the opportunity to visit Scotland and familiarize himself with its
picturesque beauties and its wealth of historical and literary
associations. In the midst of these travels the thought had occurred
to him that his own Mark of Brandenburg had its beauties, too, and its
wealth of associations. On returning to Berlin he began his long
series of journeyings through his native province, making a thorough
study of both country and people, particularly the Junkers, for which
his trained powers of observation, combined with warm patriotism and
true love of historical research, eminently fitted him. His published
records of these travels, _Rambles through the Mark of Brandenburg_
(1862-81) and _Five Castles_ (1889), won for him the title of the
interpreter of the Mark. His right to this distinction was further
established by the novels in which he later employed the fruits of
these studies.

Fontane is equally celebrated as an interpreter of Berlin, where he
lived for over fifty years, being the one prominent German writer to
identify himself with a great city. His two autobiographical works,
_From Twenty to Thirty_ and _C.F. Scherenberg_, tell of his early
experiences in the Prussian capital. From 1870 to 1889 he was dramatic
critic for the _Vossische Zeitung_, for which he reviewed the
performances at the Royal Theatre. In one of his last criticisms he
hailed Hauptmann as a dramatist of promise. In 1876 he was elected
secretary of the Berlin Academy of Arts, but served only a brief time.
In 1891 the Emperor made him a present of three thousand marks for his
services to German literature. In 1894 the University of Berlin
bestowed upon him the honorary title of doctor of philosophy. He died
on the twentieth day of September, 1898.

Fontane's lyric poetry in the narrower sense is not of a high order;
in fact almost none of his writings show the true lyric quality. There
is also a striking lack of the dramatic element in his works, and he
seems to have felt this limitation of his genius, for he studiously
avoided the portrayal of scenes that might prove intensely dramatic.
As a writer of ballads he excelled and ranks among the foremost of
Germany. The British subjects he treated were impressed upon him
during his travels in England and his study of English history. His
German themes were taken largely from Prussian history, particularly
the period of Frederick the Great. His permanent place in the history
of German literature is due, however, not so much to his verse as to
his prose writings. He is best known as a novelist, and in the field
of the modern novel he is one of the most conspicuous figures.

German novels of the older school were usually too long for a single
volume. Fontane's first important work of fiction, _Before the Storm_,
filled four volumes; but he had so much trouble in finding a publisher
for it that he began to write one-volume novels, introducing a
practice which has since become the common tradition. He employed in
them a typical feature of the technique of the ballad, which leaps
from one situation to another, leaving gaps to be filled by the fancy
of the reader. He says himself, in _Before the Storm_: "I have always
observed that the leaping action of the ballad is one of the chief
characteristics and beauties of this branch of poetry. All that is
necessary is that fancy be given the right kind of a stimulus. When
that end is attained, one may boldly assert, the less told the
better."

At the beginning of Fontane's career the Berlin novelists were
disciples of Scott, but the only one to survive was Alexis, who
adapted Scott's method to the Mark of Brandenburg. Fontane imitated
him in _Before the Storm_ (1878), which deals with conditions in the
Mark before the wars of liberation. _Schach von Wuthenow_ (1883), a
sort of prelude to _Before the Storm_, was far superior as a novel and
helped to establish Fontane's supremacy among his contemporaries, for
he had become the leader of the younger generation after the
publication of two stories of crimes, _Grete Minde_ (1880) and
_Ellernklipp_ (1881), and the creation of the modern Berlin novel, in
_L'Adultera_ (1882). _L'Adultera_ unfolds the history of a marriage of
reason between a young wife and a considerably older husband, a
situation which Fontane later treated, with important variations and
ever increasing skill, in _Count Petöfi_ (1884), _Cécile_ (1887), and
_Effi Briest_ (1895). With his inexhaustible fund of observation to
draw upon he could make the action of his novels a minor consideration
and concentrate his rare psychological powers upon realistic
conversations in which characters reveal themselves and incidentally
acquaint us intimately with others. We see and hear what the world
ordinarily sees and hears. A past master in the art of suggestion,
which he acquired in his ballad period, Fontane omits many scenes that
others would elaborate with minute detail, such as love scenes and
passionate crises, and contents himself with bringing vividly before
us his true-to-life figures in their historical and social
environments. As a conservative Prussian he believed in the supremacy
of the law and the punishment of transgression, and his works reflect
this belief.

_Trials and Tribulations_ (1887) and _Stine_ (1890) were the first
German novels absolutely to avoid the introduction of exciting scenes
merely for effect. These histories of mismated couples from different
social strata are recounted with hearty simplicity, deep understanding
of life, and frank recognition of human weakness, but without
condemnation, tears, or pointing a moral. They made Fontane famous.
_Frau Jenny Treibel_ (1892), an exquisitely humorous picture of the
Berlin _bourgeoisie_, and _Effi Briest_ "the most profound miracle of
Fontane's youthful art," added considerably to the fame of the
gray-haired "modern," while _The Poggenpuhls_ (1896) and _Stechlin_
(1898) won him further laurels at a time when most writers would long
ago have been resting on those they had already achieved. If a line
were drawn to represent graphically his productivity from his sixtieth
year on, it would take the form of a gradually rising curve.

His career as a novelist began so late in life that when he once
discovered his particular field he cultivated it with persistent
diligence and would not allow himself to be drawn away by enthusiasts
into other fields. Strength of character was not, however, a new
phenomenon in his life, for as long ago as the days when he was an
active member of the "Tunnel" he had come in close contact with the
Kugler coterie in Berlin, where the so-called Munich school
originated, and yet he did not follow his friends in that eclectic
movement. So when the naturalistic school of writers began to win
enthusiastic support, even though he found himself in the main in
sympathy with their announced creed, he did not join them in practice.
He felt that what the literature of the Fatherland needed was
"originality," and he sought to attain it in his own way, apart from
storm and stress. As his mind matured through accumulated knowledge of
the world, and his heart mellowed through years of experience and
observation, he rose to a point of view above sentiment and prejudice,
where the fogs of passion melt away and the light of kindly wisdom
shines.

[Illustration: FONTANE MONUMENT AT NEU RUPPIN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

_THEODOR FONTANE_

       *       *       *       *       *


EFFI BRIEST (1895)


TRANSLATED AND ABRIDGED BY WILLIAM A. COOPER, A.M.

Associate Professor of German, Leland Stanford Jr. University


CHAPTER I


In front of the old manor house occupied by the von Briest family
since the days of Elector George William, the bright sunshine was
pouring down upon the village road, at the quiet hour of noon. The
wing of the mansion looking toward the garden and park cast its broad
shadow over a white and green checkered tile walk and extended out
over a large round bed, with a sundial in its centre and a border of
Indian shot and rhubarb. Some twenty paces further, and parallel to
the wing of the house, there ran a churchyard wall, entirely covered
with a small-leaved ivy, except at the place where an opening had been
made for a little white iron gate. Behind this arose the shingled
tower of Hohen-Cremmen, whose weather vane glistened in the sunshine,
having only recently been regilded. The front of the house, the wing,
and the churchyard wall formed, so to speak, a horseshoe, inclosing a
small ornamental garden, at the open side of which was seen a pond,
with a small footbridge and a tied-up boat. Close by was a swing, with
its crossboard hanging from two ropes at either end, and its frame
posts beginning to lean to one side. Between the pond and the circular
bed stood a clump of giant plane trees, half hiding the swing.

The terrace in front of the manor house, with its tubbed aloe plants
and a few garden chairs, was an agreeable place to sit on cloudy days,
besides affording a variety of things to attract the attention. But,
on days when the hot sun beat down there, the side of the house toward
the garden was given a decided preference, especially by the mother
and the daughter of the house. On this account they were today sitting
on the tile walk in the shade, with their backs to the open windows,
which were all overgrown with wild grape-vines, and by the side of a
little projecting stairway, whose four stone steps led from the
garden to the ground floor of the wing of the mansion. Both mother and
daughter were busy at work, making an altar cloth out of separate
squares, which they were piecing together. Skeins of woolen yarn of
various colors, and an equal variety of silk thread lay in confusion
upon a large round table, upon which were still standing the luncheon
dessert plates and a majolica dish filled with fine large
gooseberries.

Swiftly and deftly the wool-threaded needles were drawn back and
forth, and the mother seemed never to let her eyes wander from the
work. But the daughter, who bore the Christian name of Effi, laid
aside her needle from time to time and arose from her seat to practice
a course of healthy home gymnastics, with every variety of bending and
stretching. It was apparent that she took particular delight in these
exercises, to which she gave a somewhat comical turn, and whenever she
stood there thus engaged, slowly raising her arms and bringing the
palms of her hands together high above her head, her mother would
occasionally glance up from her needlework, though always but for a
moment and that, too, furtively, because she did not wish to show how
fascinating she considered her own child, although in this feeling of
motherly pride she was fully justified. Effi wore a blue and white
striped linen dress, a sort of smock-frock, which would have shown no
waist line at all but for the bronze-colored leather belt which she
drew up tight. Her neck was bare and a broad sailor collar fell over
her shoulders and back. In everything she did there was a union of
haughtiness and gracefulness, and her laughing brown eyes betrayed
great natural cleverness and abundant enjoyment of life and goodness
of heart. She was called the "little girl," which she had to suffer
only because her beautiful slender mother was a full hand's breadth
taller than she.

Effi had just stood up again to perform her calisthenic exercises when
her mother, who at the moment chanced to be looking up from her
embroidery, called to her: "Effi, you really ought to have been an
equestrienne, I'm thinking. Always on the trapeze, always a daughter
of the air. I almost believe you would like something of the sort."

"Perhaps, mama. But if it were so, whose fault would it be? From whom
do I get it? Why, from no one but you. Or do you think, from papa?
There, it makes you laugh yourself. And then, why do you always dress
me in this rig, this boy's smock? Sometimes I fancy I shall be put
back in short clothes yet. Once I have them on again I shall courtesy
like a girl in her early teens, and when our friends in Rathenow come
over I shall sit in Colonel Goetze's lap and ride a trot horse. Why
not? He is three-fourths an uncle and only one-fourth a suitor. You
are to blame. Why don't I have any party clothes? Why don't you make a
lady of me?"

"Should you like me to?"

"No." With that she ran to her mother, embraced her effusively and
kissed her.

"Not so savagely, Effi, not so passionately. I am always disturbed
when I see you thus."

At this point three young girls stepped into the garden through the
little iron gate in the churchyard wall and started along the gravel
walk toward the round bed and the sundial. They all waved their
umbrellas at Effi and then ran up to Mrs. von Briest and kissed her
hand. She hurriedly asked a few questions and then invited the girls
to stay and visit with them, or at least with Effi, for half an hour.
"Besides, I have something else that I must do and young folks like
best to be left to themselves. Fare ye well." With these words she
went up the stone steps into the house.

Two of the young girls, plump little creatures, whose freckles and
good nature well matched their curly red hair, were daughters of
Precentor Jahnke, who swore by the Hanseatic League, Scandinavia, and
Fritz Reuter, and following the example of his favorite writer and
fellow countryman, had named his twin daughters Bertha and Hertha, in
imitation of Mining and Lining. The third young lady was Hulda
Niemeyer, Pastor Niemeyer's only child. She was more ladylike than the
other two, but, on the other hand, tedious and conceited, a lymphatic
blonde, with slightly protruding dim eyes, which, nevertheless, seemed
always to be seeking something, for which reason the Hussar Klitzing
once said: "Doesn't she look as though she were every moment
expecting the angel Gabriel?" Effi felt that the rather captious
Klitzing was only too right in his criticism, yet she avoided making
any distinction between the three girl friends. Nothing could have
been farther from her mind at this moment. Resting her arms on the
table, she exclaimed: "Oh, this tedious embroidery! Thank heaven, you
are here."

"But we have driven your mama away," said Hulda.

"Oh no. She would have gone anyhow. She is expecting a visitor, an old
friend of her girlhood days. I must tell you a story about him later,
a love story with a real hero and a real heroine, and ending with
resignation. It will make you open your eyes wide with amazement.
Moreover, I saw mama's old friend over in Schwantikow. He is a
district councillor, a fine figure, and very manly."

"Manly? That's a most important consideration," said Hertha.

"Certainly, it's the chief consideration. 'Women womanly, men manly,'
is, you know, one of papa's favorite maxims. And now help me put the
table in order, or there will be another scolding."

It took but a moment to put the things in the basket and, when the
girls sat down again, Hulda said: "Now, Effi, now we are ready, now
for the love story with resignation. Or isn't it so bad?"

"A story with resignation is never bad. But I can't begin till Hertha
has taken some gooseberries; she keeps her eyes glued on them. Please
take as many as you like, we can pick some more afterward. But be sure
to throw the hulls far enough away, or, better still, lay them here on
this newspaper supplement, then we can wrap them up in a bundle and
dispose of everything at once. Mama can't bear to see hulls lying
about everywhere. She always says that some one might slip on them and
break a leg."

"I don't believe it," said Hertha, applying herself closely to the
berries.

"Nor I either," replied Effi, confirming the opinion. "Just think of
it, I fall at least two or three times every day and have never broken
any bones yet. The right kind of leg doesn't break so easily;
certainly mine doesn't, neither does yours, Hertha. What do you think,
Hulda?"

"One ought not to tempt fate. Pride will have a fall."

"Always the governess. You are just a born old maid."

"And yet I still have hopes of finding a husband, perhaps even before
you do."

"For aught I care. Do you think I shall wait for that? The idea!
Furthermore one has already been picked out for me and perhaps I shall
soon have him. Oh, I am not worrying about that. Not long ago little
Ventivegni from over the way said to me: 'Miss Effi, what will you bet
we shall not have a charivari and a wedding here this year yet?'"

"And what did you say to that?"

"Quite possible, I said, quite possible; Hulda is the oldest; she may
be married any day. But he refused to listen to that and said: 'No, I
mean at the home of another young lady who is just as decided a
brunette as Miss Hulda is a blonde.' As he said this he looked at me
quite seriously--But I am wandering and am forgetting the story."

"Yes, you keep dropping it all the while; may be you don't want to
tell it, after all?"

"Oh, I want to, but I have interrupted the story a good many times,
chiefly because it is a little bit strange, indeed, almost romantic."

"Why, you said he was a district councillor."

"Certainly, a district councillor, and his name is Geert von
Innstetten, Baron von Innstetten."

All three laughed.

"Why do you laugh?" said Effi, nettled. "What does this mean?"

"Ah, Effi, we don't mean to offend you, nor the Baron either.
Innstetten did you say? And Geert? Why, there is nobody by that name
about here. And then you know the names of noblemen are often a bit
comical."

"Yes, my dear, they are. But people do not belong to the nobility for
nothing. They can endure such things, and the farther back their
nobility goes, I mean in point of time, the better they are able to
endure them. But you don't know anything about this and you must not
take offense at me for saying so. We shall continue to be good friends
just the same. So it is Geert von Innstetten and he is a Baron. He is
just as old as mama, to the day."

"And how old, pray, is your mama?"

"Thirty-eight."

"A fine age."

"Indeed it is, especially when one still looks as well as mama. I
consider her truly a beautiful woman, don't you, too? And how
accomplished she is in everything, always so sure and at the same time
so ladylike, and never unconventional, like papa. If I were a young
lieutenant I should fall in love with mama."

"Oh, Effi, how can you ever say such a thing?" said Hulda. "Why, that
is contrary to the fourth commandment."

"Nonsense. How can it be? I think it would please mama if she knew I
said such a thing."

"That may be," interrupted Hertha. "But are you ever going to tell the
story?"

"Yes, compose yourself and I'll begin. We were speaking of Baron von
Innstetten. Before he had reached the age of twenty he was living over
in Rathenow, but spent much of his time on the seignioral estates of
this region, and liked best of all to visit in Schwantikow, at my
grandfather Belling's. Of course, it was not on account of my
grandfather that he was so often there, and when mama tells about it
one can easily see on whose account it really was. I think it was
mutual, too."

"And what came of it?"

"The thing that was bound to come and always does come. He was still
much too young and when my papa appeared on the scene, who had already
attained the title of baronial councillor and the proprietorship of
Hohen-Cremmen, there was no need of further time for consideration.
She accepted him and became Mrs. von Briest."

"What did Innstetten do?" said Bertha, "what became of him? He didn't
commit suicide, otherwise you could not be expecting him today."

"No, he didn't commit suicide, but it was something of that nature."

"Did he make an unsuccessful attempt?"

"No, not that. But he didn't care to remain here in the neighborhood
any longer, and he must have lost all taste for the soldier's career,
generally speaking. Besides, it was an era of peace, you know. In
short, he asked for his discharge and took up the study of the law, as
papa would say, with a 'true beer zeal.' But when the war of seventy
broke out he returned to the army, with the Perleberg troops, instead
of his old regiment, and he now wears the cross. Naturally, for he is
a smart fellow. Right after the war he returned to his documents, and
it is said that Bismarck thinks very highly of him, and so does the
Emperor. Thus it came about that he was made district councillor in
the district of Kessin."

"What is Kessin? I don't know of any Kessin here."

"No, it is not situated here in our region; it is a long distance away
from here, in Pomerania, in Farther Pomerania, in fact, which
signifies nothing, however, for it is a watering place (every place
about there is a summer resort), and the vacation journey that Baron
Innstetten is now enjoying is in reality a tour of his cousins, or
something of the sort. He wishes to visit his old friends and
relatives here."

"Has he relatives here?"

"Yes and no, depending on how you look at it. There are no
Innstettens here, there are none anywhere any more, I believe. But he
has here distant cousins on his mother's side, and he doubtless wished
above all to see Schwantikow once more and the Belling house, to which
he was attached by so many memories. So he was over there the day
before yesterday and today he plans to be here in Hohen-Cremmen."

"And what does your father say about it?"

"Nothing at all. It is not his way. Besides, he knows mama, you see.
He only teases her."

At this moment the clock struck twelve and before it had ceased
striking, Wilke, the old factotum of the Briest family, came on the
scene to give a message to Miss Effi: "Your Ladyship's mother sends
the request that your Ladyship make her toilet in good season; the
Baron will presumably drive up immediately after one o'clock." While
Wilke was still delivering this message he began to put the ladies'
work-table in order and reached first for the sheet of newspaper, on
which the gooseberry hulls lay.

"No, Wilke, don't bother with that. It is our affair to dispose of the
hulls--Hertha, you must now wrap up the bundle and put a stone in it,
so that it will sink better. Then we will march out in a long funeral
procession and bury the bundle at sea."

Wilke smiled with satisfaction. "Oh, Miss Effi, she's a trump," was
about what he was thinking. But Effi laid the paper bundle in the
centre of the quickly gathered up tablecloth and said: "Now let all
four of us take hold, each by a corner, and sing something sorrowful."

"Yes, Effi, that is easy enough to say, but what, pray, shall we
sing?"

"Just anything. It is quite immaterial, only it must have a rime in
'oo;' 'oo' is always a sad vowel. Let us sing, say:


  'Flood, flood,
  Make it all good.'"


While Effi was solemnly intoning this litany, all four marched out
upon the landing pier, stepped into the boat tied there, and from the
further end of it slowly lowered into the pond the pebble-weighted
paper bundle.

"Hertha, now your guilt is sunk out of sight," said Effi, "in which
connection it occurs to me, by the way, that in former times poor
unfortunate women are said to have been thrown overboard thus from a
boat, of course for unfaithfulness."

"But not here, certainly."

"No, not here," laughed Effi, "such things do not take place here. But
they do in Constantinople and it just occurs to me that you must know
about it, for you were present in the geography class when the teacher
told about it."

"Yes," said Hulda, "he was always telling us about such things. But
one naturally forgets them in the course of time."

"Not I, I remember things like that."


CHAPTER II


The conversation ran on thus for some time, the girls recalling with
mingled disgust and delight the school lessons they had had in common,
and a great many of the teacher's uncalled-for remarks. Suddenly
Hulda said: "But you must make haste, Effi; why, you look--why, what
shall I say--why, you look as though you had just come from a cherry
picking, all rumpled and crumpled. Linen always gets so badly creased,
and that large white turned down collar--oh, yes, I have it now; you
look like a cabin boy."

"Midshipman, if you please. I must derive some advantage from my
nobility. But midshipman or cabin boy, only recently papa again
promised me a mast, here close by the swing, with yards and a rope
ladder. Most assuredly I should like one and I should not allow
anybody to interfere with my fastening the pennant at the top. And
you, Hulda, would climb up then on the other side and high in the air
we would shout: 'Hurrah!' and give each other a kiss. By Jingo, that
would be a sweet one."

"'By Jingo.' Now just listen to that. You really talk like a
midshipman. However, I shall take care not to climb up after you, I am
not such a dare-devil. Jahnke is quite right when he says, as he
always does, that you have too much Billing in you, from your mother.
I am only a preacher's daughter."

"Ah, go along. Still waters run deep--But come, let us swing, two on a
side; I don't believe it will break. Or if you don't care to, for you
are drawing long faces again, then we will play hide-and-seek. I still
have a quarter of an hour. I don't want to go in, yet, and anyhow it
is merely to say: 'How do you do?' to a district councillor, and a
district councillor from Further Pomerania to boot. He is elderly,
too. Why he might almost be my father; and if he actually lives in a
seaport, for, you know, that is what Kessin is said to be, I really
ought to make the best impression upon him in this sailor costume, and
he ought almost to consider it a delicate attention. When princes
receive anybody, I know from what papa has told me, they always put on
the uniform of the country of their guest. So don't worry--Quick,
quick, I am going to hide and here by the bench is the base."

Hulda was about to fix a few boundaries, but Effi had already run up
the first gravel walk, turning to the left, then to the right, and
suddenly vanishing from sight. "Effi, that does not count; where are
you? We are not playing run away; we are playing hide-and-seek." With
these and similar reproaches the girls ran to search for her, far
beyond the circular bed and the two plane trees standing by the side
of the path. She first let them get much farther than she was from the
base and then, rushing suddenly from her hiding place, reached the
bench, without any special exertion, before there was time to say:
"one, two, three."

"Where were you?"

"Behind the rhubarb plants; they have such large leaves, larger even
than a fig leaf."

"Shame on you."

"No, shame on you, because you didn't catch me. Hulda, with her big
eyes, again failed to see anything. She is always slow." Hereupon Effi
again flew away across the circle toward the pond, probably because
she planned to hide at first behind a dense-growing hazelnut hedge
over there, and then from that point to take a long roundabout way
past the churchyard and the front house and thence back to the wing
and the base. Everything was well calculated, but before she was half
way round the pond she heard some one at the house calling her name
and, as she turned around, saw her mother waving a handkerchief from
the stone steps. In a moment Effi was standing by her.

"Now you see that I knew what I was talking about. You still have that
smock-frock on and the caller has arrived. You are never on time."

"I shall be on time, easily, but the caller has not kept his
appointment. It is not yet one o'clock, not by a good deal," she said,
and turning to the twins, who had been lagging behind, called to them:
"Just go on playing; I shall be back right away."

The next moment Effi and her mama entered the spacious drawing-room,
which occupied almost the whole ground floor of the side wing.

"Mama, you daren't scold me. It is really only half past. Why does he
come so early? Cavaliers never arrive too late, much less too early."

Mrs. von Briest was evidently embarrassed. But Effi cuddled up to her
fondly and said: "Forgive me, I will hurry now. You know I can be
quick, too, and in five minutes Cinderella will be transformed into a
princess. Meanwhile he can wait or chat with papa."

Bowing to her mother, she was about to trip lightly up the little iron
stairway leading from the drawing-room to the story above. But Mrs.
von Briest, who could be unconventional on occasion, if she took a
notion to, suddenly held Effi back, cast a glance at the charming
young creature, still all in a heat from the excitement of the game, a
perfect picture of youthful freshness, and said in an almost
confidential tone: "After all, the best thing for you to do is to
remain as you are. Yes, don't change. You look very well indeed. And
even if you didn't, you look so unprepared, you show absolutely no
signs of being dressed for the occasion, and that is the most
important consideration at this moment. For I must tell you, my sweet
Effi--" and she clasped her daughter's hands--"for I must tell you--"

"Why, mama, what in the world is the matter with you? You frighten me
terribly."

"I must tell you, Effi, that Baron Innstetten has just asked me for
your hand."

"Asked for my hand? In earnest?"

"That is not a matter to make a jest of. You saw him the day before
yesterday and I think you liked him. To be sure, he is older than you,
which, all things considered, is a fortunate circumstance. Besides, he
is a man of character, position, and good breeding, and if you do not
say 'no,' which I could hardly expect of my shrewd Effi, you will be
standing at the age of twenty where others stand at forty. You will
surpass your mama by far."

Effi remained silent, seeking a suitable answer. Before she could find
one she heard her father's voice in the adjoining room. The next
moment Councillor von Briest, a well preserved man in the fifties, and
of pronounced _bonhomie_, entered the drawing-room, and with him Baron
Innstetten, a man of slender figure, dark complexion, and military
bearing.

When Effi caught sight of him she fell into a nervous tremble, but
only for an instant, as almost at the very moment when he was
approaching her with a friendly bow there appeared at one of the wide
open vine-covered windows the sandy heads of the Jahnke twins, and
Hertha, the more hoidenish, called into the room: "Come, Effi." Then
she ducked from sight and the two sprang from the back of the bench,
upon which they had been standing, down into the garden and nothing
more was heard from them except their giggling and laughing.


CHAPTER III


Later in the day Baron Innstetten was betrothed to Effi von Briest. At
the dinner which followed, her jovial father found it no easy matter
to adjust himself to the solemn rôle that had fallen to him. He
proposed a toast to the health of the young couple, which was not
without its touching effect upon Mrs. von Briest, for she obviously
recalled the experiences of scarcely eighteen years ago. However, the
feeling did not last long. What it had been impossible for her to be,
her daughter now was, in her stead. All things considered, it was just
as well, perhaps even better. For one could live with von Briest, in
spite of the fact that he was a bit prosaic and now and then showed a
slight streak of frivolity. Toward the end of the meal--the ice was
being served--the elderly baronial councillor once more arose to his
feet to propose in a second speech that from now on they should all
address each other by the familiar pronoun "Du." Thereupon he embraced
Innstetten and gave him a kiss on the left cheek. But this was not the
end of the matter for him. On the contrary, he went on to recommend,
in addition to the "Du," a set of more intimate names and titles for
use in the home, seeking to establish a sort of basis for hearty
intercourse, at the same time preserving certain well-earned, and
hence justified, distinctions. For his wife he suggested, as the best
solution of the problem, the continuation of "Mama," for there are
young mamas, as well as old; whereas for himself, he was willing to
forego the honorable title of "Papa," and could not help feeling a
decided preference for the simple name of Briest, if for no other
reason, because it was so beautifully short. "And then as for the
children," he said--at which word he had to give himself a jerk as he
exchanged gazes with Innstetten, who was only about a dozen years his
junior--"well, let Effi just remain Effi, and Geert, Geert. Geert, if
I am not mistaken, signifies a tall and slender trunk, and so Effi may
be the ivy destined to twine about it." At these words the betrothed
couple looked at each other somewhat embarrassed, Effi's face showing
at the same time an expression of childlike mirth, but Mrs. von Briest
said: "Say what you like, Briest, and formulate your toasts to suit
your own taste, but if you will allow me one request, avoid poetic
imagery; it is beyond your sphere." These silencing words were
received by von Briest with more assent than dissent. "It is possible
that you are right, Luise."

Immediately after rising from the table, Effi took leave to pay a
visit over at the pastor's. On the way she said to herself: "I think
Hulda will be vexed. I have got ahead of her after all. She always was
too vain and conceited."

But Effi was not quite right in all that she expected. Hulda behaved
very well, preserving her composure absolutely and leaving the
indication of anger and vexation to her mother, the pastor's wife,
who, indeed, made some very strange remarks. "Yes, yes, that's the
way it goes. Of course. Since it couldn't be the mother, it has to be
the daughter. That's nothing new. Old families always hold together,
and where there is a beginning there will be an increase." The elder
Niemeyer, painfully embarrassed by these and similar pointed remarks,
which showed a lack of culture and refinement, lamented once more the
fact that he had married a mere housekeeper.

[Illustration: _Permission F. Bruckmann A.-G. Munich_
A SUNDAY IN THE GARDEN OF THE TUILERIES   ADOLPH VON MENZEL.]

After visiting the pastor's family Effi naturally went next to the
home of the precentor Jahnke. The twins had been watching for her and
received her in the front yard.

"Well, Effi," said Hertha, as all three walked up and down between the
two rows of amaranths, "well, Effi, how do you really feel?"

"How do I feel? O, quite well. We already say 'Du' to each other and
call each other by our first names. His name is Geert, but it just
occurs to me that I have already told you that."

"Yes, you have. But in spite of myself I feel so uneasy about it. Is
he really the right man?"

"Certainly he is the right man. You don't know anything about such
matters, Hertha. Any man is the right one. Of course he must be a
nobleman, have a position, and be handsome."

"Goodness, Effi, how you do talk! You used to talk quite differently."

"Yes, I used to."

"And are you quite happy already?"

"When one has been two hours betrothed, one is always quite happy. At
least, that is my idea about it."

"And don't you feel at all--oh, what shall I say?--a bit awkward?"

"Yes, I do feel a bit awkward, but not very. And I fancy I shall get
over it."

After these visits at the parsonage and the home of the precentor,
which together had not consumed half an hour, Effi returned to the
garden veranda, where coffee was about to be served. Father-in-law and
son-in-law were walking up and down along the gravel path by the plane
trees. Von Briest was talking about the difficulties of a district
councillor's position, saying that he had been offered one at various
times, but had always declined. "The ability to have my own way in all
matters has always been the thing that was most to my liking, at least
more--I beg your pardon, Innstetten--than always having to look up to
some one else. For in the latter case one is always obliged to bear in
mind and pay heed to exalted and most exalted superiors. That is no
life for me. Here I live along in such liberty and rejoice at every
green leaf and the wild grape-vine that grows over those windows
yonder."

He spoke further in this vein, indulging in all sorts of
anti-bureaucratic remarks, and excusing himself from time to time with
a blunt "I beg your pardon, Innstetten," which he interjected in a
variety of ways. The Baron mechanically nodded assent, but in reality
paid little attention to what was said. He turned his gaze again and
again, as though spellbound, to the wild grape-vine twining about the
window, of which Briest had just spoken, and as his thoughts were thus
engaged, it seemed to him as though he saw again the girls' sandy
heads among the vines and heard the saucy call, "Come, Effi."

He did not believe in omens and the like; on the contrary, he was far
from entertaining superstitious ideas. Nevertheless he could not rid
his mind of the two words, and while Briest's peroration rambled on
and on he had the constant feeling that the little incident was
something more than mere chance.

Innstetten, who had taken only a short vacation, departed the
following morning, after promising to write every day. "Yes, you must
do that," Effi had said, and these words came from her heart. She had
for years known nothing more delightful than, for example, to receive
a large number of birthday letters. Everybody had to write her a
letter for that day. Such expressions as "Gertrude and Clara join me
in sending you heartiest congratulations," were tabooed. Gertrude and
Clara, if they wished to be considered friends, had to see to it that
they sent individual letters with separate postage stamps, and, if
possible, foreign ones, from Switzerland or Carlsbad, for her birthday
came in the traveling season.

Innstetten actually wrote every day, as he had promised. The thing
that made the receipt of his letters particularly pleasurable was the
circumstance that he expected in return only one very short letter
every week. This he received regularly and it was always full of
charming trifles, which never failed to delight him. Mrs. von Briest
undertook to carry on the correspondence with her future son-in-law
whenever there was any serious matter to be discussed, as, for
example, the settling of the details of the wedding, and questions of
the dowry and the furnishing of the new home. Innstetten was now
nearly three years in office, and his house in Kessin, while not
splendidly furnished, was nevertheless very well suited to his
station, and it seemed advisable to gain from correspondence with him
some idea of what he already had, in order not to buy anything
superfluous. When Mrs. von Briest was finally well enough informed
concerning all these details it was decided that the mother and
daughter should go to Berlin, in order, as Briest expressed himself,
to buy up the trousseau for Princess Effi.

Effi looked forward to the sojourn in Berlin with great pleasure, the
more so because her father had consented that they should take
lodgings in the Hotel du Nord. "Whatever it costs can be deducted from
the dowry, you know, for Innstetten already has everything." Mrs. von
Briest forbade such "mesquineries" in the future, once for all, but
Effi, on the other hand, joyously assented to her father's plan,
without so much as stopping to think whether he had meant it as a jest
or in earnest, for her thoughts were occupied far, far more with the
impression she and her mother should make by their appearance at the
table d'hôte, than with Spinn and Mencke, Goschenhofer, and other such
firms, whose names had been provisionally entered in her memorandum
book. And her demeanor was entirely in keeping with these frivolous
fancies, when the great Berlin week had actually come.

Cousin von Briest of the Alexander regiment, an uncommonly jolly young
lieutenant, who took the _Fliegende Blatter_ and kept a record of the
best jokes, placed himself at the disposal of the ladies for every
hour he should be off duty, and so they would sit with him at the
corner window of Kranzler's, or perhaps in the Café Bauer, when
permissible, or would drive out in the afternoon to the Zoological
Garden, to see the giraffes, of which Cousin von Briest, whose name,
by the way, was Dagobert, was fond of saying: "They look like old
maids of noble birth." Every day passed according to program, and on
the third or fourth day they went, as directed, to the National
Gallery, because Dagobert wished to show his cousin the "Isle of the
Blessed." "To be sure, Cousin Effi is on the point of marrying, and
yet it may perhaps be well to have made the acquaintance of the 'Isle
of the Blessed' beforehand." His aunt gave him a slap with her fan,
but accompanied the blow with such a gracious look that he saw no
occasion to change the tone.

These were heavenly days for all three, no less for Cousin Dagobert
than for the ladies, for he was a past master in the art of escorting
and always knew how quickly to compromise little differences. Of the
differences of opinion to be expected between mother and daughter
there was never any lack during the whole time, but fortunately they
never came out in connection with the purchases to be made. Whether
they bought a half dozen or three dozen of a particular thing, Effi
was uniformly satisfied, and when they talked, on the way home, about
the prices of the articles bought, she regularly confounded the
figures. Mrs. von Briest, ordinarily so critical, even toward her own
beloved child, not only took this apparent lack of interest lightly,
she even recognized in it an advantage. "All these things," said she
to herself, "do not mean much to Effi. Effi is unpretentious; she
lives in her own ideas and dreams, and when one of the Hohenzollern
princesses drives by and bows a friendly greeting from her carriage
that means more to Effi than a whole chest full of linen."

That was all correct enough, and yet only half the truth. Effi cared
but little for the possession of more or less commonplace things, but
when she walked up and down Unter den Linden with her mother, and,
after inspecting the most beautiful show-windows, went into Demuth's
to buy a number of things for the honeymoon tour of Italy, her true,
character showed itself. Only the most elegant articles found favor in
her sight, and, if she could not have the best, she forewent the
second-best, because this second meant nothing to her. Beyond
question, she was able to forego,--in that her mother was right,--and
in this ability to forego there was a certain amount of
unpretentiousness. But when, by way of exception, it became a question
of really possessing a thing, it always had to be something out of the
ordinary. In this regard she was pretentious.


CHAPTER IV


Cousin Dagobert was at the station when the ladies took the train for
Hohen-Cremmen. The Berlin sojourn had been a succession of happy days,
chiefly because there had been no suffering from disagreeable and, one
might almost say, inferior relatives. Immediately after their arrival
Effi had said: "This time we must remain incognito, so far as Aunt
Therese is concerned. It will not do for her to come to see us here in
the hotel. Either Hotel du Nord or Aunt Therese; the two would not go
together at all." The mother had finally agreed to this, had, in fact,
sealed the agreement with a kiss on her daughter's forehead.

With Cousin Dagobert, of course, it was an entirely different matter.
Not only did he have the social grace of the Guards, but also, what is
more, the peculiarly good humor now almost a tradition with the
officers of the Alexander regiment, and this enabled him from the
outset to draw out both the mother and the daughter and keep them in
good spirits to the end of their stay. "Dagobert," said Effi at the
moment of parting, "remember that you are to come to my nuptial-eve
celebration; that you are to bring a cortège goes without saying. But
don't you bring any porter or mousetrap seller. For after the
theatrical performances there will be a ball, and you must take into
consideration that my first grand ball will probably be also my last.
Fewer than six companions--superb dancers, that goes without
saying--will not be approved. And you can return by the early morning
train." Her cousin promised everything she asked and so they bade each
other farewell.

Toward noon the two women arrived at their Havelland station in the
middle of the marsh and after a drive of half an hour were at
Hohen-Cremmen. Von Briest was very happy to have his wife and daughter
at home again, and asked questions upon questions, but in most cases
did not wait for the answers. Instead of that he launched out into a
long account of what he had experienced in the meantime. "A while ago
you were telling me about the National Gallery and the 'Isle of the
Blessed.' Well, while you were away, there was something going on
here, too. It was our overseer Pink and the gardener's wife. Of
course, I had to dismiss Pink, but it went against the grain to do it.
It is very unfortunate that such affairs almost always occur in the
harvest season. And Pink was otherwise an uncommonly efficient man,
though here, I regret to say, in the wrong place. But enough of that;
Wilke is showing signs of restlessness too."

At dinner von Briest listened better. The friendly intercourse with
Cousin Dagobert, of whom he heard a good deal, met with his approval,
less so the conduct toward Aunt Therese. But one could see plainly
that, at the same time that he was declaring his disapproval, he was
rejoicing; for a little mischievous trick just suited his taste, and
Aunt Therese was unquestionably a ridiculous figure. He raised his
glass and invited his wife and daughter to join him in a toast. After
dinner, when some of the handsomest purchases were unpacked and laid
before him for his judgment, he betrayed a great deal of interest,
which still remained alive, or, at least did not die out entirely,
even after he had glanced over the bills. "A little bit dear, or let
us say, rather, very dear; however, it makes no difference. Everything
has so much style about it, I might almost say, so much inspiration,
that I feel in my bones, if you give me a trunk like that and a
traveling rug like this for Christmas, I shall be ready to take our
wedding journey after a delay of eighteen years, and we, too, shall be
in Rome for Easter. What do you think, Luise? Shall we make up what we
are behind? Better late than never."

Mrs. von Briest made a motion with her hand, as if to say:
"Incorrigible," and then left him to his own humiliation, which,
however, was not very deep.

       *       *       *       *       *

The end of August had come, the wedding day (October the 3d) was
drawing nearer, and in the manor house, as well as at the parsonage
and the schoolhouse, all hands were incessantly occupied with the
preparations for the pre-nuptial eve. Jahnke, faithful to his passion
for Fritz Reuter, had fancied it would be particularly "ingenious" to
have Bertha and Hertha appear as Lining and Mining, speaking Low
German, of course, whereas Hulda was to present the elder-tree scene
of _Käthchen von Heilbronn_, with Lieutenant Engelbrecht of the
Hussars as Wetter vom Strahl. Niemeyer, who by rights was the father
of the idea, had felt no hesitation to compose additional lines
containing a modest application to Innstetten and Effi. He himself was
satisfied with his effort and at the end of the first rehearsal heard
only very favorable criticisms of it, with one exception, to be sure,
viz., that of his patron lord, and old friend, Briest, who, when he
had heard the admixture of Kleist and Niemeyer, protested vigorously,
though not on literary grounds. "High Lord, and over and over, High
Lord--what does that mean? That is misleading and it distorts the
whole situation. Innstetten is unquestionably a fine specimen of the
race, a man of character and energy, but, when it comes to that, the
Briests are not of base parentage either. We are indisputably a
historic family--let me add: 'Thank God'--and the Innstettens are not.
The Innstettens are merely old, belong to the oldest nobility, if you
like; but what does oldest nobility mean? I will not permit that a von
Briest, or even a figure in the wedding-eve performance, whom
everybody must recognize as the counterpart of our Effi--I will not
permit, I say, that a Briest either in person or through a
representative speak incessantly of 'High Lord.' Certainly not, unless
Innstetten were at least a disguised Hohenzollern; there are some, you
know. But he is not one and hence I can only repeat that it distorts
the whole situation."

For a long time von Briest really held fast to this view with
remarkable tenacity. But after the second rehearsal, at which Käthchen
was half in costume, wearing a tight-fitting velvet bodice, he was so
carried away as to remark: "Käthchen lies there beautifully," which
turn was pretty much the equivalent of a surrender, or at least
prepared the way for one. That all these things were kept secret from
Effi goes without saying. With more curiosity on her part, however, it
would have been wholly impossible. But she had so little desire to
find out about the preparations made and the surprises planned that
she declared to her mother with all emphasis: "I can wait and see,"
and, when Mrs. von Briest still doubted her, Effi closed the
conversation with repeated assurances that it was really true and her
mother might just as well believe it. And why not? It was all just a
theatrical performance, and prettier and more poetical than
_Cinderella_, which she had seen on the last evening in Berlin--no, on
second thought, it couldn't be prettier and more poetical. In this
play she herself would have been glad to take a part, even if only for
the purpose of making a chalk mark on the back of the ridiculous
boarding-school teacher. "And how charming in the last act is
'Cinderella's awakening as a princess,' or at least as a countess!
Really, it was just like a fairy tale." She often spoke in this way,
was for the most part more exuberant than before, and was vexed only
at the constant whisperings and mysterious conduct of her girl
friends. "I wish they felt less important and paid more attention to
me. When the time comes they will only forget their lines and I shall
have to be in suspense on their account and be ashamed that they are
my friends."

Thus ran Effi's scoffing remarks and there was no mistaking the fact
that she was not troubling herself any too much about the pre-nuptial
exercises and the wedding day. Mrs. von Briest had her own ideas on
the subject, but did not permit herself to worry about it, as Effi's
mind was, to a considerable extent, occupied with the future, which
after all was a good sign. Furthermore Effi, by virtue of her wealth
of imagination, often launched out into descriptions of her future
life in Kessin for a quarter of an hour at a time,--descriptions
which, incidentally, and much to the amusement of her mother, revealed
a remarkable conception of Further Pomerania, or, perhaps it would be
more correct to say, they embodied this conception, with clever
calculation and definite purpose. For Effi delighted to think of
Kessin as a half-Siberian locality, where the ice and snow never fully
melted.

"Today Goschenhofer has sent the last thing," said Mrs. von Briest,
sitting, as was her custom, out in front of the wing of the mansion
with Effi at the work-table, upon which the supplies of linen and
underclothing kept increasing, whereas the newspapers, which merely
took up space, were constantly decreasing. "I hope you have everything
now, Effi. But if you still cherish little wishes you must speak them
out, if possible, this very hour. Papa has sold the rape crop at a
good price and is in an unusually good humor."

"Unusually? He is always in a good humor."

"In an unusually good humor," repeated the mother. "And it must be
taken advantage of. So speak. Several times during our stay in Berlin
I had the feeling that you had a very special desire for something or
other more."

"Well, dear mama, what can I say? As a matter of fact I have
everything that one needs, I mean that one needs _here_. But as it is
once for all decided that I am to go so far north--let me say in
passing that I have no objections; on the contrary I look forward with
pleasure to it, to the northern lights and the brighter splendor of
the stars--as this has been definitely decided, I should like to have
a set of furs."

"Why, Effi, child, that is empty folly. You are not going to St.
Petersburg or Archangel."

"No, but I am a part of the way."

"Certainly, child, you are a part of the way; but what does that mean?
If you go from here to Nauen you are, by the same train of reasoning,
a part of the way to Russia. However, if you want some furs you shall
have them. But let me tell you beforehand, I advise you not to buy
them. Furs are proper for elderly people; even your old mother is
still too young for them, and if you, in your seventeenth year, come
out in mink or marten the people of Kessin will consider it a
masquerade."

It was on the second of September that these words were spoken, and
the conversation would doubtless have been continued, if it had not
happened to be the anniversary of the battle of Sedan. But because of
the day they were interrupted by the sound of drum and fife, and Effi,
who had heard before of the proposed parade, but had meanwhile
forgotten about it, rushed suddenly away from the work-table, past the
circular plot and the pond, in the direction of a balcony built on the
churchyard wall, to which one could climb by six steps not much
broader than the rungs of a ladder. In an instant she was at the top
and, surely enough, there came all the school children marching along,
Jahnke strutting majestically beside the right flank, while a little
drum major marched at the head of the procession, several paces in
advance, with an expression on his countenance as though it were
incumbent upon him to fight the battle of Sedan all over again. Effi
waved her handkerchief and he promptly returned the greeting by a
salute with his shining baton.

A week later mother and daughter were again sitting in the same
place, busy, as before, with their work. It was an exceptionally
beautiful day; the heliotrope growing in a neat bed around the sundial
was still in bloom, and the soft breeze that was stirring bore its
fragrance over to them.

"Oh, how well I feel," said Effi, "so well and so happy! I can't think
of heaven as more beautiful. And, after all, who knows whether they
have such wonderful heliotrope in heaven?"

"Why, Effi, you must not talk like that. You get that from your
father, to whom nothing is sacred. Not long ago he even said:
'Niemeyer looks like Lot.' Unheard of. And what in the world can he
mean by it? In the first place he doesn't know how Lot looked, and
secondly it shows an absolute lack of consideration for Hulda.
Luckily, Niemeyer has only the one daughter, and for this reason the
comparison really falls to the ground. In one regard, to be sure, he
was only too right, viz., in each and every thing that he said about
'Lot's wife,' our good pastor's better half, who again this year, as
was to be expected, simply ruined our Sedan celebration by her folly
and presumption. By the by it just occurs to me that we were
interrupted in our conversation when Jahnke came by with the school.
At least I cannot imagine that the furs, of which you were speaking at
that time, should have been your only wish. So let me know, darling,
what further things you have set your heart upon."

"None, mama."

"Truly, none?"

"No, none, truly; perfectly in earnest. But, on second thought, if
there were anything--"

"Well?"

"It would be a Japanese bed screen, black, with gold birds on it, all
with long crane bills. And then perhaps, besides, a hanging lamp for
our bedroom, with a red shade."

Mrs. von Briest remained silent.

"Now you see, mama, you are silent and look as though I had said
something especially improper."

"No, Effi, nothing improper. Certainly not in the presence of your
mother, for I know you so well. You are a fantastic little person,
you like nothing better than to paint fanciful pictures of the future,
and the richer their coloring the more beautiful and desirable they
appear to you. I saw that when we were buying the traveling articles.
And now you fancy it would be altogether adorable to have a bed screen
with a variety of fabulous beasts on it, all in the dim light of a red
hanging lamp. It appeals to you as a fairy tale and you would like to
be a princess."

Effi took her mother's hand and kissed it. "Yes, mama, that is my
nature."

"Yes, that is your nature. I know it only too well. But, my dear Effi,
we must be circumspect in life, and we women especially. Now when you
go to Kessin, a small place, where hardly a streetlamp is lit at
night, the people will laugh at such things. And if they would only
stop with laughing! Those who are ill-disposed toward you--and there
are always some--will speak of your bad bringing-up, and many will
doubtless say even worse things."

"Nothing Japanese, then, and no hanging lamp either. But I confess I
had thought it would be so beautiful and poetical to see everything in
a dim red light."

Mrs. von Briest was moved. She got up and kissed Effi. "You are a
child. Beautiful and poetical. Nothing but fancies. The reality is
different, and often it is well that there should be dark instead of
light and shimmer."

Effi seemed on the point of answering, but at this moment Wilke came
and brought some letters. One was from Kessin, from Innstetten. "Ah,
from Geert," said Effi, and putting the letter in her pocket, she
continued in a calm tone: "But you surely will allow me to set the
grand piano across one corner of the room. I care more for that than
for the open fireplace that Geert has promised me. And then I am going
to put your portrait on an easel. I can't be entirely without you. Oh,
how I shall be homesick to see you, perhaps even on the wedding tour,
and most certainly in Kessin. Why, they say the place has no garrison,
not even a staff surgeon, and how fortunate it is that it is at least
a watering place. Cousin von Briest, upon whom I shall rely as my
chief support, always goes with his mother and sister to Warnemunde.
Now I really do not see why he should not, for a change, some day
direct our dear relatives toward Kessin. Besides, 'direct' seems to
suggest a position on the staff, to which, I believe, he aspires. And
then, of course, he will come along and live at our house. Moreover
Kessin, as somebody just recently told me, has a rather large steamer,
which runs over to Sweden twice a week. And on the ship there is
dancing (of course they have a band on board), and he dances very
well."

"Who?"

"Why, Dagobert."

"I thought you meant Innstetten. In any case the time has now come to
know what he writes. You still have the letter in your pocket, you
know."

"That's right. I had almost forgotten it." She opened the letter and
glanced over it.

"Well, Effi, not a word? You are not beaming and not even smiling. And
yet he always writes such bright and entertaining letters, and not a
word of fatherly wisdom in them."

"That I should not allow. He has his age and I have my youth. I should
shake my finger at him and say: 'Geert, consider which is better.'"

"And then he would answer: 'You have what is better.' For he is not
only a man of most refined manners, he is at the same time just and
sensible and knows very well what youth means. He is always reminding
himself of that and adapting himself to youthful ways, and if he
remains the same after marriage you will lead a model married life."

"Yes, I think so, too, mama. But just imagine--and I am almost ashamed
to say it--I am not so very much in favor of what is called a model
married life."

"That is just like you. And now tell me, pray, what are you really in
favor of?"

"I am--well, I am in favor of like and like and naturally also of
tenderness and love. And if tenderness and love are out of the
question, because, as papa says, love is after all only fiddle-faddle,
which I, however, do not believe, well, then I am in favor of wealth
and an aristocratic house, a really aristocratic one, to which Prince
Frederick Charles will come for an elk or grouse hunt, or where the
old Emperor will call and have a gracious word for every lady, even
for the younger ones. And then when we are in Berlin I am for court
balls and gala performances at the Opera, with seats always close by
the grand central box."

"Do you say that out of pure sauciness and caprice?"

"No, mama, I am fully in earnest. Love comes first, but right after
love come splendor and honor, and then comes amusement--yes,
amusement, always something new, always something to make me laugh or
weep. The thing I cannot endure is _ennui_."

"If that is the case, how in the world have you managed to get along
with us?"

"Why, mama, I am amazed to hear you say such a thing. To be sure, in
the winter time, when our dear relatives come driving up to see us and
stay for six hours, or perhaps even longer, and Aunt Gundel and Aunt
Olga eye me from head to foot and find me impertinent--and Aunt Gundel
once told me that I was--well, then occasionally it is not very
pleasant, that I must admit. But otherwise I have always been happy
here, so happy--"

As she said the last words she fell, sobbing convulsively, at her
mother's feet and kissed her hands.

"Get up, Effi. Such emotions as these overcome one, when one is as
young as you and facing her wedding and the uncertain future. But now
read me the letter, unless it contains something very special, or
perhaps secrets."

"Secrets," laughed Effi and sprang to her feet in a suddenly changed
mood. "Secrets! Yes, yes, he is always coming to the point of telling
me some, but the most of what he writes might with perfect propriety
be posted on the bulletin board at the mayor's office, where the
ordinances of the district council are posted. But then, you know,
Geert is one of the councillors."

"Read, read."

"Dear Effi: The nearer we come to our wedding day, the more scanty
your letters grow. When the mail arrives I always look first of all
for your handwriting, but, as you know, all in vain, as a rule, and
yet I did not ask to have it otherwise. The workmen are now in the
house who are to prepare the rooms, few in number, to be sure, for
your coming. The best part of the work will doubtless not be done till
we are on our journey. Paper-hanger Madelung, who is to furnish
everything, is an odd original. I shall tell you about him the next
time. Now I must tell you first of all how happy I am over you, over
my sweet little Effi. The very ground beneath my feet here is on fire,
and yet our good city is growing more and more quiet and lonesome. The
last summer guest left yesterday. Toward the end he went swimming at
nine degrees above zero (Centigrade), and the attendants were always
rejoiced when he came out alive. For they feared a stroke of apoplexy,
which would give the baths a bad reputation, as though the water were
worse here than elsewhere. I rejoice when I think that in four weeks I
shall row with you from the Piazzetta out to the Lido or to Murano,
where they make glass beads and beautiful jewelry. And the most
beautiful shall be yours. Many greetings to your parents and the
tenderest kiss for yourself from your Geert."

Effi folded the letter and put it back into the envelope.

"That is a very pretty letter," said Mrs. von Briest, "and that it
observes due moderation throughout is a further merit."

"Yes, due moderation it surely does observe."

"My dear Effi, let me ask a question. Do you wish that the letter did
not observe due moderation? Do you wish that it were more
affectionate, perhaps gushingly affectionate?"

"No, no, mama. Honestly and truly no, I do not wish that. So it is
better as it is."

"So it is better as it is. There you go again. You are so queer. And
by the by, a moment ago you were weeping. Is something troubling you?
It is not yet too late. Don't you love Geert?"

"Why shouldn't I love him? I love Hulda, and I love Bertha, and I love
Hertha. And I love old Mr. Niemeyer, too. And that I love you and papa
I don't even need to mention. I love all who mean well by me and are
kind to me and humor me. No doubt Geert will humor me, too. To be
sure, in his own way. You see he is already thinking of giving me
jewelry in Venice. He hasn't the faintest suspicion that I care
nothing for jewelry. I care more for climbing and swinging and am
always happiest when I expect every moment that something will give
way or break and cause me to tumble. It will not cost me my head the
first time, you know."

"And perhaps you also love your Cousin von Briest?"

"Yes, very much. He always cheers me."

"And would you have liked to marry Cousin von Briest?"

"Marry? For heaven's sake no. Why, he is still half a boy. Geert is a
man, a handsome man, a man with whom I can shine and he will make
something of himself in the world. What are you thinking of, mama?"

"Well, that is all right, Effi, I am glad to hear it. But there is
something else troubling you."

"Perhaps."

"Well, speak."

"You see, mama, the fact that he is older than I does no harm. Perhaps
that is a very good thing. After all he is not old and is well and
strong and is so soldierly and so keen. And I might almost say I am
altogether in favor of him, if he only--oh, if he were only a little
bit different."

"How, pray, Effi."

"Yes, how? Well, you must not laugh at me. It is something that I
only very recently overheard, over at the parsonage. We were talking
about Innstetten and all of a sudden old Mr. Niemeyer wrinkled his
forehead, in wrinkles of respect and admiration, of course, and said:
'Oh yes, the Baron. He is a man of character, a man of principles."

"And that he is, Effi."

"Certainly. And later, I believe, Niemeyer said he is even a man of
convictions. Now that, it seems to me, is something more. Alas, and
I--I have none. You see, mama, there is something about this that
worries me and makes me uneasy. He is so dear and good to me and so
considerate, but I am afraid of him."


CHAPTER V


The days of festivity at Hohen-Cremmen were past; all the guests had
departed, likewise the newly married couple, who left the evening of
the wedding day.

The nuptial-eve performance had pleased everybody, especially the
players, and Hulda had been the delight of all the young officers, not
only the Rathenow Hussars, but also their more critically inclined
comrades of the Alexander regiment. Indeed everything had gone well
and smoothly, almost better than expected. The only thing to be
regretted was that Bertha and Hertha had sobbed so violently that
Jahnke's Low German verses had been virtually lost. But even that had
made but little difference. A few fine connoisseurs had even expressed
the opinion that, "to tell the truth, forgetting what to say, sobbing,
and unintelligibility, together form the standard under which the most
decided victories are won, particularly in the case of pretty, curly
red heads." Cousin von Briest had won a signal triumph in his
self-composed rôle. He had appeared as one of Demuth's clerks, who had
found out that the young bride was planning to go to Italy immediately
after the wedding, for which reason he wished to deliver to her a
traveling trunk. This trunk proved, of course, to be a giant box of
bonbons from Hövel's. The dancing had continued till three o'clock,
with the effect that Briest, who had been gradually talking himself
into the highest pitch of champagne excitement, had made various
remarks about the torch dance, still in vogue at many courts, and the
remarkable custom of the garter dance. Since these remarks showed no
signs of coming to an end, and kept getting worse and worse, they
finally reached the point where they simply had to be choked off.
"Pull yourself together, Briest," his wife had whispered to him in a
rather earnest tone; "you are not here for the purpose of making
indecent remarks, but of doing the honors of the house. We are having
at present a wedding and not a hunting party." Whereupon von Briest
answered: "I see no difference between the two; besides, I am happy."

The wedding itself had also gone well, Niemeyer had conducted the
service in an exquisite fashion, and on the way home from the church
one of the old men from Berlin, who half-way belonged to the court
circle, made a remark to the effect that it was truly wonderful how
thickly talents are distributed in a state like ours. "I see therein a
triumph of our schools, and perhaps even more of our philosophy. When
I consider how this Niemeyer, an old village preacher, who at first
looked like a hospitaler--why, friend, what do you say? Didn't he
speak like a court preacher? Such tact, and such skill in antithesis,
quite the equal of Kögel, and in feeling even better. Kögel is too
cold. To be sure, a man in his position has to be cold. Generally
speaking, what is it that makes wrecks of the lives of men? Always
warmth, and nothing else." It goes without saying that these remarks
were assented to by the dignitary to whom they were addressed, a
gentleman as yet unmarried, who doubtless for this very reason was, at
the time being, involved in his fourth "relation." "Only too true,
dear friend," said he. "Too much warmth--most excellent--Besides, I
must tell you a story, later."

The day after the wedding was a clear October day. The morning sun
shone bright, yet there was a feeling of autumn chilliness in the air,
and von Briest, who had just taken breakfast in company with his wife,
arose from his seat and stood, with his hands behind his back, before
the slowly dying open fire. Mrs. von Briest, with her fancy work in
her hands, moved likewise closer to the fireplace and said to Wilke,
who entered just at this point to clear away the breakfast table: "And
now, Wilke, when you have everything in order in the dining hall--but
that comes first--then see to it that the cakes are taken over to the
neighbors, the nutcake to the pastor's and the dish of small cakes to
the Jahnkes'. And be careful with the goblets. I mean the thin cut
glasses."

Briest had already lighted his third cigarette, and, looking in the
best of health, declared that "nothing agrees with one so well as a
wedding, excepting one's own, of course."

"I don't know why you should make that remark, Briest. It is
absolutely news to me that you suffered at your wedding. I can't
imagine why you should have, either."

"Luise, you are a wet blanket, so to speak. But I take nothing amiss,
not even a thing like that. Moreover, why should we be talking about
ourselves, we who have never even taken a wedding tour? Your father
was opposed to it. But Effi is taking a wedding tour now. To be
envied. Started on the ten o'clock train. By this time they must be
near Ratisbon, and I presume he is enumerating to her the chief art
treasures of the Walhalla, without getting off the train--that goes
without saying. Innstetten is a splendid fellow, but he is pretty much
of an art crank, and Effi, heaven knows, our poor Effi is a child of
nature. I am afraid he will annoy her somewhat with his enthusiasm for
art."

"Every man annoys his wife, and enthusiasm for art is not the worst
thing by a good deal."

"No, certainly not. At all events we will not quarrel about that; it
is a wide field. Then, too, people are so different. Now you, you
know, would have been the right person for that. Generally speaking,
you would have been better suited to Innstetten than Effi. What a
pity! But it is too late now."

"Extremely gallant remark, except for the fact that it is not apropos.
However, in any case, what has been has been. Now he is my son-in-law,
and it can accomplish nothing to be referring back all the while to
the affairs of youth."

"I wished merely to rouse you to an animated humor."

"Very kind of you, but it was not necessary. I am in an animated
humor."

"Likewise a good one?"

"I might almost say so. But you must not spoil it.--Well, what else is
troubling you? I see there is something on your mind."

"Were you pleased with Effi? Were you satisfied with the whole affair?
She was so peculiar, half naïve, and then again very self-conscious
and by no means as demure as she ought to be toward such a husband.
That surely must be due solely to the fact that she does not yet fully
know what she has in him. Or is it simply that she does not love him
very much? That would be bad. For with all his virtues he is not the
man to win her love with an easy grace."

Mrs. von Briest kept silent and counted the stitches of her fancy
work. Finally she said: "What you just said, Briest, is the most
sensible thing I have heard from you for the last three days,
including your speech at dinner. I, too, have had my misgivings. But I
believe we have reason to feel satisfied."

"Has she poured out her heart to you?"

"I should hardly call it that. True, she cannot help talking, but she
is not disposed to tell everything she has in her heart, and she
settles a good many things for herself. She is at once communicative
and reticent, almost secretive; in general, a very peculiar mixture."

"I am entirely of your opinion. But how do you know about this if she
didn't tell you?"

"I only said she did not pour out her heart to me. Such a general
confession, such a complete unburdening of the soul, it is not in her
to make. It all came out of her by sudden jerks, so to speak, and then
it was all over. But just because it came from her soul so
unintentionally and accidentally, as it were, it seemed to me for that
very reason so significant."

"When was this, pray, and what was the occasion?"

"Unless I am mistaken, it was just three weeks ago, and we were
sitting in the garden, busied with all sorts of things belonging to
her trousseau, when Wilke brought a letter from Innstetten. She put it
in her pocket and a quarter of an hour later had wholly forgotten
about it, till I reminded her that she had a letter. Then she read it,
but the expression of her face hardly changed. I confess to you that
an anxious feeling came over me, so intense that I felt a strong
desire to have all the light on the matter that it is possible to have
under the circumstances."

"Very true, very true."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Well, I mean only--But that is wholly immaterial. Go on with your
story; I am all ears."

"So I asked her straight out how matters stood, and as I wished to
avoid anything bordering on solemnity, in view of her peculiar
character, and sought to take the whole matter as lightly as possible,
almost as a joke, in fact, I threw out the question, whether she would
perhaps prefer to marry Cousin von Briest, who had showered his
attentions upon her in Berlin."

"And?"

"You ought to have seen her then. Her first answer was a saucy laugh.
Why, she said, her cousin was really only a big cadet in lieutenant's
uniform. And she could not even love a cadet, to saying nothing of
marrying one. Then she spoke of Innstetten, who suddenly became for
her a paragon of manly virtues."

"How do you explain that?"

"It's quite simple. Lively, emotional, I might almost say, passionate
as she is, or perhaps just because she is so constituted, she is not
one of those who are so particularly dependent upon love, at least not
upon what truly deserves the name. To be sure, she speaks of love,
even with emphasis and a certain tone of conviction, but only because
she has somewhere read that love is indisputably the most exalted,
most beautiful, most glorious thing in the world. And it may be,
perhaps, that she has merely heard it from that sentimental person,
Hulda, and repeats it after her. But she does not feel it very deeply.
It is barely possible that it will come later. God forbid. But it is
not yet at hand."

"Then what is at hand? What ails her?"

"In my judgment, and according to her own testimony, she has two
things: mania for amusement and ambition."

"Well, those things can pass away. They do not disturb me."

"They do me. Innstetten is the kind of a man who makes his own career.
I will not call him pushing, for he is not, he has too much of the
real gentleman in him for that. Let us say, then, he is a man who will
make his own career. That will satisfy Effi's ambition."

"Very well. I call that good."

"Yes, it is good. But that is only the half. Her ambition will be
satisfied, but how about her inclination for amusement and adventure?
I have my doubts. For the little entertainment and awakening of
interest, demanded every hour, for the thousand things that overcome
ennui, the mortal enemy of a spiritual little person, for these
Innstetten will make poor provision. He will not leave her in the
midst of an intellectual desert; he is too wise and has had too much
experience in the world for that, but he will not specially amuse her
either. And, most of all, he will not even bother to ask himself
seriously how to go about it. Things can go on thus for a while
without doing much harm, but she will finally become aware of the
situation and be offended. And then I don't know what will happen. For
gentle and yielding as she is, she has, along with these qualities, a
certain inclination to fly into a fury, and at such times she hazards
everything."

At this point Wilke came in from the dining hall and reported that he
had counted everything and found everything there, except that one of
the fine wine glasses was broken, but that had occurred yesterday when
the toast was drunk. Miss Hulda had clinked her glass too hard against
Lieutenant Nienkerk's.

"Of course, half asleep and always has been, and lying under the elder
tree has obviously not improved matters. A silly person, and I don't
understand Nienkerk."

"I understand him perfectly."

"But he can't marry her."

"No."

"His purpose, then?"

"A wide field, Luise."

This was the day after the wedding. Three days later came a scribbled
little card from Munich, with all the names on it indicated by two
letters only. "Dear mama: This morning we visited the Pinakothek.
Geert wanted to go over to the other museum, too, the name of which I
will not mention here, because I am in doubt about the right way to
spell it, and I dislike to ask him. I must say, he is angelic to me
and explains everything. Generally speaking, everything is very
beautiful, but it's a strain. In Italy it will probably slacken
somewhat and get better. We are lodging at the 'Four Seasons,' which
fact gave Geert occasion to remark to me, that 'outside it was autumn,
but in me he was having spring.' I consider that a very graceful
compliment. He is really very attentive. To be sure, I have to be
attentive, too, especially when he says something or is giving me an
explanation. Besides, he knows everything so well that he doesn't even
need to consult a guide book. He delights to talk of you two,
especially mama. He considers Hulda somewhat affected, but old Mr.
Niemeyer has completely captivated him. A thousand greetings from your
thoroughly entranced, but somewhat weary Effi."

Similar cards now arrived daily, from Innsbruck, from Vicenza, from
Padua. Every one began: "We visited the famous gallery here this
morning," or, if it was not the gallery, it was an arena or some
church of "St. Mary" with a surname. From Padua came, along with the
card, a real letter. "Yesterday we were in Vicenza. One must see
Vicenza on account of Palladio. Geert told me that everything modern
had its roots in him. Of course, with reference only to architecture.
Here in Padua, where we arrived this morning, he said to himself
several times in the hotel omnibus, 'He lies in Padua interred,' and
was surprised when he discovered that I had never heard these words.
But finally he said it was really very well and in my favor that I
knew nothing about them. He is very just, I must say. And above all he
is angelic to me and not a bit overbearing and not at all old, either.
I still have pains in my feet, and the consulting of guide books and
standing so long before pictures wears me out. But it can't be helped,
you know. I am looking forward to Venice with much pleasure. We shall
stay there five days, perhaps even a whole week. Geert has already
begun to rave about the pigeons in St. Mark's Square, and the fact
that one can buy there little bags of peas and feed them to the pretty
birds. There are said to be paintings representing this scene, with
beautiful blonde maidens, 'a type like Hulda,' as he said. And that
reminds me of the Jahnke girls. I would give a good deal if I could be
sitting with them on a wagon tongue in our yard and feeding _our_
pigeons. Now, you must not kill the fan tail pigeon with the big
breast; I want to see it again. Oh, it is so beautiful here. This is
even said to be the most beautiful of all. Your happy, but somewhat
weary Effi."

When Mrs. von Briest had finished reading the letter she said: "The
poor child. She is homesick."

"Yes," said von Briest, "she is homesick. This accursed traveling--"

"Why do you say that now! You might have hindered it, you know. But it
is just your way to play the wise man after a thing is all over. After
a child has fallen into the well the aldermen cover up the well."

"Ah, Luise, don't bother me with that kind of stuff. Effi is our
child, but since the 3d of October she has been the Baroness of
Innstetten. And if her husband, our son-in-law, desires to take a
wedding tour and use it as an occasion for making a new catalogue of
every gallery, I can't keep him from doing it. That is what it means
to get married."

"So now you admit it. In talking with me you have always denied, yes,
always denied that the wife is in a condition of restraint."

"Yes, Luise, I have. But what is the use of discussing that now? It is
really too wide a field."


CHAPTER VI


Innstetten's leave of absence was to expire the 15th of November, and
so when they had reached Capri and Sorrento he felt morally bound to
follow his usual habit of returning to his duties on the day and at
the hour designated. So on the morning of the 14th they arrived by the
fast express in Berlin, where Cousin von Briest met them and proposed
that they should make use of the two hours before the departure of the
Stettin train to pay a visit to the Panorama and then have a little
luncheon together. Both proposals were accepted with thanks. At noon
they returned to the station, shook hands heartily and said good-by,
after both Effi and her husband had extended the customary invitation,
"Do come to see us some day," which fortunately is never taken
seriously. As the train started Effi waved a last farewell from her
compartment. Then she leaned back and made herself comfortable, but
from time to time sat up and held out her hand to Innstetten.

It was a pleasant journey, and the train arrived on time at the
Klein-Tantow station, from which a turnpike led to Kessin, ten miles
away. In the summer time, especially during the tourist season,
travelers were accustomed to avoid the turnpike and take the water
route, going by an old sidewheel steamer down the Kessine, the river
from which Kessin derived its name. But the "Phoenix"--about which the
wish had long been vainly cherished, that, at some time when there
were no passengers on board, it might justify its name and burn to
ashes--regularly stopped running on the 1st of October. For this
reason Innstetten had telegraphed from Stettin to his coachman Kruse:
"Five o'clock, Klein-Tantow station. Open carriage, if good weather."

It certainly was good weather, and there sat Kruse in the open
carriage at the station. He greeted the newly arrived couple with all
the prescribed dignity of a first-class coachman.

"Well, Kruse, everything in order?"

"At your service, Sir Councillor."

"Then, Effi, please get in." As Effi was doing as bid, and one of the
station porters was finding a place for a small satchel by the
coachman, in front, Innstetten left orders to send the rest of the
luggage by the omnibus. Then he, too, took his seat and after
condescendingly asking one of the bystanders for a light called to
Kruse: "Drive on, Kruse." The carriage rolled quickly over the rails
of the many tracks at the crossing, then slantingly down the slope of
the embankment, and on the turnpike past an inn called "The Prince
Bismarck." At this point the road forked, one branch leading to the
right to Kessin, the other to the left to Varzin. In front of the inn
stood a moderately tall, broad-shouldered man in a fur coat and a fur
cap. The cap he took off with great deference as the District
Councillor drove by. "Pray, who was that?" said Effi, who was
extremely interested in all she saw and consequently in the best of
humor. "He looked like a starost, though I am forced to confess I
never saw a starost before."

"Which is no loss, Effi. You guessed very well just the same. He does
really look like a starost and is something of the sort, too. I mean
by that, he is half Polish. His name is Golchowski, and whenever we
have an election or a hunt here, he is at the top of the list. In
reality he is a very unsafe fellow, whom I would not trust across the
road, and he doubtless has a great deal on his conscience. But he
assumes an air of loyalty, and when the quality of Varzin go by here
he would like nothing better than to throw himself before their
carriages. I know that at the same time he is hostile to the Prince.
But what is the use? We must not have any misunderstandings with him,
for we need him. He has this whole region in his pocket and
understands electioneering better than any one else. Besides, he is
considered well-to-do and lends out money at usury which is contrary
to the ordinary practice of the Poles."

"But he was good-looking."

"Yes, good-looking he is. Most of the people here are good-looking. A
handsome strain of human beings. But that is the best that can be said
of them. Your Brandenburg people look more unostentatious and more
ill-humored, and in their conduct they are less respectful, in fact,
are not at all respectful, but their yes is yes and no is no, and one
can depend upon them. Here everybody is uncertain."

"Why do you tell me that, since I am obliged to live here among them
now?"

"Not you. You will not hear or see much of them. For city and country
are here very different, and you will become acquainted with our city
people only, our good people of Kessin."

"Our good people of Kessin. Is that sarcasm, or are they really so
good?"

"That they are really good is not exactly what I mean to say, but they
are different from the others; in fact, they have no similarity
whatever to the country inhabitants here."

"How does that come?"

"Because they are entirely different human beings, by ancestry and
association. The people you find in the country here are the so-called
Cassubians, of whom you may have heard, a Slavic race, who have been
living here for a thousand years and probably much longer. But all the
inhabitants of our seaports, and the commercial cities near the coast,
have moved here from a distance and trouble themselves very little
about the Cassubian backwoods, because they derive little profit from
that source and are dependent upon entirely different sources. The
sources upon which they are dependent are the regions with which they
have commercial relations, and as their commerce brings them into
touch with the whole world you will find among them people from every
nook and corner of the earth, even here in our good Kessin, in spite
of the fact that it is nothing but a miserable hole."

"Why, that is perfectly charming, Geert. You are always talking about
the miserable hole, but I shall find here an entirely new world, if
you have not exaggerated. All kinds of exotics. That is about what you
meant, isn't it?"

He nodded his head.

"An entirely new world, I say, perhaps a negro, or a Turk, or perhaps
even a Chinaman."

"Yes, a Chinaman, too. How well you can guess! It may be that we still
have one. He is dead now and buried in a little fenced-in plot of
ground close by the churchyard. If you are not easily frightened I
will show you his grave some day. It is situated among the dunes, with
nothing but lyme grass around it, and here and there a few
immortelles, and one always hears the sea. It is very beautiful and
very uncanny."

"Oh, uncanny? I should like to know more about it. But I would better
not. Such stories make me have visions and dreams, and if, as I hope,
I sleep well tonight, I should certainly not like to see a Chinaman
come walking up to my bed the first thing."

"You will not, either."

"Not, either? Upon my word, that sounds strange, as though, after all,
it were possible. You seek to make Kessin interesting to me, but you
carry it a trifle too far. And have you many such foreigners in
Kessin?"

"A great many. The whole population is made up of such foreigners,
people whose parents and grandparents lived in an entirely different
region."

"Most remarkable. Please tell me more about them. But no more creepy
stories. I feel that there is always something creepy about a
Chinaman."

"Yes, there is," laughed Geert, "but the rest, thank heaven, are of an
entirely different sort, all mannerly people, perhaps a little bit too
commercial, too thoughtful of their own advantage, and always on hand
with bills of questionable value. In fact, one must be cautious with
them. But otherwise they are quite agreeable. And to let you see that
I have not been deceiving you I will just give you a little sample, a
sort of index or list of names."

"Please do, Geert."

"For example, we have, not fifty paces from our house, and our gardens
are even adjoining, the master machinist and dredger Macpherson, a
real Scotchman and a Highlander."

"And he still wears the native costume?"

"No, thank heaven, he doesn't, for he is a shriveled up little man, of
whom neither his clan nor Walter Scott would be particularly proud.
And then we have, further, in the same house where this Macpherson
lives, an old surgeon by the name of Beza, in reality only a barber.
He comes from Lisbon, the same place that the famous general De Meza
comes from. Meza, Beza; you can hear the national relationship. And
then we have, up the river by the quay, where the ships lie, a
goldsmith by the name of Stedingk, who is descended from an old
Swedish family; indeed, I believe there are counts of the empire by
that name. Further, and with this man I will close for the present, we
have good old Dr. Hannemann, who of course is a Dane, and was a long
time in Iceland, has even written a book on the last eruption of
Hekla, or Krabla."

"Why, that is magnificent, Geert. It is like having six novels that
one can never finish reading. At first it sounds commonplace, but
afterward seems quite out of the ordinary. And then you must also have
people, simply because it is a seaport, who are not mere surgeons or
barbers or anything of the sort. You must also have captains, some
flying Dutchman or other, or--"

"You are quite right. We even have a captain who was once a pirate
among the Black Flags."

"I don't know what you mean. What are Black Flags?"

"They are people away off in Tonquin and the South Sea--But since he
has been back among men he has resumed the best kind of manners and is
quite entertaining."

"I should be afraid of him nevertheless."

"You don't need to be, at any time, not even when I am out in the
country or at the Prince's for tea, for along with everything else
that we have, we have, thank heaven, also Rollo."

"Rollo?"

"Yes, Bollo. The name makes you think of the Norman Duke, provided you
have ever heard Niemeyer or Jahnke speak of him. Our Rollo has
somewhat the same character. But he is only a Newfoundland dog, a most
beautiful animal, that loves me and will love you, too. For Rollo is a
connoisseur. So long as you have him about you, you are safe, and
nothing can get at you, neither a live man nor a dead one. But just
see the moon over yonder. Isn't it beautiful?"

[Illustration: _Permission F Bruckmann A -G, Munich_
DIVINE SERVICE IN THE WOODS AT KOSEN    ADOLPH VON MENZEL]

Effi, who had been leaning back quietly absorbed, drinking in every
word, half timorously, half eagerly, now sat erect and looked out to
the right, where the moon had just risen behind a white mass of
clouds, which quickly floated by. Copper-colored hung the great disk
behind a clump of alders and shed its light upon the expanse of water
into which the Kessine here widens out. Or perhaps it might be looked
upon as one of the fresh-water lakes connected with the Baltic Sea.

Effi was stupefied. "Yes, you are right, Geert, how beautiful! But at
the same time there is something uncanny about it. In Italy I never
had such a sensation, not even when we were going over from Mestre to
Venice. There, too, we had water and swamps and moonlight, and I
thought the bridge would break. But it was not so spooky. What is the
cause of it, I wonder? Can it be the northern latitude?"

Innstetten laughed. "We are here seventy-five miles further north than
in Hohen-Cremmen, and you have still a while to wait before we come to
the first polar bear. I think you are nervous from the long journey
and the Panorama, not to speak of the story of the Chinaman."

"Why, you didn't tell me any story."

"No, I only mentioned him. But a Chinaman is in himself a story."

"Yes," she laughed.

"In any case you will soon recover. Do you see the little house yonder
with the light? It is a blacksmith's shop. There the road bends. And
when we have passed the bend you will be able to see the tower of
Kessin, or to be more exact, the two."

"Has it two?"

"Yes, Kessin is picking up. It now has a Catholic church also."

A half hour later the carriage stopped at the district councillor's
residence, which stood clear at the opposite end of the city. It was a
simple, rather old-fashioned, frame-house with plaster between the
timbers, and stood facing the main street, which led to the sea-baths,
while its gable looked down upon a grove, between the city limits and
the dunes, which was called the "Plantation." Furthermore this
old-fashioned frame-house was only Innstetten's private residence,
not the real district councillor's office. The latter stood diagonally
across the street.

It was not necessary for Kruse to announce their arrival with three
cracks of his whip. The servants had long been watching at the doors
and windows for their master and mistress, and even before the
carriage stopped all the inmates of the house were grouped upon the
stone doorstep, which took up the whole width of the sidewalk. In
front of them was Rollo, who, the moment the carriage stopped, began
to circle around it. Innstetten first of all helped his young wife to
alight. Then, offering her his arm, he walked with a friendly bow past
the servants, who promptly turned and followed him into the
entrance-hall, which was furnished with splendid old wardrobes and
cases standing around the walls. The housemaid, a pretty girl, no
longer very young, whose stately plumpness was almost as becoming to
her as the neat little cap on her blonde head, helped her mistress
take off her muff and cloak, and was just stooping down to take off
her fur-lined rubber shoes. But before she had time to make a
beginning, Innstetten said: "I suppose the best thing will be for me
to introduce to you right here all the occupants of our house, with
the exception of Mrs. Kruse, who does not like to be seen, and who, I
presume, is holding her inevitable black chicken again." Everybody
smiled. "But never mind Mrs. Kruse. Here is my old Frederick, who was
with me when I was at the university. Good times then, weren't they,
Frederick?--This is Johanna, a fellow countrywoman of yours, if you
count those who come from the region of Pasewalk as full-fledged
Brandenburgians; and this is Christel, to whom we trust our bodily
welfare every noon and evening, and who knows how to cook, I can
assure you.--And this is Rollo. Well, Rollo, how goes it?"

Rollo seemed only to have waited for this special greeting, for the
moment he heard his name he gave a bark for joy, stood up on his hind
legs and laid his forepaws on his master's shoulders.

"That will do, Rollo, that will do. But look here; this is my wife. I
have told her about you and said that you were a beautiful animal and
would protect her." Hereupon Rollo ceased fawning and sat down in
front of Innstetten, looking up curiously at the young wife. And when
she held out her hand to him he frisked around her.

During this introduction scene Effi had found time to look about. She
was enchanted, so to speak, by everything she saw, and at the same
time dazzled by the abundant light. In the forepart of the hall were
burning four or five wall lights, the reflectors themselves very
primitive, simply of tin-plate, which, however, only improved the
light and heightened the splendor. Two astral lamps with red shades, a
wedding present from Niemeyer, stood on a folding table between two
oak cupboards. On the front of the table was the tea service, with the
little lamp under the kettle already lighted. There were, beside
these, many, many other things, some of them very queer. From one side
of the hall to the other ran three beams, dividing the ceiling into
sections. From the front one was suspended a ship under full sail,
high quarter-deck, and cannon ports, while farther toward the front
door a gigantic fish seemed to be swimming in the air. Effi took her
umbrella, which she still held in her hand, and pushed gently against
the monster, so that it set up a slow rocking motion.

"What is that, Geert?" she asked.

"That is a shark."

"And that thing, clear at the end of the hall, that looks like a huge
cigar in front of a tobacco store?"

"That is a young crocodile. But you can look at all these things
better and more in detail tomorrow. Come now and let us take a cup of
tea. For in spite of shawls and rugs you must have been chilled.
Toward the last it was bitter cold."

He offered Effi his arm and the two maids retired. Only Frederick and
Rollo followed the master of the house as he took his wife into his
sitting room and study. Effi was as much surprised here as she had
been in the hall, but before she had time to say anything, Innstetten
drew back a portiere, which disclosed a second, larger room looking
out on the court and garden. "Now this, Effi, is your room. Frederick
and Johanna have tried to arrange it the best they could in accordance
with my orders. I find it quite tolerable and should be happy if you
liked it, too."

She withdrew her arm from his and stood up on her tip-toes to give him
a hearty kiss. "Poor little thing that I am, how you do spoil me! This
grand piano! and this rug! Why, I believe it is Turkish. And the bowl
with the little fishes, and the flower table besides! Luxuries,
everywhere I look."

"Ah, my dear Effi, you will have to put up with that. It is to be
expected when one is young and pretty and amiable. And I presume the
inhabitants of Kessin have already found out about you, heaven knows
from what source. For of the flower table, at least, I am innocent.
Frederick, where did the flower table come from?"

"Apothecary Gieshübler. There is a card on it."

"Ah, Gieshübler, Alonzo Gieshübler," said Innstetten, laughingly and
almost boisterously handing the card with the foreign-sounding first
name to Effi. "Gieshübler. I forgot to tell you about him. Let me say
in passing that he bears the doctor's title, but does not like to be
addressed by it. He says it only vexes the real doctors, and I presume
he is right about that. Well, I think you will become acquainted with
him and that soon. He is our best number here, a bel-esprit and an
original, but especially a man of soul, which is after all the chief
thing. But enough of these things; let us sit down and drink our tea.
Where shall it be? Here in your room or over there in mine! There is
no other choice. Snug and tiny is my cabin."

Without hesitating she sat down on a little corner sofa. "Let us stay
here today; you will be my guest today. Or let us say, rather: Tea
regularly in my room, breakfast in yours. Then each will secure his
rights, and I am curious to know where I shall like it best."

"That will be a morning and evening question."

"Certainly. But the way it is put, or better, our attitude toward it,
is the important thing."

With that she laughed and cuddled up to him and was about to kiss his
hand.

"No, Effi, for heaven's sake, don't do that. It is not my desire to be
a person looked up to with awe and respect. I am, for the inhabitants
of Kessin, but for you I am--"

"What, pray?"

"Ah, let that pass. Far be it from me to say what."


CHAPTER VII


The sun was shining brightly when Effi awoke the next morning. It was
hard for her to get her bearings. Where was she? Correct, in Kessin,
in the house of District Councillor von Innstetten, and she was his
wife, Baroness Innstetten. Sitting up she looked around with
curiosity. During the evening before she had been too tired to examine
very carefully all the half-foreign, half-old-fashioned things that
surrounded her. Two pillars supported the ceiling beam, and green
curtains shut off from the rest of the room the alcove-like sleeping
apartment in which the beds stood. But in the middle a curtain was
either lacking or pulled back, and this afforded her a comfortable
orientation from her bed. There between the two windows stood the
narrow, but very high, pier-glass, while a little to the right, along
the hall wall, towered the tile stove, the door of which, as she had
discovered the evening before, opened into the hall in the
old-fashioned way. She now felt its warmth radiating toward her. How
fine it was to be in her own home! At no time during the whole tour
had she enjoyed so much comfort, not even in Sorrento.

But where was Innstetten? All was still round about her, nobody was
there. She heard only the tick-tock of a small clock and now and then
a low sound in the stove, from which she inferred that a few new
sticks of wood were being shoved in from the hall. Gradually she
recalled that Geert had spoken the evening before of an electric bell,
for which she did not have to search long. Close by her pillows was
the little white ivory button, and she now pressed softly upon it.

Johanna appeared at once. "At your Ladyship's service."

"Oh, Johanna, I believe I have overslept myself. It must be late."

"Just nine."

"And my--" She couldn't make herself speak straightway of her
"husband." "His Lordship, he must have kept very quiet. I didn't hear
anything."

"I'm sure he did. And your Ladyship has slept soundly. After the long
journey--"

"Yes, I have. And his Lordship, is he always up so early?"

"Always, your Ladyship. On that point he is strict; he cannot endure
late sleeping, and when he enters his room across the hall the stove
must be warm, and the coffee must not be late."

"So he has already had his breakfast?"

"Oh, no, your Ladyship--His Lordship--"

Effi felt that she ought not to have asked the question and would
better have kept to herself the suspicion that Innstetten might not
have waited for her. So she was very eager to correct her mistake the
best she could, and when she had got up and taken a seat before the
pier-glass she resumed the conversation, saying: "Moreover, his
Lordship is quite right. Always to be up early was likewise the rule
in my parents' home. When people sleep away the morning, everything is
out of gear the rest of the day. But his Lordship will not be so
strict with me. For a long time last night I couldn't sleep, and was
even frightened a little bit."

"What must I hear, your Ladyship? What was it, pray?"

"There was a very strange noise overhead, not loud, but very
penetrating. At first it sounded as though gowns with long trains were
dragging over the floor, and in my excitement it seemed a few times as
though I heard little white satin slippers. It seemed as though they
were dancing overhead, but quite softly."

As the conversation ran on thus Johanna glanced over the shoulder of
the young wife at the tall narrow mirror in order the better to
observe Effi's facial expressions. In reply she said: "Oh, yes, that
is up in the social room. We used to hear it in the kitchen, too. But
now we don't hear it any more; we have become accustomed to it."

"Is there anything unusual about it?"

"God forbid, not in the least. For a while no one knew for sure what
it came from, and even the preacher looked embarrassed, in spite of
the fact that Dr. Gieshübler always simply laughed at it. But now we
know that it comes from the curtains. The room is inclined to be musty
and damp, and for that reason the windows are always left open, except
when there is a storm. And so, as there is nearly always a strong
draft upstairs, the wind sweeps the old white curtains, which I think
are much too long, back and forth over the floor. That makes a sound
like silk dresses, or even satin slippers, as your Ladyship just
said."

"That is it, of course. But what I cannot understand is why the
curtains are not taken down. Or they might be made shorter. It is such
a queer noise that it gets on one's nerves. And now, Johanna, give me
the little cape and put just a little dab of powder on my forehead.
Or, better still, take the 'refresher' from my traveling bag--Ah, that
is fine and refreshes me. Now I am ready to go over. He is still
there, isn't he, or has he been out?"

"His Lordship went out earlier; I believe he was over at the office.
But he has been back for a quarter of an hour. I will tell Frederick
to bring the breakfast."

With that Johanna left the room. Effi took one more look into the
mirror and then walked across the hall, which in the daylight lost
much of its charm of the evening before, and stepped into Geert's
room.

He was sitting at his secretary, a rather clumsy cylindrical desk,
which, however, he did not care to part with, as it was an heirloom.
Effi was standing behind him, and had embraced and kissed him before
he could rise from his chair.

"So early?"

"So early, you say. Of course, to mock me."

Innstetten shook his head. "How can I?" Effi took pleasure in accusing
herself, however, and refused to listen to the assurances of her
husband that his "so early" had been meant in all seriousness. "You
must know from our journey that I have never kept you waiting in the
morning. In the course of the day--well, that is a different matter.
It is true, I am not very punctual, but I am not a late sleeper. In
that respect my parents have given me good training, I think."

"In that respect? In everything, my sweet Effi."

"You say that just because we are still on our honeymoon,--why no, we
are past that already. For heaven's sake, Geert, I hadn't given it a
single thought, and--why, we have been married for over six weeks, six
weeks and a day. Yes, that alters the case. So I shall not take it as
flattery, I shall take it as the truth."

At this moment Frederick came in and brought the coffee. The breakfast
table stood across the corner of the sitting room in front of a sofa
made just in the right shape and size to fill that corner. They both
sat down upon the sofa.

"The coffee is simply delicious," said Effi, as she looked at the
room and its furnishings. "This is as good as hotel coffee or that we
had at Bottegone's--you remember, don't you, in Florence, with the
view of the cathedral? I must write mama about it. We don't have such
coffee in Hohen-Cremmen. On the whole, Geert, I am just beginning to
realize what a distinguished husband I married. In our home everything
was just barely passable."

"Nonsense, Effi. I never saw better house-keeping than in your home."

"And then how well your house is furnished. When papa had bought his
new weapon cabinet and hung above his writing desk the head of a
buffalo, and beneath that a picture of old general Wrangel, under whom
he had once served as an adjutant, he was very proud of what he had
done. But when I see these things here, all our Hohen-Cremmen elegance
seems by the side of them merely commonplace and meagre. I don't know
what to compare them with. Even last night, when I took but a cursory
look at them, a world of ideas occurred to me."

"And what were they, if I may ask?"

"What they were? Certainly. But you must not laugh at them. I once had
a picture book, in which a Persian or Indian prince (for he wore a
turban) sat with his feet under him on a silk cushion, and at his back
there was a great red silk bolster, which could be seen bulging out to
the right and left of him, and the wall behind the Indian prince
bristled with swords and daggers and panther skins and shields and
long Turkish guns. And see, it looks just like that here in your
house, and if you will cross your legs and sit down on them the
similarity will be complete."

"Effi, you are a charming, dear creature. You don't know how deeply I
feel that and how much I should like to show you every moment that I
do feel it."

"Well, there will be plenty of time for that. I am only seventeen, you
know, and have not yet made up my mind to die."

"At least not before I do. To be sure, if I should die first, I should
like to take you with me. I do not want to leave you to any other man.
What do you say to that?"

"Oh, I must have some time to think about it. Or, rather, let us not
think about it at all. I don't like to talk about death; I am for
life. And now tell me, how shall we live here? On our travels you told
me all sorts of queer things about the city and the country, but not a
word about how we shall live here. That here nothing is the same as in
Hohen-Cremmen and Schwantikow, I see plainly, and yet we must be able
to have something like intercourse and society in 'good Kessin,' as
you are always calling it. Have you any people of family in the city?"

"No, my dear Effi. In this regard you are going to meet with great
disappointments. We have in the neighborhood a few noble families with
which you will become acquainted, but here in the city there is nobody
at all."

"Nobody at all? That I can't believe. Why, you are upward of three
thousand people, and among three thousand people there certainly must
be, beside such inferior individuals as Barber Beza (I believe that
was his name), a certain élite, officials and the like."

Innstetten laughed. "Yes, officials there are. But when you examine
them narrowly it doesn't mean much. Of course, we have a preacher and
a judge and a school principal and a commander of pilots, and of such
people in official positions I presume there may be as many as a dozen
altogether, but they are for the most part, as the proverb says, good
men, but poor fiddlers. And all the others are nothing but consuls."

"Nothing but consuls! I beg you, Geert, how can you say 'nothing but
consuls?' Why, they are very high and grand, and, I might almost say,
awe-inspiring individuals. Consuls, I thought, were the men with the
bundles of rods, out of which an ax blade projected."

"Not quite, Effi. Those men are called lictors."

"Right, they are called lictors. But consuls are also men of very high
rank and authority. Brutus was a consul, was he not?"

"Yes, Brutus was a consul. But ours are not very much like him and are
content to handle sugar and coffee, or open a case of oranges and sell
them to you at ten pfennigs apiece."

"Not possible."

"Indeed it is certain. They are tricky little tradesmen, who are
always at hand with their advice on any question of business, when
foreign vessels put in here and are at a loss to know what to do. And
when they have given advice and rendered service to some Dutch or
Portuguese vessel, they are likely in the end to become accredited
representatives of such foreign states, and so we have just as many
consuls in Kessin as we have ambassadors and envoys in Berlin. Then
whenever there is a holiday, and we have many holidays here, all the
flags are hoisted, and, if we happen to have a bright sunny morning,
on such days you can see all Europe flying flags from our roofs, and
the star-spangled banner and the Chinese dragon besides."

"You are in a scoffing mood, Geert, and yet you may be right. But I
for my part, insignificant though I be, must confess, that I consider
all this charming and that our Havelland cities are nothing in
comparison. When the Emperor's birthday is celebrated in our region
the only flags hoisted are just the black and white, with perhaps a
bit of red here and there, but that is not to be compared with the
world of flags you speak of. Generally speaking, I find over and over
again, as I have already said, that everything here has a certain
foreign air about it, and I have not yet seen or heard a thing that
has not more or less amazed me. Yesterday evening, for example, there
was that remarkable ship out in the hall, and behind it the shark and
the crocodile. And here your own room. Everything so oriental and, I
cannot help repeating, everything as in the palace of an Indian
prince."

"Well and good! I congratulate you, Princess."

"And then upstairs the social room with its long curtains, which sweep
over the floor."

"Now what, pray, do you know about that room?"

"Nothing beyond what I just told you. For about an hour while I lay
awake in the night it seemed to me as though I heard shoes gliding
over the floor, and as though there were dancing, and something almost
like music, too. But all very quiet. I told Johanna about it this
morning, merely in order to excuse myself for sleeping so long
afterwards. She told me that it came from the long curtains up in the
social room. I think we shall put a stop to that by cutting off a
piece of the curtains or at least closing the windows. The weather
will soon turn stormy enough, anyhow. The middle of November is the
time, you know."

Innstetten was a trifle embarrassed and sat with a puzzled look on his
face, seemingly undecided whether or not he should attempt to allay
all these fears. Finally he made up his mind to ignore them. "You are
quite right, Effi, we can shorten the long curtains upstairs. But
there is no hurry about it, especially as it is not certain whether it
will do any good. It may be something else, in the chimney, or a worm
in the wood, or a polecat. For we have polecats here. But, in any
case, before we undertake any changes you must first examine our whole
house, under my guidance; that goes without saying. We can do it in a
quarter of an hour. Then you make your toilette, dress up just a
little bit, for in reality you are most charming as you are now. You
must get ready for our friend Gieshübler. It is now past ten, and I
should be very much mistaken in him if he did not put in his
appearance here at eleven, or at twelve at the very latest, in order
most devotedly to lay his homage at your feet. This, by the way, is
the kind of language he indulges in. Otherwise he is, as I have
already said, a capital man, who will become your friend, if I know
him and you aright."


CHAPTER VIII


It was long after eleven, but nothing had been seen of Gieshübler as
yet. "I can't wait any longer," Geert had said, whose duties called
him away. "If Gieshübler comes while I am gone, receive him as kindly
as possible and the call will go especially well. He must not become
embarrassed. When he is ill at ease he cannot find a word to say, or
says the queerest kind of things. But if you can win his confidence
and put him in a good humor he will talk like a book. Well, you will
do that easily enough. Don't expect me before three; there is a great
deal to do over across the way. And the matter of the room upstairs we
will consider further. Doubtless, the best thing will be to leave it
as it is."

With that Innstetten went away and left his young wife alone. She sat,
leaning back, in a quiet, snug corner by the window, and, as she
looked out, rested her left arm on a small side leaf drawn out of the
cylindrical desk. The street was the chief thoroughfare leading to the
beach, for which reason there was a great deal of traffic here in the
summer time, but now, in the middle of November, it was all empty and
quiet, and only a few poor children, whose parents lived in thatched
cottages clear at the further edge of the "Plantation" came clattering
by in their wooden shoes. But Effi felt none of this loneliness, for
her fancy was still engaged with the strange things she had seen a
short time before during her examination of the house.

This examination began with the kitchen, which had a range of modern
make, while an electric wire ran along the ceiling and into the maids'
room. These two improvements had only recently been made, and Effi was
pleased when Innstetten told her about them. Next they went from the
kitchen back into the hall and from there out into the court, the
first half of which was little more than a narrow passage-way running
along between the two side wings of the house. In these wings were to
be found all the other rooms set apart for house-keeping purposes. In
the right the maids' room, the manservant's room, and the mangling
room; to the left the coachman's quarters, situated between the stable
and the carriage shed and occupied by the Kruse family. Over this room
was the chicken house, while a trap door in the roof of the stable
furnished ingress and egress for the pigeons. Effi had inspected all
these parts of the house with a great deal of interest, but this
interest was exceeded by far when, upon returning from the court to
the front of the house, she followed Innstetten's leading and climbed
the stairway to the upper story. The stairs were askew, ramshackly,
and dark; but the hall, to which they led, almost gave one a cheerful
sensation, because it had a great deal of light and a good view of the
surrounding landscape. In one direction it looked out over the roofs
of the outskirts of the city and the "Plantation," toward a Dutch
windmill standing high up on a dune; in the other it looked out upon
the Kessine, which here, just above its mouth, was rather broad and
stately. It was a striking view and Effi did not hesitate to give
lively expression to her pleasure. "Yes, very beautiful, very
picturesque," answered Innstetten, without going more into detail, and
then opened a double door to the right, with leaves hanging somewhat
askew, which led into the so-called social room. This room ran clear
across the whole story. Both front and back windows were open and the
oft-mentioned curtains swung back and forth in the strong draft. From
the middle of one side wall projected an open fireplace with a large
stone mantlepiece, while on the opposite wall there hung a few tin
candlesticks, each with two candle sockets, just like those downstairs
in the hall, except that everything looked dingy and neglected. Effi
was somewhat disappointed and frankly said so. Then she remarked that
she would rather look at the rooms across the hall than at this
miserable, deserted social room. "To tell the truth, there is
absolutely nothing over there," answered Innstetten, but he opened the
doors nevertheless. Here were four rooms with one window each, all
tinted yellow, to match the social room, and all completely empty,
except that in one there stood three rush-bottomed chairs, with seats
broken through. On the back of one was pasted a little picture, only
half a finger long, representing a Chinaman in blue coat and wide
yellow trousers, with a low-crowned hat on his head. Effi saw it and
said: "What is the Chinaman doing here?" Innstetten himself seemed
surprised at the picture and assured her that he did not know. "Either
Christel or Johanna has pasted it there. Child's play. You can see it
is cut out of a primer." Effi agreed with that and was only surprised
that Innstetten took everything so seriously, as though it meant
something after all.

Then she cast another glance into the social room and said, in effect,
that it was really a pity all that room should stand empty. "We have
only three rooms downstairs and if anybody comes to visit us we shall
not know whither to turn. Don't you think one could make two handsome
guest rooms out of the social room? This would just suit mama. She
could sleep in the back room and would have the view of the river and
the two moles, and from the front room she could see the city and the
Dutch windmill. In Hohen-Cremmen we have even to this day only a
German windmill. Now say, what do you think of it? Next May mama will
surely come."

Innstetten agreed to everything, only he said finally: "That is all
very well. But after all it will be better if we give your mama rooms
over in the district councillor's office building. The whole second
story is vacant there, just as it is here, and she will have more
privacy there."

That was the result, so to speak, which the first walk around through
the house accomplished. Effi then made her toilette, but not so
quickly as Innstetten had supposed, and now she was sitting in her
husband's room, turning her thoughts first to the little Chinaman
upstairs, then to Gieshübler, who still did not come. To be sure, a
quarter of an hour before, a stoop-shouldered and almost deformed
little gentleman in an elegant short fur coat and a very
smooth-brushed silk hat, too tall for his proportions, had walked
past on the other side of the street and had glanced over at her
window. But that could hardly have been Gieshübler. No, this
stoop-shouldered man, who had such a distinguished air about him, must
have been the presiding judge, and she recalled then that she had once
seen such a person at a reception given by Aunt Therese, but it
suddenly occurred to her that Kessin had only a lower court judge.

While she was still following out this chain of thought the object of
her reflections, who had apparently been taking a morning stroll, or
perhaps a promenade around the "Plantation" to bolster up his courage,
came in sight again, and a minute later Frederick entered to announce
Apothecary Gieshübler.

"Ask him kindly to come in."

The poor young wife's heart fluttered, for it was the first time that
she had to appear as a housewife, to say nothing of the first woman of
the city.

Frederick helped Gieshübler take off his fur coat and then opened the
door.

Effi extended her hand to the timidly entering caller, who kissed it
with a certain amount of fervor. The young wife seemed to have made a
great impression upon him immediately.

"My husband has already told me--But I am receiving you here in my
husband's room,--he is over at the office and may be back any moment.
May I ask you to step into my room?"

Gieshübler followed Effi, who led the way into the adjoining room,
where she pointed to one of the arm chairs, as she herself sat down on
the sofa. "I wish I could tell you what a great pleasure it was
yesterday to receive the beautiful flowers with your card. I
straightway ceased to feel myself a stranger here and when I mentioned
the fact to Innstetten he told me we should unquestionably be good
friends."

"Did he say that? The good councillor. In the councillor and you, most
gracious Lady,--I beg your permission to say it--two dear people have
been united. For what kind of a man your husband is, I know, and what
kind of a woman you are, most gracious Lady, I see."

"Provided only you do not look at me with too friendly eyes. I am so
very young. And youth--"

"Ah, most gracious Lady, say nothing against youth. Youth, even with
all its mistakes, is still beautiful and lovable, and age, even with
its virtues, is not good for much. Personally I have, it is true, no
right to say anything about this subject. About age I might have,
perhaps, but not about youth, for, to be frank, I was never young.
Persons with my misfortune are never young. That, it may as well be
said, is the saddest feature of the case. One has no true spirit, one
has no self-confidence, one hardly ventures to ask a lady for the
honor of a dance, because one does not desire to cause her an
embarrassment, and thus the years go by and one grows old, and life
has been poor and empty."

Effi gave him her hand. "Oh, you must not say such things. We women
are by no means so bad."

"Oh, no, certainly not."

"And when I recall," continued Effi, "what all I have experienced--it
is not much, for I have gone out but little, and have almost always
lived in the country--but when I recall it, I find that, after all, we
always love what is worthy of love. And then I see, too, at once that
you are different from other men. We women have sharp eyes in such
matters. Perhaps in your case the name has something to do with it.
That was always a favorite assertion of our old pastor Niemeyer. The
name, he loved to say, especially the forename, has a certain
mysterious determining influence; and Alonzo Gieshübler, in my
opinion, opens to one a whole new world, indeed I feel almost tempted
to say, Alonzo is a romantic name, a fastidious name."

Gieshübler smiled with a very unusual degree of satisfaction and
mustered up the courage to lay aside his silk hat, which up to this
time he had been turning in his hand. "Yes, most gracious Lady, you
hit the nail on the head that time."

Oh, I understand. I have heard about the consuls, of Kessin is said to
have so many, and at the home of the Spanish consul your father
presumably made the acquaintance of the daughter of a sea-captain, a
beautiful Andalusian girl, I suppose; Andalusian girls are always
beautiful."

"Precisely as you suppose, most gracious Lady. And my mother really
was a beautiful woman, ill as it behooves me personally to undertake
to prove it. But when your husband came here three years ago she was
still alive and still had the same fiery eyes as in her youth. He will
confirm my statement. I personally take more after the Gieshüblers,
who are people of little account, so far as external features are
concerned, but otherwise tolerably well favored. We have been living
here now for four generations, a full hundred years, and if there were
an apothecary nobility--"

"You would have a right to claim it. And I, for my part, accept your
claim as proved, and that beyond question. For us who come of old
families it is a very easy matter, because we gladly recognize every
sort of noble-mindedness, no matter from what source it may come. At
least that is the way I was brought up by my father, as well as by my
mother. I am a Briest by birth and am descended from the Briest, who,
the day before the battle of Fehrbellin, led the sudden attack on
Rathenow, of which you may perhaps have heard."

"Oh, certainly, most gracious Lady, that, you know, is my specialty."

"Well then I am a von Briest. And my father has said to me more than
a hundred times: Effi,--for that is my name--Effi, here is our
beginning, and here only. When Froben traded the horse, he was that
moment a nobleman, and when Luther said, 'here I stand,' he was more
than ever a nobleman. And I think, Mr. Gieshübler, Innstetten was
quite right when he assured me you and I should be good friends."

Gieshübler would have liked nothing better than to make her a
declaration of love then and there, and to ask that he might fight and
die for her as a Cid or some other campeador. But as that was out of
the question, and his heart could no longer endure the situation, he
arose from his seat, looked for his hat, which he fortunately found at
once, and, after again kissing the young wife's hand, withdrew quickly
from her presence without saying another word.


CHAPTER IX


Such was Effi's first day in Kessin. Innstetten gave her half a week
further time to become settled and write letters to her mother, Hulda,
and the twins. Then the city calls began, some of which were made in a
closed carriage, for the rains came just right to make this unusual
procedure seem the sensible thing to do. When all the city calls had
been made the country nobility came next in order. These took longer,
as in most cases the distances were so great that it was not possible
to make more than one visit on any one day. First they went to the
Borckes' in Rothenmoor, then to Morgnitz, Dabergotz, and Kroschentin,
where they made their duty call at the Ahlemanns', the Jatzkows', and
the Grasenabbs'. Further down the list came, among other families,
that of Baron von Güldenklee in Papenhagen. The impression that Effi
received was everywhere the same. Mediocre people, whose friendliness
was for the most part of an uncertain character, and who, while
pretending to speak of Bismarck and the Crown Princess, were in
reality merely scrutinizing Effi's dress, which some considered too
pretentious for so youthful a woman, while others looked upon it as
too little suited to a lady of social position. Everything about her,
they said, betrayed the Berlin school,--sense in external matters and
a remarkable degree of uncertainty and embarrassment in the discussion
of great problems. At the Borckes', and also at the homes in Morgnitz
and Dabergotz, she had been declared "infected with rationalism," but
at the Grasenabbs' she was pronounced point-blank an "atheist." To be
sure, the elderly Mrs. Grasenabb, _née_ Stiefel, of Stiefelstein in
South Germany, had made a weak attempt to save Effi at least for
deism. But Sidonie von Grasenabb, an old maid of forty-three, had
gruffly interjected the remark: "I tell you, mother, simply an
atheist, and nothing short of an atheist, and that settles it." After
this outburst the old woman, who was afraid of her own daughter, had
observed discreet silence.

The whole round had taken just about two weeks, and at a late hour on
the second day of December the Innstettens were returning home from
their last visit. At the Güldenklees' Innstetten had met with the
inevitable fate of having to argue politics with old Mr. Güldenklee.
"Yes, dearest district councillor, when I consider how times have
changed! A generation ago today, or about that long, there was, you
know, another second of December, and good Louis, the nephew of
Napoleon--_if_ he was his nephew, and not in reality of entirely
different extraction--was firing grape and canister at the Parisian
mob. Oh well, let him be forgiven for that; he was just the man to do
it, and I hold to the theory that every man fares exactly as well and
as ill as he deserves. But when he later lost all appreciation and in
the year seventy, without any provocation, was determined to have a
bout with us, you see, Baron, that was--well, what shall I say?--that
was a piece of insolence. But he was repaid for it in his own coin.
Our Ancient of Days up there is not to be trifled with and He is on
our side."

"Yes," said Innstetten, who was wise enough to appear to be entering
seriously into such Philistine discussions, "the hero and conqueror of
Saarbrücken did not know what he was doing. But you must not be too
strict in your judgment of him personally. After all, who is master in
his own house? Nobody. I myself am already making preparations to put
the reins of government into other hands, and Louis Napoleon, you
know, was simply a piece of wax in the hands of his Catholic wife, or
let us say, rather, of his Jesuit wife."

"Wax in the hands of his wife, who proceeded to bamboozle him.
Certainly, Innstetten, that is just what he was. But you don't think,
do you, that that is going to save him? He is forever condemned.
Moreover it has never yet been shown conclusively"--at these words his
glance sought rather timorously the eye of his better half--"that
petticoat government is not really to be considered an advantage.
Only, of course, it must be the right sort of a wife. But who was this
wife? She was not a wife at all. The most charitable thing to call her
is a 'dame,' and that tells the whole story. 'Dame' almost always
leaves an after-taste. This Eugenie--whose relation to the Jewish
banker I gladly ignore here, for I hate the 'I-am-holier-than-thou'
attitude--had a streak of the _café-chantant_ in her, and, if the city
in which she lived was a Babylon, she was a wife of Babylon. I don't
care to express myself more plainly, for I know"--and he bowed toward
Effi--"what I owe to German wives. Your pardon, most gracious Lady,
that I have so much as touched upon these things within your hearing."

Such had been the trend of the conversation, after they had talked
about the election, the assassin Nobiling, and the rape crop, and when
Innstetten and Effi reached home they sat down to chat for half an
hour. The two housemaids were already in bed, for it was nearly
midnight.

Innstetten put on his short house coat and morocco slippers, and began
to walk up and down in the room; Effi was still dressed in her society
gown, and her fan and gloves lay beside her.

"Now," said Innstetten, standing still, "we really ought to celebrate
this day, but I don't know as yet how. Shall I play you a triumphal
march, or set the shark going out there, or carry you in triumph
across the hall? Something must be done, for I would have you know,
this visit today was the last one."

"Thank heaven, if it was," said Effi. "But the feeling that we now
have peace and quiet is, I think, celebration enough in itself. Only
you might give me a kiss. But that doesn't occur to you. On that whole
long road not a touch, frosty as a snow-man. And never a thing but
your cigar."

"Forget that, I am going to reform, but at present I merely want to
know your attitude toward this whole question of friendly relations
and social intercourse. Do you feel drawn to one or another of these
new acquaintances? Have the Borckes won the victory over the
Grasenabbs, or vice versa, or do you side with old Mr. Güldenklee?
What he said about Eugenie made a very noble and pure impression,
don't you think so?"

"Aha, behold! Sir Geert von Innstetten is a gossip. I am learning to
know you from an entirely new side."

"And if our nobility will not do," continued Innstetten, without
allowing himself to be interrupted, "what do you think of the city
officials of Kessin? What do you think of the club? After all, life
and death depend upon your answer. Recently I saw you talking with our
judge, who is a lieutenant of the reserves, a neat little man that one
might perhaps get along with, if he could only rid himself of the
notion that he accomplished the recapture of Le Bourget by attacking
him on the flank. And his wife! She is considered our best Boston
player and has, besides, the prettiest counters. So once more, Effi,
how is it going to be in Kessin? Will you become accustomed to the
place? Will you be popular and assure me a majority when I want to go
to the Imperial Diet? Or do you favor a life of seclusion, holding
yourself aloof from the people of Kessin, in the city as well as in
the country?"

"I shall probably decide in favor of a secluded life, unless the
Apothecary at the sign of the Moor draws me out. To be sure, that will
make me fall still lower in Sidonie's estimation, but I shall have to
take the risk. This fight will simply have to be fought. I shall stand
or fall with Gieshübler. It sounds rather comical, but he is actually
the only person with whom it is possible to carry on a conversation,
the only real human being here."

"That he is," said Innstetten. "How well you choose!"

"Should I have _you_ otherwise?" said Effi and leaned upon his arm.

That was on the 2d of December. A week later Bismarck was in Varzin,
and Innstetten now knew that until Christmas, and perhaps even for a
longer time, quiet days for him were not to be thought of. The Prince
had cherished a fondness for him ever since the days in Versailles,
and would often invite him to dinner, along with other guests, but
also alone, for the youthful district councillor, distinguished alike
for his bearing and his wisdom, enjoyed the favor of the Princess
also.

The first invitation came for the 14th. As there was snow on the
ground Innstetten planned to take a sleigh for the two hours' drive to
the station, from which he had another hour's ride by train. "Don't
wait for me, Effi. I can't be back before midnight; it will probably
be two o'clock or even later. But I'll not disturb you. Good-by, I'll
see you in the morning." With that he climbed into the sleigh and away
the Isabella-colored span flew through the city and across the country
toward the station.

That was the first long separation, for almost twelve hours. Poor
Effi! How was she to pass the evening? To go to bed early would be
inadvisable, for she would wake up and not be able to go to sleep
again, and would listen for every sound. No, it would be best to wait
till she was very tired and then enjoy a sound sleep. She wrote a
letter to her mother and then went to see Mrs. Kruse, whose condition
aroused her sympathy. This poor woman had the habit of sitting till
late at night with the black chicken in her lap. The friendliness the
visit was meant to show was by no means returned by Mrs. Kruse, who
sat in her overheated room quietly brooding away the time. So when
Effi perceived that her coming was felt as a disturbance rather than a
pleasure she went away, staying merely long enough to ask whether
there was anything the invalid would like to have. But all offers of
assistance were declined.

Meanwhile it had become evening and the lamp was already burning. Effi
walked over to the window of her room and looked out at the grove,
whose trees were covered with glistening snow. She was completely
absorbed in the picture and took no notice of what was going on behind
her in the room. When she turned around she observed that Frederick
had quietly put the coffee tray on the table before the sofa and set a
place for her. "Why, yes, supper. I must sit down, I suppose." But she
could not make herself eat. So she got up from the table and reread
the letter she had written to her mother. If she had had a feeling of
loneliness before, it was doubly intense now. What would she not have
given if the two sandy-haired Jahnkes had just stepped in, or even
Hulda? The latter, to be sure, was always so sentimental and as a
usual thing occupied solely with her own triumphs. But doubtful and
insecure as these triumphs were, nevertheless Effi would be very happy
to be told about them at this moment. Finally she opened the grand
piano to play some music, but she could not play. "No, this will make
me hopelessly melancholy; I will read, rather." She looked for a book,
and the first to fall into her hands was a thick red tourist's
handbook, an old edition, perhaps from the days when Innstetten was a
lieutenant. "Yes, I will read in this book; there is nothing more
quieting than books like this. Only the maps should always be avoided.
But I shall guard against this source of sand in the eyes, which I
hate."

She opened the book at random at page 153. In the adjoining room she
heard the tick-tock of the clock, and out of doors Rollo, who at
nightfall had left his place in the shed, as was his custom every
evening, and had stretched himself out on the large woven mat just
outside the bedroom door. The consciousness that he was near at hand
decreased Effi's feeling that she was forsaken. In fact, it almost put
her in a cheerful mood, and so she began, without further delay, to
read. On the page lying open before her there was something about the
"Hermitage," the well country-seat of the Margrave in the neighborhood
of Beireuth. It attracted her attention. Beireuth, Richard Wagner. So
she read: "Among the pictures in the 'Hermitage' let us mention one
more, which not because of its beauty, but because of its age and the
person it represents, may well claim our interest. It is a woman's
portrait, which has grown dark with age. The head is small, the face
has harsh, rather uncanny features, and she wears a ruff which seems
to support her head. Some think it is an old margravine from the end
of the 15th century, others are of the opinion that it is the Countess
of Orlamunde. All are agreed that it is the picture of the Lady who
since that time has achieved a certain notoriety in the history of the
Hohenzollern dynasty under the name of the 'Lady in white.'"

"That was a lucky accident!" said Effi, as she shoved the book aside.
"I seek to quiet my nerves, and the first thing I run into is the
story of the 'Lady in white,' of whom I have been afraid as long as I
can remember. But inasmuch as I already have a creepy feeling I might
as well finish the story."

She opened the book again and read further: "This old portrait itself,
the original of which plays such a rôle in Hohenzollern history, has
likewise a significance as a picture in the special history of the
Hermitage. No doubt, one circumstance that has something to do with
this is the fact that the picture hangs on a papered door, which is
invisible to the stranger and behind which there is a stairway leading
down into the cellar. It is said that when Napoleon spent the night
here the 'Lady in white' stepped out of the frame and walked up to his
bed. The Emperor, starting with fright, the story continues, called
for his adjutant, and to the end of his life always spoke with
exasperation of this 'cursed palace.'"

"I must give up trying to calm myself by reading," said Effi. "If I
read further, I shall certainly come to a vaulted cellar that the
devil once rode out of on a wine cask. There are several of these in
Germany, I believe, and in a tourist's handbook all such things have
to be collected; that goes without saying. So I will close my eyes,
rather, and recall my wedding-eve celebration as well as I can,--how
the twins could not get any farther because of their tears, and how,
when everybody looked at everybody else with embarrassment, Cousin von
Briest declared that such tears opened the gate to Paradise. He was
truly charming and always in such exuberant spirits. And look at me
now! Here, of all places! Oh, I am not at all suited to be a grand
Lady. Now mama, she would have fitted this position, she would have
sounded the key-note, as behooves the wife of a district councillor,
and Sidonie Grasenabb would have been all homage toward her and would
not have been greatly disturbed about her belief or unbelief. But I--I
am a child and shall probably remain one, too. I once heard that it is
a good fortune. But I don't know whether that is true. Obviously a
wife ought always to adapt herself to the position in which she is
placed."

At this moment Frederick came to clear off the table.

"How late is it, Frederick?"

"It is going on nine, your Ladyship."

"Well, that is worth listening to. Send Johanna to me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Your Ladyship sent for me."

"Yes, Johanna; I want to go to bed. It is still early, to be sure, but
I am so alone. Please go out first and post this letter, and when you
come back it will surely be time. And even if it isn't."

Effi took the lamp and walked over to her bedroom. Just as she had
expected, there lay Rollo on the rush mat. When he saw her coming he
arose to make room for her to pass, and rubbed his ear against her
hand. Then he lay down again.

Meanwhile Johanna had gone over to the office to post the letter. Over
there she had been in no particular hurry; on the contrary, she had
preferred to carry on a conversation with Mrs. Paaschen, the wife of
the janitor of the building. About the young wife, of course.

"What kind of a woman is she anyhow?" asked Mrs. Paaschen.

"She is very young."

"Well, that is no misfortune, but rather the opposite. Young wives,
and that is just the good thing about them, never do anything but
stand before the mirror and pull at themselves and put on some
ornament. They don't see much or hear much and have not yet formed the
habit of counting the stubs of candles in the kitchen, and they don't
begrudge a maid a kiss if she gets one, simply because she herself no
longer gets any."

"Yes," said Johanna, "that was the way with my former madame, and
wholly without occasion. But there is nothing of that kind about our
mistress."

"Is he very affectionate?"

"Oh very. That you can easily imagine."

"But the fact that he leaves her thus alone--"

"Yes, dear Mrs. Paaschen, but you must not forget--the Prince. After
all, you know, he is a district councillor, and perhaps he wants to
rise still higher."

"Certainly he wants to, and he will, too. It's in him. Paaschen always
says so and he knows."

This walk over to the office had consumed perhaps a quarter of an
hour, and when Johanna returned, Effi was already sitting before the
pier-glass, waiting.

"You were gone a long time, Johanna."

"Yes, your Ladyship--I beg your Ladyship's pardon--I met Mrs. Paaschen
over there and was delayed a bit. It is so quiet here. One is always
glad to meet a person with whom one can speak a word. Christel is a
very good person, but she doesn't talk, and Frederick is such a
sleepy-head. Besides, he is so cautious and never comes right out with
what he has to say. True, one must be able to hold one's tongue when
necessary, and Mrs. Paaschen, who is so inquisitive, is really not at
all according to my taste. Yet one likes to see and hear something
once in a while."

Effi sighed. "Yes, Johanna, it is better so."

"Your Ladyship has such beautiful hair, so long, and soft as silk."

"Yes, it is very soft. But that is not a good thing, Johanna. As the
hair is, so is the character."

"Certainly, your Ladyship. And a soft character is better than a hard
one. I have soft hair, too."

"Yes, Johanna. And you have blonde hair, too. That the men like best."

"Oh, there is a great difference, your Ladyship. There are many who
prefer black."

"To be sure," laughed Effi, "that has been my experience, too. But it
must be because of something else entirely. Now, those who are blonde
always have a white complexion. You have, too, Johanna, and I would
wager my last pfennig that you have a good deal of attention paid to
you. I am still very young, but I know that much. Besides, I have a
girl friend, who was also so blonde, a regular flaxen blonde, even
blonder than you, and she was a preacher's daughter."

"Oh, yes."

"I beg you, Johanna, what do you mean by 'oh yes?' It sounds very
sarcastic and strange, and you have nothing against preachers'
daughters, have you?--She was a very pretty girl, as even our
officers thought, without exception, for we had officers, red hussars,
too. At the same time she knew very well how to dress herself. A black
velvet bodice and a flower, a rose or sometimes heliotrope, and if she
had not had such large protruding eyes--Oh you ought to have seen
them, Johanna, at least this large--" Effi laughingly pulled down her
right eye-lid--"she would have been simply a beauty. Her name was
Hulda, Hulda Niemeyer, and we were not even so very intimate. But if I
had her here now, and she were sitting there, yonder in the corner of
the little sofa, I would chat with her till midnight, or even longer.
I am so homesick"--in saying this she drew Johanna's head close to her
breast--"I am so much afraid."

"Oh, that will soon be overcome, your Ladyship, we were all that way."

"You were all that way? What does that mean, Johanna?"

"If your Ladyship is really so much afraid, why, I can make a bed for
myself here. I can take the straw mattress and turn down a chair, so
that I have something to lean my head against, and then I can sleep
here till morning, or till his Lordship comes home."

"He doesn't intend to disturb me. He promised me that specially."

"Or I can merely sit down in the corner of the sofa."

"Yes, that might do perhaps. No, it will not, either. His Lordship
must not know that I am afraid, he would not like it. He always wants
me to be brave and determined, as he is. And I can't be. I was always
somewhat easily influenced.--But, of course, I see plainly, I must
conquer myself and subject myself to his will in such particulars, as
well as in general. And then I have Rollo, you know. He is lying just
outside the threshold."

Johanna nodded at each statement and finally lit the candle on Effi's
bedroom stand. Then she took the lamp. "Does your Ladyship wish
anything more?"

"No, Johanna. The shutters are closed tight, are they not?"

"Merely drawn to, your Ladyship. Otherwise it would be so dark and
stuffy."

"Very well."

Johanna withdrew, and Effi went to bed and wrapped herself up in the
covers.

She left the candle burning, because she was determined not to go to
sleep at once. On the contrary, she planned to recapitulate her
wedding tour, as she had her wedding-eve celebration a short time
before, and let everything pass before her mind's eye in review. But
it turned out otherwise than she had expected, for when she had
reached Verona and was looking for the house of Juliet Capulet, her
eyes fell shut. The stub of candle in the little silver holder
gradually burned down, flickered once or twice, and went out.

Effi had slept quite soundly for a while, when all of a sudden she
started up out of her sleep with a loud scream, indeed, she was able
to hear the scream, as she awoke, and she also noticed Rollo's barking
outside. His "bow-wow" went echoing down the hall, muffled and almost
terrifying. She felt as though her heart stood still, and was unable
to call out. At this moment something whisked past her, and the door
into the hall sprang open. But the moment of extreme fright was also
the moment of her rescue, for, instead of something terrible, Rollo
now came up to her, sought her hand with his head, and, when he had
found it, lay down upon the rug before her bed. With her other hand
Effi had pressed three times on the button of the bell and in less
than half a minute Johanna was there, in her bare feet, her skirt
hanging over her arm and a large checkered cloth thrown over her head
and shoulders.

"Thank heaven, Johanna, that you are here."

"What was the matter, your Ladyship? Your Ladyship has had a dream."

"Yes, a dream. It must have been something of the sort, but it was
something else besides."

"Pray, what, your Ladyship?"

"I was sleeping quite soundly and suddenly I started up and
screamed--perhaps it was a nightmare--they have nightmares in our
family--My father has them, too, and frightens us with them. Mama
always says he ought not to humor himself so--But that is easy to
say--Well, I started up out of my sleep and screamed, and when I
looked around, as well as I could in the dark, something slipped past
my bed, right there where you are standing now, Johanna, and then it
was gone. And if I ask myself seriously, what it was--"

"Well, your Ladyship?"

"And if I ask myself seriously--I don't like to say it, Johanna--but I
believe it was the Chinaman."

[Illustration: _Permission F Bruckmann, A.-G. Munich_
A STREET SCENE AT PARIS     Adolph von Menzel]

"The one from upstairs?" said Johanna, trying to laugh, "our little
Chinaman that we pasted on the back of the chair, Christel and I? Oh,
your Ladyship has been dreaming, and even if your Ladyship was awake,
it all came from a dream."

"I should believe that, if it had not been exactly the moment when
Rollo began to bark outside. So he must have seen it too. Then the
door flew open and the good faithful animal sprang toward me, as
though he were coming to my rescue. Oh, my dear Johanna, it was
terrible. And I so alone and so young. Oh, if I only had some one here
with whom I could weep. But so far from home--alas, from home."

"The master may come any hour."

"No, he shall not come. He shall not see me thus. He would probably
laugh at me and I could never pardon him for that. For it was so
fearful, Johanna--You must stay here now--But let Christel sleep and
Frederick too. Nobody must know about it."

"Or perhaps I may fetch Mrs. Kruse to join us. She doesn't sleep
anyhow; she sits there all night long."

"No, no, she is a kindred spirit. That black chicken has something to
do with it, too. She must not come. No, Johanna, you just stay here
yourself. And how fortunate that you merely drew the shutters to. Push
them open, make a loud noise, so that I may hear a human sound, a
human sound--I have to call it that, even if it seems queer--and then
open the window a little bit, that I may have air and light."

Johanna did as ordered and Effi leaned back upon her pillows and soon
thereafter fell into a lethargic sleep.


CHAPTER X


It was six o'clock in the morning when Innstetten returned home from
Varzin. He made Rollo omit all demonstrations of affection and then
retired as quietly as possible to his room. Here he lay down in a
comfortable position, but would not allow Frederick to do more than
cover him up with a traveling rug. "Wake me at nine." And at this hour
he was wakened. He arose quickly and said: "Bring my breakfast."

"Her Ladyship is still asleep."

"But it is late. Has anything happened?"

"I don't know. I only know that Johanna had to sleep all night in her
Ladyship's room."

"Well, send Johanna to me then."

She came. She had the same rosy complexion as ever, and so seemed not
to have been specially upset by the events of the night.

"What is this I hear about her Ladyship? Frederick tells me something
happened and you slept in her room."

"Yes, Sir Baron. Her Ladyship rang three times in very quick
succession, and I thought at once it meant something. And it did, too.
She probably had a dream, or it may perhaps have been the other
thing."

"What other thing?"

"Oh, your Lordship knows, I believe."

"I know nothing. In any case we must put an end to it. And how did you
find her Ladyship?"

"She was beside herself and clung to Rollo's collar with all her
might. The dog was standing beside her Ladyship's bed and was
frightened also."

"And what had she dreamed, or, if you prefer, what had she heard or
seen? What did she say?"

"That it just slipped along close by her."

"What? Who?"

"The man from upstairs. The one from the social hall or from the small
chamber."

"Nonsense, I say. Over and over that same silly stuff. I don't want to
hear any more about it. And then you stayed with her Ladyship?"

"Yes, your Lordship. I made a bed on the floor close by her. And I had
to hold her hand, and then she went to sleep."

"And she is still sleeping?"

"Very soundly."

"I am worried about that, Johanna. One can sleep one's self well, but
also ill. We must waken her, cautiously, of course, so that she will
not be startled again. And tell Frederick not to bring the breakfast.
I will wait till her Ladyship is here. Now let me see how clever you
can be."

Half an hour later Effi came. She looked charming, but quite pale, and
was leaning on Johanna. The moment she caught sight of Innstetten she
rushed up to him and embraced and kissed him, while the tears streamed
down her face. "Oh, Geert, thank heaven, you are here. All is well
again now. You must not go away again, you must not leave me alone
again."

"My dear Effi--Just put it down, Frederick, I will do the rest--my
dear Effi, I am not leaving you alone from lack of consideration or
from caprice, but because it is necessary. I have no choice. I am a
man in office and cannot say to the Prince, or even to the Princess:
Your Highness, I cannot come; my wife is so alone, or, my wife is
afraid. If I said that it would put us in a rather comical light, me
certainly, and you, too. But first take a cup of coffee."

Effi drank her coffee and its stimulating effect was plainly to be
seen. Then she took her husband's hand again and said: "You shall have
your way. I see, it is impossible. And then, you know, we aspire to
something higher. I say we, for I am really more eager for it than
you."

"All wives are," laughed Innstetten.

"So it is settled. You will accept invitations as heretofore, and I
will stay here and wait for my 'High Lord,' which reminds me of Hulda
under the elder tree. I wonder how she is getting along?"

"Young ladies like Hulda always get along well. But what else were you
going to say?"

"I was going to say, I will stay here, and even alone, if necessary.
But not in this house. Let us move out. There are such handsome houses
along the quay, one between Consul Martens and Consul Grützmacher, and
one on the Market, just opposite Gieshübler. Why can't we live there?
Why here, of all places? When we have had friends and relatives as
guests in our house I have often heard that in Berlin families move
out on account of piano playing, or on account of cockroaches, or on
account of an unfriendly concierge. If it is done on account of such a
trifle--"

"Trifle? Concierge? Don't say that."

"If it is possible because of such things it must also be possible
here, where you are district councillor and the people are obliged to
do your bidding and many even owe you a debt of gratitude. Gieshübler
would certainly help us, even if only for my sake, for he will
sympathize with me. And now say, Geert, shall we give up this
abominable house, this house with the--"

"Chinaman, you mean. You see, Effi, one can pronounce the fearful word
without his appearing. What you saw or what, as you think, slipped
past your bed, was the little Chinaman that the maids pasted on the
back of the chair upstairs. I'll wager he had a blue coat on and a
very flat-crowned hat, with a shining button on top."

She nodded.

"Now you see, a dream, a hallucination. And then, I presume, Johanna
told you something last night, about the wedding upstairs."

"No."

"So much the better."

"She didn't tell me a word. But from all this I can see that there is
something queer here. And then the crocodile; everything is so uncanny
here."

"The first evening, when you saw the crocodile, you considered it
fairy-like--"

"Yes, then."

"And then, Effi, I can't well leave here now, even if it were possible
to sell the house or make an exchange. It is with this exactly as with
declining an invitation to Varzin. I can't have the people here in the
city saying that District Councillor Innstetten is selling his house
because his wife saw the little pasted-up picture of a Chinaman as a
ghost by her bed. I should be lost, Effi. One can never recover from
such ridiculousness."

"But, Geert, are you so sure that there is nothing of the kind?"

"That I will not affirm. It is a thing that one can believe or,
better, not believe. But supposing there were such things, what harm
do they do? The fact that bacilli are flying around in the air, of
which you have doubtless heard, is much worse and more dangerous than
all this scurrying about of ghosts, assuming that they do scurry
about, and that such a thing really exists. Then I am particularly
surprised to see _you_ show such fear and such an aversion, you a
Briest. Why, it is as though you came from a low burgher family.
Ghosts are a distinction, like the family tree and the like, and I
know families that would as lief give up their coat of arms as their
'Lady in white,' who may even be in black, for that matter."

Effi remained silent.

"Well, Effi; no answer?"

"What do you expect me to answer? I have given in to you and shown
myself docile, but I think you in turn might be more sympathetic. If
you knew how I long for sympathy. I have suffered a great deal, really
a very great deal, and when I saw you I thought I should now be rid of
my fear. But you merely told me you had no desire to make yourself
ridiculous in the eyes either of the Prince or of the city. That is
small comfort. I consider it small, and so much the smaller, since, to
cap the climax, you contradict yourself, and not only seem to believe
in these things yourself, but even expect me to have a nobleman's
pride in ghosts. Well, I haven't. When you talk about families that
value their ghosts as highly as their coat of arms, all I have to say
is, that is a matter of taste, and I count my coat of arms worth more.
Thank heaven, we Briests have no ghosts. The Briests were always very
good people and that probably accounts for it."

The dispute would doubtless have gone on longer and might perhaps have
led to a first serious misunderstanding if Frederick had not entered
to hand her Ladyship a letter. "From Mr. Gieshübler. The messenger is
waiting for an answer."

All the ill-humor on Effi's countenance vanished immediately. It did
her good merely to hear Gieshübler's name, and her cheerful feeling
was further heightened when she examined the letter. In the first
place it was not a letter at all, but a note, the address "Madame the
Baroness von Innstetten, _née_ Briest," in a beautiful court hand, and
instead of a seal a little round picture pasted on, a lyre with a
staff sticking in it. But the staff might also be an arrow. She handed
the note to her husband, who likewise admired it.

"Now read it."

Effi broke open the wafer and read: "Most highly esteemed Lady, most
gracious Baroness: Permit me to join to my most respectful forenoon
greeting a most humble request. By the noon train a dear friend of
mine for many years past, a daughter of our good city of Kessin, Miss
Marietta Trippelli, will arrive here to sojourn in our midst
till tomorrow morning. On the 17th she expects to be in St.
Petersburg, where she will give concerts till the middle of January.
Prince Kotschukoff is again opening his hospitable house to her. In
her immutable kindness to me, Miss Trippelli has promised to spend
this evening at my house and sing some songs, leaving the choice
entirely to me, for she knows no such thing as difficulty. Could
Madame the Baroness consent to attend this soirée musicale, at seven
o'clock? Your husband, upon whose appearance I count with certainty,
will support my most humble request. The only other guests are Pastor
Lindequist, who will accompany, and the widow Trippel, of course.
Your most obedient servant. A. Gieshübler."

"Well," said Innstetten, "yes or no?"

"Yes, of course. That will pull me through. Besides, I cannot decline
my dear Gieshübler's very first invitation."

"Agreed. So, Frederick, tell Mirambo, for I take it for granted he
brought the letter, that we shall have the honor."

Frederick went out. When he was gone Effi asked: "Who is Mirambo?"

"The genuine Mirambo is a robber chief in Africa,--Lake Tanganyika, if
your geography extends that far--but ours is merely Gieshübler's
charcoal dispenser and factotum, and will this evening, in all
probability, serve as a waiter in dress coat and cotton gloves."

It was quite apparent that the little incident had had a favorable
effect on Effi and had restored to her a good share of her
light-heartedness. But Innstetten wished to do what he could to hasten
the convalescence. "I am glad you said yes, so quickly and without
hesitation, and now I should like to make a further proposal to you to
restore you entirely to your normal condition. I see plainly, you are
still annoyed by something from last night foreign to my Effi and it
must be got rid of absolutely. There is nothing better for that than
fresh air. The weather is splendid, cool and mild at the same time,
with hardly a breeze stirring. How should you like to take a drive
with me? A long one, not merely out through the "Plantation." In the
sleigh, of course, with the sleigh-bells on and the white snow
blankets. Then if we are back by four you can take a rest, and at
seven we shall be at Gieshübler's and hear Trippelli."

Effi took his hand. "How good you are, Geert, and how indulgent! For I
must have seemed to you very childish, or at least very childlike,
first in the episode of fright and then, later, when I asked you to
sell the house, but worst of all in what I said about the Prince. I
urged you to break off all connection with him, and that would be
ridiculous. For after all he is the one man who has to decide our
destiny. Mine, too. You don't know how ambitious I am. To tell the
truth, it was only out of ambition that I married you. Oh, you must
not put on such a serious expression. I love you, you know. What is it
we say when we pluck a blossom and tear off the petals? 'With all my
heart, with grief and pain, beyond compare.'" She burst out laughing.
"And now tell me," she continued, as Innstetten still kept silent,
"whither shall we go?"

"I thought, to the railway station, by a roundabout way, and then back
by the turnpike. We can dine at the station or, better, at
Golchowski's, at the Prince Bismarck Hotel, which we passed on the day
of our return home, as you perhaps remember. Such a visit always has a
good effect, and then I can have a political conversation with the
Starost by the grace of Effi, and even if he does not amount to much
personally he keeps his hotel in good condition and his cuisine in
still better. The people here are connoisseurs when it comes to eating
and drinking."

It was about eleven when they had this conversation. At twelve Kruse
drove the sleigh up to the door and Effi got in. Johanna was going to
bring a foot bag and furs, but Effi, after all that she had juat
passed through, felt so strongly the need of fresh air that she took
only a double blanket and refused everything else. Innstetten said to
Kruse: "Now, Kruse, we want to drive to the station where you and I
were this morning. The people will wonder at it, but that doesn't
matter. Say, we drive here past the 'Plantation,' and then to the left
toward the Kroschentin church tower. Make the horses fly. We must be
at the station at one."

Thus began the drive. Over the white roofs of the city hung a bank of
smoke, for there was little stir in the air. They flew past Utpatel's
mill, which turned very slowly, and drove so close to the churchyard
that the tips of the barberry bushes which hung out over the lattice
brushed against Effi, and showered snow upon her blanket. On the other
side of the road was a fenced-in plot, not much larger than a garden
bed, and with nothing to be seen inside except a young pine tree,
which rose out of the centre.

"Is anybody buried there?" asked Effi.

"Yes, the Chinaman."

Effi was startled; it came to her like a stab. But she had strength
enough to control herself and ask with apparent composure: "Ours?"

"Yes, ours. Of course, he could not be accommodated in the community
graveyard and so Captain Thomsen, who was what you might call his
friend, bought this patch and had him buried here. There is also a
stone with an inscription. It all happened before my time, of course,
but it is still talked about."

"So there is something in it after all. A story. You said something of
the kind this morning. And I suppose it would be best for me to hear
what it is. So long as I don't know, I shall always be a victim of my
imaginations, in spite of all my good resolutions. Tell me the real
story. The reality cannot worry me so much as my fancy."

"Good for you, Effi. I didn't intend to speak about it. But now it
comes in naturally, and that is well. Besides, to tell the truth, it
is nothing at all."

"All the same to me: nothing at all or much or little. Only begin."

"Yes, that is easy to say. The beginning is always the hardest part,
even with stories. Well, I think I shall begin with Captain Thomsen."

"Very well."

"Now Thomsen, whom I have already mentioned, was for many years a
so-called China-voyager, always on the way between Shanghai and
Singapore with a cargo of rice, and may have been about sixty when he
arrived here. I don't know whether he was born here or whether he had
other relations here. To make a long story short, now that he was here
he sold his ship, an old tub that he disposed of for very little, and
bought a house, the same that we are now living in. For out in the
world he had become a wealthy man. This accounts for the crocodile and
the shark and, of course, the ship. Thomsen was a very adroit man, as
I have been told, and well liked, even by Mayor Kirstein, but above
all by the man who was at that time the pastor in Kessin, a native of
Berlin, who had come here shortly before Thomsen and had met with a
great deal of opposition."

"I believe it. I notice the same thing. They are so strict and
self-righteous here. I believe that is Pomeranian."

"Yes and no, depending. There are other regions where they are not at
all strict and where things go topsy-turvy--But just see, Effi, there
we have the Kroschentin church tower right close in front of us. Shall
we not give up the station and drive over to see old Mrs. von
Grasenabb? Sidonie, if I am rightly informed, is not at home. So we
might risk it."

"I beg you, Geert, what are you thinking of? Why, it is heavenly to
fly along thus, and I can simply feel myself being restored and all my
fear falling from me. And now you ask me to sacrifice all that merely
to pay these old people a flying visit and very likely cause them
embarrassment. For heaven's sake let us not. And then I want above all
to hear the story. We were talking about Captain Thomsen, whom I
picture to myself as a Dane or an Englishman, very clean, with white
stand-up collar, and perfectly white linen."

"Quite right. So he is said to have looked. And with him lived a young
person of about twenty, whom some took for his niece, but most people
for his grand-daughter. The latter, however, considering their ages,
was hardly possible. Beside the grand-daughter or the niece, there was
also a Chinaman living with him, the same one who lies there among the
dunes and whose grave we have just passed."

"Fine, fine."

"This Chinaman was a servant at Thomsen's and Thomsen thought a great
deal of him, so that he was really more a friend than a servant. And
it remained so for over a year. Then suddenly it was rumored that
Thomsen's grand-daughter, who, I believe, was called Nina, was to be
married to a captain, in accordance with the old man's wish. And so
indeed it came about. There was a grand wedding at the house, the
Berlin pastor married them. The miller Utpatel, a Scottish Covenanter,
and Gieshübler, a feeble light in church matters, were invited, but
the more prominent guests were a number of captains with their wives
and daughters. And, as you can imagine, there was a lively time. In
the evening there was dancing, and the bride danced with every man and
finally with the Chinaman. Then all of a sudden the report spread that
she had vanished. And she was really gone, somewhere, but nobody knew
just what had happened. A fortnight later the Chinaman died. Thomsen
bought the plot I have shown you and had him buried in it. The Berlin
Pastor is said to have remarked: 'The Chinaman might just as well have
been buried in the Christian churchyard, for he was a very good man
and exactly as good as the rest.' Whom he really meant by the rest,
Gieshübler says nobody quite knew."

"Well, in this matter I am absolutely against the pastor. Nobody ought
to say such things, for they are dangerous and unbecoming. Even
Niemeyer would not have said that."

"The poor pastor, whose name, by the way, was Trippel, was very
seriously criticised for it, and it was truly a blessing that he soon
afterward died, for he would have lost his position otherwise. The
city was opposed to him, just as you are, in spite of the fact that
they had called him, and the Consistory, of course, was even more
antagonistic."

"Trippel, you say? Then, I presume, there is some connection between
him and the pastor's widow, Mrs. Trippel, whom we are to see this
evening."

"Certainly there is a connection. He was her husband, and the father
of Miss Trippelli."

Effi laughed. "Of Miss Trippelli! At last I see the whole affair in a
clear light. That she was born in Kessin, Gieshübler wrote me, you
remember. But I thought she was the daughter of an Italian consul. We
have so many foreign names here, you know. And now I find she is good
German and a descendant of Trippel. Is she so superior that she could
venture to Italianize her name in this fashion?"

"The daring shall inherit the earth. Moreover she is quite good. She
spent a few years in Paris with the famous Madame Viardot, and there
made the acquaintance of the Russian Prince. Russian Princes, you
know, are very enlightened, are above petty class prejudices, and
Kotschukoff and Gieshübler--whom she calls uncle, by the way, and one
might almost call him a born uncle--it is, strictly speaking, these
two who have made little Marie Trippel what she is. It was Gieshübler
who induced her to go to Paris and Kotschukoff made her over into
Marietta Trippelli."

"Ah, Geert, what a charming story this is and what a humdrum life I
have led in Hohen-Cremmen! Never a thing out of the ordinary."

Innstetten took her hand and said: "You must not speak thus, Effi.
With respect to ghosts one may take whatever attitude one likes. But
beware of 'out of the ordinary' things, or what is loosely called out
of the ordinary. That which appears to you so enticing, even a life
such as Miss Trippelli leads, is as a rule bought at the price of
happiness. I know quite well how you love Hohen-Cremmen and are
attached to it, but you often make sport of it, too, and have no
conception of how much quiet days like those in Hohen-Cremmen mean."

"Yes I have," she said. "I know very well. Only I like to hear about
something else once in a while, and then the desire comes over me to
have a similar experience. But you are quite right, and, to tell the
truth, I long for peace and quiet."

Innstetten shook his finger at her. "My dear, dear Effi, that again
you only imagine. Always fancies, first one thing, then another."


CHAPTER XI


[Innstetten and Effi stopped at the Prince Bismarck Hotel for dinner
and heard some of Golchowski's gossip. All three went out near the
tracks, when they heard a fast express coming, and as it passed in the
direction of Effi's old home, it filled her heart with longing. The
soirée musicale at Gieshübler's was particularly enlivened by the
bubbling humor of Miss Trippelli, whose singing was excellent, but did
not overshadow her talent as a conversationalist. Effi admired her
ability to sing dramatic pieces with composure. An uncanny ballad led
to a discussion of haunted houses and ghosts, in both of which Miss
Trippelli believed.]


CHAPTER XII


The guests did not go home till late. Soon after ten Effi remarked to
Gieshübler that it was about time to leave, as Miss Trippelli must not
miss her train and would have to leave Kessin at six in order to catch
it. But Miss Trippelli overheard the remark and, in her own peculiar
unabashed way, protested against such thoughtful consideration. "Ah,
most gracious Lady, you think that one following my career needs
regular sleep, but you are mistaken. What we need regularly is
applause and high prices. Oh, laugh if you like. Besides, I can sleep
in my compartment on the train--for one learns to do such things--in
any position and even on my left side, and I don't even need to
unfasten my dress. To be sure, I am never laced tight; chest and lungs
must always be free, and, above all, the heart. Yes, most gracious
Lady, that is the prime essential. And then, speaking of sleep in
general, it is not the quantity that tells; it is the quality. A good
nap of five minutes is better than five hours of restless turning over
and over, first one way, then the other. Besides, one sleeps
marvelously in Russia, in spite of the strong tea. It must be the air
that causes it, or late dinners, or because one is so pampered. There
are no cares in Russia; in that regard Russia is better than America.
In the matter of money the two are equal." After this explanation on
the part of Miss Trippelli, Effi desisted from further warnings that
it was time to go. When twelve o'clock came, the guests, who had
meanwhile developed a certain degree of intimacy, bade their host a
merry and hearty good night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days later Gieshübler's friend brought herself once more to
Effi's attention by a telegram in French, from St. Petersburg: "Madame
the Baroness von Innstetten, née von Briest. Arrived safe. Prince K.
at station. More taken with me than ever. Thousand thanks for your
good reception. Kindest regards to Monsieur the Baron. Marietta
Trippelli."

Innstetten was delighted and gave more enthusiastic expression to his
delight than Effi was able to understand.

"I don't understand you, Geert."

"Because you don't understand Miss Trippelli. It's her true self in
the telegram, perfect to a dot."

"So you take it all as a bit of comedy."

"As what else could I take it, pray? All calculated for friends there
and here, for Kotschukoff and Gieshübler. Gieshübler will probably
found something for Miss Trippelli, or maybe just leave her a legacy."

Gieshübler's party had occurred in the middle of December.
Immediately thereafter began the preparations for Christmas. Effi, who
might otherwise have found it hard to live through these days,
considered it a blessing to have a household with demands that had to
be satisfied. It was a time for pondering, deciding, and buying, and
this left no leisure for gloomy thoughts. The day before Christmas
gifts arrived from her parents, and in the parcels were packed a
variety of trifles from the precentor's family: beautiful queenings
from a tree grafted by Effi and Jahnke several years ago, beside brown
pulse-warmers and knee-warmers from Bertha and Hertha. Hulda only
wrote a few lines, because, as she pretended, she had still to knit a
traveling shawl for X. "That is simply not true," said Effi, "I'll
wager, there is no X in existence. What a pity she cannot cease
surrounding herself with admirers who do not exist!"

When the evening came Innstetten himself arranged the presents for his
young wife. The tree was lit, and a small angel hung at the top. On
the tree was discovered a cradle with pretty transparencies and
inscriptions, one of which referred to an event looked forward to in
the Innstetten home the following year. Effi read it and blushed. Then
she started toward Innstetten to thank him, but before she had time to
carry out her design a Yule gift was thrown into the hall with a
shout, in accordance with the old Pomeranian custom. It proved to be a
box filled with a world of things. At the bottom they found the most
important gift of all, a neat little lozenge box, with a number of
Japanese pictures pasted on it, and inside of it a note, running,--


  "Three kings once came on a Christmas eve,
  The king of the Moors was one, I believe;--
  The druggist at the sign of the Moor
  Today with spices raps at your door;
  Regretting no incense or myrrh to have found,
  He throws pistachio and almonds around."


Effi read the note two or three times and was pleased. "The homage of
a good man has something very comforting about it. Don't you think so,
Geert?"

"Certainly I do. It is the only thing that can afford real pleasure,
or at least ought to. Every one is otherwise so encumbered with stupid
obligations--I am myself. But, after all, one is what one is."

The first holiday was church day, on the second they went to the
Borckes'. Everybody was there, except the Grasenabbs, who declined to
come, "because Sidonie was not at home." This excuse struck everybody
as rather strange. Some even whispered: "On the contrary, this is the
very reason they ought to have come."

New Year's eve there was to be a club ball, which Effi could not well
miss, nor did she wish to, for it would give her an opportunity to see
the cream of the city all at once. Johanna had her hands full with the
preparation of the ball dress. Gieshübler, who, in addition to his
other hobbies, owned a hothouse, had sent Effi some camelias.
Innstetten, in spite of the little time at his disposal, had to drive
in the afternoon to Papenhagen, where three barns had burned.

It became very quiet in the house. Christel, not having anything to
do, sleepily shoved a footstool up to the stove, and Effi retired into
her bedroom, where she sat down at a small writing desk between the
mirror and the sofa, to write to her mother. She had already written a
postal card, acknowledging receipt of the Christmas letter and
presents, but had written no other news for weeks.

/#
  "Kessin, Dec. 31.

  "_My dear mama_:

  "This will probably be a long letter, as I have not let you
  hear from me for a long time. The card doesn't count. The last
  time I wrote, I was in the midst of Christmas preparations; now
  the Christmas holidays are past and gone. Innstetten and my
  good friend Gieshübler left nothing undone to make Holy Night
  as agreeable for me as possible, but I felt a little lonely and
  homesick for you. Generally speaking, much as I have cause to
  be grateful and happy, I cannot rid myself entirely of a
  feeling of loneliness, and if I formerly made more fun than
  necessary, perhaps, of Hulda's eternal tears of emotion, I am
  now being punished for it and have to fight against such tears
  myself, for Innstetten must not see them. However, I am sure
  that it will all be better when our household is more
  enlivened, which is soon to be the case, my dear mama. What I
  recently hinted at is now a certainty and Innstetten gives me
  daily proof of his joy on account of it. It is not necessary to
  assure you how happy I myself am when I think of it, for the
  simple reason that I shall then have life and entertainment at
  home, or, as Geert says, 'a dear little plaything.' This word
  of his is doubtless proper, but I wish he would not use it,
  because it always give me a little shock and reminds me how
  young I am and that I still half belong in the nursery. This
  notion never leaves me (Geert says it is pathological) and, as
  a result, the thing that should be my highest happiness is
  almost the contrary, a constant embarrassment for me. Recently,
  dear mama, when the good Flemming damsels plied me with all
  sorts of questions imaginable, it seemed as though I were
  undergoing an examination poorly prepared, and I think I must
  have answered very stupidly. I was out of sorts, too, for often
  what looks like sympathy is mere inquisitiveness, and theirs
  impressed me as the more meddlesome, since I have a long while
  yet to wait for the happy event. Some time in the summer, early
  in July, I think. You must come then, or better still, so soon
  as I am at all able to get about, I'll take a vacation and set
  out for Hohen-Cremmen to see you. Oh, how happy it makes me to
  think of it and of the Havelland air! Here it is almost always
  cold and raw. There I shall drive out upon the marsh every day
  and see red and yellow flowers everywhere, and I can even now
  see the baby stretching out its hands for them, for I know it
  must feel really at home there. But I write this for you alone.
  Innstetten must not know about it and I should excuse myself
  even to you for wanting to come to Hohen-Cremmen with the baby,
  and for announcing my visit so early, instead of inviting you
  urgently and cordially to Kessin, which, you may know, has
  fifteen hundred summer guests every year, and ships with all
  kinds of flags, and even a hotel among the dunes. But if I show
  so little hospitality it is not because I am inhospitable. I am
  not so degenerate as that. It is simply because our residence,
  with all its handsome and unusual features, is in reality not a
  suitable house at all; it is only a lodging for two people, and
  hardly that, for we haven't even a dining room, which, as you
  can well imagine, is embarrassing when people come to visit us.
  True, we have other rooms upstairs, a large social hall and
  four small rooms, but there is something uninviting about them,
  and I should call them lumber rooms, if there were any lumber
  in them. But they are entirely empty, except for a few
  rush-bottomed chairs, and leave a very queer impression, to say
  the least. You no doubt think this very easy to change, but the
  house we live in is--is haunted. Now it is out. I beseech you,
  however, not to make any reference to this in your answer, for
  I always show Innstetten your letters and he would be beside
  himself if he found out what I have written to you. I ought not
  to have done it either, especially as I have been undisturbed
  for a good many weeks and have ceased to be afraid; but Johanna
  tells me it will come back again, especially if some new person
  appears in the house. I couldn't think of exposing you to such
  a danger, or--if that is too harsh an expression--to such a
  peculiar and uncomfortable disturbance. I will not trouble you
  with the matter itself today, at least not in detail. They tell
  the story of an old captain, a so-called China-voyager, and
  his grand-daughter, who after a short engagement to a young
  captain here suddenly vanished on her wedding day. That might
  pass, but there is something of greater moment. A young
  Chinaman, whom her father had brought back from China and who
  was at first the servant and later the friend of the old man,
  died shortly afterward and was buried in a lonely spot near the
  churchyard. Not long ago I drove by there, but turned my face
  away quickly and looked in the other direction, because I
  believe I should otherwise have seen him sitting on the grave.
  For oh, my dear mama, I have really seen him once, or it at
  least seemed so, when I was sound asleep and Innstetten was
  away from home visiting the Prince. It was terrible. I should
  not like to experience anything like it again. I can't well
  invite you to such a house, handsome as it is otherwise, for,
  strange to say, it is both uncanny and cozy. Innstetten did not
  do exactly the right thing about it either, if you will allow
  me to say so, in spite of the fact that I finally agreed with
  him in many particulars. He expected me to consider it nothing
  but old wives' nonsense and laugh about it, but all of a sudden
  he himself seemed to believe in it, at the very time when he
  was making the queer demand of me to consider such hauntings a
  mark of blue blood and old nobility. But I can't do it and I
  won't, either. Kind as he is in other regards, in this
  particular he is not kind and considerate enough toward me.
  That there is something in it I know from Johanna and also from
  Mrs. Kruse. The latter is our coachman's wife and always sits
  holding a black chicken in an overheated room. This alone is
  enough to scare one. Now you know why _I_ want to come when the
  time arrives. Oh, if it were only time now! There are so many
  reasons for this wish. Tonight we have a New Year's eve ball,
  and Gieshübler, the only amiable man here, in spite of the fact
  that he has one shoulder higher than the other, or, to tell the
  truth, has even a greater deformity--Gieshübler has sent me
  some camelias. Perhaps I shall dance after all. Our doctor says
  it would not hurt me; on the contrary. Innstetten has also
  given his consent, which almost surprised me. And now remember
  me to papa and kiss him for me, and all the other dear friends.
  Happy New Year!

  Your Effi."


CHAPTER XIII


The New Year's eve ball lasted till the early morning and Effi was
generously admired, not quite so unhesitatingly, to be sure, as the
bouquet of camelias, which was known to have come from Gieshübler's
greenhouse. After the ball everybody fell back into the same old
routine, and hardly any attempt was made to establish closer social
relations. Hence the winter seemed very long. Visits from the noble
families of the neighborhood were rare, and when Effi was reminded of
her duty to return the visits she always remarked in a half-sorrowful
tone: "Yes, Geert, if it is absolutely necessary, but I shall be bored
to death." Innstetten never disputed the statement. What was said,
during these afternoon calls, about families, children, and
agriculture, was bearable, but when church questions were discussed
and the pastors present were treated like little popes, even looked
upon themselves as such, then Effi lost her patience and her mind
wandered sadly back to Niemeyer, who was always modest and
unpretentious, in spite of the fact that on every important occasion
it was said he had the stuff in him to be called to the cathedral.
Seemingly friendly as were the Borcke, Flemming, and Grasenabb
families, with the exception of Sidonie Grasenabb, real friendship was
out of the question, and often there would have been very little of
pleasure and amusement, or even of reasonably agreeable association,
if it had not been for Gieshübler.

He looked out for Effi as though he were a special Providence, and she
was grateful to him for it. In addition to his many other interests he
was a faithful and attentive reader of the newspapers. He was, in
fact, the head of the Journal Club, and so scarcely a day passed that
Mirambo did not bring to Effi a large white envelope full of separate
sheets and whole papers, in which particular passages were marked,
usually with a fine lead pencil, but occasionally with a heavy blue
pencil and an exclamation or interrogation point. And that was not
all. He also sent figs and dates, and chocolate drops done up in satin
paper and tied with a little red ribbon. Whenever any specially
beautiful flower was blooming in his greenhouse he would bring some of
the blossoms himself and spend a happy hour chatting with his adored
friend. He cherished in his heart, both separately and combined, all
the beautiful emotions of love--that of a father and an uncle, a
teacher and an admirer. Effi was affected by all these attentions and
wrote to Hohen-Cremmen about them so often that her mother began to
tease her about her "love for the alchymist." But this well-meant
teasing failed of its purpose; it was almost painful to her, in fact,
because it made her conscious, even though but dimly, of what was
really lacking in her married life, viz., outspoken admiration,
helpful suggestions, and little attentions.

Innstetten was kind and good, but he was not a lover. He felt that he
loved Effi; hence his clear conscience did not require him to make any
special effort to show it. It had almost become a rule with him to
retire from his wife's room to his own when Frederick brought the
lamp. "I have a difficult matter yet to attend to." With that he went.
To be sure, the portiere was left thrown back, so that Effi could hear
the turning of the pages of the document or the scratching of his pen,
but that was all. Then Rollo would often come and lie down before her
upon the fireplace rug, as much as to say: "Must just look after you
again; nobody else does." Then she would stoop down and say softly:
"Yes, Rollo, we are alone." At nine Innstetten would come back for
tea, usually with the newspaper in his hand, and would talk about the
Prince, who was having so much annoyance again, especially because of
that Eugen Richter, whose conduct and language beggared all
description. Then he would read over the list of appointments made and
orders conferred, to the most of which he objected. Finally he would
talk about the election and how fortunate it was to preside over a
district in which there was still some feeling of respect. When he had
finished with this he asked Effi to play something, either from
_Lohengrin_ or the _Walküre_, for he was a Wagner enthusiast. What had
won him over to this composer nobody quite knew. Some said, his
nerves, for matter-of-fact as he seemed, he was in reality nervous.
Others ascribed it to Wagner's position on the Jewish question.
Probably both sides were right. At ten Innstetten relaxed and indulged
in a few well-meant, but rather tired caresses, which Effi accepted,
without genuinely returning them.

Thus passed the winter. April came and Effi was glad when the garden
behind the court began to show green.

She could hardly wait for summer to come with its walks along the
beach and its guests at the baths. * * * The months had been so
monotonous that she once wrote: "Can you imagine, mama, that I have
almost become reconciled to our ghost? Of course, that terrible night,
when Geert was away at the Prince's house, I should not like to live
through again, no, certainly not; but this being always alone, with
nothing whatever happening, is hard, too, and when I wake up in the
night I occasionally listen to see if I can hear the shoes, shuffling
up above, and when all is quiet I am almost disappointed and say to
myself: If only it would come back, but not too bad and not too
close!"

It was in February that Effi wrote these words and now it was almost
May. The "Plantation" was beginning to take on new life again and one
could hear the song of the finches. During this same week the storks
returned, and one of them soared slowly over her house and alighted
upon a barn near Utpatel's mill, its old resting place. Effi, who now
wrote to her mother more frequently than heretofore, reported this
happening, and at the conclusion of her letter said: "I had almost
forgotten one thing, my dear mama, viz., the new district commander of
the landwehr, who has been here now for almost four weeks. But shall
we really have him? That is the question, and a question of
importance, too, much as my statement will make you laugh, because you
do not know how we are suffering here from social famine. At least I
am, for I am at a loss to know what to make of the nobility here. My
fault, perhaps, but that is immaterial. The fact remains, there has
been a famine, and for this reason I have looked forward, through all
the winter months, to the new district commander as a bringer of
comfort and deliverance. His predecessor was an abominable combination
of bad manners and still worse morals and, as though that were not
enough, was always in financial straits. We have suffered under him
all this time, Innstetten more than I, and when we heard early in
April that Major von Crampas was here--for that is the name of the new
man--we rushed into each other's arms, as though no further harm could
befall us in our dear Kessin. But, as already mentioned, it seems as
though there will be nothing going on, now that he is here. He is
married, has two children, one eight, the other ten years old, and
his wife is a year older than he--say, forty-five. That of itself
would make little difference, and why shouldn't I find a motherly
friend delightfully entertaining? Miss Trippelli was nearly thirty,
and I got along with her quite well. But Mrs. Crampas, who by the way
was not a _von_, is impossible. She is always out of sorts, almost
melancholy, much like our Mrs. Kruse, of whom she reminds me not a
little, and it all comes from jealousy. Crampas himself is said to be
a man of many 'relations,' a ladies' man, which always sounds
ridiculous to me and would in this case, if he had not had a duel with
a comrade on account of just such a thing. His left arm was shattered
just below the shoulder and it is noticeable at first sight, in spite
of the operation, which was heralded abroad as a masterpiece of
surgical art. It was performed by Wilms and I believe they call it
resection.

"Both Mr. and Mrs. Crampas were at our house a fortnight ago to pay us
a visit. The situation was painful, for Mrs. Crampas watched her
husband so closely that he became half-embarrassed, and I wholly. That
he can be different, even jaunty and in high spirits, I was convinced
three days ago, when, he sat alone with Innstetten, and I was able to
follow their conversation from my room. I afterward talked with him
myself and found him a perfect gentleman and extraordinarily clever.
Innstetten was in the same brigade with him during the war and they
often saw each other at Count Gröben's to the north of Paris. Yes, my
dear mama, he is just the man to instill new life into Kessin.
Besides, he has none of the Pomeranian prejudices, even though he is
said to have come from Swedish Pomerania. But his wife! Nothing can be
done without her, of course, and still less with her."

Effi was quite right. As a matter of fact no close friendship was
established with the Crampas family. They met once at the Borckes',
again quite casually at the station, and a few days later on a steamer
excursion up the "Broad" to a large beech and oak forest called "The
Chatter-man." But they merely exchanged short greetings, and Effi was
glad when the bathing season opened early in June. To be sure, there
was still a lack of summer visitors, who as a rule did not come in
numbers before St. John's Day. But even the preparations afforded
entertainment. In the "Plantation" a merry-go-round and targets were
set up, the boatmen calked and painted their boats, every little
apartment put up new curtains, and rooms with damp exposure and
subject to dry-rot were fumigated and aired.

