Few Americans, we presume, expected that the department of the Paris
Exposition in which the United States should most surpass other nations
would be that appropriated to musical instruments. Even our cornets and
bugles are highly commended in Paris. The cabinet organs, according to
several correspondents, are much admired. We can hardly credit the
assertion of an intelligent correspondent of the Tribune, that the
superiority of the American pianos is not "questioned" by Erard, Pleyel,
and Hertz, but we can well believe that it is acknowledged by the great
players congregated at Paris. The aged Rossini is reported to have said,
after listening to an American piano, "It is like a nightingale cooing
in a thunder-storm."


AN EMBER-PICTURE.


    How strange are the freaks of memory!
      The lessons of life we forget,
    While a trifle, a trick of color,
      In the wonderful web is set,--

    Set by some mordant of fancy,
      And, despite the wear and tear
    Of time or distance or trouble,
      Insists on its right to be there.

    A chance had brought us together;
      Our talk was of matters of course;
    We were nothing, one to the other,
      But a short half-hour's resource.

    We spoke of French acting and actors,
      And their easy, natural way,--
    Of the weather, for it was raining
      As we drove home from the play.

    We debated the social nothings
      Men take such pains to discuss;
    The thunderous rumors of battle
      Were silent the while for us.

    Arrived at her door, we left her
      With a drippingly hurried adieu,
    And our wheels went crunching the gravel
      Of the oak-darkened avenue.

    As we drove away through the shadow,
      The candle she held in the door,
    From rain-varnished tree-trunk to tree-trunk
      Flashed fainter, and flashed no more,--

    Flashed fainter and wholly faded
      Before we had passed the wood;
    But the light of the face behind it
      Went with me and stayed for good.

    The vision of scarce a moment,
      And hardly marked at the time,
    It comes unbidden to haunt me,
      Like a scrap of ballad-rhyme.

    Had she beauty? Well, not what they call so:
      You may find a thousand as fair,
    And yet there's her face in my memory,
      With no special right to be there.

    As I sit sometimes in the twilight,
      And call back to life in the coals
    Old faces and hopes and fancies
      Long buried,--good rest to their souls!--

    Her face shines out of the embers;
      I see her holding the light,
    And hear the crunch of the gravel
      And the sweep of the rain that night.

    'Tis a face that can never grow older,
      That never can part with its gleam;
    'Tis a gracious possession forever,
      For what is it all but a dream?


AN ARTIST'S DREAM.


When I reached Kenmure's house, one August evening, it was rather a
disappointment to find that he and his charming Laura had absented
themselves for twenty-four hours. I had not seen them since their
marriage; my admiration for his varied genius and her unvarying grace
was at its height, and I was really annoyed at the delay. My fair
cousin, with her usual exact housekeeping, had prepared everything for
her guest, and then bequeathed me, as she wrote, to Janet and baby
Marian. It was a pleasant arrangement, for between baby Marian and me
there existed a species of passion, I might almost say of betrothal,
ever since that little three-year-old sunbeam had blessed my mother's
house by lingering awhile in it, six months before. Still I went to bed
disappointed, though the delightful windows of the chamber looked out
upon the glimmering bay, and the swinging lanterns at the yard-arms of
the frigates shone like some softer constellation beneath the brilliant
sky. The house was so close upon the water that the cool waves seemed to
plash deliciously against its very basement; and it was a comfort to
think that, if there were no adequate human greetings that night, there
would be plenty in the morning, since Marian would inevitably be pulling
my eyelids apart before sunrise.

It seemed scarcely dawn when I was roused by a little arm round my neck,
and waked to think I had one of Raphael's cherubs by my side. Fingers of
waxen softness were ruthlessly at work upon my eyes, and the little form
that met my touch felt lithe and elastic, like a kitten's limbs. There
was just light enough to see the child, perched on the edge of the bed,
her soft blue dressing-gown trailing over the white night-dress, while
her black and long-fringed eyes shone through the dimness of morning.
She yielded gladly to my grasp, and I could fondle again the silken
hair, the velvety brunette cheek, the plump, childish shoulders. Yet
sleep still half held me, and when my cherub appeared to hold it a
cherubic practice to begin the day with a demand for lively anecdote, I
was fain drowsily to suggest that she might first tell some stories to
her doll. With the sunny readiness that was a part of her nature, she
straightway turned to that young lady,--plain Susan Halliday, with both
cheeks patched, and eyes of different colors,--and soon discoursed both
her and me into repose.

When I waked again, it was to find the child conversing with the morning
star, which still shone through the window, scarcely so lucent as her
eyes, and bidding it go home to its mother, the sun. Another lapse into
dreams, and then a more vivid awakening, and she had my ear at last, and
won story after story, requiting them with legends of her own youth,
"almost a year ago,"--how she was perilously lost, for instance, in the
small front yard, with a little playmate, early in the afternoon, and
how they came and peeped into the window, and thought all the world had
forgotten them. Then the sweet voice, distinct in its articulation as
Laura's, went straying off into wilder fancies, a chaos of autobiography
and conjecture, like the letters of a war correspondent. You would have
thought her little life had yielded more pangs and fears than might have
sufficed for the discovery of the North Pole; but breakfast-time drew
near at last, and Janet's honest voice was heard outside the door. I
rather envied the good Scotchwoman the pleasant task of polishing the
smooth cheeks, and combing the dishevelled silk; but when, a little
later, the small maiden was riding down stairs in my arms, I envied no
one.

At sight of the bread and milk, my cherub was transformed into a hungry
human child, chiefly anxious to reach the bottom of her porringer. I was
with her a great deal that day. She gave no manner of trouble: it was
like having the charge of a floating butterfly, endowed with warm arms
to clasp, and a silvery voice to prattle. I sent Janet out to sail, with
the other servants, by way of holiday, and Marian's perfect temperament
was shown in the way she watched the departing.

"There they go," she said, as she stood and danced at the window. "Now
they are out of sight."

"What!" I said, "are you pleased to have your friends go?"

"Yes," she answered; "but I shall be pleased--er to see them come
back." Life to her was no alternation of joy and grief, but only of joy
and more joyous.

Twilight brought us to an improvised concert. Climbing the piano-stool,
she went over the notes with her little taper fingers, touching the keys
in a light, knowing way, that proved her a musician's child. Then I must
play for her, and let the dance begin. This was a wondrous performance
on her part, and consisted at first in hopping up and down on one spot,
with no change of motion, but in her hands. She resembled a minute and
irrepressible Shaker, or a live and beautiful _marionnette_. Then she
placed Janet in the middle of the floor, and performed the dance round
her, after the manner of Vivien and Merlin. Then came her supper, which,
like its predecessors, was a solid and absorbing meal; then one more
fairy story, to magnetize her off, and she danced and sang herself up
stairs. And if she first came to me in the morning with a halo round her
head, she seemed still to retain it when I at last watched her kneeling
in the little bed--perfectly motionless, with her hands placed together,
and her long lashes sweeping her cheeks--to repeat two verses of a hymn
which Janet had taught her. My nerves quivered a little when I saw that
Susan Halliday had also been duly prepared for the night, and had been
put in the same attitude, so far as her jointless anatomy permitted.
This being ended, the doll and her mistress reposed together, and only
an occasional toss of the vigorous limbs, or a stifled baby murmur,
would thenceforth prove, through the darkened hours, that the one figure
had in it more of life than the other.

On the next morning Kenmure and Laura came back to us, and I walked down
to receive them at the boat. I had forgotten how striking was their
appearance, as they stood together. His broad, strong, Saxon look, his
noble bearing and clear blue eyes, enhanced the fascination of her
darker beauty.

America is full of the short-lived bloom and freshness of girlhood; but
grace is a rarer gift, and indeed it is only a few times in life that
one sees anywhere a beauty that really controls us with a permanent
charm. One should remember such personal loveliness, as one recalls some
particular moonlight or sunset, with a special and concentrated joy,
which the multiplicity of fainter impressions cannot disturb. When in
those days we used to read, in Petrarch's one hundred and twenty-third
sonnet, that he had once beheld on earth angelic manners and celestial
charms, whose very remembrance was a delight and an affliction, since
all else that he beheld seemed dream and shadow, we could easily fancy
that nature had certain permanent attributes which accompanied the name
of Laura.

Our Laura had that rich brunette beauty before which the mere snow and
roses of the blonde must always seem wan and unimpassioned. In the
superb suffusions of her cheek there seemed to flow a tide of passions
and powers, which might have been tumultuous in a meaner woman, but over
which, in her, the clear and brilliant eyes, and the sweet, proud mouth,
presided in unbroken calm. These superb tints implied resources only,
not a struggle. With this torrent from the tropics in her veins, she was
the most equable person I ever saw; and had a supreme and delicate
good-sense, which, if not supplying the place of genius, at least
comprehended its work. Not intellectually gifted herself, perhaps, she
seemed the cause of gifts in others, and furnished the atmosphere in
which all showed their best. With the steady and thoughtful enthusiasm
of her Puritan ancestors, she combined that grace which is so rare among
their descendants,--a grace which fascinated the humblest, while it
would have been just the same in the society of kings. And her person
had the equipoise and symmetry of her mind. While abounding in separate
points of beauty, each a source of distinct and peculiar pleasure,--as
the outline of her temples, the white line that parted her night-black
hair, the bend of her wrists, the moulding of her finger-tips,--yet
these details were lost in the overwhelming gracefulness of her
presence, and the atmosphere of charm which she diffused over all human
life.

A few days passed rapidly by us. We walked and rode and boated and read.
Little Marian came and went, a living sunbeam, a self-sufficing thing.
It was soon obvious that she was far less demonstrative towards her
parents than towards me; while her mother, gracious to her as to all,
yet rarely caressed her, and Kenmure, though habitually kind, seemed
rather to ignore her existence, and could scarcely tolerate that she
should for one instant preoccupy his wife. For Laura he lived, and she
must live for him. He had a studio, which I rarely entered and Marian
never, while Laura was constantly there; and after the first cordiality
was past, I observed that their daily expeditions were always arranged
for two. The weather was beautiful, and they led the wildest outdoor
life, cruising all day or all night among the islands, regardless of
hours, and, as it sometimes seemed to me, of health. No matter: Kenmure
liked it, and what he liked she loved. When at home, they were chiefly
in the studio, he painting, modelling, poetizing perhaps, and she
inseparably united with him in all. It was very beautiful, this
unworldly and passionate love, and I could have borne to be omitted in
their daily plans, since little Marian was left to me, save that it
seemed so strange to omit her also. Besides, there grew to be something
a little oppressive in this peculiar atmosphere; it was like living in a
greenhouse.

Yet they always spoke in the simplest way of this absorbing passion, as
of something about which no reticence was needed; it was too sacred
_not_ to be mentioned; it would be wrong not to utter freely to all the
world what was doubtless the best thing the world possessed. Thus
Kenmure made Laura his model in all his art; not to coin her into wealth
or fame,--he would have scorned it; he would have valued fame and
wealth only as instruments for proclaiming her. Looking simply at these
two lovers, then, it seemed as if no human union could be more noble or
stainless. Yet so far as others were concerned, it sometimes seemed to
me a kind of duplex selfishness, so profound and so undisguised as to
make one shudder. "Is it," I asked myself at such moments, "a great
consecration, or a great crime?" But something must be allowed, perhaps,
for my own private dissatisfactions in Marian's behalf.

I had easily persuaded Janet to let me have a peep every night at my
darling, as she slept; and once I was surprised to find Laura sitting by
the small white bed. Graceful and beautiful as she always was, she never
before had seemed to me so lovely, for she never had seemed quite like a
mother. But I could not demand a sweeter look of tenderness than that
with which she now gazed upon her child.

Little Marian lay with one brown, plump hand visible from its full white
sleeve, while the other nestled half hid beneath the sheet, grasping a
pair of blue morocco shoes, the last acquisition of her favorite doll.
Drooping from beneath the pillow hung a handful of scarlet poppies,
which the child had wished to place under her head, in the very
superfluous project of putting herself to sleep thereby. Her soft brown
hair was scattered on the sheet, her black lashes lay motionless upon
the olive cheeks. Laura wished to move her, that I might see her the
better.

"You will wake her," exclaimed I, in alarm.

"Wake this little dormouse?" Laura lightly answered. "Impossible."

And, twining her arms about her, the young mother lifted the child from
the bed, three or four times, dropping her again heavily each time,
while the healthy little creature remained utterly undisturbed,
breathing the same quiet breath. I watched Laura with amazement; she
seemed transformed.

She gayly returned my eager look, and then, seeming suddenly to
penetrate its meaning, cast down her radiant eyes, while the color
mounted into her cheeks. "You thought," she said, almost sternly, "that
I did not love my child."

"No," I said, half untruthfully.

