

Je n'ai pas manqué de prendre les ordres de l'Empereur sur le
contenu de votre rapport No. 10, du 21 Janvier/2 Février, par lequel
vous nous avez rendu compte de la fâcheuse impression que la
nouvelle exécution religieuse qui a eu lieu à Biligik a produite à
Constantinople.

Sa Majesté a voué une attention sérieuse aux diverses considérations
que vous nous avez exposées pour décider du plus ou moins
d'opportunité qu'il y aurait pour les Puissances de l'Europe en
général, et pour la Russie en particulier, à protester contre des
actes de cruauté incompatibles avec les principes d'humanité dont la
Porte devrait se montrer pénétrée à l'égard de ses sujets Chrétiens.
D'une part, nous avons reconnu la difficutté, pour ne pas dire
l'impossibilité, de découvrir le moyen propre pour paralyser d'une
manière définitive les effets de la loi du Coran qui concerne les
apostasies; d'autre part, nous ne saurions ne pas élever la voix,
lorsqu'il s'agit de l'application de la peine de mort à des
individus qui, en embrassant le Christianisme, ou en retournant dans
le sein de l'Eglise, invoquent notre protection, et nous imposent le
devoir de les soustraire aux rigueurs d'une législation barbare.

Dans un tel état de choses, l'opinion que vous a communiquée M. le
Comte de Stürmer, nous a paru celle qui offre le plus de chances de
succès. Cette opinion est d'ailleurs conforme aux vues que j'ai été
dans le cas de vous développer sur la même matière dans une occasion
précédente. Il est donc de l'intention de l'Empereur que vous
déclariez à la Porte Ottomane, sous la forme d'un conseil
bienveillant, que nous nous attendons positivement à ne plus voir se
renouveler des exécutions qui soulèvent contre elle l'indignation de
toute la Chrétienté. C'est dans son propre intérêt que nous lui
adressons cette demande. La Porte ne doit pas se faire illusion sur
les élémens qui fermentent en Turquie. Au lieu de s'aliéner les
sentimens des populations Chrétiennes, le Gouvernement Ottoman doit
travailler plus que jamais, à se les concilier. Qu'il comprenne
enfin la nécessité de laisser tomber en désuétude des dispositions
surannées de la loi Mahométane, qui ne peuvent être maintenues qu'au
mépris des représentations unanimes de toutes les Puissances. Tel
serait à peu près le langage que vous auriez à tenir, Monsieur, à la
Porte Ottomane, de concert avec les autres Représentans, et nous
espérons qu'en la rappelant ainsi à la conscience de ses devoirs et
de ses intérêts réels, nous l'empêcherons de retomber dans la voie
vicieuse qu'elle a suivie en dernier lieu.

Recevez, &c.,

(Signé) NESSELRODE.

(Translation.)

                        _St. Petersburgh_, 15/27 _February_, 1844.

I have not failed to take the orders of the Emperor upon the
contents of your despatch No. 10, of the 21 January/2 February, in
which you have reported the painful impression which the fresh
religious execution which has taken place at Biligik has produced at
Constantinople.

His Majesty has given his serious attention to the various
considerations which you have laid before us in order to determine
the greater or less degree of propriety there would be in the
principal Powers of Europe generally, and in Russia particularly,
protesting against acts of cruelty incompatible with the principles
of humanity with which the Porte should show itself animated as
regards its Christian subjects. On the one hand, we have perceived
the difficulty, not to say the impossibility, of discovering the
suitable means of definitively paralyzing the effects of the law of
the Koran relating to apostacy; on the other hand, we cannot but
raise our voice when it is a question of inflicting the penalty of
death upon individuals who, in embracing Christianity, or in
returning into the bosom of the Church, appeal to our protection,
and impose upon us the duty of withdrawing them from the rigours of
a barbarous legislation.

In such a state of things the opinion which M. de Stürmer has
communicated to you, has appeared to us to be that which offers the
greatest chance of success. This opinion is, moreover, in conformity
with the views which I have had occasion to explain to you on the
same subject on a former occasion. It is then the Emperor's
intention that you should declare to the Ottoman Porte, in the form
of friendly counsel, that we positively expect no longer to witness
executions which array against it the indignation of all
Christendom. It is with a view to its own interest that we address
to it this demand. The Porte must not delude itself with regard to
the elements now in a state of fermentation in Turkey. Instead of
alienating from itself the feelings of the Christian population, the
Ottoman Government ought more than ever to labour to conciliate them
to itself. Let it comprehend, in fine, the necessity of allowing to
become obsolete antiquated enactments of the Mahomedan law, which
cannot be upheld but in disregard of the unanimous representations
of all the Powers. Such should be the purport of the language which,
Sir, you should hold to the Ottoman Porte, in concert with the other
Representatives; and we trust that in thus recalling it to a sense
of its duties and real interests, we shall prevent it from again
falling into the vicious system which it has recently followed.

Receive, &c.,

(Signed) NESSELRODE.


No. 28.


_Lord Cowley to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received March_ 21.)

(Extract.)                        _Paris, March_ 18, 1844.

With reference to the representations made to the Ottoman Government
by the French and English Representatives at Constantinople on the
subject of the execution of a Greek near Brussa, as reported in Sir
Stratford Canning's despatches of the 10th and 12th February, I have
the honour to state that M. Guizot has communicated to me the
substance of what passed at a conference which he has had within
these few days with Reshid Pasha upon that subject.

The Pasha said that he was instructed to express in strong terms the
concern of the Sultan at this interference of the Allied Sovereigns
(of Great Britain and France in particular) in the internal concerns
of his empire; that a compliance with these demands might be
attended with very serious consequences to himself and his
Government; and that he (the Pasha) was instructed to express the
fervent hope of his Master, that they would not be persisted in.

M. Guizot replied that the French and British Governments never
could desist from expressing their abhorrence of such atrocious acts
of cruelty as had been perpetrated upon the late occasion, and which
had given rise to a renewal of the requisition that the practice
should be entirely abandoned, and that they confidently expected
that their representations would have the desired effect upon the
Ottoman Government.


No. 29.


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Lord Cowley_.

(Extract.)                        _Foreign Office, March_ 22, 1844.

I transmit to your Excellency herewith a copy of an instruction
which I addressed on the 19th instant to Sir Stratford Canning, in
reply to his Excellency's despatch of the 10th of February last
relative to the execution of the Greek near Brussa, a copy of which
was forwarded to your Excellency on the 15th instant.

You will lose no time in communicating this instruction to M. Guizot
and you will at the same time, suggest to him the propriety of
instructing the French Minister at the Porte to make it perfectly
clear to the Turkish Government, that neither Great Britain nor
France demand the abrogation of any law of the Turkish Empire; and
that all that we desire is an assurance that the practice which has
so justly called forth the reprobation of all Christian countries,
shall cease, by the law being suffered to remain, as it had long
been, dormant.


No. 30.


_Sir Stratford Canning to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received March_
24.)

(Extract.)                   _Constantinople, February_ 29, 1844.

I applied to Rifaat Pasha on the 24th instant, in concert with the
French Minister, for an answer to your Lordship's requisition on the
subject of the executions for apostacy from Islamism. My application
was made in the form of an instruction to M. Frederick Pisani, and
Baron de Bourqueney adopted a similar line of proceeding. Copies of
my instruction to M. Pisani and of his report of Rifaat Pasha's
reply, identical with the report of the French interpreter, are
inclosed herewith for your Lordship's more complete information.

Several Councils have been held, as well at the Porte as at the
Sheik-ul-Islam's residence.

I inclose with this despatch a short report from M. Pisani, which
preceded the instruction referred to above.

Inclosure l in No. 30.

_Sir Stratford Canning to M. Pisani_.

Monsieur,                         _Péra, le_ 22 _Février_, 1844.

Le message que vous m'avez transmis avant-hier de la part de son
Excellence Rifaat Pacha, laisse tout-à-fait incertaine l'époque où
je recevrai une réponse à la communication importante que j'ai eu
l'honneur de lui faire le 8 du courant par l'ordre exprès de ma
Cour. Il est pourtant à désirer que cette incertitude ne soit pas
prolongée hors de mesure. La question dont il s'agit est toute
entière dans la dépêche officielle dont la copie se trouve depuis
quinze jours entre les mains du Ministre, et j'attends du
Gouvernement Ottoman la prompte solution d'une affaire qui touche de
trop près ses intérêts, son avenir, et ses rapports avec les
Puissances amies, pour que son Excellence soit autorisée à la
regarder comme purement du ressort de la religion.

Il me semble, au contraire, que cette question est, à ne pas en
douter, essentiellement liée avec les considérations les plus
élevées de la politique. J'aime par conséquent à croire que les
Ministres de Sa Hautesse ne méconnaîtront pas leur obligation d'en
mesurer la portée par les principes de la raison et les règles de la
prudence dont aucun Etat ne pourrait impunément se dispenser. Eviter
la responsabilité qui appartient nécessairement à leur position
serait-ce en effet autre chose que priver leur Souverain du gage le
plus sûr de leur exactitude à en remplir les conditions conformément
au but de leur nomination, aux exigeances de la conjoncture, et aux
inspirations de la sagacité que la Providence leur a accordée?

Je vous invite donc, Monsieur, à vous rendre de nouveau auprès du
Ministre des Affaires Etrangères, et à exprimer formellement à son
Excellence ma juste attente que le Conseil ne tardera pas à me faire
remettre par son canal une réponse catégorique et comme je l'espère,
satisfaisante à la demande d'un Gouvernement sincèrement ami de la
Porte. Vous lui laisserez une copie de cette instruction, et vous
vous entendrez quant au temps de sa présentation avec Monsieur
l'Interprète de l'Ambassade Française, qui est muni d'une
instruction pareille par son Ministre.

Je suis, &c.,

(Signé) STRATFORD CANNING.

(Translation.)

Sir,                              _Pera, February_ 22, 1844.

The message which you yesterday conveyed to me from his Excellency
Rifaat Pasha leaves altogether uncertain the time at which I shall
receive an answer to the important communication which I had the
honour to make to him on the 8th instant by the express order of my
Court. It is however to be desired that this uncertainty should not
indefinitely be prolonged. The question at issue is altogether
contained in the official despatch the copy of which has been for
the last fortnight in the Minister's hands, and I expect from the
Ottoman Government the speedy settlement of a matter which affects
its interests, its future position, and its relations with friendly
Powers too nearly for his Excellency to be authorized in considering
it merely as a religious question.

On the contrary it appears to me that without doubt this question is
essentially connected with the highest political considerations. I
am consequently fain to believe that the Ministers of His Highness
will not overlook their obligation to estimate the bearing of it by
the principles of reason and the rules of prudence which no State
can with impunity disregard. To shrink from the responsibility which
necessarily attaches to their position, what else would that be than
to deprive their Sovereign of the surest pledge of their diligence
in discharging the conditions thereof consistently with the object
of their appointment, the emergencies of the state of affairs, and
the inspirations of the sagacity which Providence has bestowed upon
them?

I accordingly request you, Sir, to go again to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and formally to intimate to his Excellency my just
expectation that the Council will not delay to cause to be delivered
to me through him a categorical answer, and, as I hope, a
satisfactory answer to the demand of a Government sincerely friendly
to the Porte. You will leave with him a copy of this instruction,
and you will concert as to the time of its delivery with the
Interpreter of the French Embassy, who is furnished by his Minister
with a similar instruction.

I have, &c.,

(Signed) STRATFORD CANNING.

Inclosure 2 in No. 30.

_Answer of Rifaat Pasha to M. Pisani, February_ 22, 1844.

Aucune nouvelle démarche n'était nécessaire pour nous faire sentir
l'importance de cette question, importance dont nous sommes
profondément pénétrés. Nous la traitons avec tout le sérieux et tous
les soins que sa gravité exige. Oui, ce que vos chefs respectifs
disent est vrai; cette question a son côté politique aussi bien que
son côté religieux. Il faut en effet que nous nous séparions de la
nation, ou bien des Puissances Chrétiennes; ce sont là deux grands
maux également à éviter. Le Sultan a ordonné que cette question soit
discutée dans un Conseil d'Oulémas qui s'ouvrira Samedi prochain
chez le Sheik-ul-Islam, auquel seront appelés le Cazi-Asker et
d'autres notabilités parmi les hommes de loi; après quoi, le Conseil
des Ministres s'en occupera de nouveau. Ne croyez-pas au reste que
nous nous soyons bornés à appeler leur attention purement et
simplement sur la question sous le rapport religieux; nous leur
avons remis aussi les protocoles des conférences, les dépêches des
deux Gouvernemens, et même des extraits des journaux qui ont agité
cette question, et nous leur communiquerons également les
instructions que vous venez de me remettre, et qui, bien que
superflues pour la Porte, peuvent encore ajouter à l'impression
produite par les autres pièces qui sont entre leurs mains. Comme
nous ne devons pas douter des bonnes intentions des Puissances, nous
espérons que MM. les Représentans d'Angleterre et de France, dans
leur haute sagesse et avec l'esprit d'équité qui les anime, ne se
refuseront pas à prendre en considération les graves difficultés qui
existent, et qu'ils se prêteront à amener une solution qui nous
sauverait des deux maux que je vous ai signalés. C'est là le but que
nous devons nous efforcer d'atteindre.

C'était pour vous informer de la marche de cette affaire que je vous
ai prié ce matin de passer chez moi.

(Translation.)

No fresh step was requisite to make us sensible of the importance of
this question, with which we are deeply impressed. We are dealing
with it with all the seriousness and all the care which its gravity
requires. Yes, what your respective chiefs say is true; this
question has its political as also its religious side. It is
requisite, in fact, that we should separate ourselves from the
nation, or otherwise from the Christian Powers; those are two great
evils to be equally avoided. The Sultan has commanded that this
question shall be discussed in the Council of Oulemas which will be
opened next Saturday at the Sheik-ul-Islam's, to which the
Cazi-Asker and the other principal persons among the men of the law
will be summoned; after which, the Council of Ministers will again
apply themselves to it. Do not suppose, however, that we have
confined ourselves to directing their attention purely and simply to
the question as it regards religion; we have likewise submitted to
them the protocols of the conferences, the despatches of the two
Governments, and even the extracts of the newspapers which have
discussed this question, and we shall likewise communicate to them
the instructions which you have just delivered to me, and which,
although superfluous as far as the Porte is concerned, may still add
to the impression produced by the other documents in their hands. As
we must not doubt the good intentions of the Powers, we trust that
the Representatives of England and France, in their profound wisdom,
and with the spirit of equity by which they are animated, will not
refuse to take into consideration the serious difficulties which
exist, and that they will lend themselves to bring about a solution
which would preserve us from the two evils which I have pointed out
to you. That is the object which we must strive to attain.

It was in order to acquaint you with the progress of this matter
that I requested you to call upon me this morning.

Inclosure 3 in No. 30.

_Answer of Rifaat Pasha to M. Pisani, February_ 20, 1844.

Nous connaissons toute l'importance de la question dont il s'agit.
Mais il faut considérer que cette question n'est ni politique ni
administrative, et qu'elle regarde la religion. Il faut donc que
nous consultions préalablement les docteurs de la loi, et la mission
d'examiner cette affaire leur a été donnée de la part du Conseil;
cette affaire reviendra ensuite au Divan.

J'accomplis ma mission, qui est celle de porter exactement à la
connaissance des Ministres de la Sublime Porte tout ce que les deux
Représentans me disent, et je ne manquerai pas de leur faire savoir
la réponse du Conseil. Ainsi, non seulement je ne suis pas à même de
répondre aujourd'hui, mais il m'est encore impossible de vous dire
avec précision quel jour je pourrais vous la donner. Je ferai savoir
au Conseil le message dont vous vous êtes acquitté aujourd'hui.

(Translation.)

We know all the importance of the case in question. But it is
necessary to consider that this question is neither one of policy
nor of administration, and that it concerns religion. We must
therefore first consult the doctors of the law, and the charge of
inquiring into this matter has been entrusted to them by the
Council; the matter will then come back to the Divan.

I discharge my duty, which is to represent exactly to the Ministers
of the Sublime Porte what the two Representatives say to me, and I
shall not fail to let the latter know the answer of the Council. For
this reason, not only is it not in my power to give you an answer
to-day, but it is also impossible for me to say to you precisely on
what day I can give it to you. I will let the Council know the
message which you have communicated to-day.


No. 31.


_Sir Stratford Canning to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received March_
24.)

(Extract.)                        _Constantinople, March_ 3, 1844.

I have this moment received important information, and I rely so
much upon its correctness that I send off an express to overtake the
messenger. The Turkish Government has virtually decided on complying
with your Lordship's requisition.

Rifaat Pasha has written to propose in rather urgent terms a private
interview with me. I have assented to this proposal, repeating at
the same time my opinion that no advantage is likely to result from
it. The French Minister will be present, and we shall probably meet
on the 5th.

In reply to our renewed demand for the Porte's official answer,
Rifaat Pasha has pressed for an additional delay of eight or ten
days, alleging that the deliberations of the Council are not yet
closed.

On the expiration of that term, or shortly afterwards, I trust it
will be in my power to forward the official confirmation of what I
now submit to your Lordship with confidence.


No. 32.


_Lord Cowley to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received March_ 27.)

My Lord,                          _Paris, March_ 25, 1844.

With reference to your Lordship's despatch of the 22nd instant
inclosing a copy of your instructions to Sir Stratford Canning under
date the 19th instant, I have the honour to state that upon
communicating those instructions to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, he assured me that he would without loss of time send
instructions of a similar tenour to M. de Bourqueney, although that
Minister was already in possession of the sentiments of his
Government relative to those barbarous executions; which are, that
the Government of France had no intention of requiring of the
Ottoman Government that they should abrogate any law, but they
expect a satisfactory assurance in writing should be given to the
Allies that the practice complained of should cease.

I have, &c.,

(Signed) COWLEY.


No. 33.


_Sir Stratford Canning to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received March_
30.)

My Lord,                          _Constantinople, March_ 6, 1844.

The confidential interview to which I was invited by Rifaat Pasha,
took place yesterday, and the French Minister was also present. In
order to mark more emphatically the private character of this
meeting we trusted entirely to Foad Effendi, who accompanied Rifaat
Pasha at my request, for the interpretation of what passed between
us. I am happy to say that although the Pasha repeated all the
arguments stated in M. Pisani's report, of which a copy has been
already transmitted to your Lordship, nothing occurred to shake my
confidence in the information previously conveyed to me and recorded
in my preceding despatch. The French Minister participated fully in
this impression, and gave me his support in a most frank and
effectual manner.

The Pasha's main position was this: if we refuse, we lose the
friendship of Europe; if we consent, we hazard the peace of the
empire; you come as friends, and therefore we reckon upon your
helping us to find some course by which we may satisfy you without
injuring ourselves.

In answer we confirmed his persuasion that our intentions were
friendly; but we added that our course was prescribed by the
instructions; that we could not admit the supposition of our
Governments having acted without a full consideration of the
consequences; and that although we were not called upon to require
an express and formal repeal of the law which they termed religious,
we must, at the very least, require an official declaration that
effectual measures would be taken to prevent the recurrence of
executions for apostacy, and a disclaimer of every idea involving
insult to Christianity, or the persecution of its followers, on
account of their faith.

This explanation appeared to produce a good effect on the Pasha's
mind, and I observed with particular satisfaction, that he admitted
that the Mufti had expressed to the Porte a personal opinion, which
drew a very desirable distinction between the strict language of the
law and the discretion warranted by State necessity.

Upon the whole, my Lord, it was sufficiently apparent that the
objections entertained by the Porte are far from insuperable; that
much of the remaining difficulty arises from the reference unwisely
made to the Ulemah; and that, with every wish to escape from our
demand, and every determination to give us the least acceptable
degree of satisfaction, there is no intention ultimately to refuse,
although it is possible that we shall not be able to obtain as
complete a declaration as we could desire without a reference to
London and Paris.

I have, &c.,

(Signed) STRATFORD CANNING.


No. 34.


_Sir Stratford Canning to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received April_
4.)

(Extract.)                        _Constantinople, March_ 14, 1844.

Since I had last the honour of addressing your Lordship the Turkish
Ministers have been almost exclusively occupied with the great
question which formed the subject matter of your Lordship's
instruction of 16th January. The deferred settlement of this
question is, indeed, a source of much inconvenience to all who have
business to transact with the Porte. The affairs of Her Majesty's
Embassy, and those of the French and even of the Austrian Legation,
are almost suspended. I have, therefore, been doubly anxious to
obtain the Porte's definitive answer; but notwithstanding every
exertion consistent with the consideration due to an independent and
friendly Government, I have only this moment succeeded in obtaining
it; and I lament to say that it is so unsatisfactory as to induce me
to reject it without a moment's hesitation.

In this decision the French Minister concurs with equal promptitude
and completeness. I inclose herewith the terms of the answer, as
reported to us by our respective interpreters. It was given
verbally, but with some additional authority derived from the
presence of the Grand Vizier and the President of the Council.

The 16th instant had been previously fixed for the delivery of the
Porte's answer, and we were content to wait. This morning, however,
I received through several channels a confirmation of intelligence
which had reached me imperfectly the evening before, to the effect
that an unfavourable resolution had already been adopted by the
Council, and that the Turkish Ministers deferred the communication
of it for the sole purpose of engaging the Sultan's word, and
frustrating any eventual appeal to His Majesty. At the same time,
therefore, that, in concurrence with the French Minister, I directed
M. Pisani to demand an audience, if an immediate and satisfactory
answer were not delivered at the Porte, I sent to the Grand Marshal
of the Palace and called upon him to apprize the Sultan forthwith of
my intention to seek a formal audience of His Majesty, and to
entreat that the Royal decision might be withheld until I had an
opportunity of executing your Lordship's instruction in that
respect.

Meanwhile in spite of adverse appearances, I still retain the
opinion expressed in a former part of my correspondence. The Porte,
I am satisfied, is prepared to give way in the end, though with much
reluctance. Nothing whatever has occurred to warrant the alarming
rumours of popular excitement and insurrection diligently
circulated, and even countenanced by Rifaat Pasha, some days ago. If
my information be correct, there is reason, on the contrary, to
believe that not only the Mussulman inhabitants of the capital are
sufficiently indifferent to the question at issue, but that many of
the upper classes, some of the most distinguished Turkish statesmen,
and a few even of the Ulemah are favourable to our view of the
subject.

Inclosure in No. 34.

_Answer of Rifaat Pasha to M. Frederic Pisani, March_ 14, 1844.

La réponse de son Excellence Rifaat Pacha, dite verbalement et
officiellement, se trouve dans une pièce qui nous a été présentée.
Cette pièce était un extrait d'une dépêche à Aali Effendi et à
Réchid Pacha. Nous avons refusé de la prendre parcequ'elle n'est pas
satisfaisante. Elle est conçue ainsi: "Comme la loi ne permet
nullement de changer les dispositions à l'égard de la punition des
apostats, la Sublime Porte prendra des mesures efficaces, les
mesures possibles, pour que l'exécution des Chrétiens qui, devenus
Musulmans, retournent au Christianisme, n'ait pas lieu."

(Translation.)

The answer of his Excellency Rifaat Pasha, verbally and officially
pronounced, is contained in a document which was presented to us.
This document was an extract from a despatch to Aali Effendi and to
Reshid Pasha. We refused to take it, because it is not satisfactory.
It is couched in these terms: "As the law does not admit of any
change being made in the enactments regarding the punishment of
apostates, the Sublime Porte will take efficacious measures, the
measures which are possible, in order that the execution of
Christians who, having become Mussulmans, return to Christianity,
shall not take place."


No. 35.


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Sir Stratford Canning_.

(Extract.)                        _Foreign Office, April_ 6, 1844.

The latest account which I have received from your Excellency of
your proceedings with regard to the question pending with the Porte,
arising out of the execution of the Greek near Brussa on the charge
of apostacy from Islamism, is contained in your despatch of the 14th
of March. From that despatch it appears that, in conjunction with
your French colleague, you had rejected as unsatisfactory the
communication made to your dragomans on that day by the Ministers of
the Porte, and that you were taking measures to secure an audience
of the Sultan, in the event of your failing to obtain from the Porte
without further delay, a more satisfactory reply.

On the statements in that despatch I have to acquaint your
Excellency that Her Majesty's Government concur with you in
considering that the communication made to you through your dragoman
on the 14th of March, was not of that absolute and unequivocal
character which you were instructed in my despatch of the 16th of
January to require from the Porte; and that you consequently acted
rightly in refusing to receive it, and in taking steps to obtain
either a more satisfactory communication from the Ministers of the
Porte, or admission to the presence of the Sultan for the purpose of
addressing to His Highness in person that appeal which you were
directed in case of necessity to make to him.

With regard, however, to the nature of the communication which Her
Majesty's Government would consider satisfactory, I have to state to
your Excellency that Her Majesty's Government are content to abide
by the terms which, it appears from your despatch of the 6th of
March, were suggested to Rifaat Pasha on the preceding day by your
Excellency and M. de Bourqueney, namely, that the Porte should make
"an official declaration that effectual measures would be taken to
prevent the recurrence of executions for apostacy," or, as the
proposition has been reported by M. de Bourqueney to his Government,
"that the Porte will take effectual measures to prevent the renewal
of executions similar to those which have recently taken place at
Constantinople and Biligik."

With such a declaration, officially made, Her Majesty's Government
would be perfectly satisfied, even without the additional clause
reported by your Excellency, which appears to them to be
unnecessary.

I need scarcely inform your Excellency that Her Majesty's Government
look with much anxiety to an early solution of this question. They
are sensible of the many inconveniences which the continued
agitation of it may involve, although it is with no small
satisfaction that they perceive from your Excellency's despatch that
there is no present appearance of the difficulties necessarily
attached to the question being increased by any insurrectionary or
fanatical movement on the part of the Mussulman inhabitants of the
Capital.

I have not yet received from the Turkish Ambassador in this country
any communication of the despatch from which the answer given to
your Excellency, through M. Pisani, appears to be an extract.

It is greatly to be desired that the Porte should act with
promptitude. Much of the embarrassment to which the agitation of
this question has given rise, may be traced to the attempt of the
Porte to invest it exclusively with a religious character.


No. 36.


_Sir Stratford Canning to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received April_
10.)

(Extract.)                        _Constantinople, March_ 23, 1844.

I have the honour and satisfaction to inform your Lordship that the
question of religious executions is happily and, to all appearance,
conclusively settled. The concession has been obtained with great
difficulty; and, even to the last moment, it required the firmness
of resolution inspired by your Lordship's instruction to overcome
the obstacles which were raised against us, and to keep the Turkish
Ministers steady to their professions. I felt it to be my duty to
accept nothing short of your Lordship's requisition in its full
extent. But this obligation did not preclude me either from adopting
such means of success as were best calculated to hasten a favourable
result, or from accepting that result in a conciliatory though
effective shape. By availing myself of an overture to communicate
directly with the Sultan, I succeeded in obtaining all that was
necessary, and in receiving His Highness' acknowledgments for the
consideration I had shewn to his wishes.

These transactions have so little interest now, that it would be a
waste of your Lordship's time to enter upon a narration of them. It
may suffice for me to state that, after several unacceptable
propositions, the Porte's definitive reply was communicated to me
and to the French Minister in suitable terms, and also in writing,
which had been long refused; that to leave no doubt of what I
understand to be the meaning of the Porte, I sent in an
acknowledgment, of which a copy is herewith inclosed, together with
a translated copy of the Porte's declaration; and that to-day, at my
audience of the Sultan, His Highness not only confirmed what the
Porte had declared, but added, in frank and explicit language, the
assurances which I had previously required as to the general good
treatment of the Christians throughout his dominions. He, in fact,
gave me his royal word that, henceforward, neither should
Christianity be insulted in his dominions, nor should Christians be
in any way persecuted for their religion. Important as it was to
obtain this assurance from the lips of the Sovereign himself, I
should have thought it right to demand an audience for the mere
purpose of removing false impressions from His Highness' mind
respecting the motives and objects of Her Majesty's Government. In
this respect, also, I had every reason to be satisfied. The Sultan
expressed the strongest reliance on the friendly intentions of Great
Britain; he fully appreciated the motives which had actuated her on
the present occasion; he acknowledged more than once the signal and
frequent services rendered to his empire by British arms and
counsels; he declared that the great concession which he had now
confirmed, though entirely consonant with his own feelings, had been
made to his sense of obligation towards the British Government; he
called upon me to convey his thanks to Her Majesty for the good
treatment experienced by the millions of Mussulman subjects living
under British sway in India, and his anxious desire that the
engagements which he had taken to protect from violent and undue
interference the Christians established in his empire, should be
appreciated by Her Majesty's Government, and prove a source of
increased good-will between the two nations, and an occasion of
eliciting fresh proofs of friendly interest on the part of Great
Britain towards his dominions.

What passed at this audience is the more important and binding, as
it was one of a formal character, applied for on public grounds;
and, to give it still greater value, the Sultan, after I had retired
from his presence, called back the dragoman of the Porte, and
desired him to assure me that what he had said in public proceeded
from his real conviction, and was, in fact, the sincere expression
of his personal sentiments.

Inclosure 1 in No. 36.

_Official Declaration of the Sublime Porte, relinquishing the
practice of Executions for Apostacy_.

(Translation.)

It is the special and constant intention of His Highness the Sultan
that his cordial relations with the High Powers be preserved, and
that a perfect reciprocal friendship be maintained, and increased.

The Sublime Porte engages to take effectual measures to prevent
henceforward the execution and putting to death of the Christian who
is an apostate.

_March_ 21, 1844.

Inclosure 2 in No. 36.

_Acknowledgment of the Sublime Porte's Official Declaration
respecting Executions for Apostacy. March_ 22, 1844.

The official declaration communicated by his Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs shall be transmitted to the British Government,
who will understand with satisfaction that the Sublime Porte, in
taking effectual measures to prevent henceforward the execution and
putting to death of any Christian, an apostate from Islamism,
relinquishes for ever a principle inconsistent with its friendly
professions; and the further assurances to be given at the
Ambassador's audience of the Sultan, in the sense of the instruction
presented in copy to the Porte on the 9th ultimo, will fully satisfy
the British Government that Christianity is not to be insulted in
His Highness' empire, nor any one professing it to be treated as a
criminal, or persecuted on that account.


(Signed) STRATFORD CANN1NG.


No. 37.


_Earl of Westmorland to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received April_
12.)

My Lord,                          _Berlin, April_ 7, 1844.

I received a private letter From Sir Stratford Canning, dated
Constantinople, March 23, announcing the termination of his
negotiation with the Turkish Government as to its future conduct in
the cases of Christians who have renounced the Mahomedan religion,
and bearing witness to the cordial manner in which M. de Le Coq, the
Prussian Minister, under Baron Bülow's instruction, had assisted his
exertions.

I thought it my duty to communicate this feeling to Baron Bülow, who
has expressed himself obliged by the expressions of Sir Stratford
Canning, and most happy to have contributed to so good a work as the
attainment of a written pledge from the Turkish Government that it
will take effectual means to prevent henceforward the execution of
the Christian who is an apostate.

I have, &c.,

(Signed) WESTMORLAND.






No. 38.


_Lord Cowley to the Earl of Aberdeen_.--(_Received April_ 17.)

My Lord,                          _Paris, April_ 15, 1844.

At the desire of Her Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople I have
the honour to forward to your Lordship copies of a despatch and of
its inclosures which his Excellency has addressed to me in
consequence of the acquiescence of the Porte in the representations
of Great Britain and France on the subject of the execution of
apostates from Islamism.

M. Guizot read to me yesterday Baron de Bourqueney's report
announcing the successful termination of these negotiations, and
expressing his entire satisfaction at the assurances afforded him by
the Sultan, at the audience to which His Majesty has been graciously
pleased to invite him, of his determination to adhere strictly to
the engagements he had entered into with the two Powers.

I have, &c.,

(Signed) COWLEY.

Inclosure 1 in No. 38.

