On the other hand, ample testimony was adduced to show that Frank
Bouverie, notwithstanding his wife's irregularity of conduct, had
always regarded the boy as his son and heir; and one witness told how
the father had held the little fellow up to look at the picture of
his ancestral home, and said, "All that will one day be yours." So
the Bouveries' case broke down entirely, and the ex-private soldier,
ex-policeman, stepped into the fine old mansion of Delapre with sixty
thousand dollars a year. It is satisfactory to be able to add that he
has always borne an excellent character, and seems likely to duly
take his place as a country gentleman. Of course nothing but the bare
fabric and land came to him: the personalty was all left to his aunt,
the general's widow, an old lady near ninety, who yet survives; and it
was by her direction that the famous Linley picture once more changed
hands.

[Footnote 3: This lady's granddaughters, her son's daughters--the
duchess of Somerset, Queen of Beauty in the celebrated Eglinton
Tournament; the countess Gifford, mother, by her first husband, of
Lord Dufferin, viceroy of Canada; and the Honorable Mrs. Norton,
the well-known authoress--were famous in their day for beauty.
Gainsborough passed many years at Bath, where his intimacy with the
Linley family, then resident there, commenced. The following is from
Fulcher's _Life of Gainsborough_: "After returning from a concert at
Bath, where we had been charmed with Miss Linley's voice, I went home
to supper with my friend (Gainsborough), who sent his servant for a
bit of clay, with which he modeled, and then colored, her head--and
that too in a quarter of an hour--in such a manner that I protest it
appeared to me even superior to his paintings. The next day I took a
friend or two to his house to see it, but it was not to be seen:
the servant had thrown it down from the mantelpiece and broken it."
Gainsborough would now and then mould the faces of his friends in
miniature, finding the material in the wax candles burning before him:
the models were as perfect in their resemblance as his portraits.]

[Footnote 4: The history of the Bouverie family settling in England is
curious. The family had, prior to 1542, long been settled in Flanders.
In that year was born, near Lisle in that country, Laurence des
Bouveries, as the name was then written, founder of the English
branch. Laurence, from mixing with his father's Protestant tenants,
had imbibed some of their ideas, and his father, a stern Catholic,
told him that if he failed to appear at mass the following Sunday he
would have him examined by the Inquisition. In terror he ran away
to Frankfort-on-the-Main, and there had the luck to fall in with a
sympathetic silk manufacturer, who made him superintendent of his men.
Subsequently he married his patron's niece and heiress, and eventually
removed to England when Queen Elizabeth offered an asylum there to
those of the Reformed faith. His family made wealthy alliances and
prospered, and in 1747 his representative was created a peer. He
married, first, the heiress of Delapre, and her property went to her
second son, Edward. His eldest son by his second marriage took the
name of Pusey, and was, father of the celebrated Dr. Pusey.]

[Footnote 5: Lord Cairns, then Sir Hugh, opened the case for the
claimant, and received, it was said, two hundred and fifty guineas for
the work, which occupied about two hours. Sir Fitzroy Kelly appeared
as counsel for the family. He spoke for about fifteen minutes, and his
fee was the same.]


HINTS FOR NOVEL-WRITERS.


"Constance," said Philip to his sister, "I have got on very well with
my novel. I have written fifty pages, described my hero and heroine,
made them thoroughly in love with each other; and now I intend to part
them for a season, without letting them be certain of the state of
each other's heart. I think narrative my forte, but it will not do to
have no conversations, and my dialogues seem so short and trite. Do
look over this:

"'_Helena_. Your letter has arrived, I see.'

"'_Bertram_. Yes, I have just read it.'

"'_H_. Well?'

"'_B_. It says I must delay no longer.'

"'_H_. When shall you start?'

"'_B_. Tomorrow, at the latest.'

"'_H_. Have you told my aunt?'

"'_B_. Not yet: I must do it now.'

"'_H_. Shall you go direct to London?'

"'_B_. No: I stop one night at the Grange.'

"'_H_. Oh, then I will ask you to be the bearer of my letter.'

"'_B_. Is that _all_ you will permit me to do for you?'

"'_H_. I am careful not to burden my friends.'

"'_B_. Then you have no belief in true friendship.'"

"Well, Philip, let me try whilst you are at the office, and see what I
can suggest:

"'_Your letter has arrived, I see_,' said Helena, turning as Bertram
entered, letter in hand.

"'_Yes, I have just read it_,' he replied, advancing and leaning his
arm on the mantelpiece.

"'_Well_?' said Helena, stooping as if to warm her hands, but really
endeavoring to shade her face.

"'_It says I must delay no longer_,' he answered, trying to assume an
air of indifference.

"'_When shall you start_?' she said, resuming her work and fixing her
eyes on her pattern.

"'_To-morrow, at the latest_,' he replied, transferring the letter to
his pocket.

"'_Have you told my aunt_?' she said, searching her work-basket for
her scissors.

"'_Not yet: I must do it now_,' he said, putting back the little
ornament his elbow had displaced.

"'_Shall you go direct to London_?' she said, trying to disentangle a
skein of colored yarn.

"'_No: I stop one night at the Grange_,' he said quietly, but with an
air of decision.

"'_Then I will ask you to be the bearer of my letter_,' she added,
laying down her work as she spoke.

"'_Is that all you will permit me to do for you_?' he asked anxiously.

"'_Oh, I never burden my friends_,' she said, raising her head and
tossing back her curls.

"'_Then you have no belief in true friendship_,' he answered in a tone
of bitterness."

"That is pretty good," said Constance to herself, "but I will take
these two young people out of doors: perhaps Philip may be better
pleased:

"'_Your letter has arrived, I see_,' said Helena, advancing as Bertram
opened the garden gate.

"'_Yes, I have just read it_,' he replied as he secured the fastening.

"'_Well_?' said Helena, taking the path to the house.

"'_It says I must delay no longer_,' he replied, proffering her a
bunch of wild-flowers he had gathered in his walk.

"'_When shall you start_?' said Helena, turning away to pluck some
rosebuds, which she added to her bouquet.

"'_Tomorrow, at the latest_,' he answered, flinging aside roughly a
branch that crossed his path.

"'_Have you told my aunt_?' said Helena, tying the strings of her hat.

"'_No: I must do it now_,' he said, holding out his hand to relieve
her of her parasol as they entered the shady avenue.

"'_Shall you go direct to London_?' she asked hurriedly.

"'_No: I stop one night at the Grange_,' he said, inviting her by a
gesture to take a seat upon a rustic bench.

"'_Oh, then I will ask you to be the bearer of my letter_,' she said,
quickening her steps lest he should perceive her emotion.

"'_Is that all you will permit me to do for you_?' he said, with more
feeling than he had yet permitted himself to show.

"'_Yes: I am careful not to burden my friends_,' she added, drawing
her mantle round her and speaking in a tone of irony.

"'_Then you do not believe in true friendship_,' he replied as they
reached the house, and with a heightened color he threw back the hall
door and made way for her to enter."


NOTES.


Since the publication of the article on "Salmon Fishing in Canada,"
in the May Number of this Magazine, the writer has had access to the
_Report of the Department of Fisheries of the Dominion of Canada_,
for 1872. By this document it appears that an establishment for the
artificial hatching of salmon, whitefish and trout is in operation at
Newcastle on Lake Ontario, and that two millions of fish eggs were put
in the hatching-troughs the last season. Adult salmon, the produce of
this establishment, are now found in nearly all the streams between
the Bay of Quinté and Niagara River. A salmon-breeding establishment
is about going into operation on the Restigouché, and another is
contemplated for the Matapedia, both rivers of the Bay of Chaleur.

The reports from the river overseers indicate that under the system
of protection all the rivers are improving in the number and size of
their salmon. There were taken with the rod in 1872--from Grand River,
70 fish, average weight 14 pounds; Cascapedia, 139 fish, average
weight 22 pounds; Restigouche, 500 fish; Upsalquitch, 70 fish; St.
Marguerite, 165 fish; Moisie, 219 fish, average weight 18 pounds; St.
John, 147 fish, average weight 13 pounds; Mingan, 130 fish; and in
most of the rivers the young salmon are very numerous.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a familiar observation that great inventions are commonly
foreshadowed in theory or speculation, and very often are approached
gradually in a long series of tentative experiments before the
perfected result is reached. Exceptions occur to this rule, but they
are exceedingly few, since usually it is a general sense of the need
of any new device which directs mechanical skill toward supplying
it. Nevertheless, it is with no little surprise that one reads how
thoroughly a century ago the entire theory of the modern electric
telegraph was comprehended; for a most remarkable premonition, so to
speak, of this great device is contained in a letter recently brought
to public notice, written by the abbé Barthélemy (the once famous
author of the _Voyage of Anacharsis_) to the marchioness du Deffand.
"I often think," says the abbé, writing under date of Chanteloup, 8th
August, 1772, "of an experiment which would be a very happy one for
us. They say that if two clocks have their hands equally magnetized,
you need only to move the hands of one to make those of the other
revolve in the same direction; so that, for example, when one strikes
twelve, the other will denote the same hour. Now, suppose that
artificial magnets can some day be so improved as to communicate their
power from here to Paris: you shall procure one of these clocks, and
we will have another. Instead of the hours, we will mark on the two
dials the letters of the alphabet. Every day at a certain hour we will
turn the hands. M. Wiart will put the letters together, and will read
them thus: 'Good-morning, dear little girl! I love you more tenderly
than ever.' That will be grandmother's turn at the clock. When my turn
comes, I shall say about the same thing. Besides, we could arrange to
have the first motion of the hand strike a bell, to give warning that
the oracle is about to speak. The fancy pleases me wonderfully. It
would soon become corrupted, to be sure, by being applied to spying
in war and in politics; but it would still be very pleasant in
the intercourse of friendship." In 1774--that is, two years after
Barthélemy's letter--Lesage, a Genevese professor of physics,
guardedly intimated that an apparatus could be constructed to
fulfill these vague suggestions. There were a few experiments in
electro-magnetism during the succeeding half century. It was reserved
for our own Morse to put into practical application the grand system
which the abbé Barthélemy had so curiously foreshadowed in a freak of
fancy.

       *       *       *       *       *

