Except that such stories serve to call the attention of unscientific
people to scientific facts, and teach them to observe the wonders of the
universe, it really seems a shame that such marvels should be used as
bogies to scare the ignorant and superstitious.

As a matter of fact, very little is known about these sun-spots. They
occur in greatest numbers in periods of about eleven years apart, and
astronomers and geologists agree that periods of rainy and dry seasons
seem to correspond with the sun-spot periods.

When the greatest number of spots are visible on the sun, scientists
agree that the climatic conditions on the earth are normal and even.
When there are fewest spots on the sun we have extreme temperature and
sudden changes. When we say that astronomers and geologists agree on
this point, we must also admit that some astronomers are not quite
satisfied that the fact has been proved.
Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   DECEMBER 30, 1897.   NO. 60

=Copyright, 1897, by THE GREAT ROUND WORLD Publishing Company.=

       *       *       *       *       *

The heavens are affording us an interesting study just now.

Our kind old friend, the sun, it is who is giving us this benefit.

One of the largest sun-spots which has ever been observed is now to be
seen.

With Austria and Hungary divided into two small kingdoms with separate
aims and interests, Turkey could not be held in check any longer, and
the Russians, who are so full of ambition for power in the East, could
do pretty much as they pleased.

The Hungarians are supposed to be a very wide-awake people, and able to
comprehend the true meaning of a political situation. It is therefore
supposed that in the present crisis they are not striving so much for
freedom, which would be a disadvantage to them, as for the supremacy in
the two kingdoms.

This idea is outlined by Kossuth in a speech made by him the other day,
in which he said: "We want a separate army and separate treasury. The
King of Hungary should be Emperor of Austria as a sort of extra
occupation. Vienna (the capital of Austria) is already a suburb of
Budapest (the capital of Hungary), and in time Austria will become a
collection of provinces attached to Hungary."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rioting still continues in Prague. The troops are patrolling the street,
and special guards have been stationed at the places where outbreaks are
feared.

Numbers of arrests have been made, and it is said that the prisons are
so full that it has been found necessary to take no note of the smaller
offenders, and only hold those persons who are accused of serious
crimes.

In Vienna there has been a demonstration, unfriendly to both Hungarians
and Bohemians.

One morning the inhabitants of the city awoke to find the town covered
with flaming red placards.

Some of them read, "No new compact between Austria and Hungary"; and
others, "No language laws. German is the national language."

These placards naturally aroused a great deal of angry feeling between
the opposing parties. The police tore them down, and made every effort
to find the persons who had posted them, but without any result.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Treaty of Peace between Turkey and Greece has been finally signed by
the Powers interested.

Little notice has, however, been taken of the fact; matters in Europe
are looking so threatening that the affair of Greece is almost
forgotten.

It is said that war will break out in the Balkan provinces in the
spring, a war which will involve both Turkey and Austria.

The Balkan provinces are Servia, Roumania, Bulgaria, and Montenegro. If
you look at your map, you will see that they lie between Hungary and
Turkey.

The Sultan of Turkey is so convinced that such a war cannot be avoided,
that he is doing everything in his power to raise money for it.

He has given orders that the taxes must all be collected by the new
year, instead of May, in which month they are generally paid.

To accomplish this the unfortunate people, particularly the Christian
population, are being very roughly dealt with.

It is stated that the Sultan will not recall his troops from Thessaly
until the war indemnity has been paid, and that Germany is upholding him
in his determination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reports of the various officers of our Government have followed the
Message of President McKinley.

Every one is somewhat shocked to find that the tariff bill, which was to
put such a lot of money in our treasury, has fallen far short of the
expected results, and, indeed, has not produced enough revenue to pay
the expenses of the Government.

If the receipts from customs are not larger during the next few months
than they have been during the last, the country will be $65,000,000
behind at the end of the year, and Congress will have to devise some
plan for raising this sum of money.

This means that some new tax will be imposed upon us, for the Government
must have the money it needs, and the people must help to make up what
is lacking.

The friends of the Dingley Bill hope that the custom receipts will
increase, and think that the reason they have been so small is that the
merchants brought so much stuff into the country before the bill went
into effect, that they have not needed to get fresh supplies so far. In
short, they claim the Dingley Bill needs a longer trial.

The enemies of the measure point out that, as a means of providing an
income for the Government, the Dingley Bill has been a failure.

We told you about the discussion as to the exact hour at which the bill
became a law.

The question is not as yet settled.

The importers, if you remember, declared that the bill only became a law
from the exact hour it was signed; the Government insists that it was a
law from early morning of the day on which it was signed.

Seventy-three importers have protested against paying duty for all day
July 24th, because the bill was not signed until six minutes past four
in the afternoon.

It is expected that a final decision will be given shortly, which will
put an end to the disagreement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Side by side with the fact that there is not enough money in the
treasury to meet the country's expenses, the armor-plate question has
come into prominence once more.

