
Louis Spohr, one of the world's greatest violinists, and a composer of
world-wide fame, was born at Brunswick, April 25, 1784. Like all great
musical geniuses, his ability was displayed very early. He began to play
the violin in his fifth year, and to compose for that instrument before
he was in his teens. After studying the rudiments with several teachers,
the Duke of Brunswick induced Franz Eck, a recognized master of the
violin, to give him instruction. Spohr remained with him two years, and
accompanied him on his travels to Russia, studying, composing, and
learning much by his observation of Eck's playing. In 1805 he was
appointed leader of the band of the Duke of Gotha, and began writing
orchestral works, his compositions before that time having been mainly
for the violin. His first opera, "Die Prüfung," also appeared about this
time. In 1807 he made a very successful tour through Germany, and another
in 1809, arousing great enthusiasm by his admirable playing. In that year
also occurred the first musical festival in Germany, which was conducted
by Spohr at Frankenhausen, in Thuringia. In 1811 another was held, for
which he wrote his first symphony. In 1812 his first oratorio, "Das
jüngste Gericht," appeared; but after two performances of it he was
greatly dissatisfied, and laid it aside. In the fall of that year he made
his first public appearance in Vienna, and achieved such success that he
was offered and accepted the leadership of the band at the
Theater-an-der-Wien. He remained there only three years, however, and
then resumed his professional tours in Switzerland and Italy. In 1818 he
was appointed conductor of the opera at Frankfort, where he remained for
two years, during which time he brought out his operas "Faust" and
"Zemire and Azor." In 1820 he went to England for the first time, and
played many of his compositions in the Philharmonic concerts. His English
visit was a very successful one, and on his journey back to Germany he
stopped in Paris, where also he met with an enthusiastic welcome. He
finally settled down at Dresden, where Weber was then busy with the
preparations for the performance of his "Freischütz." During his stay
there, Weber had been offered the post of Hofkapellmeister to the Elector
of Cassel; but not being in a position to accept it, he recommended
Spohr, and the latter obtained the appointment Jan. 1, 1822, where he
remained the rest of his days, as it was a life-office. During this year
he finished his opera "Jessonda," one of the most successful of all his
vocal works. Four years later he conducted the Rhenish Festival at
Düsseldorf and brought out his second oratorio, "Die letzten Dinge" ("The
Last Things"). In 1831 he completed his "Violin School," which has ever
since been a standard work. His most important symphony, "Die Weihe der
Töne" ("The Consecration of Sound"), was produced at Cassel in 1832, and
his third oratorio, "Des Heiland's letzte Stunden" ("Calvary"), at the
same place in 1835. Four years later he went to England again, and
produced his "Calvary" at the Norwich Festival with immense success,
which led to his reception of a commission to produce "The Fall of
Babylon" for the Festival of 1842. His last opera, "The Crusaders," was
written in 1844, but did not meet with a permanent success. From this
time until 1857 he was engaged in making tours and producing the works of
other composers, among them those of Wagner, whose "Tannhäuser" he
brought out in 1853, in spite of the Elector's opposition. In 1857 he was
pensioned, and two years later died. He was born a musician and died one,
and in his long and honorable life he was always true to his art and did
much to ennoble and dignify it, notwithstanding the curious combinations
in his musical texture. He never could understand or appreciate
Beethoven. He proclaimed himself a disciple of Mozart, though he had
little in common with him, and he declared Wagner the greatest of all
living composers, on the strength of his "Flying Dutchman" alone. As a
performer, he was one of the best of any period.


                           The Last Judgment.


Spohr wrote two oratorios upon the same subject,--"Das jüngste Gericht"
("The Last Judgment") and "Die letzten Dinge" ("The Last Things"); but
the latter is now universally entitled "The Last Judgment," and the
former was shelved by the composer himself shortly after its performance.
His autobiography gives us some interesting details of each. After a
concert-tour to Hamburg, Spohr returned to Gotha, and found there a
letter from Bischoff, the Precentor of Frankenhausen, informing him that
he had been commanded by the Governor of Erfurt to arrange a musical
festival there in celebration of the birthday of Napoleon, August 15. He
invited Spohr to assume its direction and to write an oratorio for the
occasion. Previous to this a poet in Erfurt had offered him the text
called "The Last Judgment," and Spohr determined to avail himself of it.
He writes,--

  "I sent for the libretto and set to work at once. But I soon felt that
  for the oratorio style I was yet too deficient in counterpoint and in
  fugueing. I therefore suspended my work in order to make the
  preliminary studies requisite for the subject. From one of my pupils I
  borrowed Marpurg's 'Art of Fugue-writing,' and was soon deeply and
  continuously engaged in the study of that work. After I had written
  half a dozen fugues according to its instruction, the last of which
  seemed to me very successful, I resumed the composition of my oratorio,
  and completed it without allowing anything else to intervene. According
  to a memorandum I made, it was begun in January, 1812, and finished in
  June."

In this connection Spohr tells the following humorous story:--

  "One of the solo-singers alone, who sang the part of Satan, did not
  give me satisfaction. The part, which was written with a powerful
  instrumentation, I gave, by the advice of Bischoff, to a village
  schoolmaster in the neighborhood of Gotha who was celebrated throughout
  the whole district for his colossal bass voice. In power of voice he
  had indeed quite sufficient to outroar a whole orchestra; but in
  science and in music he could by no means execute the part in a
  satisfactory manner. I taught and practised him in the part myself, and
  took great pains to assist him a little. But without much success; for
  when the day of public trial came, he had totally forgotten every
  instruction and admonition, and gave such loose to his barbarian voice
  that he first of all frightened the auditory, and then set it in roars
  of laughter."

It is clear from Spohr's remarks that he was satisfied with the choruses
and fugues, but not with the solo parts of Jesus and Mary, which were in
the florid cantata style of that day. He subsequently determined to
re-write them; but "when about to begin," he says, "it seemed to me as
though I could no longer enter into the spirit of the subject, and so it
remained undone. To publish the work as it was, I could not make up my
mind. Thus in later years it has lain by without any use being made of
it."

Thirteen years afterwards he wrote "Die letzten Dinge," now so well known
as "The Last Judgment." He says in one of his letters,--

  "In the same year [1825] Councillor Rochlitz, the editor of the
  'Leipsic Musical Journal,' offered me the text of an oratorio, 'Die
  letzten Dinge,' to compose for, which I received with great pleasure,
  as my previous attempt in that style of art, 'Das jüngste Gericht,' by
  no means pleased me any longer, and therefore I had not once been
  disposed to perform a single number of it at the meeting of our
  Society.... The whole work was finished by Good Friday [1826], and then
  first performed complete in the Lutheran Church. It was in the evening,
  and the church was lighted up. My son-in-law, Wolff, who had been long
  in Rome, proposed to illuminate the church as at Rome on Good Friday,
  with lights disposed overhead in the form of a cross, and carried out
  his idea. A cross fourteen feet long, covered with silver-foil and hung
  with six hundred glass lamps, was suspended overhead in the middle of
  the church, and diffused so bright a light that one could everywhere
  clearly read the text-books. The musicians and singers, nearly two
  hundred in number, were placed in the gallery of the church, arranged
  in rows one above the other, and for the most part unseen by the
  auditory, which, amounting to nearly two thousand persons, observed a
  solemn stillness. My two daughters, Messrs. Wild, Albert, and Föppel,
  together with an amateur, sang the soli, and the performance was
  faultless. The effect was, I must myself say, extraordinary."

The title of the work is clearly a misnomer, as well as a mistranslation,
for it contains nothing of the terrors of the Last Judgment, but, on the
other hand, is graceful and elegant in style. The affixing of this title
to it is said to have been the work of Professor Taylor, who arranged it
for the Norwich festival of 1830, and supposed he was preparing the
earlier oratorio, "Das jüngste Gericht." The title has now become so
indissolubly connected with it that no effort has been made to change it.
In the first part the text is confined to ascriptions of praise. The
solo, "Blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sitteth upon
the throne, and unto the Lamb forever," conveys the meaning of the whole
first part; while the second part is confined to those portions of the
Apocalypse which describe the terrible signs of the last day, concluding
with visions of the new heaven and a hallelujah. And yet Malibran, in her
biography of Spohr, calls the oratorio a musical copy of Michael Angelo's
"Last Judgment,"--showing that more than one person has confounded the
two oratorios.

The work opens with a very long overture of a grave and majestic
character, in limits far beyond those usually found in oratorio. It is
followed by the striking chorus, "Praise His awful Name," which is
beautifully written, and contains impressive soprano and bass solos. Some
brief tenor and bass recitatives lead to the second number, a short
chorus ("Holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts"), in which the voices have no
accompaniment except the horns. Three phrases of recitative for soprano
and tenor lead to the next chorus ("All Glory to the Lamb that died"), a
grand number, which is familiar to nearly every lover of oratorio music.
The next number is one of the most striking in the work. A short tenor
recitative introduces the tenor solo and chorus, "Blessing, honor, glory,
and power," beginning with a tranquil and smoothly flowing solo, the
chorus opening in the same manner, then developing into an admirably
written fugue, and closing in the same serene style as it opened. A very
dramatic and picturesque scene follows, comprising the tenor recitative
("And lo! a mighty Host"), with a very striking accompaniment descriptive
of "the mighty host of all nations and people that stood before the
throne and the Lamb," and the exquisite quartet and chorus ("Lord God of
Heaven and Earth") which close the first part.

The second part opens with an orchestral symphony which heralds the signs
and portents of the Day of Judgment in graphic style. It is followed by a
long bass recitative with intensely dramatic accompaniment:--

