'Yes,' said the colonel a little bitterly, 'in that particular my
stepmother was right. You little know the social disabilities under
which those lie in England who do not belong to the Established Church.
For policy, nobody should be a Dissenter.'

'Dissenter?' echoed Esther, the word awaking a long train of old
associations; and for a moment her thoughts wandered back to them.

'Yes,' the colonel went on; 'my father bade me follow him; but with
more than equal right I called on him to follow a long line of
ancestors. Rather hundreds than one!'

'Papa, in such a matter surely conscience is the only thing to follow,'
said Esther softly. 'You do not think a man ought to be either
Independent or Church of England, just because his fathers have set him
the example?'

'You do not think example and inheritance are anything?' said the
colonel.

'I think they are everything, for the right;--most precious!--but they
cannot decide the right. _That_ a man must do for himself, must he not?'

'Republican doctrine!' said the colonel bitterly. 'I suppose, after I
am gone, you will become a Church of England woman, just to prove to
yourself and others that you are not influenced by me!'

'Papa,' said Esther, half laughing, 'I do not think that is at all
likely; and I am sure you do not. And so that was the reason you came
away?'

'I could not stay there,' said the colonel, 'and see my young brother
in my place, and his mother ruling where your mother should by right
have ruled. They did not love me either,--why should they?--and I felt
more a stranger there than anywhere else. So I took the little property
that came to me from my mother, to which my father in his will had made
a small addition, and left England and home for ever.'

There was a pause of some length.

'Who is left there now, of the family?' Esther asked.

'I have not heard.'

'Do they never write to you?'

'Never.'

'Nor you to them, papa?'

'No. Since I came away there has been no intercourse whatever between
our families.'

'Oh, papa!'

'I am inclined to regret it now, for your sake.'

'I am not thinking of that. But, papa, it must be sixteen or seventeen
years now; isn't it?'

'Something like so much.'

'Oh, papa, do write to them! do write to them, and make it up. Do not
let the quarrel last any longer.'

'Write to them and make it up?' said the colonel, rubbing his head
again. In all his life Esther had hardly ever seen him do it before.
'They have forgotten me long ago; and I suppose they are all grown out
of my remembrance. But it might be better for you if we went home.'

'Never mind that, papa; that is not what I am thinking of. Why, who
could be better off than I am? But write and make it all up, papa; do!
It isn't good for families to live so in hostility. Do what you can to
make it up.'

The colonel sat silent, rubbing the hair of his head in every possible
direction, while Esther's fancy for a while busied itself with images
of an unknown crowd of relations that seemed to flit before her. How
strange it would be to have aunts and cousins; young and old family
friends, such as other girls had; instead of being so entirely set
apart by herself, as it were. It was fascinating, the mere idea. Not
that Esther felt her loneliness now; she was busy and healthy and
happy; yet this sudden vision made her realise that she _was_ alone.
How strange and how pleasant it would be to have a crowd of friends, of
one's own blood and name! She mused a little while over this picture,
and then came back to the practical present.

'Meanwhile, papa, what do you think of my plan? About getting a house
in the city, and giving up Buonaparte and his oats? Don't you think it
would be comfortable?'

The colonel considered the subject now in a quieter mood, discussed it
a little further, and finally agreed to drive into town and see what he
could find in the way of a house.


CHAPTER XXX.

_A HOUSE_.


Yet the colonel did not go. Days passed, and he did not go. Esther
ventured some gentle reminders, which had no effect. And the winter was
gone and the spring was come, before he made the first expedition to
the city in search of a house. Once started on his quest, it is true
the colonel carried it on vigorously, and made many journeys for it;
but they were all in vain. Rents in the city were found to be so much
higher than rents in the country as fully to neutralize the advantage
hoped for in a smaller household and the dismissal of the horse. Not a
dwelling could be found where this would not be true. The search was
finally given up; and things in the little family went on as they had
been going for some time past.

Esther at last, under stress of necessity, made fresh representations
to her father, and besought leave to give lessons. They were running
into debt, with no means of paying. It went sorely against the grain
with the colonel to give his consent; pride and tenderness both
rebelled; he hesitated long, but circumstances were too much for him.
He yielded at last, not with a groan, but with many groans.

'I came here to take care of you,' he said; 'and _this_ is the end of
it!'

'Don't take it so, papa,' cried Esther. 'I like to do it. It is not a
hardship.'

'_It_ is a hardship,' he retorted; 'and you will find it so. I find it
so now.'

'Even so, papa,' said the girl, with infinite sweetness; 'suppose it be
a hardship, the Lord has given it to me; and so long as I am sure it is
something He has given, I want no better. Indeed, papa, you know I
_could have_ no better.'

'I know nothing of the kind. You are talking folly.'

'No, papa, if you please. Just remember,--look here, papa,--here are
the words. Listen: "The Lord God is a sun and shield; the Lord will
give grace and glory; _no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly_."'

'Do you mean to tell me,' said the colonel angrily, 'that--well, that
all the things that you have not just now, and ought to have, are not
good things?'

'Not good for me, or at least not the _best_, or I should have them.'

This answer was with a smile so absolutely shadowless, that the colonel
found nothing to answer but a groan, which was made up of pain and
pride and pleasure in inscrutable proportions.

The next step was to speak to Miss Fairbairn. That wise woman showed no
surprise, and did not distress Esther with any sympathy; she took it as
the most natural thing in the world that her favourite pupil should
wish to become a teacher; and promised her utmost help. In her own
school there was now no longer any opening; that chance was gone; but
she gave Esther a recommendation in person to the principal of another
establishment, where in consequence Miss Gainsborough found ready
acceptance.

And now indeed she felt herself a stranger, and found herself alone.
This was a different thing from her first entering school as a pupil.
And Esther began also presently to perceive that her father had not
been entirely wrong in his estimate of a teacher's position and
experiences. It is not a path of roses that such a one has to tread;
and even the love she may bear to those she teaches, and even the
genuine love of teaching them, do not avail to make it so. Woe to the
teacher who has not those two alleviations and helps to fall back upon!
Esther soon found both; and yet she gave her father credit for having
known more about the matter than she did. She was truly alone now; the
children loved her, but scattered away from her as soon as their tasks
were done; her fellow-teachers she scarcely saw--they were busy and
jaded; and with the world outside of school she had nothing to do. She
had never had much to do with it; yet at Miss Fairbairn's she had
sometimes a little taste of society that was of high order, and all in
the house had been at least well known to her and she to them, even if
no particular congeniality had drawn them together. She had lost all
that now. And it sometimes came over Esther in those days the thought
of her English aunts and cousins, as a vision of strange pleasantness.
To have plenty of friends and relations, of one's own blood, and
therefore inalienable; well-bred and refined and cultivated (whereby I
am afraid Esther's fancy made them a multiplication of Pitt
Dallas),--it looked very alluring! She went bravely about her work, and
did it beautifully, and was very contented in it, and relieved to be
earning money; yet these visions now and again would come over her
mind, bringing a kind of distant sunshiny glow with them, different
from the light that fell on that particular bit of life's pathway she
was treading just then. They came and went; what came and did not go
was Esther's consciousness that she was earning only a little money,
and that with that little she could not clear off all the debts that
had accrued and were constantly accruing. When she had paid the
butcher, the grocer's bill presented itself, and when she had after
some delay got rid of that, then came the need for a fresh supply of
coal. Esther spent nothing on her own dress that she could help, but
her father's was another matter, and tailors' charges she found were
heavy. She went bravely on; she was young and full of spirit, and she
was a Christian and full of confidence; nevertheless she did begin to
feel the worry of these petty, gnawing, money cares, which have broken
the heart of so many a woman before her. Moreover, another thing
demanded consideration. It was necessary, now that she had no longer a
home with Miss Fairbairn, that she should go into town and come back
every day, and, furthermore, as she was giving lessons in a school, no
circumstance of weather or anything else must hinder her being
absolutely punctual. Yet Esther foresaw that as the winter came on
again it would be very difficult sometimes to maintain this
punctuality; and it became clear to her that it would be almost
indispensable for them to move into town. If only a house could be
found!

Meantime Christopher went and came about the house, cultivated the
garden and took care of the horse and drove Esther to school, all just
as usual; his whilome master never having as yet said one word to him
on the subject of his marriage and consequent departure. Whether his
wages were paid him, Esther was anxiously doubtful; but she dared not
ask. I say 'whilome' master, for there is no doubt that Mr. Bounder in
these days felt that nobody was his master but himself. He did all his
duties faithfully, but then he took leave to cross the little field
which lay between his old home and his new, and to disappear for whole
spaces of time from the view of the colonel's family.

It was one evening in November. Mrs. Barker was just sitting down to
her tea, and Christopher was preparing himself to leave her. I should
remark that Mrs. Barker had called on the former Mrs. Blumenfeld, and
established civil relations between the houses.

'Won't you stay, Christopher?' asked his sister.

'No, thank ye. I've got a little woman over there, who's expecting me.'

'Does she set as good a table for you as I used to do? in those days
when I could?' the housekeeper added, with a sigh.

'Well, she ain't just up to some o' your arts,' said Christopher, with
a contented face, in which his blue eye twinkled with a little slyness;
'but I'll tell you what, she can cook a dish o' pot-pie that you can't
beat, nor nobody else; and her rye bread is just uncommon!'

'Rye bread!' said the housekeeper, with an utterance of disdain.

'I'll bring a loaf over,' said Christopher, nodding his head; 'and you
can give some to Miss Esther if you like. Good-night!'

He made few steps of it through the dark cold evening to the house that
had become his home. The room that received him might have pleased a
more difficult man. It was as clean as hands could make it; bright with
cleanliness, lighted and warmed with a glowing fire, and hopeful with a
most savoury scent of supper. The mistress of the house was busy about
her hearth, looking neat and comfortable enough to match her room. As
Christopher came in she lit a candle that stood on the supper-table.
Christopher hugged himself at this instance of his wife's thrift, and
sat down.

'You've got something that smells uncommon good there!' said he
approvingly.

'I allays du think a hot supper's comfortable at the end o' a cold
day,' returned the new Mrs. Bounder. 'I don't care what I du as long's
I'm busy with all the world all the day long; I kin take a piece and a
bite and go on, but when it comes night, and I hev time to think I'm
tired, then I like a good hot something or other.'

'What have you got there?' said Christopher, peering over at the dish
on the hearth which Mrs. Bounder was filling from a pot before the
fire. She laughed.

'You wouldn't be any wiser ef I told you. It's a little o' everything.
Give me a good garden, and I kin live as well as I want to, and cost no
one more'n a few shillin's, neither. 'Tain't difficult, ef you know
how. Now see what you say to that.'

She dished up her supper, put a plate of green pickles on the table,
filled up her tea-pot, and cut some slices from a beautiful brown loaf,
which must have rivalled the rye, though it was not that colour.
Christopher sat down, said grace reverently, and attacked the viands,
while the mistress poured him out a cup of tea.

'Christopher,' she said, as she handed it to him, 'I'd jes' like to ask
you something.'

'What is it?'

'I'd like to know jes' why you go through that performance?'

'Performance?' echoed Christopher. 'What are you talkin' about?'

'I mean, that bit of a prayer you think it is right to make whenever
you're goin' to put your fork to your mouth.'

'Oh! I couldn't imagine what you were driving at. Why do I do it?'

'I'd like to know, ef you think you kin tell.'

'Respectable folk always does it.'

'Hm! I don' know about that. So it's for respectability you keep it up?'

'No,' said Christopher, a little embarrassed how to answer. 'It's
proper. Don't you know the Bible bids us give thanks?'

'Wall, hev you set out to du all the rest o' the things the Bible bids
you du?--that's jes' what I'm comin' to.'

A surly man would not perhaps have answered at all, resenting this
catechizing; but Christopher was not surly, and not at all offended. He
was perplexed a little; looked at his wife in some sly wonder at her,
but answered not.

'Ef I began, I'd go through. I wouldn't make no half way with it;
that's all I was goin' to say,' his wife went on, with a grave face
that showed she was not jesting.

'It's saying a good deal!' remarked Christopher, still looking at her.

'It's sayin' a good deal, to make the first prayer; but ef I made the
first one, I'd make all the rest. I don't abide no half work in _my_
garden, Christopher; that's what I was thinkin'; and I don't believe
Him you pray to likes it no better.'

Christopher was utterly unprepared to go on with this subject; and
finally gave up trying, and attended to his supper. After a little
while his wife struck a new theme. She was not a trained rhetorician;
but when she had said what she had to say she was always contented to
stop.

'How are things going up your way to-day?' she asked.

'My way is down here, I'm happy to say.'

'Wall, up to the colonel's, then. What's the news?'

'Ain't no sort o' news. Never is. They're always at the old things. The
colonel he lies on his sofy, and Miss Esther she goes and comes. They
want to get a house in town, now she's goin' so regular, only they
can't find one to fit.'

'Kin't find a house? I thought there was houses enough in all New York.'

'Houses enough, but they all is set up so high in their rents, you see.'

'Is that the trouble?'

'That is exactly the trouble; and Miss Esther, I can see, she doesn't
know just what to do.'

'They ain't gittin' along well, Christopher?'

'Well, there is no doubt they ain't! I should say they was gettin' on
uncommon bad. Don't seem as if they could any way pay up all their
bills at once. They pay this man, and then run up a new score with some
other man. Miss Esther, she tries all she knows; but there ain't no one
to help her.'

'They git this house cheaper than they'd git any one in town, I guess.
They'd best stay where they be.'

'Yes, but you see, Miss Esther has to go and come every day now; she's
teachin' in a school, that's what she is,' said Christopher, letting
his voice drop as if he were speaking of some desecration. 'That's what
she is; and so she has to be there regular, rain or shine makes no
difference. An' if they was in town, you see, they wouldn't want the
horse, nor me.'

'_You_ don't cost 'em nothin'!' returned Mrs. Bounder.

'No; but they don't know that; and _if_ they knowed it, you see,
there'd be the devil to pay.'

'I wouldn't give myself bad names, ef I was you,' remarked Mrs. Bounder
quietly. 'Christopher'--

'What then?'

'I'm jes' thinkin''--

'What are you thinkin' about?'

'Jes' you wait till I know myself, and I'll tell ye.'

Christopher was silent, watching from time to time his spouse, who
seemed to be going on with her supper in orderly fashion. Mr. Bounder
was not misled by this, and watched curiously. He had acquired in a few
months a large respect for his wife. Her very unadorned attire, and her
peculiar way of knotting up her hair, did not hinder that he had a
great and growing value for her. Christopher would have liked her
certainly to dress better and to put on a cap; nevertheless, and odd as
it may seem, he was learning to be proud of his very independent wife,
and even boasted to his sister that she was a 'character.' Now he
waited for what was to come next.

'I guess I was a fool,' began Mrs. Bounder at last. 'But it came into
my head, ef they're in such a fix as you say, whether maybe they
wouldn't take up with my house. I guess, hardly likely.'

'_Your_ house?' inquired Christopher, in astonishment. But his wife
calmly nodded.

'_Your_ house!' repeated Christopher. 'Which one?'

'Wall, not this one, I guess,' said his wife quietly. 'But I've got one
in town.'

'A house in town! Why, I never heard of it before.'

'No, 'cause it's been standin' empty for a spell back, doin' nothin'.
Ef there had been rent comin' in, I guess you'd have heard of it. But
the last folks went out; and I hadn't found no one that suited me to
let hev it.'

'Would it do for the colonel and Miss Esther?'

'That's jes' what I don' know, Christopher. It would du as fur's the
rent goes; an' it's all right and tight. It won't let the rain in on
'em; I've kep' it in order.'

'I should like to see what you don't keep in order!' said Christopher
admiringly.

'Wall, I guess it's my imagination. For, come to think of it, it ain't
jes' sich a house as your folks are accustomed to.'

'The thing is,' said Christopher gravely, 'they can't have just what
they're accustomed to. Leastways I'm afeard they can't. I'll just speak
to Miss Esther about it.'

'Wall, you kin du that. 'Twon't du no harm. I allays think, when
anybody's grown poor he'd best take in his belt a little.'


CHAPTER XXXI.

_MAJOR STREET_.


According to the conclusion thus arrived at, Christopher took the
opportunity of speaking to Esther the very next time he was driving her
in from school. Esther immediately pricked up her ears, and demanded to
know where the house was situated. Christopher told her. It was a
street she was not acquainted with.

'Do you know how to find the place, Christopher?'

'Oh, yes, Miss Esther; I can find the place, to be sure; but I'm afraid
my little woman has made a mistake.'

'What is the rent?'

Christopher named the rent. It was less than what they were paying for
the house they at present occupied; and Esther at once ordered
Christopher to turn about and drive her to the spot.

It was certainly not a fashionable quarter, not even near Broadway or
State Street; nevertheless it was respectable, inhabited by decent
people. The house itself was a small wooden one. Now it is true that at
that day New York was a very different place from what it is at
present; and a wooden house, and even a small wooden house, did not
mean then what it means now; an abode of Irish washerwomen, or of
something still less distinguished. Yet Esther startled a little at the
thought of bringing her father and herself to inhabit it. Christopher
had the key; and he fastened Buonaparte, and let Esther in, and went
all over the house with her. It was in order, truly, as its owner had
said; even clean; and nothing was off the hinges or wanting paint or
needing plaster. 'Right and tight' it was, and susceptible of being
made an abode of comfort; yet it was a very humble dwelling,
comparatively, and in an insignificant neighbourhood; and Esther
hesitated. Was it pride? she asked herself. Why did she hesitate? Yet
she lingered over the place, doubting and questioning and almost
deciding it would not do. Then Christopher, I cannot tell whether
consciously or otherwise, threw in a makeweight that fell in the scale
that was threatening to rise.

'If you please, Miss Esther, would you speak to the master about the
blacksmith's bill? I don't hardly never see the colonel, these days.'

Esther faced round upon him. The word 'bill' always came to her now
like a sort of stab. She repeated his words. 'The blacksmith's bill?'

'Yes, mum; that is, Creasy, the blacksmith; just on the edge o' the
town. It's been runnin' along, 'cause I never could get sight o' the
colonel to speak to him about it.'

'Bill for what?'

'Shoes, mum.'

'_Shoes?_' repeated Esther. 'The blacksmith? What do you mean?'

'Shoes for Buonaparty, mum. He does kick off his shoes as fast as any
horse ever I see; and they does wear, mum, on the stones.'

'How much is the bill?'

'Well, mum,' said Christopher uneasily, 'it's been runnin' along--and
it's astonishin' how things does mount up. It's quite a good bit, mum;
it's nigh on to fifty dollars.'

It took away Esther's breath. She turned away, that Christopher might
not see her face, and began to look at the house as if a sudden new
light had fallen upon it. Small and mean, and unfit for Colonel
Gainsborough and his daughter,--that had been her judgment concerning
it five minutes before; but now it suddenly presented itself as a
refuge from distress. If they took it, the relief to their finances
would be immediate and effectual. There was a little bit of struggle in
Esther's mind; to give up their present home for this would involve a
loss of all the prettiness in which she had found such refreshment;
there would be here no river and no opposite shore, and no pleasant
country around with grass and trees and a flower garden. There would be
no garden at all, and no view, except of a very humdrum little street,
built up and inhabited by mechanics and tradespeople of a humble grade.
But then--no debt! And Esther remembered that in her daily prayer for
daily bread she had also asked to be enabled to 'owe no man anything.'
Was here the answer? And if this were the Lord's way for supplying her
necessities, should she refuse to accept it and to be thankful for it?

'It is getting late,' was Esther's conclusion as she turned away. 'We
had better get home, Christopher; but I think we will take the house. I
must speak to papa; but I think we will take it. You may tell Mrs.
Bounder so, with my thanks.'

It cost a little trouble, yet not much, to talk the colonel over. He
did not go to see the house, and Esther did not press that he should;
he took her report of it, which was an unvarnished one, and submitted
himself to what seemed the inevitable. But his daughter knew that her
task would have been harder if the colonel's imagination had had the
assistance of his eyesight. She was sure that the move must be made,
and if it were once effected she was almost sure she could make her
father comfortable. To combat his objections beforehand might have been
a more difficult matter. Esther found Mrs. Barker's dismay quite enough
to deal with. Indeed, the good woman was at first overwhelmed; and sat
down, the first time she was taken to the house, in a sort of despair,
with a face wan in its anxiety.

'What's the matter, Barker?' Esther said cheerily. 'You and I will soon
put this in nice order, with Christopher's help; and then, when we have
got it fitted up, we shall be as comfortable as ever; you will see.'

'Oh dear Miss Esther!' the housekeeper ejaculated; 'that ever I should
see this day! The like of you and my master!'

'What then?' said Esther, smiling. 'Barker, shall we not take what the
Lord gives us, and be thankful? I am.'

'There ain't no use for Christopher here, as I see,' Mrs. Barker went
on.

'No, and he will not be here. Do you see now how happy it is that he
has got a home of his own?--which you were disposed to think so
unfortunate.'

'I haven't changed my mind, mum,' said the housekeeper. 'How's your
horse goin' to be kep', without Christopher?'

'I am not going to keep the horse. Here I shall not need him.'

'The drives you took was very good for you, mum.'

'I will take walks instead. Don't you be troubled. Dear Barker, do you
not think our dear Lord knows what is good for us? and do you not think
what He chooses is the best? I do.'

Esther's face was very unshadowed, but the housekeeper's, on the
contrary, seemed to darken more and more. She stood in the middle of
the floor, in one of the small rooms, and surveyed the prospect,
alternately within and without the windows.

'Miss Esther, dear,' she began again, as if irrepressibly, 'you're
young, and you don't know how queer the world is. There's many folks
that won't believe you are what you be, if they see you are livin' in a
place like this.'

Did not Esther know that? and was it not one of the whispers in her
mind which she found it hardest to combat? She had begun already to
touch the world on that side on which Barker declared it was 'queer.'
She went, it is true, hardly at all into society; scarce ever left the
narrow track of her school routine; yet even there once or twice a
chance encounter had obliged her to recognise the fact that in taking
the post of a teacher she had stepped off the level of her former
associates. It had hurt her a little and disappointed her. Nobody,
indeed, had tried to be patronizing; that was nearly impossible towards
anybody whose head was set on her shoulders in the manner of Miss
Gainsborough's; but she felt the slighting regard in which low-bred
people held her on account of her work and position. And so large a
portion of the world is deficient in breeding, that to a young person
at least the desire of self-assertion comes as a very natural and
tolerably strong temptation. Esther had felt it, and trodden it under
foot, and yet Mrs. Barker's words made her wince. How could anybody
reasonably suppose that a gentleman would choose such a house and such
a street to live in?

'Never mind, Barker,' she said cheerfully, after a pause. 'What we have
to do is the right thing; and then let all the rest go.'

'Has the colonel seen it, Miss Esther?'

'No, and I do not mean he shall, till we have got it so nice for him
that he will feel comfortable.'

The work of moving and getting settled began without delay. Mrs. Barker
spent all the afternoons at the new house; and thither came Esther also
every day as soon as school was out at three o'clock. The girl worked
very hard in these times; for after her long morning in school she gave
the rest of the daylight hours to arranging and establishing furniture,
hanging draperies, putting up hooks, and the like; and after that she
went home to make her father's tea, and give him as much cheery talk as
she could command. In the business of moving, however, she found
unexpected assistance.

When Christopher told his wife of the decision about the house, the
answering remark, made approvingly, was, 'That's a spunky little girl!'

'What do you mean?' said Christopher, not approving such an irreverent
expression.

'She's got stuff in her. I like that sort.'

'But that house ain't really a place for her, you know.'

'That's what I'm lookin' at,' returned Mrs. Bounder, with a broad smile
at him. 'She ain't scared by no nonsense from duin' what she's got to
du. Don't you be scared neither; houses don't make the folks that live
in 'em. But what I'm thinkin' of is, they'll want lots o' help to git
along with their movin'. Christopher, do you know there's a big box
waggin in the barn?'

'I know it.'

'Wall, that'll carry their things fust-rate, ef you kin tackle up your
fine-steppin' French emperor there with our Dolly. Will he draw in
double harness?'

'Will he! Well, I'll try to persuade him.'

'An' you needn't to let on anything about it. They ain't obleeged to
know where the waggin comes from.'

'You're as clever a woman as any I know!' said Mr. Bounder, with a
smile of complacency. 'Sally up there can't beat you; and _she's_ a
smart woman, too.'

A few minutes were given to the business of the supper table, and then
Mrs. Bounder asked,--

'What are they goin' to du with the French emperor?'

'Buonaparte?' (Christopher called it 'Buonaparty.') 'Well, they'll have
to get rid of him somehow. I suppose that job'll come on me.'

'I was thinkin'. Our Dolly's gittin' old'--

'Buonaparty was old some time ago,' returned Christopher, with a sly
twinkle of his eyes as he looked at his wife.

'There's work in him yet, ain't there?'

'Lots!'

'Then two old ones would be as good as one young one, and better, for
they'd draw the double waggin. What'll they ask for him?'

'It'll be what I can get, I'm thinking.'

'What did you pay for him?'

Christopher named the sum the colonel had given. It was not a high
figure; however, he knew, and she knew, that a common draught horse for
their garden work could be had for something less. Mrs. Bounder
meditated a little, and finally concluded,--

'It won't break us.'

'Save me lots o' trouble,' said Christopher; 'if you don't mind paying
so much.'

'If _you_ don't mind, Christopher,' his wife returned, with a grin.
'I've got the money here in the house; you might hand it over to Miss
Esther to-morrow; I'll bet you she'll know what to du with it.'

Christopher nodded. 'She'll be uncommon glad of it, to be sure! There
ain't much cash come into her hands for a good bit. And I see sometimes
she's been real worrited.'

So Esther's path was smoothed in more ways than one, and even in more
ways than I have indicated. For Mrs. Bounder went over and insinuated
herself (with some difficulty) so far into Mrs. Barker's good graces
that she was allowed to give her help in the multifarious business and
cares of the moving. She was capital help. Mrs. Barker soon found that
any packing intrusted to her was sure to be safely done; and the little
woman's wits were of the first order, always at hand, cool, keen, and
comprehensive. She followed, or rather went with the waggon to the
house in Major Street; helped unpack, helped put down carpets, helped
clear away litter and arrange things in order; and further still, she
constantly brought something with her for the bodily refreshment and
comfort of Esther and the housekeeper. Her delicious rye bread came,
loaf after loaf, sweet butter, eggs, and at last some golden honey.
There was no hindering her; and her presence and ministry grew to be a
great assistance and pleasure also to Esther. Esther tried to tell her
something of this. 'You cannot think how your kindness has helped me,'
she said, with a look which told more than her words.

'Don't!' said Mrs. Bounder, when this had happened a second time. 'I
was readin' in the Bible the other day--you set me readin' the Bible,
Miss Esther--where it says somethin' about a good woman "ministerin' to
the saints." I ain't no saint myself, and I guess it'll never be said
of me; but I suppose the next thing to _bein'_ a saint is ministerin'
to the saints, and I'd like to du that anyhow, ef I only knowed how.'

'You have been kind ever since I knew you,' said Esther. 'I am glad to
know our Christopher has got such a good wife.'

Mrs. Bounder laughed a little slyly, as she retorted, 'Ain't there
nothin' to be glad of on my side tu?'

'Indeed, yes!' answered Esther. 'Christopher is as true and faithful as
it is possible to be; and as to business-- But you do not need that I
should tell you what Christopher is,' she broke off, laughing.

There was a pleasant look in the little woman's eyes as she stood up
for a moment and faced Esther.

'I guess I took him most of all because he be longed to you!' she said.


CHAPTER XXXII.

_MOVING_.


Esther made to herself a pleasure of getting the little dwelling in
order. With two such helpers as she had, the work went on bravely, and
Christopher got in coal and chopped wood enough to last all winter. The
ready money from the sale of Buonaparte had given her the means for
that and for some other things. She was intent upon making the new home
look so homelike that her father should be in some measure consoled for
the shock which she knew its exterior would give him. The colonel liked
no fire so well as one of his native 'sea-coal.' The house had open
fireplaces only. So Esther had some neat grates put in the two lower
rooms and in her father's sleeping chamber. They had plenty of carpets,
and the two little parlours were soon looking quite habitable.

'We will keep the back one for a dining-room,' she said to Mrs. Barker;
'that will be convenient for you, being nearest the kitchen stairs, and
this will be for papa's study. But it has a bare look yet. I must make
some curtains and put up, to hide the view of that dreadful street.'

'That'll cost money, mum,' observed the housekeeper. 'Wouldn't some o'
them old ones at home be passable, if they was made over a bit?'

'The colour would not fit here. No, that would not do. I'll get some
chintz that is dark and bright at once. I have money. Oh, we are going
to be rich now, Barker; and you shall not be stinted in your marketing
any more. And this is going to be very nice, _inside_.'

To the outside Esther could not get accustomed. It gave her a kind of
prick of dismay every time she saw it anew. What would her father say
when _he_ saw it? Yet she had done right and wisely; of that she had no
doubt at all; it was very unreasonable that, her judgment being
satisfied, her feeling should rebel. Yet it did rebel. When did ever
one of her family live in such a place before? They had come down
surely very far, to make it possible. Only in the matter of money, to
be sure; but then, money has to do largely with the outward appearance
one makes, and upon the appearance depends much of the effect upon
one's fellow-creatures. The whisper would come back in Esther's mind:
Who will believe you are what you are, if they see you coming out of
such a house? And what then? she answered the whisper. If the Lord has
given us this place to dwell in, that and all other effects and
consequences of it are part of His will in the matter. What if we are
to be overlooked and looked down upon? what have I to do with it? what
matters it? Let pride be quiet, and faith be very thankful. Here are
all my difficulties set aside, and no danger of not paying our debts
any more.

She reasoned so, and fought against pride, if pride it were, which took
the other side. She _would_ be thankful; and she was. Nevertheless, a
comparison would arise now and then with the former times, and with
their state at Seaforth; and further back still, with the beauties and
glories of the old manor house in England. Sometimes Esther felt a
strange wave of regret come over her at the thought of the gay circle
of relations she did not know, who were warm in the shelter of
prosperity and the cheer of numbers. She knew herself in a better
shelter, yes, and in a better cheer; and yet sometimes, as I said, an
odd feeling of loss and descent would come over her as she entered
Major Street Esther was working hard these days, which no doubt had
something to do with this. She rushed from her morning duties to the
school; then at three o'clock rushed to Major Street; and from there,
when it grew too dark to work, drove home to minister to her father.
Probably her times of discouragement were times when she was a little
tired. The thought was very far from her usually. In her healthy and
happy youth, busy life, and mental and spiritual growth and thrift,
Esther's wants seemed to be all satisfied; and so long as things ran
their ordinary course, she felt no deficiency. But there are conditions
in which one is warm so long as one does not move, while the first stir
of change brings a chill over one. And so sometimes now, as Esther
entered Major Street or set her face towards it, she would think of her
far-off circle of Gainsborough cousins, with a half wish that her
father could have borne with them a little more patiently; and once or
twice the thought came too, that the Dallases never let themselves be
heard from any more. Not even Pitt. She would not have thought it of
him, but he was away in a foreign country, and it must be that he had
forgotten them. His father and mother were near, and could not forget;
was not the old house there before them always to remind them? But they
were rich and prosperous and abounding in everything; they had no need
of the lonely two who had gone out of their sight and who did need
them. It was the way of the world; so the world said. Esther wondered
if that were really true, and also wondered now and then if Major
Street were to be henceforth not only the sphere but the limit of her
existence. She never gave such thoughts harbour; they came and they
went; and she remained the cheerful, brave, busy girl she had long been.

The small house at last looked homelike. On the front room Esther had
put a warm, dark-looking carpet; the chintz curtains were up and in
harmony with the carpet; and the colonel's lounge was new covered with
the same stuff. The old furniture had been arranged so as to give that
pleasant cosy air to the room which is such a welcome to the person
entering it, making the impression of comfort and good taste and of the
habit of good living; not good living in matters of the table, but in
those other matters which concern the mind's nourishment and social
well-being. Everything was right and in order, and Esther surveyed her
work with much content.

'It looks _very_ nice,' she said to her good friend the housekeeper.

'It do, mum,' Mrs. Barker answered, with a reservation. 'But I'm
thinkin', Miss Esther, I can't stop thinkin', whatever'll the colonel
say when he sees the outside.'

'He shall see the inside first. I have arranged that. And, Barker, we
must have a capital supper ready for him. We can afford it now. Have a
pheasant, Barker; there is nothing he likes better; and some of that
beautiful honey Mrs. Bounder has brought us; I never saw such rich
honey, I think. And I have good hope papa will be pleased, and put up
with things, as I do.'

'Your papa remembers Gainsborough Manor, mum, and that's what you
don't.'

'What then! Mrs. Barker, do you really think the Lord does _not_ know
what is good for us? That is sheer unbelief. Take what He gives, and be
thankful. Barker, why do you suppose the angels came to the sepulchre
so, as they did the morning of the resurrection?'

'Mum!' said Mrs. Barker, quite taken aback by this sudden change of
subject. But Esther went on in a pleasant, pleased tone of interest.

'I was reading the last chapter of Matthew this morning, and it set me
to thinking. You know a number of them, the angels, came, and were seen
about the sepulchre; and I suppose there was just a crowd of them
coming and going that morning. What for, do you suppose?'

'Miss Esther!' said the housekeeper open-mouthed, 'I'm sure I can't
say.'

'Why, they came _to see the place_, Barker; just for that. They knew
what had been done, and they just came in crowds, as soon as Jesus had
left the sepulchre--perhaps before--to look at the spot where that
wonder of all wonders had been. But it never occurred to me before how
like it was to the way we human creatures feel and do. _That_ was what
they came for; and don't you remember what one of them, with his
lightning face and his robes of whiteness, sitting on the stone, said
to the women? He told them to do what he had been doing. "_Come see the
place_." It brought the angels nearer to me than ever they had seemed
to be before.'

Mrs. Barker stood there spellbound, silenced. To be sure, if Miss
Esther's head was so busy with the angels, she was in a sort lifted up
above the small matters or accidents of common earthly life. And as
much as the words the girl's face awed her too, its expression was so
consonant with them.

'Now, Barker, Christopher may bring up some coal and make a fire before
he drives back for papa. In both rooms, Barker. And-- Hark! what is
that?'

A long-drawn, musical cry was sounding a little distance off, slowly
coming nearer as it was repeated. A cry that New York never hears now,
but that used to come through the streets in the evening with a
sonorous, half melancholy intonation, pleasant to hear.

'Oys----ters!----Oys----ters! Here's your fresh oys----ters!'

'That's just what we want, Barker. Get Christopher to stop the man.'

Esther had arranged that her father's room and belongings at home
should not be disturbed until the very day when he himself should make
the transfer from the one house to the other. So until that morning
even the colonel's sofa had not been moved. Now it was brought over and
placed in position between the fireplace and the window, where the
occupant would have plenty of light and warmth. The new chintz cover
had been put on it; the table was placed properly, and the books which
the colonel liked to have at hand lay in their usual position. In the
back room the table was set for supper. The rooms communicated, though
indeed not by folding doors; still the eye could go through and catch
the glow of the fire, and see the neat green drugget on the floor and
the pleasant array on the supper table.

'It looks _very_ nice, Barker!' Esther could not help saying again.

'It certainly do, mum,' was the answer, in which, nevertheless, Esther
heard the aforementioned mental reservation. If her father liked it!
Yes, that could not be known till he came; and she drew a breath of
patient anxiety. It was too dark for him to take the effect of anything
outside; she had arranged that. One thing at a time, she thought. The
house to-day; Major Street to-morrow.

She met him in the hall when he came, giving him a kiss and a welcome;
helped him to take off his greatcoat, and conducted him into the small
apartment so carefully made ready for him. It offered as much tasteful
comfort as it was possible for a room of its inches to do. Esther
waited anxiously for the effect. The colonel warmed his hands at the
blaze, and took his seat on the sofa, eyeing things suspiciously.

'What sort of a place is this we have come to?' were his first words.

'Don't you think it is a comfortable place, papa? This chimney draws
beautifully, and the coal is excellent. It is really a very nice little
house, papa. I think it will be comfortable.'

'Not very large,' said the colonel, taking with his eye the measure of
the room.

'No, papa; and none the worse for that. Room enough for you, and room
enough for me; and quite room enough for Barker, who has to take care
of it all. I like the house very much.'

'What sort of a street is it?'

Must that question come up to-night! Esther hesitated.

'I thought, sir, the street was of less importance to us than the home.
It is _very_ comfortable; and the rent is so moderate that we can pay
our way and be at ease. Papa, I would not like the finest house in the
world, if I had to run in debt to live in it.'

'What is the name of the street?'

'Major Street'

'Whereabouts is it? In the darkness I could not see where we were
going.'

'Papa, it is in the east part of the city, not very far from the river.
Fulton Market is not very far off either, which is convenient.'

'Who lives here?' asked the colonel, with a gathering frown on his brow.

'I know none of the people; nor even their names.'

'Of course not! but you know, I suppose, what sort of people they are?'

'They are plain people, papa; they are not of our class. They seem to
be decent people.'

'Decent? What do you mean by decent?'

'Papa, I mean not disorderly people; not disreputable. And is not that
enough for us, papa? Oh, papa, does it matter what the people are, so
long as our house is nice and pretty and warm, and the low rent just
relieves us from all our difficulties? Papa, do be pleased with it! I
think it is the very best thing we could have done.'

'Esther, there are certain things that one owes to oneself.'

'Yes, sir; but must we not pay our debts to other people first?'

'Debts? We were not in debt to anybody!'

'Yes, papa, to more than one; and I saw no way out of the difficulty
till I heard of this house. And I am so relieved now--you cannot think
with what a relief;--if only _you_ are pleased, dear papa.'

He must know so much of the truth, Esther said to herself with rapid
calculation. The colonel did not look pleased, it must be confessed.
All the prettiness and pleasantness on which Esther had counted to
produce a favourable impression seemed to fail of its effect; indeed,
seemed not to be seen. The colonel leaned his head on his hand and
uttered something very like a groan.

'So this is what we have come to!' he said. 'You do not know what you
have done, Esther.'

Esther said nothing to that. Her throat seemed to be choked. She looked
at her beautiful little fire, and had some trouble to keep tears from
starting.

'My dear, you did it for the best, I do not doubt,' her father added
presently. 'I only regret that I was not consulted before an
irrevocable step was taken.'

Esther could find nothing to answer.

'It is quite true that a man remains himself, whatever he does that is
not morally wrong; it is true that our real dignity is not changed;
nevertheless, people pass in the world not for what they are, but for
what they seem to be.'

'Oh, papa, do you think that!' Esther cried. But the colonel went on,
not heeding her.

'So, if you take to making shoes, it will be supposed that you are no
better than a cobbler; and if you choose your abode among washerwomen,
you will be credited with tastes and associations that fit you for your
surroundings. Have we _that_ sort of a neighbourhood?' he asked
suddenly.

'I do not know, papa,' Esther said meekly. The colonel fairly groaned
again. It was getting to be more than she could stand.

'Papa,' she said gently, 'we have done the best we knew,--at least I
have; and the necessity is not one of our own making. Let us take what
the Lord gives. I think He has given us a great deal. And I would
rather, for my part, that people thought anything of us, rather than
that we should miss our own good opinion. I do not know just what the
inhabitants are, round about here; but the street is at least clean and
decent, and within our own walls we need not think about it. Inside it
is _very_ comfortable, papa.'

The colonel was silent now, not, however, seeming to see the comfort.
There was a little interval, during which Esther struggled for calmness
and a clear voice. When she spoke, her voice was very clear.

'Barker has tea ready, papa, I see. I hope that will be as good as
ever, and better, for we have got something you like. Shall we go in?
It is in the other room.'

'Why is it not here, as usual, in my room? I do not see any reason for
the change.'

'It saves the mess of crumbs on the floor in this room. And then it
saves Barker a good deal of trouble to have the table there.'

'Why should Barker be saved trouble here more than where we have come
from? I do not understand.'

'We had Christopher there, papa. Here Barker has no one to help
her--except what I can do.'

'It must be the same thing, to have tea in one room or in another, I
should think.'

Esther could have represented that the other room was just at the head
of the kitchen stairs, while to serve the tea on the colonel's table
would cost a good many more steps. But she had no heart for any further
representations. With her own hands, and with her own feet, which were
by this time wearily tired, she patiently went back and forth between
the two rooms, bringing plates and cups and knives and forks, and
tea-tray, and bread and butter and honey and partridge, and salt and
pepper, from the one table to the other, which, by the way, had first
to be cleared of its own load of books and writing materials. Esther
deposited these on the floor and on chairs, and arranged the table for
tea, and pushed it into the position her father was accustomed to like.
The tea-kettle she left on its trivet before the grate in the other
room; and now made journeys uncounted between that room and this, to
take and fetch the tea-pot. Talk languished meanwhile, for the spirit
of talk was gone from Esther, and the colonel, in spite of his
discomfiture, developed a remarkably good appetite. When he had done,
Esther carried everything back again.

'Why do you do that? Where is Barker?' her father demanded at last.

'Barker has been exceedingly busy all day, putting down carpets and
arranging her storeroom. I am sure she is tired.'

'I suppose you are tired too, are you not?'

'Yes, papa.'

He said no more, however, and Esther finished her work, and then sat
down on a cushion at the corner of the fireplace, in one of those moods
belonging to tired mind and body, in which one does not seem at the
moment to care any longer about anything. The lively, blazing coal fire
shone on a warm, cosy little room, and on two somewhat despondent
figures. For his supper had not brightened the colonel up a bit. He sat
brooding. Perhaps his thoughts took the road that Esther's had often
followed lately, for he suddenly came out with a name now rarely spoken
between them.

'It is a long while that we have heard nothing from the Dallases!'

'Yes,' Esther said apathetically.

'Mr. Dallas used to write to me now and then.'

'They are busy with their own concerns, and we are out of sight; why
should they remember us?'

'They used to be good neighbours, in Seaforth.'

'Pitt. Papa, I do not think his father and mother were ever specially
fond of us.'

'Pitt never writes to me now,' the colonel went on, after a pause.

'He is busy with _his_ concerns. He has forgotten us too. I suppose he
has plenty of other things to think of. Oh, I have given up Pitt long
ago.'

The colonel brooded over his thoughts a while, then raised his head and
looked again over the small room.

'My dear, it would have been better to stay where we were,' he said
regretfully.

Esther could not bear to pain him by again reminding him that their
means would not allow it; and as her father lay back upon the sofa and
closed his eyes, she went away into the other room and sat down at the
corner of that fire, where the partition wall screened her from view.
For she wanted to let her head drop on her knees and be still; and a
few tears that she could not help came hot to her eyes. She had worked
so hard to get everything in nice order for her father; she had so
hoped to see him pleased and contented; and now he was so illogically
discontented! Truly he could tell her nothing she did not already know
about the disadvantages of their new position; and they all rushed upon
Esther's mind at this minute with renewed force. The pleasant country
and the shining river were gone; she would no longer see the lights on
the Jersey shore when she got up in the morning; the air would not come
sweet and fresh to her windows; there would be no singing of birds or
fragrance of flowers around her, even in summer; she would have only
the streets and the street cries and noises, and dust, and unsweet
breath. The house would do inside; but outside, what a change! And
though Esther was not very old in the world, nor very worldly-wise for
her years, she knew--if not as well as her father, yet she knew--that
in Major Street she was pretty nearly cut off from all social
intercourse with her kind. Her school experience and observation had
taught her so much. She knew that her occupation as a teacher in a
school was enough of itself to put her out of the way of invitations,
and that an abode in Major Street pretty well finished the matter.
Esther had not been a favourite among her school companions in the best
of times; she was of too uncommon a beauty, perhaps; perhaps she was
too different from them in other respects. Pleasant as she always was,
she was nevertheless separate from her fellows by a great separation of
nature; and that is a thing not only felt on both sides, but never
forgiven by the inferiors. Miss Gainsborough, daughter of a rich and
influential retired officer, would, however, have been sought eagerly
and welcomed universally; Miss Gainsborough, the school teacher,
daughter of an unknown somebody who lived in Major Street, was another
matter; hardly a desirable acquaintance. For what should she be desired?

Esther had not been without a certain dim perception of all this; and
it came to her with special disagreeableness just then, when every
thought came that could make her dissatisfied with herself and with her
lot. Why had her father ever come away from England, where friends and
relations could not have failed? Why had he left Seaforth, where at
least they were living like themselves, and where they would not have
dropped out of the knowledge of Pitt Dallas? The feeling of loneliness
crept again over Esther, and a feeling of having to fight her way as it
were single-handed. Was this little house, and Major Street, henceforth
to be the scene and sphere of her life and labours? How could she ever
work up out of it into anything better?

Esther was tired, and felt blue, which was the reason why all these
thoughts and others chased through her mind; and more than one tear
rolled down and dropped on her stuff gown. Then she gathered herself
up. How had she come to Major Street and to school teaching? Not by her
own will or fault. Therefore it was part of the training assigned for
her by a wisdom that is perfect, and a love that never forgets. And
Esther began to be ashamed of herself. What did she mean by saying,
'The Lord is my Shepherd,' if she could not trust Him to take care of
His sheep? And now, how had she been helped out of her difficulties,
enabled to pay her debts, brought to a home where she could live and be
clear of the world; yes, and live pleasantly too? And as for being
alone-- Esther rose with a smile. 'Can I not trust the Lord for that
too?' she thought. 'If it is His will I should be alone, then that is
the very best thing for me; and perhaps He will come nearer than if I
had other distractions to take my eyes in another direction.'

Barker came in to remove the tea-things, and Esther met her with a
smile, the brightness of which much cheered the good woman.

'Was the pheasant good, mum?' she asked in a whisper.

'Capital, Barker, and the honey. And papa made a very good supper. And
I am so thankful, Barker! for the house is very nice, and we are moved.'


CHAPTER XXXIII.

_BETTY_.


It was summer again, and on the broad grassy street of Seaforth the
sunshine poured in its full power. The place lay silent under the heat
of mid-day; not a breath stirred the leaves of the big elms, and no
passing wheels stirred the dust of the roadway, which was ready to rise
at any provocation. It was very dry, and very hot. Yet at Seaforth
those two facts, though proclaimed from everybody's mouth, must be
understood with a qualification. The heat and the dryness were not as
elsewhere. So near the sea as the town was, a continual freshness came
from thence in vapours and cool airs, and mitigated what in other
places was found oppressive. However, the Seaforth people said it was
oppressive too; and things are so relative in the affairs of life that
I do not know if they were more contented than their neighbours. But
everybody said the heat was fine for the hay; and as most of the
inhabitants had more or less of that crop to get in, they criticised
the weather only at times when they were thinking of it in some other
connection.

At Mrs. Dallas's there was no criticism of anything. In the large
comfortable rooms, where windows were all open, and blinds tempering
the too ardent light, and cool mats on the floors, and chintz furniture
looked light and summery, there was an atmosphere of pure enjoyment and
expectation, for Pitt was coming home again, and his mother was looking
for him with every day. She was sitting now awaiting him; no one could
tell at what hour he might arrive; and his mother's face was beautiful
with hope. She was her old self; not changed at all by the four or five
years of Pitt's absence; as handsome and as young and as stately as
ever. She made no demonstration now; did not worry either herself or
others with questions and speculations and hopes and fears respecting
her son's coming; yet you could see on her fine face, if you were
clever at reading faces, the lines of pride and joy, and now and then a
quiver of tenderness. It was seen by one who was sitting with her,
whose interest and curiosity it involuntarily moved.

This second person was a younger lady. Indeed a _young_ lady, not by
comparison, but absolutely. A very attractive person too. She had an
exceedingly good figure, which the trying dress of those times showed
in its full beauty. Woe to the lady then whose shoulders were not
straight, or the lines of her figure not flowing, or the proportions of
it not satisfactory. Every ungracefulness must have shown its full
deformity, with no possibility of disguise; every angle must have been
aggravated, and every untoward movement made doubly fatal. But the
dress only set off and developed the beauty that could bear it. And the
lady sitting with Mrs. Dallas neither feared nor had need to fear
criticism. Something of that fact appeared in her graceful posture and
in the brow of habitual superiority, and in the look of the eyes that
were now and then lifted from her work to her companion. The eyes were
beautiful, and they were also queenly; at least their calm fearlessness
was not due to absence of self-consciousness. She was a pretty picture
to see. The low-cut dress and fearfully short waist revealed a white
skin and a finely-moulded bust and shoulders. The very scant and
clinging robe was of fine white muslin, with a narrow dainty border of
embroidery at the bottom; and a scarf of the same was thrown round her
shoulders. The round white arms were bare, the little tufty white
sleeves making a pretty break between them and the soft shoulders; and
the little hands were busy with a strip of embroidery, which looked as
if it might be destined for the ornamentation of another similar dress.
The lady's face was delicate, intelligent, and attractive, rather than
beautiful; her eyes, however, as I said, were fine; and over her head
and upon her neck curled ringlets of black, lustrous hair.

'You think he will be here to-day?' she said, breaking the familiar
silence that had reigned for a while. She had caught one of Mrs.
Dallas's glances towards the window.

'He may be here any day. It is impossible to tell. He would come before
his letter.'

'You are very fond of him, I can see. What made you send him away from
you? England is so far off!'

Mrs. Dallas hesitated; put up the end of her knitting-needle under her
cap, and gently moved it up and down in meditative fashion.

'We wanted him to be an Englishman, Betty.'

'Why, Mrs. Dallas? Is he not going to live in America?'

'Probably.'

'Then why make an Englishman of him? That will make him discontented
with things here.'

'I hope not. He was not changed enough for that when he was here last.
Pitt does not change.'

'He must be an extraordinary character!' said the young lady, with a
glance at Pitt's mother. 'Dear Mrs. Dallas, how am I to understand
that?'

'Pitt does not change,' repeated the other.

'But one _ought_ to change. That is a dreadful sort of people, that go
on straight over the heads of circumstances, just because they laid out
the road there before the circumstances arose. I have seen such people.
They tread down everything in their way.'

'Pitt does not change,' Mrs. Dallas said again. Her companion thought
she said it with a certain satisfied confidence. And perhaps it was
true; but the moment after Mrs. Dallas remembered that if the
proposition were universal it might be inconvenient.

'At least he is hard to change,' she went on; 'therefore his father and
I wished him to be educated in the old country, and to form his notions
according to the standard of things there. I think a republic is very
demoralizing.'

'Is the standard of morals lower here?' inquired the younger lady,
demurely.

'I am not speaking of _morals_, in the usual sense. Of course, that--
But there is a little too much freedom here. And besides,--I wanted
Pitt to be a true Church of England man.'

'Isn't he that?'

'Oh yes, I have no doubt he is now; but he had formed some associations
I was afraid of. With my son's peculiar character, I thought there
might be danger. I rely on you, Betty,' said Mrs. Dallas, smiling, 'to
remove the last vestige.'

The young lady gave a glance of quick, keen curiosity and
understanding, in which sparkled a little amusement. 'What can I do?'
she asked demurely.

'Bewitch him, as you do everybody.'

'Bewitch him, and hand him over to you!' she remarked.

'No,' said Mrs. Dallas; 'not necessarily. You must see him, before you
can know what you would like to do with him.'

'Do I understand, then? He is supposed to be in some danger of lapsing
from the true faith'--

'Oh, no, my dear! I did not say that. I meant only, if he had stayed in
America. It seems to me there is a general loosening of all bonds here.
Boys and girls do their own way.'

'Was it only the general spirit of the air, Mrs. Dallas, or was it a
particular influence, that you feared?'

'Well--both,' said Mrs. Dallas, again applying her knitting-needle
under her cap.

The younger lady was silent a few minutes; going on with her embroidery.

'This is getting to be very interesting,' she remarked.

'It is very interesting to me,' replied the mother, with a thoughtful
look. 'For, as I told you, Pitt is a very fast friend, and persistent
in all his likings and dislikings. Here he had none but the company of
dissenters; and I did not want him to get _in_ with people of that
persuasion.'

'Is there much society about here? I fancied not.'

'No society, for him. Country people--farmers--people of that stamp.
Nothing else.'

'I should have thought, dear Mrs. Dallas, that _you_ would have been
quite a sufficient counteraction to temptation from such a source?'

Mrs. Dallas hesitated. 'Boys will be boys,' she said.

'But he is not a boy now?'

'He is twenty-four.'

'Not a boy, certainly. But do you know, that is an age when men are
very hard to manage? It is easier earlier, or later.'

'Not difficult to you at any time,' said the other flatteringly.

The conversation dropped there; at least there came an interval of
quiet working on the young lady's part, and of rather listless knitting
on the part of the mother, whose eyes went wistfully to the window
without seeing anything. And this lasted till a step was heard at the
front door. Mrs. Dallas let fall her needles and her yarn and rose
hurriedly, crying out, 'That is not Mr. Dallas!' and so speaking,
rushed into the hall.

There was a little bustle, a smothered word or two, and then a
significant silence; which lasted long enough to let the watcher left
behind in the drawing-room conclude on the very deep relations
subsisting between mother and son. Steps were heard moving at length,
but they moved and stopped; there was lingering, and slow progress; and
words were spoken, broken questions from Mrs. Dallas and brief
responses in a stronger voice that was low-pitched and pleasant. The
figures appeared in the doorway at last, but even there lingered still.
The mother and son were looking into one another's faces and speaking
those absorbed little utterances of first meeting which are
insignificant enough, if they were not weighted with such a burden of
feeling. Miss Betty, sitting at her embroidery, cast successive rapid
glances of curiosity and interest at the new-comer. His voice had
already made her pulses quicken a little, for the tone of it touched
her fancy. The first glance showed him tall and straight; the second
caught a smile which was both merry and sweet; a third saw that the
level brows expressed character; and then the two people turned their
faces towards her and came into the room, and Mrs. Dallas presented her
son.

The young lady rose and made a reverence, according to the more stately
and more elegant fashion of the day. The gentleman's obeisance was
profound in its demonstration of respect. Immediately after, however,
he turned to his mother again; a look of affectionate joy shining upon
her out of his eyes and smile.

'Two years!' she was exclaiming. 'Pitt, how you have changed!'

'Have I? I think not much.'

'No, in one way not much. I see you are your old self. But two years
have made you older.'

'So they should.'

'Somehow I had not expected it,' said the mother, passing her hand
across her eyes with a gesture a little as if there were tears in them.
'I thought I should see _my_ boy again--and he is gone.'

'Not at all!' said Pitt, laughing. 'Mistaken, mother. There is all of
him here that there ever was. The difference is, that now there is
something more.'

'What?' she asked.

'A little more experience--a little more knowledge--let us hope, a
little more wisdom.'

'There is more than that,' said the mother, looking at him fondly.

'What?'

'It is the difference I might have looked for,' she said, 'only,
somehow, I had not looked for it.' And the swift passage of her hand
across her eyes gave again the same testimony of a few minutes before.
Her son rose hereupon and proposed to withdraw to his room; and as his
mother accompanied him, Miss Betty noticed how his arm was thrown round
her and he was bending to her and talking to her as they went. Miss
Betty stitched away busily, thoughts keeping time with her needle, for
some time thereafter. Yet she did not quite know what she was thinking
of. There was a little stir in her mind, which was so unaccustomed that
it was delightful; it was also vague, and its provoking elements were
not clearly discernible. The young lady was conscious of a certain
pleasant thrill in the view of the task to which she had been invited.
It promised her possible difficulty, for even in the few short minutes
just passed she had gained an inkling that Mrs. Dallas's words might be
true, and Pitt not precisely a man that you could turn over your
finger. It threatened her possible danger, which she did not admit;
nevertheless the stinging sense of it made itself felt and pricked the
pleasure into livelier existence. This was something out of the
ordinary. This was a man not just cut after the common work-a-day
pattern. Miss Betty recalled involuntarily one trait after another that
had fastened on her memory. Eyes of bright intelligence and hidden
power, a very frank smile, and especially with all that, the great
tenderness which had been shown in every word and look to his mother.
The good breeding and ease of manner Miss Betty had seen before; this
other trait was something new; and perhaps she was conscious of a
little pull it gave at her heartstrings. This was not the manner she
had seen at home, where her father had treated her mother as a sort of
queen-consort certainly,--co-regent of the house; but where they had
lived upon terms of mutual diplomatic respect; and her brothers, if
they cared much for anybody but Number One, gave small proof of the
fact. What a brother this man would be! what a--something else! Miss
Betty sheered off a little from just this idea; not that she was averse
to it, or that she had not often entertained it; indeed, she had
entertained it not two hours ago about Pitt himself; but the presence
of the man and the recognition of what was in him had stirred in her a
kindred delicacy which was innate, as in every true woman, although her
way of life and some of her associates had not fostered it. Betty Frere
was a true woman, originally; alas, she was also now a woman of the
world; also, she was poor, and to make a good marriage she had known
for some years was very desirable for her. What a very good marriage
this would be! Poor girl, she could not help the thought now, and she
must not be judged hardly for it. It was in the air she breathed, and
that all her associates breathed. Betty had not been in a hurry to get
married, having small doubt of her power to do it in any case that
pleased her; now, somehow, she was suddenly confronted by a doubt of
her power.

I am pulling out the threads of what was to Betty only a web of very
confused pattern; _she_ did not try to unravel it. Her consciousness of
just two things was clear: the pleasant stimulus of the task set before
her, and a little sharp premonition of its danger. She dismissed that.
She could perform the task and detach Pitt from any imaginary ties that
his mother was afraid of, without herself thereby becoming entangled.
It would be a game of uncommon interest and entertainment, and a piece
of benevolence too. But Betty's pulses, as I said, were quickened a
little.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

_HOLIDAYS_.


She did not see her new acquaintance again till they met at the
supper-table. She behaved herself then in an extremely well-bred way;
was dignified and reserved and quiet; hardly said anything, as with a
nice recognition that her words were not wanted; scarce ever seemed to
look at the new arrival, of whom, nevertheless, not a word nor a look
escaped her; and was simply an elegant quiet figure at the table, so
lovely to look at that words from her seemed to be superfluous. Whether
the stranger saw it, or whether he missed anything, there was no sign.
He seemed to be provokingly and exclusively occupied with his father
and mother; hardly, she thought, giving to herself all the attention
which is due from a gentleman to a lady. Yet he fulfilled his duties in
that regard, albeit only as one does it to whom they are a matter of
course. Betty listened attentively to everything that was said, while
she was to all appearance indifferently busied with her supper.

But the conversation ran, as it is wont to run at such times, when
hearts long absent have found each other again, and fling trifles
about, knowing that their stores of treasure must wait for a quieter
time to be unpacked. They talked of weather and crops and Pitt's
voyage, and the neighbours, and the changes in the village, and the
improvements about the place; not as if any of these things were much
cared for; they were bubbles floating on their cups of joy. Questions
asked and questions answered, as if in the pleasure of speaking to one
another again the subject of their words did not matter; or as if the
supreme content of the moment could spare a little benevolence even for
these outside things. At last a question was asked which made Betty
prick up her ears; this must have been due to something indefinable in
the tone of the speakers, for the words were nothing.

'Have you heard anything of the Gainsboroughs?'

'No.'

It was the elder Dallas who answered.

'What has become of them?'

'I am not in condition to tell.'

'Have you written to them?'

'No, not since the last time; and that was a good while ago.'

'Then you do not know how things are with them, of course. I do not see
how you have let them drop out of knowledge so. They were not exactly
people to lose sight of.'

'Why not, when they went out of sight?'

'You do not even know, sir, whether Colonel Gainsborough is still
living?'

'How should I? But he was as likely to live as any other man.'

'He did not think so.'

'For which very reason he would probably live longer than many other
men. There is nothing like a hypochondriack for tough holding out.'

'Well, I must search New York for them this time, until I find them.'

'What possible occasion, Pitt?' said his mother, with a tone of
uneasiness which Betty noted.

'Duty, mamma, and also pleasure. But duty is imperative.'

'I do not see the duty. You tried to look them up the last time you
were here, and failed.'

'I shall not fail this time.'

'If it depended on your will,' remarked his father coolly. 'But I think
the probability is that they have gone back to England, and are
consequently no longer in New York.'

'What are the grounds of that probability?'

'When last I heard from the colonel, he was proposing the question of
reconciliation with his family. And as I have heard no more from him
since then, I think the likeliest thing is that he has made up his
quarrel and gone home.'

'I can easily determine that question by looking over the shipping
lists.'

'Perhaps not,' said Mr. Dallas, rubbing his chin. 'If he has gone, I
think it will have been under another name. The one he bore here was, I
suspect, assumed.'

'What for?' demanded Pitt somewhat sharply.

'Reasons of family pride, no doubt. That is enough to make men do
foolisher things.'

'It would be difficult to find a foolisher thing to do,' replied his
son. But then the conversation turned. It had given Miss Betty
something to think of. She drew her own conclusions without asking
anybody. And in some indefinite, inscrutable way it stimulated and
confirmed her desire for the game Mrs. Dallas had begged her to play.
Human hearts are certainly strange things. What were the Gainsboroughs
to Miss Betty Frere? Nothing in the world, half an hour before; now?
Now there was a vague suspicion of an enemy somewhere; a scent of
rivalry in the air; an immediate rising of partisanship. Were these the
people of whom Mrs. Dallas was afraid? against whom she craved help?
She should have help. Was it not even a meritorious thing, to withdraw
a young man from untoward influences, and keep him in the path marked
out by his mother?

Miss Frere scented a battle like Job's war-horse. In spirit, that is;
outwardly, nothing could show less signs of war. She was equal to Pitt,
in her seeming careless apartness; the difference was, that with her it
_was_ seeming, and with him reality. She lost not a word; she failed
not to observe and regard every movement; she knew, without being seen
to look, just what his play of feature and various expressions were;
all the while she was calmly embroidering, or idly gazing out of the
window, or skilfully playing chess with Mr. Dallas, whom she inevitably
beat.

Pitt, the while, his mother thought (and so thought the young lady
herself), was provokingly careless of her attractions. He was going
hither and thither; over the farm with his father; about the village,
to see the changes and look up his old acquaintances; often, too, busy
in his room where he had been wont to spend so many hours in the old
time. He was graver than he used to be; with the manner of a man, and a
thoughtful one; he showed not the least inclination to amuse himself
with his mother's elegant visitor. Mrs. Dallas became as nearly fidgety
as it was in her nature to be.

'What do you think of my young friend?' she asked Pitt when he had been
a day or two at home.

'The lady? She is a very satisfactory person, to the eye.'

'To the eye!'

'It is only my eyes, you will remember, mother, that know anything
about her.'

'That is your fault. Why do you let it be true?'

'Very naturally, I have had something else to think of.'

'But she is a guest in the house, and you really seem to forget it,
Pitt. Can't you take her for a drive?'

'Where shall I take her?'

'_Where?_ There is all the country to choose from. What a question! You
never used to be at a loss, as I remember, in old times, when you went
driving about with that little protegée of yours.'

It was very imprudent of Mrs. Dallas, and she knew it immediately, and
was beyond measure vexed with herself. But the subject was started.

'Poor Esther!' said Pitt thoughtfully. 'Mamma, I can't understand how
you and my father should have lost sight of those people so.'

'They went out of our way.'

'But you sometimes go to New York.'

'Passing through, to Washington. I could not have time to search for
people whose address I did not know.'

'I cannot understand why you did not know it. They were not the sort of
people to be left to themselves. A hypochondriack father, who thought
he was dying, and a young girl just growing up to need a kind mother's
care, which she had not. I would give more than I can tell you to find
her again!'

'What could you possibly do for her, Pitt? You, reading law and living
in chambers in the Temple,--in London,--and she a grown young woman by
this time, and living in New York. No doubt her father is quite equal
to taking care of her.'

Pitt made no reply. His mother repeated her question. 'What could you
do for her?'

She was looking at him keenly, and did not at all like a faint smile
which hovered for a second upon his lips.

'That is a secondary question,' he said. 'The primary is, Where is she?
I must go and find out.'

'Your father thinks they have gone back to England. It would just be
lost labour, Pitt.'

'Not if I found that was true.'

'What _could_ you do for them, if you could discover them?'

'Mother, that would depend on what condition they were in. I made a
promise once to Colonel Gainsborough to look after his daughter.'

'A very extraordinary promise for him to ask or for you to give, seeing
you were but a boy at the time.'

'Somewhat extraordinary, perhaps. However, that is nothing to the
matter.'

There was a little vexed pause, and then Mrs. Dallas said:

'In the meanwhile, instead of busying yourself with far-away claims
which are no claims, what do you think of paying a little attention to
a guest in your own house?'

Pitt lifted his head and seemed to prick up his ears.

'Miss Frere? You wish me to take her to drive? I am willing, mamma.'

'Insensible boy! You ought to be very glad of the privilege.'

'I would rather take you, mother.'

The drive accordingly was proposed that very day; did not, however,
come off. It was too hot, Miss Frere said.

She was sitting in the broad verandah at the back of the house, which
looked out over the garden. It was an orderly wilderness of cherry
trees and apple trees and plum trees, raspberry vines and gooseberry
bushes; with marigolds and four o'clocks and love-in-a-puzzle and
hollyhocks and daisies and larkspur, and a great many more sweet and
homely growths that nobody makes any account of nowadays. Sunlight just
now lay glowing upon it, and made the shade of the verandah doubly
pleasant, the verandah being further shaded by honeysuckle and trumpet
creeper which wreathed round the pillars and stretched up to the eaves,
and the scent of the honeysuckle was mingled with the smell of roses
which came up from the garden. In this sweet and bowery place Miss
Frere was sitting when she declared it was too hot to drive. She was in
an India garden chair, and had her embroidery as usual in her hand. She
always had something in her hand. Pitt lingered, languidly
contemplating the picture she made.

'It _is_ hot,' he assented.

'When it is hot I keep myself quiet,' she went on. 'You seem to be of
another mind.'

'I make no difference for the weather.'

'Don't you? What energy! Then you are always at work?'

'Who said so?'

'I said so, as an inference. When the weather has been cool enough to
allow me to take notice, I have noticed that you were busy about
something. You tell me now that weather makes no difference.'

'Life is too short to allow weather to cut it shorter,' said Pitt,
throwing himself down on a mat. 'I think I have observed that you too
always have some work in hand whenever I have seen you.'

'My work amounts to nothing,' said the young lady. 'At least you would
say so, I presume.'

'What is it?'

Miss Betty displayed her roll of muslin, on the free portion of which
an elegant line of embroidery was slowly growing, multiplying and
reproducing its white buds and leaves and twining shoots. Pitt regarded
it with an unenlightened eye.

'I am as wise as I was before,' he said.

'Why, look here,' said the young lady, with a slight movement of her
little foot calling his attention to the edge of her skirt, where a
somewhat similar line of embroidery was visible. 'I am making a border
for another gown.'

Pitt's eye went from the one embroidery to the other; he said nothing.

'You are not complimentary,' said Miss Frere.

'I am not yet sure that there is anything to compliment.'

The young lady gave him a full view of her fine eyes for half a second,
or perhaps it was only that they took a good look at him.

'Don't you see,' she said, 'that it is economy, and thrift, and all the
household virtues? Not having the money to buy trimming, I am
manufacturing it.'

'And the gown must be trimmed?'

'Unquestionably! You would not like it so well if it were not.'

'That is possible. The question remains'--

'What question?'

'Whether Life is not worth more than a bit of trimming.'

'Life!' echoed the young lady a little scornfully. 'An hour now and
then is not Life.'

'It is the stuff of which Life is made.'

'What is Life good for?'

'That is precisely the weightiest question that can occupy the mind of
a philosopher!'

'Are you a philosopher, Mr. Dallas!'

'In so far as a philosopher means a lover of knowledge. A philosopher
who has attained unto knowledge, I am not;--that sort of knowledge.'

'You have been studying it?'

'I have been studying it for years.'

'What Life is good for?' said the young lady, with again a lift of her
eyes which expressed a little disdain and a little impatience. But she
saw Pitt's face with a thoughtful earnestness upon it; he was not
watching her eyes, as he ought to have been. Her somewhat petulant
words he answered simply.

'What question of more moment can there be? I am here, a human creature
with such and such powers and capacities; I am here for so many years,
not numerous; what is the best thing I can do with them and myself?'

'Get all the good out of them you can.'

'Certainly! but you observe that is no answer to my question of "how."'

'Good is pleasure, isn't it?'

'Is it?'

'I think so.'

'Make pleasure lasting, and perhaps I should agree with you. But how
can you do that?'

'You cannot do it, that ever I heard. It is not in the nature of
things.'

'Then what is the good of pleasure when it is over, and you have given
your life for it?'

'Well, if pleasure won't do, take greatness, then.'

'What sort of greatness?' Pitt asked in the same tone. It was the tone
of one who had gone over the ground.

'Any sort will do, I suppose,' said Miss Frere, with half a laugh. 'The
thing is, I believe, to be great, no matter how. I never had that
ambition myself; but that is the idea, isn't it?'

'What is it worth, supposing it gained?'

'People seem to think it is worth a good deal, by the efforts they make
and the things they undergo for it.'

'Yes,' said Pitt thoughtfully; 'they pay a great price, and they have
their reward. And, I say, what is it worth?'

'Why, Mr. Dallas,' said the young lady, throwing up her head, 'it is
worth a great deal--all it costs. To be noble, to be distinguished, to
be great and remembered in the world,--what is a worthy ambition, if
that is not?'

'That is the general opinion; but what is it _worth_, when all is done?
Name any great man you think of as specially great'--

'Napoleon Buonaparte,' said the young lady immediately.

'Do not name _him_,' said Pitt. 'He wore a brilliant crown, but he got
it out of the dirt of low passions and cold-hearted selfishness. His
name will be remembered, but as a splendid example of wickedness. Name
some other.'

'Name one yourself,' said Betty. 'I have succeeded so ill.'

'Name them all,' said Pitt. 'Take all the conquerors, from Rameses the
Great down to our time; take all the statesmen, from Moses and onward.
Take Apelles, at the head of a long list of wonderful painters;
philosophers, from Socrates to Francis Bacon; discoverers and
inventors, from the man who first made musical instruments, in the
lifetime of Adam our forefather, to Watt and the steam engine. Take any
or all of them; _we_ are very glad they lived and worked, _we_ are the
better for remembering them; but I ask you, what are they the better
for it?'

This appeal, which was evidently meant in deep earnest, moved the mind
of the young lady with so great astonishment that she looked at Pitt as
at a _lusus naturae_. But he was quite serious and simply matter of
fact in his way of putting things. He looked at her, waiting for an
answer, but got none.

'We speak of Alexander, and praise him to the skies, him of Macedon, I
mean. What is that, do you think, to Alexander now?'

'If it is nothing to him, then what is the use of being great?' said
Miss Frere in her bewilderment.

'You are coming back to my question.'

There ensued a pause, during which the stitches of embroidery were
taken slowly.

'What do you intend to do with _your_ life, Mr. Dallas, since pleasure
and fame are ruled out?' the young lady asked.

'You see, that decision waits on the previous question,' he answered.

'But it has got to be decided,' said Miss Frere, 'or you will be'--

'Nothing. Yes, I am aware of that.'

There was again a pause.

'Miss Frere,' Pitt then began again, 'did you ever see a person whose
happiness rested on a lasting foundation?'

The young lady looked at her companion anew as if he were to her a very
odd character.

'What do you mean?' she said.

'I mean, a person who was thoroughly happy, not because of
circumstances, but in spite of them?'

'To begin with, I never saw anybody that was "thoroughly happy." I do
not believe in the experience.'

'I am obliged to believe in it. I have known a person who seemed to be
clean lifted up out of the mud and mire of troublesome circumstances,
and to have got up to a region of permanent clear air and sunshine. I
have been envying that person ever since.'

'May I ask, was it a man or a woman?'

'Neither; it was a young girl.'

'It is easy to be happy at _that_ age.'

'Not for her. She had been very unhappy.'

'And got over it?'

'Yes; but not by virtue of her youth or childishness, as you suppose.
She was one of those natures that are born with a great capacity for
suffering, and she had begun to find it out early; and it was from the
depths of unhappiness that she came out into clear and peaceful
sunshine; with nothing to help her either in her external surroundings.'

'Couldn't you follow her steps and attain her experience?' asked Miss
Frere mockingly.

Pitt rose up from the mat where he had been lying, laughed, and shook
himself.

'As you will not go to drive,' he said, 'I believe I will go alone.'

But he went on horseback, and rode hard.


CHAPTER XXXV.

_ANTIQUITIES_.


As Pitt went off, Mrs. Dallas came on the verandah. 'You would not go
to drive?' she said to Betty.

'It is so hot, dear Mrs. Dallas! I had what was much better than a
drive--a good long talk.'

'What do you think of my boy?' asked the mother, with an accent of
happy confidence in which there was also a vibration of pride.

'He puzzles me. Has he not some peculiar opinions?'

'Have you found that out already?' said Mrs. Dallas, with a change of
tone. 'That shows he must like you very much, Betty; my son is not
given to letting himself out on those subjects. Even to me he very
seldom speaks of them.'

'What subjects do you mean, dear Mrs. Dallas?' inquired the young lady
softly.

'I mean,' said Mrs. Dallas uneasily and hesitating, 'some sort of
religious questions. I told you he had had to do at one time with
dissenting people, and I think their influence has been bad for him. I
hoped in England he would forget all that, and become a true Churchman.
What did he say?'

'Nothing about the Church, or about religion. I do not believe it would
be easy for any one to influence him, Mrs. Dallas.'

'You can do it, Betty, if any one. I am hoping in you.'

The young lady, as I have intimated, was not averse to the task, all
the rather that it promised some difficulty. All the rather, too, that
she was stimulated by the idea of counter influence. She recalled more
than once what Pitt had said of that 'young girl,' and tried to make
out what had been in his tone at the time. No passion certainly; he had
spoken easily and frankly; too easily to favour the supposition of any
very deep feeling; and yet, not without a certain cadence of
tenderness, and undoubtedly with the confidence of intimate knowledge.
Undoubtedly, also, the influence of that young person, whatever its
nature, had not died out. Miss Betty had little question in her own
mind that she must have been one of the persons referred to and dreaded
by Mrs. Dallas as dissenters; and the young lady determined to do what
she could in the case. She had a definite point of resistance now, and
felt stronger for the fray.

The fray, however, could not be immediately entered upon. Pitt departed
to New York, avowedly to look up the Gainsboroughs. And there, as two
years before, he spent unwearied pains in pursuit of his object; also,
as then, in vain. He returned after more than a week of absence, a
baffled man. His arrival was just in time to allow him to sit down to
dinner with the family; so that Betty heard his report.

'Have you found the Gainsboroughs?' his father asked.

'No, sir.'

'Where did you look?'

'Everywhere.'

'What have you done?' his mother asked.

'Everything.'

'I told you, I thought they were gone back to England.'

'If they are, there is no sign of it, and I do not believe it. I have
spent hours and hours at the shipping offices, looking over the lists
of passengers; and of one thing I am certain, they have not sailed from
that port this year.'

'Not under the name by which you know them.'

'And not under any other. Colonel Gainsborough was not a man to hide
his head under an alias. But they know nothing of any Colonel
Gainsborough at the post office.'

'That is strange.'

'They never had many letters, you know, sir; and the colonel had given
up his English paper. I think I know all the people that take the
London _Times_ in New York; and he is not one of them.'

'He is gone home,' said Mr. Dallas comfortably.

'I can find that out when I go back to England; and I will.'

Miss Betty said nothing, and asked never a word, but she lost none of
all this. Pitt was becoming a problem to her. All this eagerness and
painstaking would seem to look towards some very close relations
between the young man and these missing people; yet Pitt showed no
annoyance nor signs of trouble at missing them. Was it that he did not
really care? was it that he had not accepted failure, and did not mean
to fail? In either case, he must be a peculiar character, and in either
case there was brought to light an uncommon strength of determination.
There is hardly anything which women like better in the other sex than
force of character. Not because it is a quality in which their own sex
is apt to be lacking; on the contrary; but because it gives a woman
what she wants in a man--something to lean upon, and somebody to look
up to. Miss Betty found herself getting more and more interested in
Pitt and in her charge concerning him; how it was to be executed she
did not yet see; she must leave that to chance. Nothing could be forced
here. Where liking begins to grow, there also begins fear.

She retreated to the verandah after dinner, with her embroidery. By and
by Mrs. Dallas came there too. It was a pleasant place in the
afternoon, for the sun was on the other side of the house, and the sea
breeze swept this way, giving its saltness to the odours of rose and
honeysuckle and mignonette. Mrs. Dallas sat down and took her knitting;
then, before a word could be exchanged, they were joined by Pitt. That
is, he came on the verandah; but for some time there was no talking.
The ladies would not begin, and Pitt did not. His attention, wherever
it might be, was not given to his companions; he sat thoughtful, and
determinately silent. Mrs. Dallas's knitting needles clicked, Miss
Betty's embroidering thread went noiselessly in and out. Bees hummed
and flitted about the honeysuckle vines; there was a soft, sweet,
luxurious atmosphere to the senses and to the mind. This went on for a
while.

'Mr. Pitt,' said Miss Betty, 'you are giving me no help at all.'

He brought himself and his attention round to her at once, and asked
how he could be of service.

'Your mother,' began Miss Betty, stitching away, 'has given me a
commission concerning you. She desires me to see to it that _ennui_
does not creep upon you during your vacation in this unexciting place.
How do I know but it is creeping upon you already? and you give me no
chance to drive it away.'

Pitt laughed a little. 'I was never attacked by _ennui_ in my life,' he
said.

'So you do not want my services!'

'Not to fight an enemy that is nowhere in sight. Perhaps he is your
enemy, and I might be helpful in another way.'

It occurred to him that _he_ had been charged to make Miss Frere's
sojourn in Seaforth pleasant; and some vague sense of what this mutual
charge might mean dawned upon him, with a rising light of amusement.

'I don't know!' said the young lady. 'You did once propose a drive. If
you would propose it again, perhaps I would go. We cannot help its
being hot?'

So they went for a drive. The roads were capital, the evening was
lovely, the horses went well, and the phaeton was comfortable; if that
were not enough, it was all. Miss Frere bore it for a while patiently.

'Do you dislike talking?' she asked at length meekly, when a soft bit
of road and the slow movement of the horses gave her a good opportunity.

'I? Not at all!' said Pitt, rousing himself as out of a muse.

'Then I wish you would talk. Mrs. Dallas desires that I should
entertain you; and how am I to do that unless I know you better?'

'So you think people's characters come out in talking?'

'If not their characters, at least something of what is in their
heads--what they know--and don't know; what they can talk about, in
short.'

'I do not know anything--to talk about.'

'Oh, fie, Mr. Dallas! you who have been to Oxford and London. Tell me,
what is London like? An overgrown New York, I suppose.'

'No, neither. "Overgrown" means grown beyond strength or usefulness.
London is large, but not overgrown, in any sense.'

'Well, like New York, only larger?'

'No more than a mushroom is like a great old oak. London is like that;
an old oak, gnarled and twisted and weather-worn, with plenty of hale
life and young vigour springing out of its rugged old roots.'

'That sounds--poetical.'

'If you mean, not true, you are under a mistake.'

'Then it seems you know London?'

'I suppose I do; better than many of those who live in it. When I am
there, Miss Frere, I am with an old uncle, who is an antiquary and an
enthusiast on the subject of his native city. From the first it has
been his pleasure to go with me all over London, and tell me the
secrets of its old streets, and show me what was worth looking at.
London was my picture-book, my theatre, where I saw tragedy and comedy
together; my museum of antiquities. I never tire of it, and my Uncle
Strahan is never tired of showing it to me.'

'Why, what is it to see?' asked Miss Frere, with some real curiosity.

'For one thing, it is an epitome of English history, strikingly
illustrated.'

'Oh, you mean Westminster Abbey! Yes, I have heard of that, of course.
But I should think _that_ was not interminable.'

'I do not mean Westminster Abbey.'

'What then, please?'

'I cannot tell you here,' said Pitt smiling, as the horses, having
found firm ground, set off again at a gay trot. 'Wait till we get home,
and I will show you a map of London.'

The young lady, satisfied with having gained her object, waited very
patiently, and told Mrs. Dallas on reaching home that the drive had
been delightful.

Next day Pitt was as good as his word. He brought his map of London
into the cool matted room where the ladies were sitting, rolled up a
table, and spread the map out before Miss Frere. The young lady dropped
her embroidery and gave her attention.

'What have you there, Pitt?' his mother inquired.

'London, mamma.'

'London?' Mrs. Dallas drew up her chair too, where she could look on;
while Pitt briefly gave an explanation of the map; showed where was the
'City' and where the fashionable quarter.

'I suppose,' said Miss Frere, studying the map, 'the parts of London
that delight you are over here?' indicating the West End.

'No,' returned Pitt, 'by no means. The City and the Strand are
infinitely more interesting.'

'My dear,' said his mother, 'I do not see how that can be.'

'It is true, though, mother. All this,' drawing his finger round a
certain portion of the map, 'is crowded with the witnesses of human
life and history; full of remains that tell of the men of the past, and
their doings, and their sufferings.'

Miss Frere's fine eyes were lifted to him in inquiry; meeting them, he
smiled, and went on.

'I must explain. Where shall I begin? Suppose, for instance, we take
our stand here at Whitehall. We are looking at the Banqueting House of
the Palace, built by Inigo Jones for James I. The other buildings of
the palace, wide and splendid as they were, have mostly perished. This
stands yet. I need not tell you the thoughts that come up as we look at
it.'

'Charles I was executed there, I know. What else?'

'There is a whole swarm of memories, and a whole crowd of images,
belonging to the palace of which this was a part. Before the time you
speak of, there was Cardinal Wolsey'--

'Oh, Wolsey! I remember.'

'His outrageous luxury and pomp of living, and his disgrace. Then comes
Henry VIII., and Anne Boleyn, and their marriage; Henry's splendours,
and his death. All that was here. In those days the buildings of
Whitehall were very extensive, and they were further enlarged
afterwards. Here Elizabeth held her court, and here she lay in state
after death. James I comes next; he built the Banqueting House. And in
his son's time, the royal magnificence displayed at Whitehall was
incomparable. All the gaieties and splendours and luxury of living that
then were possible, were known here. And here was the scaffold where he
died. The next figure is Cromwell's.'

'Leave him out!' said Mrs. Dallas, with a sort of groan of impatience.

'What shall I do with the next following, mamma? That is Charles II.'

'He had a right there at least.'

'He abused it.'

'At least he was a king, and a gentleman.'

'If I could show you Whitehall as it was in his day, mother, I think
you would not want to look long. But I shall not try. We will go on to
Charing Cross. The old palace extended once nearly so far. Here is the
place.' He pointed to a certain spot on the map.

'What is there now?' asked Betty.

'Not the old Cross. That is gone; but, of course, I cannot stand there
without in thought going back to Edward I. and his queen. In its place
is a brazen statue of Charles I. And in fact, when I stand there the
winds seem to sweep down upon me from many a mountain peak of history.
Edward and his rugged greatness, and Charles and his weak folly; and
the Protectorate, and the Restoration. For here, where the statue
stands, stood once the gallows where Harrison and his companions were
executed, when "the king had his own again." Sometimes I can hardly see
the present, when I am there, for looking at the past.'

'You are enthusiastic,' said Miss Frere. 'But I understand it. Yes,
that is not like New York; not much!'

'What became of the Cross, Pitt?'

'Pulled down, mother--like everything else in its day.'

'Who pulled it down?'

'The Republicans.'

'The Republicans! Yes, it was like them!' said Mrs. Dallas. 'Rebellion,
dissent, and a want of feeling for whatever is noble and refined, all
go together. That was the Puritans!'

'Pretty strong!' said Pitt. 'And not quite fair either, is it? How much
feeling for what is noble and refined was there in the court of the
second Charles?--and how much of either, if you look below the surface,
was in the policy or the character of the first Charles?'

'He did not destroy pictures and pull down statues,' said Mrs. Dallas.
'He was at least a gentleman. But the Puritans were a low set, always.
I cannot forgive them for the work they did in England.'

'You may thank heaven for some of the work they did. But for them, you
would not be here to-day in a land of freedom.'

'Too much freedom,' said Mrs. Dallas. 'I believe it is good to have a
king over a country.'

'Well, go on from Charing Cross, won't you,' said Miss Frere. 'I am
interested. I never studied a map of London before. I am not sure I
ever saw one.'

'I do not know which way to go,' said Pitt. 'Every step brings us to
new associations; every street opens up a chapter of history. Here is
Northumberland House; a grand old building, full of its records.
Howards and Percys and Seymours have owned it and built it; and there
General Monk planned the bringing back of the Stuarts. Going along the
Strand, every step is full of interest. Just _here_ used to be the
palace of Sir Nicholas Baron and his son; then James the First's
favourite, the Duke of Buckingham, lived in it; and the beautiful
water-gate is yet standing which Inigo Jones built for him. All the
Strand was full of palaces which have passed away, leaving behind the
names of their owners in the streets which remain or have been built
since. Here Sir Walter Raleigh lived; _here_ the Dudleys had their
abode, and Lady Jane Grey was married; here was the house of Lord
Burleigh. But let us go on to the church of St. Mary-le-Strand. Here
once stood a great Maypole, round which there used to be merry doings.
The Puritans took that down too, mother.'

'What for?'

'They held it to be in some sort a relic of heathen manners. Then under
Charles II. it was set up again. And here, once, four thousand children
were gathered and sang a hymn, on some public occasion of triumph in
Queen Anne's reign.'

'It is not there now?'

'Oh, no! It was given to Sir Isaac Newton, and made to subserve the
uses of a telescope.'

'How do you know all these things, Mr. Pitt.'

'Every London antiquary knows them, I suppose. And I told you, I have
an old uncle who is a great antiquary; London is his particular hobby.'

'He must have had an apt scholar, though.'

'Much liking makes good learning, I suppose,' said the young man. 'A
little further on is the church of St. Clement Danes, where Dr. Johnson
used to attend divine service. About _here_ stands Temple Bar.'

'Temple Bar!' said Miss Frere. 'I have heard of Temple Bar all my life,
and never connected any clear idea with the name. What _is_ Temple Bar?'

'It is not very much of a building. It is the barrier which marks the
bound of the city of London.'

'Isn't it London on both sides of Temple Bar?'

'London, but not the City. The City proper begins here. On the west of
this limit is Westminster.'

'There are ugly associations with Temple Bar, I know,' said Miss Frere.

'There are ugly associations with everything. Down here stood Essex
House, where Essex defended himself, and from which he was carried off
to the Tower. _There_, in Lincoln's Inn fields, Thomas Babington and
his party died for high treason, and there Russell died. And just up
here is Smithfield. It is all over, the record of violence,
intolerance, and brutality. It meets you at every turn.'

'It is only what would be in any other place as old as London,' said
Mrs. Dallas. 'In old times people were rough, of course, but they were
rough everywhere.'

'I was thinking'-- said Miss Frere. 'Mr. Dallas gives a somewhat
singular justification of his liking for London.'

'Is it?' said Pitt. 'It would be singular if the violence were there
now; but to read the record and look on the scene is interesting, and
for me fascinating. The record is of other things too. See,--in this
place Milton lived and wrote; here Franklin abode; here Charles Lamb;
from an inn in this street Bishop Hooper went away to die. And so I
might go on and on. At every step there is the memorial of some great
man's life, or some noted man's death. And with all that, there are
also the most exquisite bits of material antiquity. Old picturesque
houses; old crypts of former churches, over which stands now a modern
representative of the name; old monuments many; old doorways, and
courts, and corners, and gateways. Come over to London, and I will take
you down into the crypt of St. Paul's, and show you how history is
presented to you there.'

'The crypt?' said Miss Frere, doubting somewhat of this invitation.

'Yes, the old monuments are in the crypt.'

'My dear,' said Mrs. Dallas, 'I do not understand how all these things
you have been talking about should have so much charm for you. I should
think the newer and handsomer parts of the city, the parks and the
gardens, and the fine squares, would be a great deal more agreeable.'

'To live in, mother.'

'And don't you go to the British Museum, and to the Tower, and to Hyde
Park?'

'I have been there hundreds of times.'

'And like these old corners still?'

'I am very fond of the Museum.'

'There is nothing like that is this country,' said Mrs. Dallas, with an
accent of satisfaction.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

_INTERPRETATIONS_.


Miss Betty hereupon begged to be told more distinctly what was in the
British Museum, that anybody should go there 'hundreds of times.' Pitt
presently got warm in his subject, and talked long and well; as many
people will do when they are full of their theme, even when they can
talk upon nothing else. Pitt was not one of those people; he could talk
well upon anything, and now he made himself certainly very
entertaining. His mother thought so, who cared nothing for the British
Museum except in so far that it was a great institution of an old
country, which a young country could not rival. She listened to Pitt.
Miss Betty gave him even more profound interest and unflagging
attention; whether she too were not studying the speaker full as much
as the things spoken, I will not say. They had a very pleasant morning
of it; conversation diverging sometimes to Assyria and Egypt, and
ancient civilizations and arts, and civilization in general. Mrs.
Dallas gradually drew back from mingling in the talk, and watched, well
pleased, to see how eager the two other speakers became, and how they
were lost in their subject and in each other.

In the afternoon there was another drive, to which Pitt did not need to
be stimulated; and all the evening the two young people were busy with
something which engaged them both. Mrs. Dallas breathed freer.

'I _think_ he is smitten,' she said privately to her husband. 'How
could he help it? He has seen nobody else to be smitten with.'

But Betty Frere was not sure of any such thing; and the very fact of
Pitt's disengagedness made him more ensnaring to her. There was nobody
else in the village to divert his attention, and the two young people
were thrown very much together. They went driving, they rode, and they
talked, continually. The map of London was often out, and Mrs. Dallas
saw the two heads bent over it, and interested faces looking into each
other; and she thought things were going on very fairly. If only the
vacation were not so short! For only a little time more, and Pitt must
be back at his chambers in London. The mother sighed to herself. She
was paying rather a heavy price to keep her son from Dissenters!

Betty Frere too remembered that the vacation was coming to an end, and
drew her breath rather short. She was depending on Pitt too much for
her amusement, she told herself, and to be sure there were other young
men in the world that could talk; but she felt a sort of disgust at the
thought of them all. They were not near so interesting. They all
flattered her, and some of them were supposed to be brilliant; but
Betty turned from the thought of them to the one whose lips never
condescended to say pretty things, nor made any effort to say witty
things. They behaved towards her with a sort of obsequious reverence,
which was the fashion of that day much more than of this; and Betty
liked far better a manner which never made pretence of anything, was
thoroughly natural and perfectly well-bred, but which frankly paid more
honour to his mother than to herself. She admired Pitt's behaviour to
his mother. Even to his mother it had less formality than was the
custom of the day; while it gave her every delicate little attention
and every possible graceful observance. The young beauty had sense
enough to see that this promised more for Pitt's future wife than any
amount of civil subserviency to herself. Perhaps there is not a quality
which women value more in a man, or miss more sorely, than what we
express by the term manliness. And she saw that Pitt, while he was
enthusiastic and eager, and what she called fanciful, always was true,
honest, and firm in what he thought right. From that no fancy carried
him away.

And Miss Betty found the days pass with almost as much charm as
fleetness. How fleet they were she did not bear to think. She found
herself recognising Pitt's step, distinguishing his voice in the
distance, and watching for the one and the other. Why not? He was so
pleasant as a companion. But she found herself also starting when he
appeared suddenly, thrilled at the unexpected sound of his voice, and
conscious of quickened pulses when he came into the room. Betty did not
like these signs in herself; at the same time, that which had wrought
the spell continued to work, and the spell was not broken. In justice
to the young lady, I must say that there was not the slightest outward
token of it. Betty was as utterly calm and careless in her manner as
Pitt himself; so that even Mrs. Dallas--and a woman in those matters
sees far--could not tell whether either or both of the young people had
a liking for the other more than the social good-fellowship which was
frank and apparent. It might be, and she confessed also to herself that
it might not be.

'You must give that fellow time,' said her husband. Which Mrs. Dallas
knew, if she had not been so much in a hurry.

'If he met those Gainsboroughs by chance, I would not answer for
anything,' she said.

'How should he meet them? They are probably as poor as rats, and have
drawn into some corner, out of the way. He will never see them.'

'Pitt is so persistent!' said Mrs. Dallas uneasily.

'He'll be back in England in a few weeks.'

'But when he comes again!'

'He shall not come again. We will go over to see him ourselves next
year.'

'That is a very good thought,' said Mrs. Dallas.

And, comforted by this thought and the plans she presently began to
weave in with it, she looked now with much more equanimity than Betty
herself towards the end of Pitt's visit. Mrs. Dallas, however, was not
to get off without another shock to her nerves.

It was early in September, and the weather of that sultry, hot, and
moist character which we have learned to look for in connection with
the first half of that month. Miss Frere's embroidery went languidly;
possibly there might have been more reasons than one for the slow and
spiritless movement of her fingers, which was quite contrary to their
normal habit. Mrs. Dallas, sitting at a little distance on the
verandah, was near enough to hear and observe what went on when Pitt
came upon the scene, and far enough to be separated from the
conversation unless she chose to mix in it. By and by he came, looking
thoughtful, as Betty saw, though she hardly seemed to notice his
approach. There was no token in her quiet manner of the quickened
pulses of which she was immediately conscious. Something like a
tremulous thrill ran through her nerves; it vexed her to be so little
mistress of them, yet the pleasure of the thrill at the moment was more
than the pain. Pitt threw himself into a chair near her, and for a few
moments watched the play of her needle. Betty's eyelashes never
stirred. But the silence lasted too long. Nerves would not bear it.

'What can you find to do in this weather, Mr. Pitt?' she asked
languidly.

'It is good weather,' he answered absently. 'Do you ever read the
Bible?'

Miss Betty's fine eyes were lifted now with an expression of some
amusement. They were very fine eyes; Mrs. Dallas thought they could not
fail of their effect.

'The Bible?' she repeated. 'I read the lessons in the Prayer-book; that
is the same.'

'Is it the same? Is the whole Bible contained in the lessons?'

'I don't know, I am sure,' she answered doubtfully. 'I think so. There
is a great deal of it.'

'But you read it piecemeal so.'

'You must read it piecemeal any way,' returned the young lady. 'You can
read only a little each day; a portion.'

'You could read consecutively, though, or you could choose for
yourself.'

'I like to have the choice made for me. It saves time; and then one is
sure one has got hold of the right portion, you know. I like the
lessons.'

'And then,' remarked Mrs. Dallas, 'you know other people and your
friends are reading that same portion at the same time, and the feeling
is very sacred and sweet.'

'But if the Bible was intended to be read in such a way, how comes it
that we have no instruction to that end?'

'Instruction was given,' said Mrs. Dallas. 'The Church has ordered it.'

'The Church' said Pitt thoughtfully. 'Who is the Church?'

'Why, my dear,' said Mrs. Dallas, 'don't ask such questions. You know
as well as I do.'

'As I understand it, mother, what you mean is simply a body of
Christians who lived some time ago.'

'Yes. Well, what then?'

'I do not comprehend how they should know what you and I want to read
to-day. I am not talking of Church services. I am talking of private
reading.'

'But it is pleasant and convenient,' said Betty.

'May be very inappropriate.'

'Pitt,' said his mother, 'I wish you would not talk so! It is really
very wrong. This comes of your way of questioning and reasoning about
everything. What we have to do with the Church is to _obey_.'

'And that is what we have to do with the Bible, isn't it?' he said
gravely.

'Undoubtedly.'

'Well, mother, I am not talking to you; I am attacking Miss Frere. I
can talk to her on even terms. Miss Frere, I want to know what you
understand by obeying, when we are speaking of the demands of the
Bible?'

'Obeying? I understand just what I mean by it anywhere.'

'Obeying what?'

'Why, obeying God, of course.'

'Of course! But how do we know what His commands are?'

'By the words--how else?' she asked, looking at him. He was in earnest,
for some reason, she saw, and she forbore from the light words with
which at another time she would have given a turn to the subject.

'Then you think, distinctly, that we ought to obey the words of the
Bible?'

'Ye-s,' she said, wondering what was coming.

'_All_ the words?'

'Yes, I suppose so. All the words, according to their real meaning.'

'How are we to know what that is?'

'I suppose--the Church tells us.'

'Where?'

'I do not know--in books, I suppose.'

'What books? But we are going a little wild. May I bring you an
instance or two? I am talking in earnest, and mean it earnestly.'

'Do you ever do anything in any other way?' asked the young lady, with
a charming air of fine raillery and recognition blended. 'Certainly; I
am in earnest too.'

Pitt went away and returned with a book in his hand.

'What have you there? the Prayer-book?' his mother asked, with a
doubtful expression.

'No, mamma; I like to go to the Fountain-head of authority as well as
of learning.'

'The Fountain-head!' exclaimed Mrs. Dallas, in indignant protest; and
then she remembered her wisdom, and said no more. It cost her an
effort; however, she knew that for her to set up a defence of either
Church or Prayer-book just then would not be wise, and that she had
better leave the matter in Betty's hands. She looked at Betty
anxiously. The young lady's face showed her cool and collected, not
likely to be carried away by any stream of enthusiasm or overborne by
influence. It was, in fact, more cool than she felt. She liked to get
into a good talk with Pitt upon any subject, and so far was content; at
the same time she would rather have chosen any other than this, and was
a little afraid whereto it might lead. Religion had not been precisely
her principal study. True, it had not been his principal study either;
but Betty discerned a difference in their modes of approaching it. She
attributed that to the Puritan or dissenting influences which had at
some time got hold of him. To thwart those would at any rate be a good
work, and she prepared herself accordingly.

Pitt opened his book and turned over a few leaves.

'To begin with,' he said, 'you admit that whatever this book commands
we are bound to obey?'

'Provided we understand it,' his opponent put in.

'Provided we understand it, of course. A command not understood is
hardly a command. Now here is a word which has struck me, and I would
like to know how it strikes you.'

He turned to the familiar twenty-fifth of Matthew and read the central
portion, the parable of the talents. He read like an interested man,
and perhaps it was owing to a slight unconscious intonation here and
there that Pitt's two hearers listened as if the words were strangely
new to them. They had never heard them sound just so. Yet the reading
was not dramatic at all; it was only a perfectly natural and feeling
deliverance. But feeling reaches feeling, as we all know. The reading
ceased, nobody spoke for several minutes.

'What does it mean?' asked Pitt.

'My dear,' said his mother, 'can there be a question what it means? The
words are perfectly simple, it seems to me.'

'Mamma, I am not talking to you. You may sit as judge and arbiter; but
it is Miss Frere and I who are disputing. She will have the goodness to
answer.'

'I do not know what to answer,' said the young lady. 'Are not the
words, as Mrs. Dallas says, perfectly plain?'

'Then surely it cannot be difficult to say what the teaching of them
is?'

If it was not difficult, the continued silence of the lady was
remarkable. She made no further answer.

'_Are_ they so plain? I have been puzzling over them. I will divide the
question, and perhaps we can get at the conclusion better so. In the
first place, who are these "servants" spoken of?'

'Everybody, I suppose. You have the advantage of me, Mr. Dallas; I have
_not_ been studying the passage.'

'Yet you admit that we are bound to obey it.'

'Yes,' she said doubtfully. 'Obey what?'

'That is precisely what I want to find out. Now the servants; they
cannot mean everybody, for it says, he "called _his own_ servants;" the
Greek is "bond-servants."'

'His servants would be His Church then.'

'His own people. "He delivered unto them His goods." What are the goods
he delivered to them? Some had more, some had less; all had a share and
a charge. What are these goods?'

'I don't know,' said Miss Frere, looking at him.

'What were they to do with these goods?'

'Trade with them, it seems.'

'In Luke the command runs so: "Trade till I come." Trading is a process
by which the goods or the money concerned are multiplied. What are the
goods given to you and me?--to bring the question down into the
practical. It must be something with which we may increase the wealth
of Him who has entrusted it to us.'

'Pitt, that is a very strange way of speaking,' said his mother.

'I am talking to Miss Frere, mamma. You have only to hear and judge
between us. Miss Frere, the question comes to you.'

'I should say it is not possible to increase "His wealth."'

'That is not _my_ putting of the case, remember. And also, every
enlargement of His dominion in this world, every addition made to the
number of His subjects, may be fairly spoken of so. The question
stands, What are the goods? That is, if you like to go into it. I am
not catechizing you,' said Pitt, half laughing.

'I do not dislike to be catechized,' said Miss Frere slowly. _By you_,
was the mental addition. 'But I never had such a question put to me
before, and I am not ready with an answer.'

'I never heard the question discussed either,' said Pitt. 'But I was
reading this passage yesterday, and could not help starting it. The
"goods" must be, I think, all those gifts or powers by means of which
we can work for God, and so work as to enlarge His kingdom. Now, what
are they?'

'Of course we can pay money,' said the young lady, looking a good deal
mystified. 'We can pay money to support ministers, if that is what you
mean.'

'So much is patent enough. Is money the only thing?'

Miss Frere looked bewildered, Mrs. Dallas impatient. She restrained
herself, however, and waited. Pitt smiled.

'We pay money to support ministers and teachers. What do the ministers
work with? what do they _trade_ with?'

'The truth, I suppose.'

'And how do they make the truth known? By their lips, and by their
lives; the power of the word, with the power of personal influence.'

'Yes,' said Miss Frere; 'of course.'

'Then the goods, or talents, so far as they are commonly possessed, and
so far as we have discovered, are three: property, speech, and personal
example. But the two last are entrusted to you and me, are they not, as
well as the former?'

The girl looked at him now with big eyes, in which no shadow of
self-consciousness was any more lurking. Eyes that were bewildered,
astonished, inquiring, and also disturbed. 'What do you mean?' she said
helplessly.

'It comes to this,' said Pitt. 'If we are ready to obey the Bible, we
shall use not only our money, but our tongues and ourselves to do the
work which--you know--the Lord left to His disciples to do; make
disciples of every creature. It will be our one business.'

'How do you mean, our one business?'

'That to which we make all others subservient.'

'Subservient! Yes,' said Miss Frere. 'Subservient in a way; but that
does not mean that we should give up everything else for it.'

Pitt was silent.

'My dear boy,' said his mother anxiously, 'it seems to me you are
straining things quite beyond what is intended. We are not all meant to
be clergymen, are we?'

'That is not the point, mamma. The point is, what work is given us?'

'That work you speak of is clergymen's work.'

'Mamma, what is the command?'

'But that does not mean everybody.'

'Where is the excepting clause?'

'But, my dear, what would become of Society?'

'We may leave that. We are talking of obeying the Bible. I have given
you one instance. Now I will give you another. It is written over
here,' and he turned a few leaves,--'it is another word of Christ to
those whom He was teaching,--"If any man serve me, let him follow me."
Now here is a plain command; but what is it to follow Christ?'

'To imitate him, I suppose,' said Miss Frere, to whom he looked.

'In what?'

The young lady looked at him in silence, and then said, 'Why, we all
know what it means when we say that such a person or such a thing is
Christlike. Loving, charitable, kind'--

'But to _follow_ Him,--that is something positive and active. Literal
following a person is to go where he has gone, through all the paths
and to all the places. In the spiritual following, which is intended
here,--what is it? It is to do as He did, is it not? To have His aims
and purposes and views in life, and to carry them out logically.'

'What do you mean by "logically"?'

'According to their due and proper sequences.'

'Well, what are you driving at?' asked Miss Frere a little worriedly.

'I will tell you. But I do not mean to drive _you_,' he said, again
with a little laugh, as of self-recollection. 'Tell me to stop, if you
are tired of the subject.'

'I am not in the least tired; how could you think it? It always
delights me when people talk logically. I do not very often hear it.
But I never heard of logical religion before.'

'True religion must be logical, must it not?'

'I thought religion was rather a matter of feeling.'

'I believe I used to think so.'

'And pray, what is it, then, Pitt?' his mother asked.

'Look here, mamma. "If any man will serve me, _let him follow me_."'

'Well, what do you understand by that, Pitt? You are going too fast for
me. I thought the love of God was the whole of religion.'

'But here is the "following," mamma.'

'What sort of following?'

'That is what I am asking. As it cannot be in bodily, so it must be in
mental footsteps.'

'I do not understand you,' said his mother, with an air both vexed and
anxious; while Miss Frere had now let her embroidery fall, and was
giving her best consideration to the subject and the speaker. She was a
little annoyed too, but she was more interested. This was a different
sort of conversation from any she had been accustomed to hear, and Pitt
was a different sort of speaker. He was not talking to kill time, or to
please her; he was--most wonderful and rare!--in earnest; and that not
in any matter that involved material interests. She had seen people in
earnest before on matters of speculation and philosophy, often on
stocks and schemes for making money, in earnest violently on questions
of party politics; but in earnest for the truth's sake, never, in all
her life. It was a new experience, and Pitt was a novel kind of person;
manly, straightforward, honest; quite a person to be admired, to be
respected, to be--  Where were her thoughts running?

He had sat silent a moment, after his mother's last remark; gravely
thinking. Betty brought him back to the point.

'You will tell us what you think "following" means?' she said gently.

'I will tell _you_,' he said, smiling. 'I am not supposed to be
speaking to mamma. If you will look at the way Christ went, you will
see what following Him must be. In the first place, Self was nowhere.'

'Yes,' said Miss Frere.

'Who is ready to follow Him in that?'

'But, my dear boy!' cried Mrs. Dallas. 'We are human creatures; we
cannot help thinking of ourselves; we are _meant_ to think of
ourselves. Everybody must think of self; or the world would not hold
together.'

'I am speaking to Miss Frere,' he said pleasantly.

'I confess I think so too, Mr. Dallas. Of course, we ought not to be
_selfish;_ that means, I suppose, to think of self unduly; but where
would the world be, if everybody, as you say, put self nowhere?'

'I will go on to another point. Christ went about doing good. It was
the one business of His life. Whenever and wherever He went among men,
He went to heal, to help, to teach, or to warn. Even when He was
resting among friends in the little household at Bethany, He was
teaching, and one of the household at least sat at His feet to listen.'

'Yes, and left her sister to do all the work,' remarked Mrs. Dallas.

'The Lord said she had done right, mamma.'

There ensued a curious silence. The two ladies sat looking at Pitt,
each apparently possessed by a kind of troubled dismay; neither ready
with an answer. The pause lasted till both of them felt what it
implied, and both began to speak at once.

'But, my son'--

'But, Mr. Dallas!'--

'Miss Frere, mamma. Let her speak.' And turning to the young lady with
a slight bow, he intimated his willingness to hear her. Miss Frere was
nevertheless not very ready.

'Mr. Dallas, do I understand you? Can it be that you mean--I do not
know how to put it,--do you mean that you think that everybody, that
all of us, and each of us, ought to devote his life to helping and
teaching?'

'It can be of no consequence what I think,' he said. 'The question is
simply, what is "following Christ"?'

'Being His disciple, I should say.'

'What is that?' he replied quickly. 'I have been studying that very
point; and do you know it is said here, and it was said then,
"Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot
be my disciple"?'

'But what do you mean, Pitt?' his mother asked in indignant
consternation.

'What did the Lord mean, mother?' he returned very gravely.

'Are we all heathen, then?' she went on with heat. 'For I never saw
anybody yet in my life that took such a view of religion as you are
taking.'

'Do we know exactly Mr. Pitt's view?' here put in the other lady. 'I
confess I do not. I wish he would say.'

'I have been studying it,' said Pitt, with an earnest gravity of manner
which gave his mother yet more trouble than his words. 'I have gone to
the Greek for it; and there the word rendered "forsake" is one that
means to "take leave of"--"bid farewell." And if we go to history for
the explanation, we do find that that was the attitude of mind which
those must needs assume in that day who were disposed to follow Christ.
The chances were that they would be called upon to give up all--even
life--as the cost of their following. They would begin by a secret
taking leave, don't you see?'

'But the times are not such now,' Miss Frere ventured.

Pitt did not answer. He sat looking at the open page of his Bible,
evidently at work with the problem suggested there. The two women
looked at him; and his mother got rid as unobtrusively as possible of a
vexed and hot tear that would come.

'Mr. Dallas,' Miss Frere urged again, 'these are not times of
persecution any more. We can be Christians--disciples--and retain all
our friends and possessions; can we not?'

'Can we without "taking leave" of them?'

'Certainly. I think so.'

'I do not see it!' he said, after another pause. 'Do you think anybody
will be content to put self nowhere, as Christ did, giving up his whole
life and strength--and means--to the help and service of his fellow
men, _unless_ he has come to that mental attitude we were speaking of?
No, it seems to me, and the more I think of it the more it seems to me,
that to follow Christ means to give up seeking honour or riches or
pleasure, except so far as they may be sought and used in His service.
I mean _for_ His service. All I read in the Bible is in harmony with
that view.'

'But how comes it then that nobody takes it,' said Miss Frere uneasily.

'I suppose,' said Pitt slowly, 'for the same reason that has kept me
for years from accepting it;--because it was so difficult.'

'But religion cannot be a difficult thing, my dear son,' said Mrs.
Dallas.

He looked up at her and smiled, an affectionate, very expressive,
wistful smile.

'Can it not, mother? What mean Christ's words here,--"Whosoever doth
not _take up his cross_ and follow me, he cannot be my disciple"? The
cross meant shame, torture, and death, in those days; and I think in a
modified way, it means the same thing now. It means something.'

'But Mr. Pitt, you do not answer my argument,' Miss Frere repeated. 'If
this view is correct, how comes it that nobody takes it but you?'

'Your argument is where the dew is after a hot sun,--nowhere. Instead
of nobody taking this view, it has been held by hundreds of thousands,
who, like the first disciples, _have_ forsaken all and followed Him.
Rather than be false to it they have endured the loss of all things,
they have given up father and mother, they have borne torture and faced
the lions. In later days, they have been chased and worried from
hiding-place to hiding-place, they have been cut down by the sword,
buried alive, thrown from the tops of rocks, and burned at the stake.
And in peacefuller times they have left their homes and countries and
gone to the ends of the earth to tell the gospel. They have done what
was given them to do, without regarding the cost of it.'

'Then you think all the people who fill our churches are no Christians!'

'I say nothing about the people who fill our churches.'

Pitt rose here.

'But, Mr. Dallas, how can all the world be so mistaken? Our clergymen,
our bishops, do not preach such doctrine as you do, if I understand
you.'

'That has been a great puzzle to me,' he said.

'Is it not enough to make you doubt?'

'Can I question the words I have read to you?'

'No, but perhaps your interpretation of them.'

'When you have got down to the simplest possible English, there is no
room that I see for interpretation. "Follow me" can mean nothing but
"follow me;" and "forsaking all" is not a doubtful expression.'

The discussion would probably have gone on still further, but the elder
Dallas's step was heard in the house, and Pitt went away with his book.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

_A STAND_.


Mrs. Dallas was very deeply disturbed. She saw in these strange views
of Pitt's all sorts of possible dangers to what she had hoped would be
his future career in life. Even granting that they were a youthful
folly and would pass away, how soon would they pass away? and in the
meantime what chances Pitt might lose, what time might be wasted, what
fatal damage his prospects might suffer! And Pitt held a thing so fast
when he had once taken it up. Almost her only hope lay in Betty's
influence.

Betty herself was disturbed, much more than she cared to have known. If
_this_ fascination got hold of Pitt, she knew very well he would, for
the time at least, be open to no other. Her ordinary power would be
gone; he would see in her nothing but a talking machine with whom he
could discuss things. It was not speculation merely that busied his
thoughts now, she could see; not mere philosophy, or study of human
nature; Pitt was carrying all these Bible words in upon himself,
comparing them with himself, and working away at the discrepancy.
Something that he called conscience was engaged, and restless. Betty
saw that there was but one thing left for her to do. Diversion was not
possible; she could not hope to turn Pitt aside from his quest after
truth; she must seem to take part in it, and so gain her advantage from
what threatened to be her discomfiture.

The result of all which was, that after this there came to be a great
deal of talk between the two upon Bible subjects, intermingled with not
a little reading aloud from the Bible itself. This was at Betty's
instance, rather than Pitt's. When she could she got him out for a walk
or a drive; in the house (and truly, often out of the house too) she
threw herself with great apparent interest into the study of the
questions that had been started, along with others collateral, and
desired to learn and desired to discuss all that could be known about
them. So there were, as I said, continual Bible readings, mingled
occasionally with references to some old commentary; and Betty and Pitt
sat very near together, looking over the same page; and remained long
in talk, looking eagerly into one another's eyes. Mrs. Dallas was not
satisfied.

She came upon Betty one day in the verandah, just after Pitt had left
her. The young lady was sitting with her hand between the leaves of a
Bible, and a disturbed, far-away look in her eyes, which might have
been the questioning of a troubled conscience, or--of a very different
feeling. She roused up as Mrs. Dallas came to her, and put on a
somewhat wan smile.

'Where is Pitt?'

'Going to ride somewhere, I believe.'

'What have you got there? the Bible again? I don't believe in all this
Bible reading! Can't you get him off it?'

'It is the only thing to do now.'

'But cannot you get him off it?'

'Not immediately. Mr. Dallas takes a fancy hard.'

'So unlike him!' the mother went on. 'So unlike all he used to be. He
always took things "hard," as you say; but then it used to be science
and study of history, and collecting of natural curiosities, and
drawing. Have you seen any of Pitt's drawings? He has a genius for
that. Indeed, I think he has a genius for everything,' Mrs. Dallas said
with a sigh; 'and he used to be keen for distinguishing himself, and he
did distinguish himself everywhere, always; here at school and at
college, and then at Oxford. My dear, he distinguished himself at
_Oxford_. He was always a good boy, but not in the least foolish, or
superstitious, or the least inclined to be fanatical. And now, as far
as I can make out, he is for giving up everything!'

'He does nothing by halves.'

'No; but it is very hard, now when he is just reading law and getting
ready to take his place in the world--and he would take no mean place
in the world, Betty--it is hard! Why, he talks as if he would throw
everything up. I never would have thought it of Pitt, of all people. It
is due, I am convinced, to the influence of those dissenting friends of
his!'

'Who are they?' Miss Betty asked curiously.

'You have heard the name,' said Mrs. Dallas, lowering her voice, though
Pitt was not within hearing. 'They used to live here. It was a Colonel
Gainsborough--English, but of a dissenting persuasion. That kind of
thing seems to be infectious.'

'He must have been a remarkable man, if his influence could begin so
early and last so long.'

'Well, it was not just that only. There was a daughter'--

'And a love affair?' asked Miss Betty, with a slight laugh which
covered a sudden down-sinking of her heart.

'Oh dear no! she was a child; there was no thought of such a thing. But
Pitt was fond of her, and used to go roaming about the fields with her
after flowers. My son is a botanist; I don't know if you have found it
out.'

'And those were the people he went to New York to seek?'

'Yes, and could not find--most happily.'

Miss Betty mused. Certainly Pitt was 'persistent.' And now he had got
this religious idea in his head, would there be any managing it, or
him? It did not frighten Miss Betty, so far as the religious idea
itself was concerned; she reflected sagely that a man might be worse
things than philanthropic, or even than pious. She had seen wives made
unhappy by neglect, and others made miserable by the dissipated habits
or the ungoverned tempers of their husbands; a man need not be
unendurable because he was true and thoughtful and conscientious, or
even devout. She could bear that, quite easily; the only thing was,
that in thoughts which possessed Pitt lately he had passed out of her
influence; beyond her reach. All she could do was to follow him into
this new and very unwonted sphere, and seem to be as earnest as he was.
He met her, he reasoned with her, he read to her, but Betty did not
feel sure that she got any nearer to him, nevertheless. She was shrewd
enough to divine the reason.

'Mr. Pitt,' she said frankly to him one day, when the talk had been
eager in the same line it had taken that first day on the verandah, and
both parties had held the same respective positions with regard to each
other,--'Mr. Pitt, are you fighting me, or yourself?'

He paused and looked at her, and half laughed.

'You are right,' said he. And then he went off, and for the present
that was all Miss Betty gained by her motion.

Nobody saw much of Pitt during the rest of the day. The next morning,
after breakfast, he came out to the two ladies where as usual they were
sitting at work. It was another September day of sultry heat, yet the
verandah was also in the morning a pleasant place, sweet with the
honeysuckle fragrance still lingering, and traversed by a faint
intermittent breeze. Both ladies raised their heads to look at the
young man as he came towards them, and then, struck by something in his
face, could not take their eyes away. He came straight to his mother
and stood there in front of her, looking down and meeting her look;
Miss Frere could not see how, but evidently it troubled Mrs. Dallas.

'What is it now, Pitt?' she asked.

'I have come to tell you, mother. I have come to tell you that I have
given up fighting.'

'Fighting!?'

'Yes. The battle is won, and I have lost, and gained. I have given up
fighting, mother, and I am Christ's free man.'

'What?' exclaimed Mrs. Dallas bewilderedly.

'It is true, mother. I am Christ's servant. The things are the same.
How should I not be the servant, the _bond-servant_, of Him who has
made a free man of me?'

His tone was not excited; it was quiet and sweet; but Mrs. Dallas was
excited.

'A free man? My boy, what are you saying? Were you not always free?'

'No, mother. I was in such bonds, that I have been struggling for years
to do what was right--what I knew was right--and was unable.'

'To do what was right? My boy, how you talk! You _always_ did what was
right.'

'I was never Christ's servant, mamma.'

'What delusion is this!' cried Mrs. Dallas. 'My son, what do you mean?
You were baptized, you were confirmed, you were everything that you
ought to be. You cannot be better than you have always been.'

He smiled, stooped down and kissed her troubled face.

'I was never Christ's servant before,' he repeated. 'But I am His
servant now at last, all there is of me. I wanted you to know at once,
and Miss Frere, I wanted her to know it. She asked me yesterday whom I
was fighting? and I saw directly that I was fighting a won battle; that
my reason and conscience were entirely vanquished, and that the only
thing that held out was my will. I have given that up, and now I am the
Lord's servant.'

'You were His servant before.'

'Never, in any true sense.'

'My dear, what difference?' asked Mrs. Dallas helplessly.

'It was nominal merely.'

'And now?'

'Now it is not nominal; it is real. I have come to know and love my
Master. I am His for life and death; and now His commands seem the
pleasantest things in the world to me.'

'But you obeyed them always?'

'No, mamma, I did not. I obeyed nothing, in the last resort, but my own
supreme will.'

'But, Pitt, you say you have come to know; what time has there been for
any such change?'

'Not much time,' he replied; 'and I cannot tell how it is; but it
seemed as if, so soon as I had given up the struggle and yielded,
scales fell from my eyes. I cannot tell how it was; but all at once I
seemed to see the beauty of Christ, which I never saw before; and,
mamma, the sight has filled me with joy. Nothing now to my mind is more
reasonable than His demands, or more delightful than yielding obedience
to them.'

'Demands? what demands?' said Mrs. Dallas.

Her son repeated the words with which the twelfth chapter of Romans
begins.

'"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service; and be not conformed to this world."'

'But, my dear, that means'--

'It means all.'

'How all?'

'There is nothing more left to give, when this sacrifice is presented.
It covers the whole ground. The sacrifice is a living sacrifice, but it
gives all to God as entirely as the offering that imaged it went up in
smoke and flame.'

'What sacrifice imaged it?'

'The burnt-sacrifice of old. That always meant consecration.'

'How do you know? You are not a clergyman.'

Pitt smiled again, less brightly. 'True, mother, but I have been
studying all this for years, in the Bible and in the words of others
who _were_ clergymen; and now it is all plain before me. It became so
as soon as I was willing to obey it.'

'And what are you going to do?'

'Do? I cannot say yet. I am a soldier but just enlisted, and do not
know where my orders will place me or what work they will give me. Only
I _have_ enlisted; and that is what I wanted you to know at once.
Mother, it is a great honour to be a soldier of Christ.'

'I should think,--if I did not see you and hear your voice,--I should
certainly think I heard a Methodist talking. I suppose that is the way
they do.'

'Did you ever hear one talk, mother?'

'No, and do not want to hear one, even if it were my own son!' she
answered angrily.

'But in all that I have been saying, if they say it too, the Methodists
are right, mother. A redeemed sinner is one bought with a price, and
thenceforth neither his spirit nor his body can be his own. And his
happiness is not to be his own.'

Mrs. Dallas was violently moved, yet she had much self-command and
habitual dignity of manner, and would not break down now. More pitiful
than tears was the haughty gesture of her head as she turned it aside
to hide the quivering lips. And more tender than words was the air with
which her son presently stooped and took her hand.

'Mother!' he said gently and tenderly.

'Pitt, I never would have believed this of you!' she said with bitter
emphasis.

'You never could have believed anything so good of me.'

'What are you going to _do?_' she repeated vehemently. 'What does all
this amount to? or is it anything but dissenting rant?'

'Anything but that,' he answered gravely. 'Mother, do you remember the
words,--"No man when he hath lighted a lamp covereth it with a vessel,
or putteth it under a bed; but putteth it on a stand, that they which
enter in may see the light"? Every Christian is such a lighted lamp,
intended for some special place and use. My special use and place I do
not yet know; but this I know plainly, that my work in the world, one
way or another, must be the Lord's work. For that I live henceforth.'

'You will go into the Church?' cried his mother.

'Not necessarily.'

'You will give up reading law?'

'No, I think not. At present it seems to me I had better finish what I
have begun. But if I do, mother, my law will be only one of the means I
have to work with for that one end.'

'And I suppose your money would be another?'

'Undoubtedly.'

'What has money to do with teaching people?' Miss Frere asked. It was
the first word she had spoken; she spoke it seriously, not mockingly.
The question brought his eyes round to her.

'Do you ask that?' said he. 'Every unreasoning, ignorant creature of
humanity understands it. The love that would win them for heaven would
also help them on earth; and if they do not see the one thing, they do
not believe in the other.'

'Then-- But-- What do you propose?'

'It is simple enough,' he said.

'It is too simple for Betty and me,' said his mother. 'I would be
obliged to you, Pitt, to answer her.'

The young man's countenance changed; a shadow fell over it which raised
Miss Frere's sympathy. He went into the house, however, for a Bible,
and coming back with it sat down and read quietly and steadfastly the
beautiful words in Isaiah:

'"To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to
let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke. ... To deal
thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out
to thy house; when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that
thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh."'

'It would take a good deal of money, certainly,' said Miss Frere, 'to
do all that; indeed, I hardly think all the fortunes in the world would
be sufficient.'

Pitt made no answer. He sat looking down at the page from which he had
been reading.

'Nobody is required to do more than his part of the work,' said Mrs.
Dallas. 'If Pitt will be contented with that'--

'What is my part of it, mother?'

'Why, your share; what you can do properly and comfortably, without any
fanaticism of sacrifice.'

'Must I not do all I can?'

'No, not all you _can_. You _could_ spend your whole fortune in it.'

'I was thinking, easily,' observed Miss Frere.

'What is the Bible rule? "When thou seest the naked, that thou cover
him"--"that ye break every yoke." And, "he that hath two coats, let him
impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do
likewise."'

'You can find Scripture to quote for everything, said Mrs. Dallas,
rising in anger; 'that is the way Methodists and fanatics always do, as
I have heard. But I can tell you one thing, Pitt, which you may not
have taken into account; if you persist in this foolishness, your
father, I know, will take care that the fortune you have to throw away
shall not be large!'

With these words she swept into the house. The two left behind were for
some moments very still. Pitt had drooped his head a little, and rested
his brow in his hand; Miss Betty watched him. Her dismay and dislike of
Pitt's disclosures were scarcely less than his mother's, but different.
Disappointed pride was not here in question. That he should give up a
splendid and opulent career did not much trouble her. In the first
place, he might modify his present views; in the second place, if he
did not, if he lived up to his principles, there was something in her
which half recognised the beauty and dignity and truth of such a life.
But in either case, alas, alas! how far was he drifted away out of her
sphere, and beyond her reach? For the present, at least, his mind was
utterly taken up by this one great subject; there was no room in it
left for light things; love skirmishes could not be carried on over the
ground he now occupied; he was wholly absorbed in his new decisions and
experiences, and likely to be engaged with the consequences of them.
Betty was sorry for him just now, for she saw that he felt pain; and at
the same time she admired him more than ever. His face was more sweet,
she thought, and yet more strong, than she had ever seen it; his manner
to his mother was perfect. So had not been her manner towards him. He
had been gentle, steadfast, and true, manly and tender. 'Happy will be
the woman that will share his life, whatever it be!' thought Betty,
with some constriction of heart; but to bring herself into that
favoured place she saw little chance now. She longed to say a word of
some sort that might sound like sympathy or intelligence; but she could
not find it, and wisely held her peace.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

_LIFE PLANS_.


Happily or unhappily,--it was as people looked at it,--Pitt's free days
in America were drawing to a close. There were few still remaining to
him before he must leave Seaforth and home, and go back to his reading
law in the Temple. In those days there was a little more discussion of
his new views and their consequences between him and his mother, but
not much; and none at all between him and his father.

'Pitt is not a fool,' he had said, when Mrs. Dallas, in her distress,
confided to him Pitt's declaration; 'I can trust him not to make an ass
of himself; and so can you, wife.'

'But he is very strong when he takes a thing in his head; always was.'

'This thing will get out of his head again, you will see.'

'I do not believe it. It isn't his way.'

'One thing is certain,--I shall never give my money to a fool to make
ducks and drakes with; and you may hint as much to him.'

'It would be very unwise policy,' said Mrs. Dallas thoughtfully.

'Then let it alone. I have no idea there is any need. You may depend
upon it, London and law will scare all this nonsense away, fast enough.'

Mrs. Dallas felt no comforting assurance of the kind. She watched her
son during the remaining days of his presence with them--watched him
incessantly; so did Betty Frere, and so, in truth, secretly, did his
father. Pitt was rather more quiet than usual; there was not much other
change to be observed in him, or so Mrs. Dallas flattered herself.

'I see a difference,' said Miss Frere, to whom she communicated this
opinion.

'What is it?' asked the mother hastily. For she had seen it too.

'It is not just easy to put it in words; but I see it. Mrs. Dallas,
there is a wonderful _rest_ come into his face.'

'Rest?' said the other. 'Pitt was never restless, in a bad sense; there
was no keep still to him; but that is not what you mean.'

'That is not what I mean. I never in my life saw anybody look so happy.'

'Can't you do something with him?'

'He gives me no chance.'

It may seem strange that a good mother should wish to interfere with
the happiness of a good son; but neither she nor Miss Frere adverted to
that anomaly.

'I should not wonder one bit,' said Mrs. Dallas bitterly, 'if he were
to disinherit himself.'

That would be bad, Betty agreed--deplorable; however, the thought of
her own loss busied her most just now; not of what Pitt might lose. Two
days before his departure all these various feelings of the various
persons in the little family received a somewhat violent jar.

It was evening. Miss Frere and Pitt had had a ride that afternoon--a
long and very spirited one. It might be the last they would take
together, and she had enjoyed it with the keenness of that
consciousness; as a grain of salt intensifies sweetness, or as discords
throw out the value of harmony. Pitt had been bright and lively as much
as ever, the ride had been gay, and the one regret on Betty's mind as
they dismounted was that she had not more time before her to try what
she could do. Pitt, as yet at least, had not grown a bit precise or
sanctimonious; he had not talked nonsense, indeed, but then he never
had paid her the very poor compliment of doing that. All the more, she
as well as the others was startled by what came out in the evening.

All supper-time Pitt was particularly talkative and bright. Mrs.
Dallas's face took a gleam from the brightness, and even Mr. Dallas
roused up to bear his part in the conversation. When supper was done
they still sat round the table, lingering in talk. Then, after a slight
pause which had set in, Pitt leaned forward a little and spoke, looking
alternately at one and the other of his parents.

'Mother,--father,--I wish you would do one thing before I go away.'

At the change in his tone all three present had pricked up their ears,
and every eye was now upon him.

'What is that, Pitt?' his mother said anxiously.

'Have family prayer.'

If a bombshell had suddenly alighted on the table and there exploded,
there would have been, no doubt, more feeling of fright, but not more
of shocked surprise. Dumb silence followed. Angry eyes were directed
towards the speaker from the top and from the bottom of the table. Miss
Frere cast down hers with the inward thought, 'Oh, you foolish, foolish
fellow! what did you do that for, and spoil everything!' Pitt waited a
little.

'It is duty,' he said. 'You yourselves will grant me that.'

'And you fancy it is _your_ duty to remind us of ours!' said his
father, with contained scorn.

The mother's agitation was violent--so violent that she had difficulty
to command herself. What it was that moved her so painfully she could
not have told; her thoughts were in too much of a whirl. Between anger,
and fear, and something else, she was in the greatest confusion, and
not able to utter a syllable. Betty sat internally railing at Pitt's
folly.

'The only question is, Is it duty?--in either case,' the son said
steadfastly.

'Exactly!' said his father. 'Well, you have done yours; and I will do
mine.'

His wife wondered at his calmness, and guessed that it was studied.
Neither of them was prepared for Pitt's next word.

'Will you?' he said simply. 'And will you let me make a beginning now?
Because I am going away?'

'Do what you like,' said the older man, with indescribable expression.
Betty interpreted it to be restrained rage. His wife thought it was a
moved conscience, or mere policy and curiosity; she could not tell
which. The words were enough, however, whatever had moved them. Pitt
took a Bible and read, still sitting at the table, the Parable of the
Talents; and then he kneeled down. The elder Dallas never stirred.
Betty knelt at once. Mrs. Dallas sat still at first, but then slipped
from her chair to the floor and buried her face in her hands, where
tears that were exceedingly bitter flowed beyond all her power to
hinder them. For Pitt was praying, and to his mother's somewhat shocked
astonishment, not in any words from a book, but in words--where did he
get them?--that broke her heart. They were solemn and sweet, tender and
simple; there was neither boldness nor shyness in them, although there
was a frankness at which Mrs. Dallas wondered, along with the
tenderness that quite subdued her.

The third one kneeling there was moved differently. The fountain of her
tears was not touched at all, neither had she any share in the passion
of displeasure which filled the father and mother. Yet she was in a
disturbance almost as complete as theirs. It was a bitter and secret
trouble, which as a woman she had to keep to herself, over which her
head bowed as she knelt there. Just for that minute she might bow her
head and confess to her trouble, while no one could see; and her head,
poor girl, went low. She did not in the least approve of Pitt's
proceedings; she did not sympathize with his motives; at the same time
they did not make her like him the less. On the contrary, and Betty
felt it was on the contrary, she could not help admiring his bravery,
and she was almost ready to worship his strength. Somebody brave enough
to avow truth that is unwelcome, and strong enough to do what goes
against the grain with himself; such a person is not to be met with
every day, and usually excites the profound respect of his fellows,
even when they do not like him. But Betty liked this one, and liked him
the more for doing the things she disliked, and it drove her to the
bounds of desperation to feel that in the engrossment of his new
principles he was carried away from her, and out of her power. Added to
all this was the extreme strangeness of the present experience.
Absolutely kneeling round the dinner-table!--kneeling to pray! Betty
had never known such a thing, nor conceived the possibility of such a
thing. In an unconsecrated place, led by unconsecrated lips, in words
nowhere set down; what could equal the irregularity and the
impropriety? The two women, in their weakness, kneeling, and the master
of the house showing by his unmoved posture that he disallowed the
whole thing! Incongruous! unfortunate! I am bound to say that Betty
understood little of the words she so disapproved; the sea under a
stormy wind is not more uneasy than was her spirit; and towards the end
her one special thought and effort was bent upon quieting the
commotion, and at least appearing unmoved. She was pretty safe, for the
other members of the family had each enough to busy him without taking
much note of her.

Pitt had but a day or two more to stay; and Miss Frere felt an
irresistible impulse to force him into at least one talk more. She
hardly knew what she expected, or what she wished from it; only, to let
him go so, without one more word, was unbearable. She wanted to get
nearer to him, if she could, if she might not bring him nearer to her;
and at any rate she wanted the bitter-sweet pleasure of arguing with
him. Nothing might come of it, but she must have the talk if she could.
So she took the first chance that offered.

The family atmosphere was a little oppressive the next morning; and
after breakfast Mr. and Mrs. Dallas both disappeared. Betty seized her
opportunity, and reminded Pitt that he had never showed her his
particular room, his old workshop and play place. 'It was not much to
see,' he said; however, he took her through the house, and up the open
flight of steps, where long ago Esther had been used to go for her
lessons. The room looked much as it had done at that time; for during
Pitt's stay at home he had pulled out one thing after another from its
packing or hiding place; and now, mounted birds and animals, coins,
shells, minerals, presses, engravings, drawings, and curiosities, made
a delightful litter; delightful, for it was not disorderly; only gave
one the feeling of a wealth of tastes and pursuits, every one of them
pursued to enjoyment. Betty studied the place and the several objects
in it with great and serious attention.

'And you understand all these things!' said she.

'So little, that I am ashamed to speak of it.'

'I know!' said Betty; 'that is what nobody says whose knowledge is
small. It takes a good deal of knowing to perceive how much one does
_not_ know.'

'That is true.'

'And what becomes of all these riches when you are gone away?'

'They remain in seclusion. I must pack them up to-day. It is a job I
have reserved to the last, for I like to have them about while I am
here.'

He began as he spoke to put away some little articles, and got out
paper to wrap up others.

'And how came you by all these tastes? Mr. and Mrs. Dallas do not share
them, I think.'

'No. Impossible to say. Inherited from some forgotten ancestor,
perhaps.'

'Were there ever any Independents or Puritans among your ancestors?'

'No!' said Pitt, with a laughing look at her. 'The record is clean, I
believe, on both sides of the house. My mother has not that on her
conscience.'

'But you sympathize with such supposititious ancestors?'

'Why do you say so?'

'Mr. Pitt,' said Betty, sitting down and folding her hands seriously in
her lap, 'I wish you would let me ask you one thing.'

'Ask it certainly,' said he.

'But it is really not my business; only, I am puzzled, and interested,
and do not know what to think. You will not be displeased?'

'I think I can answer for that.'

'Then do tell me why, when you are just going away and cannot carry it
on, you should have done what you did last night?'

'As I am just going away, don't you see, it was my only chance.'

'But I do not understand why you did it. You knew it would be something
like an earthquake; and what is the use of earthquakes?'

'You remember the Eastern theory--Burmese, is it? or
Siamese?--according to which the world rests on the heads of four
elephants; when one of the elephants shakes his head, there is an
earthquake. But must not the elephant therefore move his head?'

'But the world does not rest on _your_ head.'

'I do not forget that,' said Pitt gravely. 'Not the world, but a small
piece of it does rest on my head, as on that of every other human
creature. On the right position and right movement of every one of us
depends more than we know. What we have to do is to keep straight and
go straight.'

'But did you think it was _duty_ to do what you did last night?'

'I did it in that faith.'

'I wish you would explain to me!' cried the lady. 'I cannot understand.
I believe you, of course; but _why_ did you think it duty? It just
raised a storm; you know it did; they did not like it; and it would
only make them more opposed to your new principles. I do not see how it
could do any good.'

'Yes,' said Pitt, who meanwhile was going on with his packing and
putting away. 'I know all that. But don't you think people ought to
show their colours, as much as ships at sea?'

'Ships at sea do not always show their colours.'

'If they do not, when there is occasion, it is always ground for
suspicion. It shows that they are for some reason either afraid or
ashamed to announce themselves.'

'I do not understand!' said Miss Frere perplexedly. 'Why should _you_
show your colours?'

'I said I was moved by duty to propose prayers last night. It was more
than that.' Pitt stopped in his going about the room and stood opposite
his fair opponent, if she can be called so, facing her with steady eyes
and a light in them which drew her wonder. 'It was more than duty.
Since I have come to see the goodness of Christ, and the happiness of
belonging to Him, I wish exceedingly that everybody else should see it
and know it as I do.'

'And, if I remember, you intimated once that it was to be the business
of your life to make them know it?'

'What do you think of that purpose?'

'It seems to me extravagant.'

'Otherwise, fanatical!'

'I would not express it so. But what are clergymen for, if this is your
business?'

'To whom was the command given?'

'To the apostles and their successors.'

'No, it was given to the whole band of disciples; the order to go into
all the world and make disciples of every creature.'

'All the disciples!'

'And to all the disciples that other command was given,--"Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." And of all the
things that a man can want and desire to have given him, there is
nothing comparable for preciousness to the knowledge of Christ.'

'But, Mr. Dallas, this is not the general way of thinking?'

'Among those who'--he paused--'who are glad in the love of Christ, I
think it must be.'

'Then what are those who are not "glad" in that way?'

'Greatly to be pitied!'

There was a little pause. Pitt went on busily with his work. Betty sat
and looked at him, and looked at the varieties of things he was putting
under shelter or out of the way. One after another, all bearing their
witness to the tastes and appetite for knowledge possessed by the
person who had gathered them together. Yes, if Pitt was not a
scientist, he was very fond of sciences; and if he were not to be
called an artist in some kinds, he was full of feeling for art. What an
anomaly he was! how very unlike this room looked to the abode of a
fanatic!

'What is to become of all these things?' she asked, pursuing her
thoughts.

'They will be safe here till I return.'

'But I mean-- You do not understand me. I was thinking rather, what
would become of all the tastes and likings to which they bear evidence?
How do they match with your new views of things?'

'How do they not match?' said Pitt, stopping short.

'You spoke of giving up all things, did you not?'

'The Bible does,' said Pitt, smiling. 'But that is, _if need be_ for
the service or honour of God. Did you think they were to be renounced
in all cases?'

'Then what did you mean?'

'The Bible means, evidently, that we are to be so minded, toward them
and toward God, that we are ready to give them up and do give them up
just so far and so fast as His service calls for it. That is all, and
it is enough!'

Betty watched him a little longer, and then began again.

'You say, it is to be the business of your life to--well, how shall I
put it?--to set people right, in short. Why don't you begin at the
beginning, and attack me?'

'I don't know how to point my guns.'

'Why? Do you think me such a hard case?'

He hesitated, and said 'Yes.'

'Why?' she asked again, with a mixture of mortification and curiosity.

'Your defences have withstood all I have been able to bring to bear in
the shape of ordnance.'

'Why do you say that? I have been very much interested in all I have
heard you say.'

'I know that; and not in the least moved.'

Betty was vexed. Had her tactics failed so utterly? Did Pitt think she
was a person quite and irremediably out of his plane, and inaccessible
to the interests which he ranked first of all? She had wanted to get
nearer to him. Had she so failed? She would not let the tears come into
her eyes, but they were ready, if she would have let them.

'So you give me up!' she said.

'I have no alternative.'

'You have lost all hope of me?'

'No. But at present your eyes are so set in another direction that you
will not look the way I have been pointing you. Of course, you do not
see what I see.'

'In what direction are my eyes so set?'

'I will not presume to tell Miss Frere what she knows so much better
than I do.'

Betty bit her lip.

'What is in that cabinet?' she asked suddenly.

'Coins.'

'Oh, coins! I never could see the least attractiveness in coins.'

'That was because--like some other things--they were not looked at.'

'Well, what _is_ the interest of them?'

'To find out, I am afraid you must give them your attention. They are
like witnesses, stepping out from the darkness of the past and telling
the history of it--history in which they moved and had a part, you
understand.'

'But the history of the past is not so delightful, is it, that one
would care much about hearing the witnesses? What is in that other
cabinet, where you are standing?'

'That contains my herbarium.'

'All that? You don't mean that all those drawers are filled with dried
flowers?'

'Pretty well filled. There is room for some more.'

'How you must have worked!'

'That was play.'

'Then what do you call work?'

'Well, reading law rather comes into that category.'

'You expect to go on reading law?'

'For the present. I approve of finishing things when they are begun.'

'Mr. Dallas, what are you going to _do?_ In what, after all, are you
going to be unlike other men? Your mother seems to apprehend some
disastrous and mysterious change in all your prospects; I cannot see
the necessity of that. In what are you going to be other than she
wishes you to be? Are not her fears mistaken?'

Pitt smiled a grave smile; again stopped in his work and stood opposite
her.

'I might say "yes" and "no,"' he answered. 'I do not expect to have a
red cross embroidered on my sleeve, like the old crusaders. But judge
yourself. Can those who live to do the will of God be just like those
whose one concern is to do their own will?'

'Mr. Dallas, you insinuate, or your words might be taken to insinuate,
that all the rest of us are in the latter class!'

'Whose will do you do?' he said.

There was no answer, for Betty had too much pluck to speak falsely, and
too much sense not to know what was truth. She accordingly did not say
anything, and after waiting a minute or two Pitt went on with his
preparations, locking up drawers, packing up boxes, taking down and
putting away the many objects that filled the room. There was not a
little work of this sort to be done, and he went on with it busily, and
with an evidently trained and skilled hand.

'Then, after finishing with law, do you expect to come back here and
unpack all these pretty things again?' she said finally.

'Perhaps. I do not know.'

'Perhaps you will settle in England?'

'I do not yet know what is the work that I have to do in the world. I
_shall_ know, but I do not know now. It may be to go to India, or to
Greenland; or it may be to come here. Though I do not now see what I
should do in Seaforth that would be worth living for.'

India or Greenland! For a young man who was heir to no end of money,
and would have acres of land! Miss Betty perceived that here was
something indeed very different from the general run of rich young men,
and that Mrs. Dallas had not been so far wrong in her forebodings. 'How
very absurd!' she said to herself as she went away down the open
staircase; 'and what a pity!'


CHAPTER XXXIX.

_SKIRMISHING_.


To the great chagrin of his mother, and, indeed, of everybody, Pitt
took his departure a few days before the necessary set termination of
his visit. He must, he declared, have a few days to run down from
London into the country and find out the Gainsborough family; if
Colonel Gainsborough and his daughter had really gone home, he must
know.

'What on earth do you want to know for?' his lather had angrily asked.
'What concern is it to you, in any way? Pitt, I wish you would take all
the time you have and use it to make yourself agreeable to Miss Frere.
Where could you do better?'

'I have no time for that now, sir.'

'Time! What is time? Don't you admire her?'

'Everyone must do that.'

'I have an idea she don't dislike you. It would suit your mother and me
very well. She has not money, but she has everything else. There has
been no girl more admired in Washington these two winters past; no
girl. You would have a prize, I can tell you, that many a one would
like to hinder your getting.'

'I have no time, sir, now; and I must find out my old friends, first of
all.'

'Do you mean, you want to marry _that_ girl?' said Mr. Dallas,
imprudently flaming out.

Pitt was at the moment engaged in mending up a precious old volume,
which by reason of age and use had become dangerously dilapidated. He
was manipulating skilfully, as one accustomed to the business, with awl
and a large needle, surrounded by his glue-pot and bits of leather and
paper. At the question he lifted up his head and looked at his father.
Mr. Dallas did not like the look; it was too keen and had too much
recognition in it; he feared he had unwarily showed his play. But Pitt
answered then quietly, going on with his work again.

'I said nothing of that, sir; I do not know anything about that. My old
friends may be in distress; both or one of them; it is not at all
unlikely, I think. If things had gone well with them, you would have
been almost sure to hear of their whereabouts at least. I made a
promise, at any rate, and I am bound to find them, one side or the
other of the Atlantic.'

'Don Quixote!' muttered his father. 'Colonel Gainsborough, I have no
doubt, has gone home to his people, whom he ought never to have left.'

'In that case I can certainly find them.'

Mr. Dallas seldom made the mistake of spoiling his cause with words; he
let the matter drop, though his mouth was full of things he would have
liked to speak.

So the time came for Pitt's departure, and he went; and the two women
he left behind him hardly dared to look at each other; the one lest she
should betray her sorrow, and the other lest she should seem to see it.
Betty honestly suffered. She had found Pitt's society delightful; it
had all the urbanity without the emptiness of that she was accustomed
to. Whether right or wrong, he was undoubtedly a person in earnest, who
meant his life to be something more than a dream or a play, and who had
higher ends in view than to understand dining, or even to be an
acknowledged critic of light literature, or a leader of fashion. Higher
ends even than to be at the head of the State or a leader of its
armies. There was enough natural nobleness in Betty to understand Pitt,
at least in a degree, and to be mightily attracted by all this. And his
temper was so fine, his manners so pleasant, his tender deference to
his mother so beautiful. Ah, such a man's wife would be well sheltered
from some of the harshest winds that blow in the face of human nature!
Even if he were a little fanatical, it was a fanaticism which Betty
half hoped, half inconsistently feared, would fade away with time. He
had stayed just long enough to kindle a tire in her heart, which now
she could not with a blow or a breath extinguish; not long enough for
the fire to catch any loose tinder lying about on the outskirts of his.
Pitt rode away heart-whole, she was obliged to confess to herself, so
far, at least, as she was concerned; and Betty had nothing to do now
but to feel how that fire bit her, and to stifle the smoke of it. Mrs.
Dallas was a woman and a mother, and she saw what Betty would not have
had her see for any money.

'_I_ think Pitt was taken with her,' she said to her husband, as one
seeks to strengthen a faint belief by putting it into words.

'He is taken with nothing but his own obstinacy!' growled Mr. Dallas.

'His obstinacy never troubled you,' said the mother. 'Pitt was always
like that, but never for anything bad.'

'It's for something foolish, then; and that will do as well.'

'Did you sound him?'

'Yes!'

'And what did he say?'

'Said he must see Esther Gainsborough first, confound him!'

'Esther Gainsborough! But he tried and could not find them.'

'He will try on the other side now. He'll waste his time running all
over England to discover the family place; and then he will know that
there is more looking to be done in America.'

'And he talked of coming over next year! Husband, he must not come. We
must go over there.'

'Next summer. Yes, that is the only thing to do.'

'And we will take Betty Frere along with us.'

Mrs. Dallas said nothing of this scheme at present to the young lady,
though it comforted herself. Perhaps it would have comforted Betty too,
whose hopes rested on the very faint possibility of another summer's
gathering at Seaforth. That was a very doubtful possibility; the hope
built upon it was vaporously unsubstantial. She debated with herself
whether the best thing were not to take the first passable offer that
should present itself, marry and settle down, and so deprive herself of
the power of thinking about Pitt, and him of the fancy that she ever
had thought about him. Poor girl, she had verified the truth of the
word which speaks about going on hot coals; she had burned her feet.
She had never done it before; she had played with a dozen men at
different times, allowed them to come near enough to be looked at;
dallied with them, discussed, and rejected, successively, without her
own heart ever even coming in danger; as to danger to their's, that
indeed had not been taken into consideration, or had not excited any
scruple. Now, now, the fire bit her, and she could not stifle it; and a
grave doubt came over her whether even that expedient of marriage might
be found able to stifle it. She went away from Seaforth a few days
after Pitt's departure, a sadder woman than she had come to it, though,
I fear, scarce a wiser.

On her way to Washington she tarried a few days in New York; and there
it chanced that she had a meeting which, in the young lady's then state
of mind, had a tremendous interest for her.

Society in New York at that day was very little like society there now.
Even granting that the same principles of human nature underlay its
developments, the developments were different. Small companies, even of
fashionable people, could come together for an evening; dancing,
although loved and practised, did not quite exclude conversation;
supper was a far less magnificent affair; and fashion itself was much
more necessarily and universally dependent on the accessories of birth,
breeding, and education, than is the case at present. It was known who
everybody was; parvenus were few; and there was still a flavour left of
old-world traditions and colonial antecedents. So, when Miss Frere was
invited to one of the best houses in the city to spend the evening, she
was not surprised to find only a moderate little company assembled, and
dresses and appointments on an easy and unostentatious footing, which
now is nearly unheard of. There was elegance enough, however, both in
the dresses and persons of many of those present; and Betty was quite
in her element, finding herself as usual surrounded by attentive and
admiring eyes, and able to indulge her love of conversation; for this
young lady liked talking better than dancing. Indeed, there was no
dancing in the early part of the evening; it was rather a musical
company, and Betty's favourite amusement was often interrupted; for the
music was too good, and the people present too well-bred, to allow of
that jumble of sounds musical and unmusical which is so distressing,
and alas! not so rare.

Several bits of fine, old-fashioned music had been given, from Mozart
and Beethoven and Handel; and Betty had got into full swing of
conversation again, when a pause around her gave notice that another
performer was taking her seat at the piano. Betty checked her speech
with a little impulse of vexation, and cast her eyes across the room.

'Who is it now?' she asked.

There was a little murmur of question and answer, for the gentlemen
immediately at hand did not know; then she was told, 'It is a Miss
Gainsborough.'

'Gainsborough!' Betty's eyes grew large, and her face took a sudden
gravity. 'What Gainsborough?'

Nobody knew. 'English, I believe,' somebody said.

All desire to talk died out of Betty's lips; she became as silent as
the most rigid decorum could have demanded, and applied herself to
listen, and of course those around her were becomingly silent also.
What was the astonishment of them all, to hear the notes of a hymn, and
then the hymn itself, sung by a sweet voice with very clear accent, so
that every word was audible! The hymn was not known to Miss Frere; it
was fine and striking; and the melody, also unfamiliar, was exceedingly
simple. Everybody listened, that was manifest; it was more than the
silence of politeness which reigned in the rooms until the last note
was ended. And Betty listened more eagerly than anybody, and a strange
thrill ran through her. The voice which sang the hymn was not finer,
not so fine as many a one she had heard; it was thoroughly sweet and
had a very full and rich tone; its power was only moderate. The
peculiarity lay in the manner with which the meaning was breathed into
the notes. Betty could not get rid of the fancy that it was a spirit
singing, and not a woman. Simpler musical utterance she had never
heard, nor any, in her life, that so went to the heart. She listened,
and wondered as she listened what it was that so moved her. The voice
was tender, pleading, joyous, triumphant. How anybody should dare sing
such words in a mixed company, Betty could not conceive; yet she envied
the singer; and heard with a strange twinge at her heart the words of
the chorus, which was given with the most penetrating ring of truth--


  'Glory, glory, glory, glory,
  Glory be to God on high,
  Glory, glory, glory, glory,
  Sing His praises through the sky;
  Glory, glory, glory, glory,
  Glory to the Father give:
  Glory, glory, glory, glory,
  Sing His praises, all that live!'


The hymn went on to offer Christ's salvation to all who would have it;
and closed with a variation of the chorus, taken from the song of the
redeemed in heaven,--'Worthy is the Lamb that was slain.'

As sweet and free as the jubilant shout of a bird the notes rang; with
a _lift_ in them, however, which the unthinking creature neither knows
nor can express. Betty's eye roved once or twice round the room during
the singing to see how the song was taken by the rest of the company.
All listened, but she could perceive that some were bored and some
others shocked. Others looked curiously grave.

The music ceased and the singer rose. Nobody proposed that she should
sing again.

'What do you think of the good taste of that?' one of Betty's cavaliers
asked her softly.

'Oh, don't talk about good taste! Who is she?'

'I--really, I don't know--I believe somebody said she was a teacher
somewhere. She has tried her hand on us, hasn't she?'

'A teacher!' Betty repeated the word, but gave no attention to the
question. She was looking across the room at the musician, who was
standing by the piano talking with a gentleman. The apartment was not
so large but that she could see plainly, while it was large enough to
save her from the charge of ill-bred staring. She saw a moderately tall
figure, as straight as an Indian, with the head exquisitely set on the
shoulders, the head itself covered with an abundance of pale brown
hair, disposed at the back in a manner of careless grace which reminded
Betty of a head of Sappho on an old gem in her possession. The face she
could not see quite so well, for it was partly turned from her; Betty's
attention centred on the figure and carriage. A pang of jealous rivalry
shot through her as she looked. There was not a person in the room that
carried her head so nobly, nor whose pose was so stately and graceful;
yet, stately as it was, it had no air of proud self-consciousness, nor
of pride at all; it was not that; it was simple, maidenly dignity, not
dignity aped. Betty read so much, and rapidly read what else she could
see. She saw that the figure she was admiring was dressed but
indifferently; the black silk had certainly seen its best days, if it
was not exactly shabby; no ornaments whatever were worn with it. The
fashion of garments at that day was, as I have remarked, very trying to
any but a good figure, while it certainly showed such a one to
advantage. Betty knew her own figure could bear comparison with most;
the one she was looking at would bear comparison with any. Miss
Gainsborough was standing in the most absolute quiet, the arms crossed
over one another, with no ornament but their whiteness.

'A good deal of _aplomb_ there?' whispered one of Betty's attendants,
who saw whither her eyes had gone.

'_Aplomb!_' repeated Betty. 'That is not _aplomb!_'

'Isn't it? Why not?'

'It is something else,' said Betty, eyeing still the figure she was
commenting on. 'You don't speak of _balance_ unless--how shall I put
it? Don't you know what I mean?'

'No!' laughed her companion.

'You might save me the trouble of telling you, if you were clever. You
know you do not speak of "balance," except--well, except where either
the footing or the feet are somehow doubtful. You would not think of
"balance" as belonging to a mountain.'

'A mountain!' said the other, looking over at Esther, and still
laughing.

'Yes; I grant you there is not much in common between the two things;
only that element of undisturbableness. Do you know Miss Gainsborough?'

'I have not the honour. I have never met her before.'

'I must know her. Who can introduce me?' And finding her hostess at
this moment near her, Betty went on: 'Dear Mrs. Chatsworth, do take me
over and introduce me to Miss Gainsborough! I am filled with admiration
and curiosity. But first, who is she?'

'I really can tell you little. She is a great favourite of my friend
Miss Fairbairn; that is how I came to know her. She teaches in Mme.
Duval's school. She is English, I believe. Miss Fairbairn says she is
very highly accomplished; and I believe it is true.'

'Well, please introduce me. I am dying to know her.'

The introduction was made; the gentleman who had been talking to Miss
Gainsborough withdrew; the two girls were left face to face.

Yes, what a face! thought Betty, as soon as it was turned upon her; and
with every minute of their being together the feeling grew. Not like
any face she had ever seen in her life, Betty decided; what the
difference was it took longer to determine. Good features, with
refinement in every line of them; a fair, delicate skin, matching the
pale brown hair, Betty had seen as good repeatedly. What she had not
seen was what attracted her. The brow, broad and intellectual, had a
most beautiful repose upon it; and from under it looked forth upon
Betty two glorious grey eyes, pure, grave, thoughtful, penetrating,
sweet. Yet more than all the rest, perhaps, which struck Miss Frere,
was an expression, in mouth and eyes both, which is seen on no faces
but of those who have gone through discipline and have learned the
habit of self-renunciation, endurance, and loving ministry.

The two girls sat down together at Betty's instance.

'Will you forgive me?' she said. 'I am a stranger, but I do want to ask
you a question or two. May I? and will you hear me patiently? I see you
will.'

The other made a courteous, half smiling sign of assent, _not_ as if
she were surprised. Betty noticed that.

'It is very bold, for a stranger,' she went on, making her observations
while she spoke; 'but the thing is earnest with me, and I must seize my
chance, if it _is_ a chance. It has happened,'--she lowered her voice
somewhat and her words came slower,--'it has happened that I have been
studying the subject of religion a good deal lately; it interests me;
and I want to ask you, why did you sing that hymn?'

'That particular hymn?'

'No, no; I mean, why did you sing a hymn at all? It is not the usual
thing, you know.'

'May I ask you a counter question? What should be the motive with which
one sings, or does anything of the sort?'

'Motive? why, to please people, I suppose.'

'And you think my choice was not happy?'

'What does she ask me that for?' thought Betty; 'she knows, just as
well as I do, what people thought of it. What is she up to?' But aloud
she answered,--

'I think it was very happy, as regarded the choice of the hymn; it was
peculiar, but very effective. My question meant, why did you sing a
hymn at all?'

'I will tell you,' said the other. 'I do not know if you will
understand me. I sang that, because I have given myself to Christ, and
my voice must be used only as His servant.'

Quick as thought it flashed upon Betty, the words she had heard Pitt
Dallas quote so lately, quote and descant upon, about giving his body
'a living sacrifice.' 'How you two think alike!' was her instant
reflection; 'and how you would fit if you could come together!--which
you never shall, if I can prevent it.' But her face showed only serious
attention and interest.

'I do _not_ quite understand,' she said. 'Your words are so unusual'--

'I cannot put my meaning in simpler words.'

'Then do you think it wrong to sing common songs?--those everybody
sings?'

'_I_ cannot sing them,' said Esther simply. 'My voice is Christ's
servant.' But the smile with which these (to Betty) severe words were
spoken was entirely charming. There was not severity but gladness upon
every line of the curving lips, along with a trait of tenderness which
touched Betty's heart. In all her life she had never had such a feeling
of inferiority. She had given due reverence to persons older than
herself; it was the fashion in those days; she had acknowledged a
certain social precedence in ladies who were leaders of society and
heads of families; she had never had such a feeling of being set down,
as before this young, pure, stately creature. Mentally, Betty, as it
were, stepped down from the dais and stood with her arms folded over
her breast, in the Eastern attitude of reverence, during the rest of
the interview.

'Then you do not do anything,' said Betty incredulously, 'if you cannot
do it _so?_'

'Not if I know it,' the other said, smiling more broadly and with some
archness.

'But still--may I speak frankly?--that does not tell me all. You
know--you _must_ know--that not everybody would like your choice of
music?'

'I suppose, very few.'

'Would it do any good, in any way, to displease them?'

'That is not the first question. The first question, in any case, is,
How may I best do this thing for God?--for His honour and His kingdom.'

'I do not see what His honour and His kingdom have to do with it.'

'It is for His honour that His servants should obey Him, is it not?'
said Esther, with another smile. 'And is it not for His kingdom, that
His invitations should be given?'

'But _here?_'

'Why not here?'

'It is unusual.'

'I have no business to be anywhere where I cannot do it.'

'That sounds--dreadful!' said Betty honestly.

'Why?'

'Oh, it sounds strict, narrow, like a sort of slavery, as if one could
never be free.'

'Free for what?'

'Whatever one likes! I should be miserable if I felt I could not do
what I liked!'

'Can you do it now?' said Esther.

'Well, not always; but I am free to try,' said Betty frankly.

'Is that your definition of happiness?--to try for that which you
cannot attain.'

'I do attain it,--sometimes.'

'And keep it?'

'Keep it? You cannot keep anything in this world.'

'I do not think anything is happiness, that you cannot keep.'

'But--if you come to that--what _can_ you keep?' said Betty.

Esther bent forward a little, and said, with an intense gleam in her
grey eyes, which seemed to dance and sparkle,

'"Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever."'

'I do not know Him,' Betty breathed out, after staring at her companion.

'I saw that.'

Esther rose, and Betty felt constrained to rise too.

'Oh, are you going?' she cried. 'I have not done talking. How can I
know Him?'

'Do you wish me to tell you?'

'Indeed, yes.'

'If you are in dead earnest, and seek Him, He will reveal Himself to
you. But then, you must be willing to obey every word He says. Good
night.'

She offered her hand. Before Miss Frere, however, could take it, up
came the lady of the house.

'You are not _going_, Miss Gainsborough?'

'My father would be uneasy if I stayed out late.'

'Oh, well, for once! What have you two been talking about? I saw
several gentlemen casting longing looks in this direction, but they did
not venture to interrupt. What were you discussing?'

'Life in general,' said Betty.

'Life!' echoed the older woman, and her brow was instantly clouded.
'What is the use of talking about that? Can either of you say that her
life is not a failure?'

'Miss Gainsborough will say that,' replied Betty. 'As for me, my life
is a problem that I have not solved.'

'What do you mean by a "failure," Mrs. Chatsworth?' the other girl
asked.

'Oh, just a failure! Turning out nothing, coming to nothing; nothing, I
mean, that is satisfying. "_Tout lasse,--tout casse,--tout passe!_" A
true record; but isn't it sorrowful?'

'I do not think it need be true,' said Esther.

'It is not true with you?'

'No, certainly not.'

'Your smile says more than your words. What a smile! My dear, I envy
you. And yet I do not. You have got to wake up from all that. You are
seventeen, eighteen--nineteen, is it?--and you have not found out yet
that the world is hollow and your doll stuffed with sawdust.'

'But the world is not all.'

'Isn't it? What is?'

'The Lord said, "He that believeth on me hath everlasting life."'

'Everlasting life! In the next world! Oh yes, my dear, but I was
speaking of life now.'

'Does not everlasting life begin now?' said Esther, with another of
those rare smiles. They were so rare and so beautiful that Betty had
come to watch for them,--arch, bright, above all happy, and full of a
kind of loving power. 'The Lord said "hath"; He did not say will
"have."'

'Miss Gainsborough, you talk riddles.'

'I am sorry,' said Esther; 'I do not mean to do that. I am speaking the
simplest truth. We were made to be happy in the love of God; and as we
were made for that, nothing less will do.'

'Are you happy? My dear, I need not ask; your face speaks for you. I
believe that pricked me on to ask the question with which we began, in
pure envy. I see you are happy. But confess honestly now, honestly, and
quite between ourselves, confess there is some delightful lover
somewhere, who provokes those smiles, with which no doubt you reward
him?'

Esther's grey eyes opened unmistakeably at her hostess while she was
speaking, and then a light colour rose on her cheek, and then she
laughed.

'I neither have, nor ever expect to have, anything of the kind,' she
said. And then she was no longer to be detained, but took leave, and
went away.

'She is a little too certain about the lover,' remarked Miss Frere.
'That looks as if there were already one, _in petto_.'

'She is poor,' said Mrs. Chatsworth. 'She has not much chance. I
believe she supports herself and her father--he is old or invalid or
something--by teaching; perhaps they have a little something to help
her out. But I fancy she sees very little society. I never meet her
anywhere. The lady in whose house she was educated is a very warm
friend of hers, and she introduced her to me. So I get her to come here
sometimes for a little change.'

Betty went home with a great many thoughts in her mind, which kept her
half the night awake. Jealousy perhaps pricked her the most. Not that
Pitt loved this girl; about that Betty was not sure; but how he would
love her if he could see her! How anybody would, especially a man of
refined nature and truth of character, who requires the same in those
connected with him. What a pure creature this was! and then, she was
not only tender, but strong. The look on her face, the lines of her
lips, told surely of self-control, self-denial, and habitual patience.
People do not look so, who have all they need of this world's goods,
and have always dipped their hands into full money bags. No; Esther had
something to bear, and something to do, both of which called for and
called out that strength and sweetness; and yet she was so
happy!--happy after Pitt's fashion. And this was the girl he had been
looking to find. Betty could deserve well of him by letting him know
where to find her! But then, all would be lost, and Betty's life a
failure indeed. She could not face it. And besides, as things were,
they were quite safe for the other two. The childish friendship had
faded out; would start up again, no doubt, if it had a chance; but
there was no need that it should. Pitt was at least heart-whole, if not
memory-free; and as for Esther, she had just declared a lover to be a
possibility nowhere within the range of her horizon. Esther would not
lose anything by not seeing Pitt any more. But then, _would_ she lose
nothing? The girl teaching to support herself and her father, alone and
poor, what would it be to her life if Pitt suddenly came into it, with
his strong hand and genial temper and plenty of means? What would it be
to Betty's life, if he went out of it? She turned and tossed, she
battled and struggled with thoughts; but the end was, she went on to
Washington without ever paying Esther a visit, or letting her know that
her old friend was looking for her.


CHAPTER XL.

_LONDON_.


The winter passed. In the spring Betty received a letter from Mrs.
Dallas, part of which ran as follows:--

'My husband and I have a new plan on foot; we have been meditating it
all winter, so it ought to be ripe now. We are going over to spend the
summer in England. My son talked of making us a visit again this year,
and we decided it was better we should go to him. Time is nothing to
us, and to him it is something; for although he will have no need to
practise in any profession, I agree with him and Mr. Dallas in thinking
that it is good a young man should _have_ a profession; and, at any
rate, what has been begun had better be finished. So, some time in May
we think to leave Seaforth, on our way to London. Dear Betty, will you
take pity on an old woman and go with us, to give us the brightness of
your youth? Don't you want to see London? and I presume by this time
Pitt has qualified himself to be a good cicerone. Besides, we shall not
be fixed in London. We will go to see whatever you would most like to
see in the kingdom; perhaps run up to Scotland. Of course what _I_ want
to see is my boy; but other things would naturally have an attraction
for you. Do not say no; it would be a great disappointment to me. Meet
us in New York about the middle of May. Mr. Dallas wishes to go as soon
as the spring storms are over. I have another reason for making this
journey; I wish to keep Pitt from coming over to America.'

Betty's heart made a bound as she read this letter, and went on with
faster beats than usual after she had folded it up. A voyage, and
London, and Pitt Dallas for a showman! What could be more alluring in
its temptation and promise? Going about in London with him to guide and
explain things--could opportunity be more favourable to finish the work
which last summer left undone? Betty's heart jumped at it; she knew she
would say yes to Mrs. Dallas; she could say nothing but yes; and yet,
questions did come up to her. Would it not be putting herself unduly
forward? would it not look as though she went on purpose to see--not
London but somebody in London? That would be the very truth, Betty
confessed to herself, with a pang of shame and humiliation; the pang
was keen, yet it did not change her resolution. What if? Nobody knew,
she argued, and nobody would have cause to suspect. There was reason
enough, ostensible, why she should go to England with Mrs. Dallas; if
she refused to visit all the old ladies who had sons, her social limits
would be restricted indeed. But Mrs. Dallas herself; would not she
understand? Mrs. Dallas understood enough already, Betty said to
herself defiantly; they were allies in this cause. It was very
miserable that it should be so; however, not now to be undone or set
aside. Lightly she had gone into Mrs. Dallas's proposition last summer;
if it had grown to be life and death earnest with her, there was no
need Mrs. Dallas should know _that_. It _was_ life and death earnest,
and she must go to London. It was a capital plan. To have met Pitt
Dallas again at Seaforth and again spent weeks in his mother's house
while he was there, would have been too obvious; this was better every
way. Of course she could not refuse such an invitation; such a chance
of seeing something of the world; she who had always been too poor to
travel. Pitt could not find any matter of surprise nor any ground for
criticism in her doing that. And it would give her all the opportunity
she wished for.

Here, most inopportunely, came before her the image of Esther. How
those two would suit each other! How infallibly Pitt would be devoted
to her if he could see her! But Betty said to herself that _she_ had a
better right. They did not know each other; he was nothing to Esther,
Esther was nothing to him. She set her teeth, and wrote to Mrs. Dallas
that she would be delighted to go.

And then, having made her choice, she put away thought. All through the
voyage she was a most delightful companion. A little stifled
excitement, like forcing heat in a greenhouse, made all her social
qualities blossom out in unwonted brilliancy. She was entertaining,
bright, gay, witty, graceful; she was the admiration and delight of the
whole company on board; and Mrs. Dallas thought to herself with proud
satisfaction that Pitt could find nothing better than that, nor more
attractive, and that she need wish nothing better than that at the head
of her son's household and by his side. That Pitt could withstand such
enchantment was impossible. She was doing the very best thing she could
do in coming to England and in bringing Betty with her.

Having meditated this journey for months, Mr. Dallas had made all his
preparations. Rooms had been engaged in a pleasant part of the city,
and there, very soon after landing, the little party found themselves
comfortably established and quite at home.

'Nothing like England!' Mr. Dallas grumbled with satisfaction. 'You
couldn't do this in New York; they understand nothing about it, and
they are too stupid to learn. I believe there isn't a lodging-house in
all the little Dutch city over there; you could not find a single house
where they let lodgings in the English fashion.'

'Mr. Dallas, it is not a Dutch city!'

'Half Dutch, and that's enough. Have you let Pitt know we are here,
wife?'

Mrs. Dallas had done that; but the evening passed away, nevertheless,
without any news of him. They made themselves very comfortable; had an
excellent dinner, and went to rest in rooms pleasant and well
appointed; but Betty was in a state of feverish excitement which would
not let her be a moment at ease. Now she was here, she almost was ready
to wish herself back again. How would Pitt look at her? how would he
receive her? and yet, what affair was it of his, if his mother brought
a young friend with her, to enjoy the journey and make it agreeable? It
was nothing to Pitt; and yet, if it _were_ nothing to him, Betty would
want to take passage in the next packetship sailing for New York or
Boston. She drew her breath short, until she could see him.

He came about the middle of the next morning. Mr. Dallas had gone out,
and the two ladies were alone, in a high state of expectancy; joyous on
one part, most anxious and painful on the other. The first sight of him
calmed Betty's heart-beating; at the same time it gave her a great
thrill of pain. Pitt was himself so frank and so quiet, she said to
herself, there was no occasion for her to fear anything in his
thoughts; his greeting of her was entirely cordial and friendly. He was
neither surprised nor displeased to see her. At the same time, while
this was certainly comforting, Pitt looked too composedly happy for
Betty's peace of mind. Apparently he needed neither her nor
anybody;--'Do men ever?' said Betty to herself bitterly. And besides,
there was in his face and manner a nobleness and a pureness which at
one blow drove home, as it were, the impressions of the last year. Such
a look she had never seen on any face in her life; _except_--yes, there
was one exception, and the thought sent another pang of pain through
her. But women do not show what they feel; and Pitt, if he noticed Miss
Frere at all, saw nothing but the well-bred quiet which always belonged
to Betty's demeanour. He was busy with his mother.

'This is a pleasure, to have you here!' he was saying heartily.

'I thought we should have seen you last night. My letter was in time.
Didn't you get it?'

'It went to my chambers in the Temple; and I was not there.'

'Where were you?'

'At Kensington.'

'At Kensington! With Mr. Strahan.'

'Not with Mr. Strahan,' said Pitt gravely. 'I have been with him a
great deal these last weeks. You got my letter in which I told you he
was ill?'

'Yes, and that you were nursing him.'

'Then you did _not_ get my letter telling of the end of his illness?
You left home before it arrived.'

'You do not mean that uncle Strahan is dead?'

'It is a month ago, and more. But there is nothing to regret, mother.
He died perfectly happy.'

Mrs. Dallas passed over this sentence, which she did not like, and
asked abruptly,--

'Then what were you doing at Kensington?'

'There was business. I have been obliged to give some time to it. You
will be as much surprised as I was, to learn that my old uncle has left
all he had in the world to me.'

'To you!' Mrs. Dallas did not utter a scream of delight, or embrace her
son, or do anything that many women would have done in honour of the
occasion; but her head took a little loftier set upon her shoulders,
and in her cheeks rose a very pretty rosy flush.

'I am not surprised in the least,' she said. 'I do not see how he could
have done anything else; but I did not know the old gentleman had so
much sense, for all that. Is the property large?'

'Rather large.'

'My dear, I am very glad. That makes you independent at once. I do not
know whether I ought to be glad of that; but you would never be led off
from any line of conduct you thought fit to enter, by either having or
wanting money.'

'I hope not. It is not _high_ praise to say that I am not mercenary.
Who was thinking to bribe me? and to what?'

'Never mind,' said Mrs. Dallas hastily. 'Was not the house at
Kensington part of the property?'

'Certainly.'

'And has that come to you too?'

'Yes, of course; just as it stood. I was going to ask if you would not
move in and take possession?'

'Take possession!--we?'

'Yes, mother; it is all ready. The old servants are there, and will
take very passably good care of you. Mrs. Bunce can cook a chop, and
boil an egg, and make a piece of toast; let me see, what else can she
do? Everything that my old uncle liked, I know; beyond that, I cannot
say how far her power extends. But I think she can make you
comfortable.'

'My dear, aren't you going to let the house?'

'No, mother.'

'Why not? You cannot live in chambers and there too?'

'I can never let the house. In the first place, it is too full of
things which have all of them more or less value, many of them _more_.
In the second place, the old servants have their home there, and will
always have it.'

'You are bound by the will?'

'Not at all. The will binds me to nothing.'

'Then, my dear boy! it may be a long time before you would want to set
up housekeeping there yourself; you might never wish it; and in the
meantime all this expense going on?'

'I know what uncle Strahan would have liked, mamma; but apart from
that, I could never turn adrift his old servants. They are devoted to
me now; and, besides, I wish to have the house taken care of. When you
have seen it, you will not talk any more about having it let. You will
come at once, will you not? It is better than _this_. I told Mrs. Bunce
she might make ready for you; and there is a special room for Miss
Frere, where she may study several things.'

He gave a pleasant glance at the young lady as he spoke, which
certainly assured her of a welcome. But Betty felt painfully
embarrassed.

'This is something we never contemplated,' she said, turning to Mrs.
Dallas. 'What will you do with me? _I_ have no right to Mr. Pitt's
hospitality, generous as it is.'

'You will come with us, of course,' said Mrs. Dallas. 'You are one of
us, as much as anybody could be.'

'And you would be very sorry afterwards if you did not, I can tell
you,' said Pitt frankly. 'My old house is quite something to see; and I
promise myself some pleasure in the enjoyment you all will have in it.
I hope we are so much old friends that you would not refuse me such an
honour?'

There was no more to say, after the manner in which this was spoken;
and from embarrassment Betty went over to great exultation. What
_could_ be better than this? and did even her dreams offer her such a
bewildering prospect of pleasure. She heard with but half an ear what
Pitt and his mother were saying; yet she did hear it, and lost not a
word, braiding in her own reflections diligently with the thoughts thus
suggested. They talked of Mr. Strahan, of his illness, through which
Pitt had nursed him; of the studies thus interrupted; of the property
thus suddenly come into Pitt's hands.

'I do not see why you should go on with your law reading,' Mrs. Dallas
broke out at last. 'Really,--why should you? You are perfectly
independent already, without any help from your father; house and
servants and all, and money enough; your father would say, too much.
Haven't you thought of giving up your chambers in the Temple?'

'No, mother.'

'Any other young man would. Why not you? What do you want to study law
for any more?'

'One must do something, you know.'

'Something--but I never heard that law was an amusing study. Is it not
the driest of the dry?'

'Rather dry--in spots.'

'What is your notion, then, Pitt?--if you do not like it.'

'I do like it. And I am thinking of the use it may be.'

'The _use?_' said Mrs. Dallas bewilderedly.

'It is a grand profession,' he went on; 'a grand profession, when used
for its legitimate purposes! I want to have the command of it. If the
study is sometimes dry, the practice is often, or it often may be, in
the highest degree interesting.'

'Purposes! What purposes?' Mrs. Dallas pursued, fastening on that one
word in Pitt's speech.

'Righting the wrong, mother, and lifting up the oppressed. A knowledge
of law is necessary often for that; and the practice too.'

'Pitt,' said his mother, 'I don't understand you.'

Betty thought _she_ did, and she was glad that Mr. Dallas's entrance
broke off the conversation. Then it was all gone over again, Mr.
Strahan's illness, Pitt's ministrations, the will, the property, the
house; concluding with the plan of removing thither. Betty, saying
nothing herself, watched the other members of the party; the gleam in
Mr. Dallas's money-loving eyes, the contained satisfaction of Mrs.
Dallas's motherly pride, and the extremely different look on the
younger man's face. With all the brightness and life of his talk to
them, with all the interest and pleasure he showed in the things talked
about, there was a quiet apartness on his brow and in his eyes, a lift
above trifles, a sweetness and a gravity that certainly found their
aliment neither in the sudden advent of a fortune nor in any of the
accessories of money. Betty saw and read, while the others were
talking; and her outward calm and careless demeanour was no true
indication of how she felt. The very things which drew her to Pitt,
alas, made her feel set away at a distance from him. What had her
restless soul in common with that happy repose that was about him? And
yet, how restlessness is attracted by rest! Of all things it seemed to
Betty one of the most delightful and desirable. Not to be fretted, not
to be anxious; to be never 'out of sorts,' never, seemingly,
discontented with anything or afraid of anything!--while these terms
were the very reverse of all which must describe her and every one else
whom she knew. Where did that high calm come from? No face that Betty
had ever seen had that look upon it; except--

Oh, she wished she had never seen that other, or that she could forget
it. Those two fitted together. 'But I should make him just as good a
wife,' said Betty to herself; 'perhaps better. And _she_ does not care;
and I do. Oh, what a fool I was ever to go into this thing!'


CHAPTER XLI.

_AN OLD HOUSE_.


Arrangements were soon made. The landlady of the house was contented
with a handsome bonus; baggage was sent off; a carriage was ordered,
and the party set forth.

It was a very strange experience to Betty. If her position was felt to
be a little awkward, at the same time it was most deliciously
adventurous and novel. She sat demurely enough by Mrs. Dallas's side,
eyeing the strange streets through which they passed, hearing every
word that was spoken by anybody, and keeping the while herself an
extremely smooth and careless exterior. She was full of interest for
all she saw, and yet the girl saw it as in a dream, or only as a
background upon which she saw Pitt. She saw him always, without often
seeming to look at him. The content of Mr. and Mrs. Dallas was
inexpressible.

'Where will you find anything like that, now?' said Mr. Dallas, as they
were passing Hyde Park. 'Ah, Miss Betty, wait; you will never want to
see Washington again. The Capitol? Pooh, pooh! it may do for a little
beginning of a colony; but wait till you have seen a few things here.
What will you show her first, Pitt?'

'Kensington.'

'Kensington! Ah, to be sure. Well, I suppose your new house takes
precedence of all other things for the present.'

'Not my _new_ house,' said Pitt. 'It is anything but that. There is
nothing new about it but the master. I thought I should bring you back
with me, mother; so I told Mrs. Bunce to have luncheon ready. As I
said, she can cook a chop.'

By degrees the houses became thinner, as they drove on; grass and trees
were again prominent; and it was in a region that looked at least half
country that the carriage at last stopped. Indeed more than half
country, for the city was certainly left behind. Everything was in
fresh green; the air was mild and delicious; the place quiet. The
carriage turned from the road and passed through an iron gateway and up
a gravel sweep to the door of an old house, shaded by old trees and
surrounded by a spread of velvety turf. The impression, as Betty
descended from the carriage, was that here had been ages of dignified
order and grave tranquillity. The green-sward was even and soft and of
vivid freshness; the old trees were stately with their length of limb
and great solid trunks; and the house?--

The house, towards which she turned, as if to ask questions of it, was
of moderate size, built of stone, and so massively built as if it had
been meant to stand for ever. That was seen at once in the thickness of
the walls, the strong oaken doorway, and the heavy window frames. But
as soon as Betty set foot within the door she could almost have
screamed with delight.

'Upon my word, very good! very well!' said Mr. Dallas, standing in the
hall and reviewing it. And then, perceiving the presence of the
servants, he checked himself and reviewed them.

'These are my uncle's faithful old friends, mother,' Pitt was saying;
'Mrs. Bunce, and Stephen Hill. Have you got something ready for
travellers, Mrs. Bunce?'

Dignified order and grave tranquillity was the impression on Betty's
mind again, as they were ushered into the dining-room. It was late, and
the party sat down at once to table.

But Betty could hardly eat, for feasting her eyes. And when they went
up-stairs to their rooms that feast still continued. The house was
irregular, with rather small rooms and low ceilings; which itself was
pleasant after the more commonplace regularity to which Miss Frere had
been accustomed; and then it was full--all the rooms were full--of
quaintness and beauty. Oak wainscottings, dark with time; oaken
doorways with singular carvings; chimney-pieces, before which Betty
stood in speechless delight and admiration; small-paned windows set in
deep window niches; in one or two rooms dark draperies; but the late
Mr. Strahan had not favoured anything that shut out the light, and in
most of the house there were no curtains put up. And then, on the
walls, in cupboards and presses, on tables and shelves, and in
cabinets, there was an endless variety and wealth of treasures and
curiosities. Pictures, bronzes, coins, old armour, old weapons,
curiosities of historical value, others of natural production, others,
still, of art; some of all these were very valuable and precious. To
examine them must be the work of many days; it was merely the fact of
their being there which Betty took in now, with a sense of the great
riches of the new mental pasture-ground in which she found herself. She
changed her dress in a kind of breathless mood; noticing as she did so
the old-fashioned and aged furniture of her room. Aged, not infirm; the
manufacture solid and strong as ever; the wood darkened by time, the
patterns quaint, but to Betty's eye the more picturesque. Her apartment
was a corner room, with one deep window on each of two sides; the
look-out over a sunny landscape of grass, trees, and scattered
buildings. On another side was a deep chimney-place, with curious
wrought-iron fire-dogs. What a delightful adventure--or what a terrible
adventure--was it which had brought her to this house! She would not
think of that; she dressed and went down.

The rest of the party were gathered in the library, and this room
finished Betty's enchantment. It was a well-sized room, the largest in
the house, on the second floor; and all the properties that made the
house generally interesting were gathered and culminated here. Dark
wainscotting, dark bookcases, and dark books, gave it an aspect that
might have been gloomy, yet was not so; perhaps because of the many
other objects in the room, which gave points of light or bits of
colour. What they were, Betty could only find out by degrees; she saw
at once, in general, that this must have been a favourite place of the
late owner, and that here he had collected a special assemblage of the
things that pleased him best. A table at one side must have been made,
she thought, about the same time with her chamber furniture, and by the
same hand. The floor was dark and polished, and on it lay here and
there bits of soft carpeting, which were well worn. Betty advanced
slowly to the corner where the party were siting, taking in the effect
of all this; then almost started as Pitt gave her a chair, to see in
the corner just beyond the group a stuffed bear showing his teeth at
her.

The father and mother had been talking about various matters at home,
and the talk went on. Betty presently left them, and began to examine
the sides of the room. She studied the bear, which was in an upright
position, resting one paw on a stick, while the other supported a lamp.
From the bear her eyes passed on to a fire-screen, which stood before
the empty chimney, and then she went to look at it nearer by. It was a
most exquisite thing. Two great panes of plate glass were so set in a
frame that a space of some three or four inches separated them. In this
space, in every variety of position, were suspended on invisible wires
some twenty humming birds, of different kinds; and whether the light
fell upon this screen in front or came through it from behind, the
display was in either case most beautiful and novel. Betty at last
wandered to the chimney-piece, and went no farther for a good while;
studying the rich carving and the coat of arms which was both
sculptured and painted in the midst of it. By and by she found that
Pitt was beside her.

'Mr. Strahan's?' she asked.

'No; they belonged to a former possessor of the house. It came into my
uncle's family by the marriage of his father.'

'It is very old?'

'Pretty old; that is, what in America we would call so. It reaches back
to the time of the Stuarts. Really that is not so long ago as it seems.'

'It is worth while to be old, if it gives one such a chimney-piece as
that. But I should not like another man's arms in it, if I were you.'

'Why not?'

'I don't know--I believe it diminishes the sense of possession.'

'A good thing, then,' said Pitt. 'Do you remember that "they that have"
are told to be "as though they possessed not"?'

'How can they?' answered Betty, looking at him.

'You know the words?'

'I seem to have read them--I suppose I have.'

'Then there must be some way of making them true.'

'What is this concern, Pitt?' inquired his father, who had followed
them, and was looking at a sort of cabinet which was framed into the
wall.

'I was going to invite Miss Frere's attention to it; yet, on
reflection, I believe she is not enthusiastic for that sort of thing.
That is valuable, father. It is a collection of early Greek coins.
Uncle Strahan was very fond of that collection, and very proud of it.
He had brought it together with a great deal of pains.'

'Rubbish, I should say,' observed the elder man; and he moved on, while
Betty took his place.

'Now, I do not understand them,' she said.

'You can see the beauty of some of them. Look at this head of Apollo.'

'That is beautiful--exquisite! Was that a common coin of trade?'

'Doubtful, in this case. It is not certain that this was not rather a
medal struck for the members of the Amphictyonic Council. But see this
coin of Syracuse; _this_ was a common coin of trade; only of a size not
the most common.'

'All I can say is, their coinage was far handsomer than ours, if it was
like that.'

'The reverse is as fine as the obverse. A chariot with four horses,
done with infinite spirit.'

'How can you remember what is on the other side--I suppose this side is
what you mean by the _obverse_--of this particular coin? Are you sure?'

Pitt produced a key from his pocket, unlocked the glass door of the
cabinet, and took the coin from its bed. On the other side was what he
had stated to be there. Betty took the piece in her hands to look and
admire.

'That is certainly very fine,' she said; but her attention was not
entirely bent on the coin 'Is this lovely head meant for Apollo too?'

'No; don't you see it is feminine? Ceres, it is thought; but Mr.
Strahan held that it was Arethusa, in honour of the nymph that presided
over the fine fountain of sweet water near Syracuse. The coinage of
that city was extremely beautiful and diversified; yielding to hardly
any other in design and workmanship. Here is an earlier one; you see
the very different stage art had attained to.'

'A regular Greek face,' remarked Betty, going back to the coin she held
in her hand. 'See the straight line of the nose and the very short
upper lip. Do you hold that the Greek type is the only true beauty?'

'Not I. The only _true_ beauty, I think, is that of the soul; or at
least that which the soul shines through.'

'What are these little fish swimming about the head? They would seem to
indicate a marine deity.'

'The dolphin; the Syracusan emblem.'

'I wish I had been born in those times!' said Betty. And the wish had a
meaning in the speaker's mind which the hearer could not divine.

'Why do you wish that?' asked Pitt, smiling.

'I suppose the principal reason is, that then I should not have been
born in this. Everything is dreadfully prosy in our age. Oh, not
_here_, at this moment! but this is a fairy tale we are living through.
I know how the plain world will look when I go back to it.'

'At present,' said Pitt, taking the Syracusan coin and restoring it to
its place, 'you are not an enthusiastic numismatist!'

'No; how should I? Coins are not a thing to excite enthusiasm. They are
beautiful, and curious, but not exactly--not exactly stirring.'

'I had a scholar once,' remarked Pitt, as he locked the glass door of
the cabinet, 'whose eyes would have opened very wide at sight of this
collection. Have you heard anything of the Gainsboroughs, mother?'

Betty started, inwardly, and was seized with an unreasoning fear lest
the question might next be put to herself. Quietly, as soon as she
could, she moved away from the coin cabinet, and seemed to be examining
something else; but she was listening all the while.

'Nothing whatever,' Mrs. Dallas had answered.

'They have not come back to England. I have made out so much. I looked
up the family after I came home last fall; their headquarters are at a
nice old place down in Devonshire. I introduced myself and got
acquainted with them. They are pleasant people. But they knew nothing
of the colonel. He has not come home, and he has not written. Thus much
I have found out.'

'It is not certain, however,' grumbled Mr. Dallas. 'I believe he _has_
come home; that is, to England. He was on bad terms with his people,
you know.'

'When are you going to show Miss Frere and me London?' asked Mrs.
Dallas. She was as willing to lead off from the other subject as Betty
herself.

'Show you London, mamma! Show you a bit of it, you mean. It would take
something like a lifetime to show you London. What bit will you begin
with?'

'What first, Betty?' said Mrs. Dallas.

Betty turned and slowly came back to the others.

'Take her to see the lions in the Tower,' suggested Mr. Dallas; 'and
the wax-work.'

'Do you think I have never seen a lion, Mr. Dallas?' said the young
lady.

'Well,--small ones,' said the gentleman, stroking his chin. 'But the
Tower is a big lion itself. I believe _I_ should like to go to the
Tower. I have never been there yet, old as I am.'

'I do not want to go to the Tower,' said Mrs. Dallas. 'I do not care
for that kind of thing. I should like to see the Temple, and Pitt's
chambers.'

'So should I,' said the younger lady.

'You might do worse,' said Pitt. 'Then to-morrow we will go to the
Temple, and to St. Paul's.'

'St. Paul's? _that_ will not hold us long, will it?' said Betty. 'Is it
so much to see?'

'A good deal, if you go through and study the monuments!'

'Well,' said Betty, 'I suppose it will be all delightful.'

But when she had retired to her room at night, her mood was not just
so. She sat down before her glass and ruminated. That case of coins,
and Pitt's old scholar, and the Gainsboroughs, who had not come home.
He would find them yet; yes, and Esther would one day be standing
before those coins; and Pitt would be showing them to her; and she--she
would enter into his talk about them, and would understand and have
sympathy, and there would be sympathy on other points too. If Esther
ever stood there, in that beautiful old library, it would be as
mistress and at home. Betty had a premonition of it; she put her hands
before her eyes to shut out the picture. Suppose she earned well of the
two and gained their lasting friendship by saying the words that would
bring them to each other? That was one way out of her difficulty. But
then, why should she? What right had Esther Gainsborough to be happy
more than Betty Frere? The other way out of her difficulty, namely, to
win Pitt's liking, would be much better; and then, they both of them
might be Esther's friends. For of one thing Betty was certain; _if_ she
could win Pitt, he would be won. No half way-work was possible with
him. He would never woo a woman he did not entirely love; and any woman
so loved by him would not need to fear any other woman; it would be
once for all. Betty had never, as it happened, met thoroughgoing truth
before; she recognised it and trusted it perfectly in Pitt; and it was
one of the things, she confessed to herself, that drew her most
mightily to him. A person whom she could absolutely believe, and always
be sure of. Whom else in the world could she trust so? Not her own
brothers; not her own father; mother she had none. How did she know so
securely that Pitt was an exception to the universal rule?--the
question might be asked, and she asked it. She had not seen him tested
in any great thing. But she had seen him tried in little bits of
everyday things, in which most people think it is no harm to dodge the
truth a little; and Betty recognised the soundness of the axiom,--'He
that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much.'


CHAPTER XLII.

_THE TOWER_.


The next morning they went to inspect the Temple; Pitt and the two
ladies. Mr. Dallas preferred some other occupation. But the interest
brought to the inspection was not altogether legitimate. Mrs. Dallas
cared principally to see how comfortable her son's chambers were, and
to refresh herself with the tokens of antiquity and importance which
attached to the place and the institution to which he belonged. Betty
was no antiquarian in the best of times, and at present had all her
faculties concentrated on one subject and one question which was not of
the past. Nevertheless, it is of the nature of things that a high
strain of the mind renders it intensely receptive and sensitive for
outward impressions, even though they be not welcomed; like a taut
string, which answers to a breath breathed upon it. Betty did not care
for the Temple; had no interest in the old Templars' arms on the sides
of the gateways; and thought its medley of dull courts and lanes a very
undesirable place. What was it to her where Dr. Johnson had lived? she
did not care for Dr. Johnson at all, and as little for Oliver
Goldsmith. Pitt, she saw, cared; how odd it was! It was some comfort
that Mrs. Dallas shared her indifference.

'My dear,' she said, 'I do not care about anybody's lodgings but yours.
Dr. Johnson is not there now, I suppose. Where are _your_ rooms?'

But Pitt laughed, and took them first to the Temple church.

