Produced by Sigal Alon, Fox in the Stars, Martin Pettit
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


MONTE-CRISTO'S DAUGHTER.

SEQUEL TO

ALEXANDER DUMAS'

GREAT NOVEL, THE "COUNT OF MONTE-CRISTO," AND CONCLUSION OF "EDMOND
DANTÈS."

BY

EDMUND FLAGG

       *       *       *       *       *

"MONTE-CRISTO'S DAUGHTER," a wonderfully brilliant, original,
exciting and absorbing novel, is the Sequel to "The Count of
Monte-Cristo," Alexander Dumas' masterwork, and the continuation
and conclusion of that great romance, "Edmond Dantès." It possesses
rare power, unflagging interest and an intricate plot that for
constructive skill and efficient development stands unrivalled.
Zuleika, the beautiful daughter of Monte-Cristo and Haydée, is the
heroine, and her suitor, the Viscount Giovanni Massetti, an ardent,
impetuous young Roman, the hero. The latter, through a flirtation
with a pretty flower-girl, Annunziata Solara, becomes involved in a
maze of suspicion that points to him as an abductor and an
assassin, causes his separation from Zuleika and converts him into
a maniac. The straightening out of these tangled complications
constitutes the main theme of the thrilling book. The novel abounds
in ardent love scenes and stirring adventures. The Count of
Monte-Cristo figures largely in it, and numerous Monte-Cristo
characters are introduced. "MONTE-CRISTO'S DAUGHTER" is the latest
addition to Petersons' famous series, consisting of "The Count of
Monte-Cristo," "Edmond Dantès," "The Countess of Monte-Cristo,"
"The Wife of Monte-Cristo," and "The Son of Monte-Cristo."

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

WM. L. ALLISON COMPANY

PUBLISHERS.


CONTENTS

Chapter.                                      Page.
      I. MONTE-CRISTO AND THE PRIMA DONNA        21

     II. A STRANGELY SENT EPISTLE                33

    III. THE INTRUDER IN THE CONVENT GARDEN      45

     IV. A STORMY INTERVIEW                      57

      V. ANNUNZIATA SOLARA                       69

     VI. THE POWER OF A NAME                     81

    VII. IN THE PEASANT'S HUT                    91

   VIII. A SYLVAN IDYL                          101

     IX. THE ABDUCTION                          112

      X. THE COUNTESS OF MONTE-CRISTO           130

     XI. THE BEGGAR AND HIS MATES               142

    XII. FATHER AND DAUGHTER                    156

   XIII. MORCERF'S ADVENTURE                    166

    XIV. ZULEIKA AND MME. MORREL                183

     XV. AN UNEXPECTED MEETING                  195

    XVI. AMID THE COLOSSEUM'S RUINS             206

   XVII. PEPPINO'S STORY                        218

  XVIII. MORE OF PEPPINO'S STORY                228

    XIX. THE MANIAC OF THE COLOSSEUM            238

     XX. THE ISLE OF MONTE-CRISTO               248

    XXI. ZULEIKA LEARNS THE TRUTH               264

  XXII. THE WONDROUS PHYSICIAN                  274

 XXIII. A MODERN MIRACLE                        285

  XXIV. A DESPERATE ENCOUNTER                   296

   XXV. A VISIT TO THE REFUGE                   306

  XXVI. VAMPA AND MONTE-CRISTO                  316

 XXVII. THE BANDITS' REPRISALS                  326

XXVIII. THE RAID ON THE BANDITS                 336

  XXIX. VAMPA'S TRIAL                           346

   XXX. JOY UNBOUNDED                           363


MONTE-CRISTO'S DAUGHTER.

_SEQUEL TO ALEXANDER DUMAS' GREAT NOVEL, "THE COUNT OF
MONTE-CRISTO," AND CONTINUATION AND CONCLUSION OF "EDMOND DANTÈS."_


CHAPTER I.

MONTE-CRISTO AND THE PRIMA DONNA.


The Count of Monte-Cristo was in Rome. He had hired one of the numerous
private palaces, the Palazzo Costi, situated on a broad thoroughfare
near the point where the Ponte St. Angelo connects Rome proper with that
transtiberine suburb known as the Leonine City or Trastavere. The
impecunious Roman nobility were ever ready to let their palaces to
titled foreigners of wealth, and Ali, acting for the Count, had
experienced no difficulty in procuring for his master an abode that even
a potentate might have envied him. It was a lofty, commodious edifice,
built of white marble in antique architectural design, and commanded
from its ample balconies a fine view of the Tiber and its western shore,
upon which loomed up that vast prison and citadel, the Castle of St.
Angelo, and the largest palace in the world, the Vatican.

The Count of Monte-Cristo had always liked Rome because of its
picturesque, mysterious antiquity, but his present mission there had
nothing whatever to do with his individual tastes. He had fixed himself
for a time in the Eternal City that his daughter Zuleika, Haydée's[1]
child, might finish her education at a famous convent school conducted
under the auspices of the Sisterhood of the Sacred Heart.

Zuleika was fifteen years of age, but looked much older, having the
early maturity of the Greeks, whose ardent blood, on her dead mother's
side, flowed in her youthful veins. She had attained her full height,
and was tall and well-developed. She strongly resembled her mother,
possessing brilliant beauty of the dreamy, voluptuous oriental type. Her
hair was abundant and black as night. She had dark, flashing eyes,
pearly teeth, full ruby lips and feet and hands that were of fairylike
diminutiveness, as well as miracles of grace and dainty shapeliness. In
temperament she was more like Haydée than the Count, though she
possessed her father's quick decision and firmness, with the addition of
much of his enthusiasm.

The Palazzo Costi was magnificently furnished, so the Count had made no
alterations in that respect, bringing with him only the family wardrobe
and a portion of his library, consisting mainly of oriental manuscripts
written in weird, cabalistic characters and intelligible to no one but
himself.

The household was made up solely of the Count, his son Espérance,[2] his
daughter Zuleika, the faithful Nubian mute Ali and five or six male and
female domestics. Having no other object than his daughter's education,
the Count wished to live in as thorough retirement as he could, but it
was impossible for him to keep his presence a secret, and no sooner had
it become known that he was in Rome than he was besieged by hosts of
callers belonging to the highest nobility, mingled with whom came
numerous patriots, disciples of the unfortunate Savonarola,
distinguished for their firm devotion to the cause of Italian liberty.

At an early hour of the morning upon which this narrative opens the
Count of Monte-Cristo sat alone in a small apartment of the Palazzo
Costi, which had been arranged as his study and in which his precious
manuscripts were stored in closely locked cabinets. The Count had a copy
of a Roman newspaper before him, and his eyes were fixed on a paragraph
that seemed to have fascinated him as the serpent fascinates the bird.
The paragraph read as follows:

"Mlle. Louise d' Armilly, the famous prima donna, who will sing to-night
at the Apollo Theatre her great rôle of _Lucrezia Borgia_, has, it
appears, a deep impenetrable mystery surrounding her. She is French by
birth, and is said to be the daughter of a banker, who vanished under
peculiar circumstances, but, as she positively declines to speak of her
history, we can only give the rumors concerning her for what they are
worth. M. Léon d' Armilly, brother of the prima donna, who supports her
in Donizetti's opera, also refuses to be communicative. At any rate, the
mere hint of the mystery has already caused quite a flutter of
excitement in high society circles and that is sufficient to insure a
crowded house."

"Louise d' Armilly!" murmured the Count, half-audibly. "The name is
familiar, certainly, though where I have seen or heard it before I
cannot now recall. The lady is French by birth, the paper says, and that
fact, at least, is a sufficient pretext for me to visit her. I will call
on her as a fellow countryman, and the interview will demonstrate if she
is known to me."

The Count arose, went to his desk and, seating himself there, wrote the
following brief epistle:

"Edmond Dantès,[3] Count of Monte-Cristo, desires permission to call
upon Mlle. Louise d' Armilly at ten o'clock this morning. In this desire
M. Dantès is actuated solely by the wish to lay the homage of a
Frenchman at the feet of so distinguished an artiste of his own nation
as Mlle. d' Armilly."

Having finished, sealed and addressed this note, the Count touched a
bell which was immediately answered by the ever-watchful Nubian.

"Ali," said the Count, in the Arabic tongue, "take this letter to the
Hôtel de France and wait for a reply."

The faithful servant bowed almost to the floor, took the missive and
departed. When he had gone, the Count walked the apartment with the long
strides habitual to him at such times as he was engrossed by some
all-powerful thought.

"Surely," he muttered, "this artiste can in no way interest me
personally, and yet I feel a subtile premonition that it would be wise
in me to see her."

He was still pacing the study when Ali returned. The Nubian's usually
impassible face bore traces of excitement and horror. He prostrated
himself at his master's feet and, with his visage pressed against the
floor, held up his hand, presenting to the Count the identical letter of
which he had been the bearer.

"Why, how is this, Ali?" asked the Count, frowning. "My letter sent back
without an answer. The seal has been broken, too. It must have been
read."

The mute slowly arose and began an eloquent pantomime which his master
readily translated into words: "You went to the Hôtel de France and sent
up the letter. In ten minutes it was returned to you by the lady's
valet, who said all the answer the Count of Monte-Cristo deserved from
his mistress was written on the back."

Ali nodded his head in confirmation of his master's translation, looking
as if he expected to be severely reprimanded for being the bearer of
such an indignity. The Count, however, merely smiled. Curiosity rather
than anger predominated in him. He turned the letter over and read,
scrawled in pencil in a woman's hand, the following brief and
enigmatical but insulting communication:

"Any Frenchman save the ignominious M. Dantès, the so-called Count of
Monte-Cristo, would be welcome to Mlle. d' Armilly. That person she does
not wish to see and will not."

The Count was perplexed and also amused. The fervor of the prima donna
made him smile. He certainly did not know her, certainly had never seen
her. Why then was she so bitter against him? He could make nothing out
of it. Was it possible her name was really as familiar to him as it had
seemed? The irate artiste had surely heard of the Count of Monte-Cristo
and, therefore, could not be mistaken in regard to his identity, but in
what way could he have injured her or incurred her anger? The more he
thought of the matter the more perplexed he grew. As he was debating
within himself what action he ought to take, there was a knock at the
door and a domestic entered, handing him a card upon which was
inscribed: "Captain Joliette."

"Ha!" cried Monte-Cristo, "he comes in time. He will aid me in solving
this mystery."

He motioned Ali from the study, and directed the valet who had brought
the card to show the visitor up at once. In another instant Captain
Joliette entered the room. The Count sprang forward to greet him.

"Welcome, Captain," said he. "I have not seen you since our stirring
adventures in Algeria.[4] I hope you are well and happy. By the way,
what are you doing, in Rome? I was not aware you were here."

"I am here simply by chance," answered the young soldier, with a blush
that belied his words. "I was in Italy on a little pleasure trip and
naturally drifted to the Eternal City. I learned only this morning that
you were installed at the Palazzo Costi and instantly hastened to pay my
respects."

When their cordial greetings were over and they were seated side by side
upon a commodious sofa luxuriously upholstered in crimson silk, the
Count said, abruptly:

"Captain, did you ever hear of a French opera singer named Louise d'
Armilly?"

Again the young man colored deeply, a circumstance that did not escape
the close observation of his companion, who instantly divined that the
famous prima donna counted for more in the reasons that had brought the
Captain to Rome than that gallant warrior was willing to admit.

"Yes," stammered Joliette, "I have heard of her, and report says she is
a remarkably charming lady as well as a great artiste."

"Your tone is enthusiastic, my dear Captain," returned Monte-Cristo,
smiling pleasantly. "Perhaps you are acquainted with Mlle. d' Armilly."

"Well, to confess, Count," said Joliette, with a laugh, "I am acquainted
with her, and, curiously enough, part of my mission here to-day was to
ask you to occupy a box at the performance of 'Lucrezia Borgia' this
evening. Will you accept?"

"With genuine delight," was Monte-Cristo's ready answer. "I desire to
see this mysterious prima donna for more than one reason. In the first
place, her name is dimly familiar to me, though I cannot remember where
I ever heard it, and, in the second place, she flatly refused a visit
from me no later than this morning."

Joliette looked greatly surprised.

"Refused a visit from you, Count! I would not believe it did I not hear
it from your own lips. Mlle. d' Armilly must be mad! She surely cannot
know what an honor it is to receive a visit from the Count of
Monte-Cristo!"

The Count smiled in his peculiar way, and handed the Captain Mlle. d'
Armilly's singular reply to his note. The young man glanced at it in
amazement, reading it again and again; finally he stammered out:

"It is her handwriting, but what can she mean?"

"That is exactly what I would like to know, and I see by your manner and
words that you are powerless to enlighten me. Still, you can tell me who
this Mlle. d' Armilly is, and that will in all probability furnish me
with the key to her rather shabby treatment of me."

"My dear Count, I am acquainted with the young lady, it is true, but,
like yourself, I am in total ignorance so far as her history is
concerned. She is French, that is evident, and she has gone so far as
to admit to me that Louise d' Armilly is only her professional name,
but what her real name is she has more than once positively refused to
disclose to me. She is equally reticent as to the rumors afloat
regarding her. You are, doubtless, aware that she is reputed to be the
daughter of a French banker who mysteriously disappeared. This she
neither denies nor affirms; she merely maintains an obstinate silence
whenever it is mentioned in her presence."

"Your recital interests me greatly, Captain," said Monte-Cristo. "You
are more privileged than myself in that you enjoy the acquaintance of
this eccentric young lady, but she does not seem to repose a greater
degree of confidence in you than in me, for she has told you absolutely
nothing."

"Well," said Joliette, "you will see her to-night, at any rate, despite
her prohibition. She cannot keep you out of the theatre, for the box is
purchased and here are the tickets."

"But she will be angry with you, Captain," said the Count, slyly, "for
bringing such an undesirable auditor. I had better go alone and occupy
some obscure seat. I do not wish you to forfeit Mlle. d' Armilly's
smiles for me."

"Pshaw!" replied Joliette, "there is plainly some mistake. She does not
know you, will not recognize you. She has certainly confounded you with
some one else."

"Perhaps so," said Monte-Cristo; "but women's memories are good, and I
warn you that you are taking a grave risk."

"None whatever, I assure you. It is more than likely that, in answering
your note as she did, Mlle. d' Armilly was influenced solely by caprice.
If she should ask me after the performance who was my companion, I have
only to give you a fictitious name and she will be none the wiser."

That evening Captain Joliette and the Count of Monte-Cristo made their
way through the dense throng in front of the Apollo Theatre, and were
finally shown into a lower proscenium box commanding a full view of the
stage. Monte-Cristo instinctively sought refuge behind the curtains and
drapery of the box, where he could sit unobserved and yet be enabled to
closely scrutinize the mysterious singer who appeared to have such an
intense aversion for him.

Although still early the house was already crowded in every part, and
throngs were unable to gain even admission. The vast audience was made
up chiefly of the best and most fashionable society in Rome. It included
many of the highest nobility, who occupied the boxes they held for the
season. Everywhere the bright colored, elegant toilets of the ladies met
the eye, while the gentlemen were brilliant in fête attire. Fresh young
faces and noble old visages were side by side, the beauty of youth and
the impressiveness of age, and the male countenances were not less
striking than those of the females. Truly, it was a grand assemblage,
one that should delight the heart and flatter the vanity of even the
most capricious of prima donnas.

At first there was a low hum of conversation throughout the theatre,
together with preliminary visits from box to box, but the flutter began
to subside as the musicians appeared, and by the time they were in their
places in the orchestra absolute silence reigned. When the conductor
made his appearance he was greeted with a burst of applause, which he
gracefully acknowledged with a profound bow. Then he grasped his bâton,
tapped lightly upon the rack in front of him, and the delightful
overture to Donizetti's great work commenced.

At its conclusion the curtain slowly rose and the opera began. Mlle. d'
Armilly came forth in due course, and the house fairly rung with
plaudits of welcome. She sang divinely and acted with consummate art,
receiving loud encores for all her numbers. Monte-Cristo who was
passionately fond of music, caught the prevailing enthusiasm and
gradually emerged from the shelter of the protecting curtains and
drapery. He had scanned Mlle. d' Armilly carefully through his
opera-glass and was thoroughly convinced that she was a perfect stranger
to him, although now and then a tone, a gesture or a movement of the
body vaguely conveyed a sense of recognition of some tone, gesture or
movement he had heard or seen somewhere before. The Count, however,
reflected that all women possessed certain points of resemblance in
voice and bearing; he, therefore, passed the present coincidences over
as purely accidental, thinking no more of them.

For a long while Mlle. d' Armilly did not glance at the box occupied by
Captain Joliette and the Count of Monte-Cristo,[5] and it was not until
the former threw her a costly wreath of flowers that she turned her eyes
in that direction. She was about bowing her acknowledgments, when her
gaze rested upon the stately form of the Count. Instantly she paused in
the centre of the stage, turned deadly pale beneath the paint of her
make-up, and, with a loud scream, fell in a swoon. The curtain was at
once rung down, and the director, stating that the prima donna had been
seized with sudden and alarming indisposition, dismissed the audience.
Captain Joliette rushed to Mlle. d' Armilly's dressing-room and the
Count of Monte-Cristo wended his way back to the Palazzo Costi, utterly
bewildered by what had taken place.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] A full account of the life of Haydée, will be found in that great
romance "The Wife of Monte-Cristo," published complete and unabridged by
T. B. Peterson & Brothers, Philadelphia.

[2] A full account of his life and of Espérance's remarkable career will
be found in that absorbing novel, "The Son of Monte-Cristo," published
complete and unabridged by T. B. Peterson & Brothers, Philadelphia.

[3] For a full account of the life and career of "Edmond Dantès," one of
the most powerful and thrilling novels ever issued, see "Edmond Dantès,"
published complete and unabridged by T. B. Peterson & Brothers,
Philadelphia.

[4] See "The Son of Monte-Cristo," complete and unabridged edition,
published by T. B. Peterson & Brothers, Philadelphia.

[5] For a full account of the life and remarkable career of "The Count
of Monte-Cristo," Alexander Dumas' masterpiece, one of the greatest
romances ever written, see the illustrated and unabridged edition of it,
published by T. B. Peterson & Brothers, Philadelphia.


CHAPTER II.

A STRANGELY SENT EPISTLE.


Zuleika, Monte-Cristo's daughter, had been for some months in the
convent school conducted by the Sisterhood of the Sacred Heart. She was
not a close student though a rapid learner, and was rather inclined to
romance and adventure than to musty books of history and science. As has
already been stated, she had the early maturity of Greek girls. Besides,
she had attracted the attention of several Roman youths of high and
noble lineage, who had eagerly paid her the homage due to her beauty and
oriental attractiveness. Though but fifteen, she appreciated and felt
flattered by this homage, and naturally was impatient of the restraint
put upon her by the regulations of the convent school, which rigorously
excluded all male visitors save parents or guardians.

In the first rank of her youthful admirers was the Viscount Giovanni
Massetti. He was more ardent than any of the rest and, indeed, was
desperately in love with the fair and bewitching child of the dead
Haydée. He belonged to a family of great antiquity and boundless wealth,
and was reputed to possess a vast fortune in his own right. The Viscount
was only in his twenty-first year, but was exceedingly manly, dashing
and gallant. He was quite handsome and was said to be the soul of
honor, though his ardent temperament and headlong pursuit of whatever he
most coveted not unfrequently involved him in serious troubles, from
which, thanks to his own tact and the vast influence of his family, he
generally came out unscathed.

On Zuleika's arrival in Rome and before she had been placed in the
convent school, the Viscount Massetti had made her acquaintance in a way
that savored of romance and that made a deep impression upon the
inexperienced young girl. In Monte-Cristo's carriage, attended only by a
timid femme de chambre, she was one day crossing one of the two bridges
leading to the Island of San Bartolomeo, when a trace broke and the
horses took fright. The terrified driver lost control of them, and the
mad animals dashed along at a fearful rate, almost overturning the
carriage. Zuleika had arisen in the vehicle, which was an open barouche,
and was wildly clinging to the back of the front seat, her face white
with fear and her long black hair, which had become loosened, streaming
out behind her. Her wide open eyes had in them a look of tearful
supplication most difficult to resist. The young Viscount, who was
riding over the bridge on horseback at the time of the accident, could
not resist it. He sprang from his horse and, as the carriage passed him,
leaped into it. Seizing Zuleika by the waist, and holding her tightly to
him, he then made another spring, alighting safely with her upon the
roadway of the bridge. The flying horses were ultimately stopped and the
occupants of the badly shattered vehicle rescued from their dangerous
situation. This adventure caused the Count of Monte-Cristo to throw open
the doors of his palazzo to the young Italian, and he had been a
frequent visitor there up to the time of Zuleika's departure for the
convent school.

In the interval both the Viscount and the girl had become much attached
to each other, and then this mutual attachment had rapidly ripened into
mutual love of that ardor and intensity experienced only by children of
the southern or oriental sun. Young Massetti had avowed his passion to
his beautiful charmer, and the avowal had not caused her displeasure; it
was, on the contrary, exceedingly agreeable to her and she did not seek
to conceal the fact from her enthusiastic suitor.

The momentous interview took place in a densely shaded alley of the
garden of the Palazzo Costi one sultry afternoon of the early autumn.
The youthful couple were seated very near each other upon a rustic
bench. Massetti held Zuleika's small, soft hand in his and the electric
touch of her tiny and shapely fingers thrilled him as the touch of
female fingers had never thrilled him before. He gazed into the liquid
depths of her dark, glowing eyes and their subtile fire seemed to melt
his very soul. The close, sultry atmosphere, laden with heavy,
intoxicating perfumes, was fraught with a delirious influence well
calculated to set the blood aflame and promote the explosion of pent-up
love. The thick, green foliage enclosed the pair as in a verdant cloud,
effectually concealing them from observation. The opportunity was
irresistible. Giovanni drew closer to his fascinating companion, so
closely that her fragrant breath came full in his face, utterly
subjecting him and totally obliterating all caution, everything save his
absorbing passion for the palpitating girl whose slight, but clear-cut
form, gracefully-outlined beneath her flowing, half-oriental garments,
touched his. Suddenly carried away by a powerful transport, he threw his
arm around the young girl's yielding waist and drew her without
resistance upon his bosom, where she lay, gazing up into his flushed,
excited countenance with an indescribable, voluptuous charm, mingled
with thorough confidence and unhesitating innocence. Panting in his
clasp, her ruby lips partly opened as if for breath, and the ardent
Italian hastily, recklessly imprinted a fiery kiss upon them. Zuleika,
with an almost imperceptible movement, returned this chaste, but
ravishing salute.

"Oh! how I love you!" murmured Giovanni, quivering from head to foot in
his wild ecstasy, and clasping the lovely girl still tighter.

She made no verbal response, but did not stir, did not strive to
extricate herself from his warm embrace This was a sufficient answer for
the quick Italian. Zuleika, the beautiful Zuleika, returned his love,
favored his suit. His joy approached delirium.

"Oh! Zuleika," he whispered, gazing directly into her night black eyes,
"you love me, I am sure! Give me the treasures of your virgin heart! Be
mine--be my wife!"

"Oh! Giovanni," returned the quivering girl, in a low, but sweetly
modulated voice, "I do love you--God alone knows how much!--but I am
too young to be your wife! I am only a child, not yet out of school. My
father would not hear of my marrying for several years to come. Can you
not wait?"

"It will be a hard task, Zuleika," answered the young man, excitedly;
"but, still, I will wait if you give me a lover's hope. Promise to marry
me when you are at liberty to do so, nay, swear it, and I shall be
satisfied!"

"I can neither promise nor swear it, Giovanni, without my father's
approval and consent. He is a wise, experienced and thoughtful man,
tender and mild to every one he loves, though hard and implacable to his
enemies. Speak to him of me, of your love, of your wish. He will listen
to you and he will not imperil his daughter's happiness. Go to him
without delay, and rest assured that whatever he says or does will be
for the best interests of us both."

She had released herself from his clasp and drawn slightly away from
him, not in terror, not in prudery, not in coquetry, but as a measure of
prudence. She felt intuitively that the wild, intense passion of her
Italian adorer must be kept within discreet limits.

"I cannot speak to your father yet," replied Giovanni, hesitatingly. "He
might listen to me, it is true; but he would treat our love as a mere
childish fancy that time could not fail to dim, if not obliterate. I am
deeply in earnest, Zuleika, and could not bear to be treated as a
thoughtless, headlong stripling, who did not know his own mind.
Ridicule, even in its mildest form, would fire my blood, fill me with
mad projects of revenge. I prefer not to ask your father for your hand
until certain of a favorable reception of my suit. You comprehend my
scruples, do you not, Zuleika? I love you too dearly not to win you when
I ask!"

"But you will speak to my father?" said the girl, in faltering tones.

"Yes, darling, oh! yes; but not until that hated convent school has
ceased to oppose its barriers between us. When you have left it, when
you have completed the education the Count designs for you, I will seek
your father and ask you of him for my wife; until then, until I can with
safety speak, at least promise me that you will love no other man,
encourage no other suitor."

"That I will do," responded the girl, joyously. "Rest assured I will
love no other man, encourage no other suitor!"

Unable to control himself, the Viscount again clasped the object of his
adoration in his arms, and again their lips met in a long, passionate
kiss of love.

So it was settled, and Zuleika went to the convent school of the Sacred
Heart, feeling that her happiness was assured, but impatient of and
dissatisfied with the long delay that must necessarily intervene before
the realization of her hopes, the dawn of her woman's future.

The Viscount Massetti, though he had professed himself willing to wait,
was, on his side, thoroughly discontented with the arduous task he had
undertaken. It was one thing to make a rash promise in the heat of
enthusiasm, but quite another to keep it, especially when that promise
involved a separation from the lovely girl who had inextricably entwined
herself about the fibres of his heart and was the sole guiding star of
his life and love.

The convent school of the Sacred Heart was located in the convent of
that Sisterhood, about three miles beyond the Porta del Popolo on the
northern side of Rome. The convent was a spacious edifice, but gloomy
and forbidding, with the aspect of a prison. Narrow, barred windows,
like those of a dungeon of the middle ages, admitted the light from
without, furnishing a dim, restricted illumination that gave but little
evidence of the power and brilliancy of the orb of day. At night the
faint, sepulchral blaze of candles only served to make the darkness
palpable and more ghastly.

The huge school-room was as primitive and comfortless in its
appointments and furniture as well could be. The walls were of dressed
stone and loomed up bare and grisly to a lofty ceiling that was covered
with a perfect labyrinth of curiously carved beams, the work of some
unknown artist of long ago. The scholars' dormitories were narrow
cell-like affairs, scantily furnished, in which every light must be
extinguished at the hour of nine in the evening. Once admitted to the
school, the pupils were not permitted to leave its precincts save at
vacation or at the termination of their course of studies, a
circumstance that heartily disgusted the gay, light-hearted Italian
girls sent there to receive both mental and moral training. Another
source of grave vexation to them was the regulation, already alluded to,
that rigorously excluded all male visitors, with the exception of
parents or guardians.

Attached to the convent was an extensive garden, full of huge trees that
had, apparently, stood there for centuries, so bent, gnarled and aged
were they. An ancient gardener, with a flowing beard as white as snow
and scanty locks of the same spotless hue, aided by two or three
assistants almost as ancient as himself, attended to the lawns and vast
flower-beds, the latter being kept constantly filled with plants of
gorgeous bloom and exquisite fragrance. The picturesque appearance of
the garden contrasted strongly and strangely with the rigid and staid
aspect of the convent edifice, and this garden was the one spot where
the pupils felt at home and thoroughly enjoyed themselves. They were
allowed to walk there at noon and towards twilight in the evening, under
the supervision of Sister Agatha, a sharp-sighted and vigilant nun, who
never failed to rebuke and correct her vivacious charges for even the
slightest infraction of discipline. Still, the girls enjoyed themselves
in the garden, for its extent and the fact that Sister Agatha could not
be everywhere at once enabled the frisky and light-hearted pupils to
indulge in many an escapade.

One noon Zuleika, who was in an unusually despondent frame of mind,
strayed from the rest of her companions and strolled beneath the
centenarian trees. Unconsciously she approached the lofty wall of the
garden. She seated herself at the foot of a gnarled old elm, the leafy
branches of which descended to the ground and effectually screened
Monte-Cristo's daughter from view. At least, so she thought, but though
she could not be seen by any within the garden enclosure she was plainly
visible from the wall and the trees looming above it without.

As Zuleika sat pondering on her lot and sadly thinking of her separation
from her lover, she heard or imagined she heard a singular noise amid
the thick boughs of an immense chestnut tree immediately outside the
garden wall. She started up in affright, but could discern nothing
unusual, and the singular noise was not repeated. The strangest part of
the whole affair, however, was that the noise had sounded like her own
name uttered by a human voice. This increased her terror and confusion,
and she was about to flee from the spot when an oblong pebble to which
something white was attached fluttered over the wall and fell at her
feet. She was now more alarmed then ever and took several steps
backward, the while regarding the white object that lay where it had
fallen, motionless and fascinating.

Finally her curiosity obtained the mastery, and, approaching the
suspicious object with the utmost caution, she bent over to examine it.
It was an ordinary envelope and, no doubt, contained a letter. For whom
was it intended? Obviously for one of the pupils. It was a clandestine
epistle, too, otherwise it would have come by the regular channel
through the post office. Perhaps it was a love letter. At this thought
she gave a guilty start and gazed piercingly into the chestnut tree, but
nothing was visible there save boughs and leaves. After all, the epistle
was, doubtless, destined for some swarthy-visaged Italian beauty, and
many such were in the convent school. That it had fallen at her feet was
certainly but a mere coincidence. It was not, it could not be intended
for her! Its rightful owner, who had clearly received many similar notes
in the same way, knew where it was and presently would come for it. The
envelope had fallen face downward, and she could not see the address.
She touched it with her foot, then cautiously turned it with the tip of
her shoe. She saw writing. It was the address. Somehow the arrangement
of the characters seemed familiar to her, though she was so dazed and
confused she could not make out the name. Her curiosity was unworthy of
her, she knew, unworthy of Monte-Cristo's daughter. What right had she
to pry into the heart secret of one of her school companions? Still she
gazed; she could not help it. Suddenly she stooped and took the envelope
from the ground. The address riveted her eyes like a magician's spell.
Great heavens! it was her own name--Zuleika!

Hurriedly snapping the slight string that bound the envelope to the
stone, she thrust the former into the bosom of her dress. Then she
glanced around her, half-fearing she had been seen by some of the pupils
or the watchful Sister Agatha. But no, she was unobserved, and even now
her companions and the nun were at such a distance that she could read
her letter without the slightest danger of being discovered or
interrupted. The temptation was strong. She yielded to it. She would
read the letter. She felt convinced that it was from the Viscount
Massetti, and the conviction filled her with unutterable joy. She had
not heard a word concerning him since she had been immured within the
sombre walls of that dismal convent, and now she had tidings of him in
his own handwriting! It was rapture! What had he written to her? An
assurance of his love, no doubt, and, perhaps, an exhortation to her to
keep her part of their agreement--to love no other man, to encourage no
other suitor! Surely she loved no one else--she never could love any one
but Giovanni Massetti, for did he not possess her whole heart, all the
wealth of her ardent youthful affection?

She kissed the envelope, then opened it, took out the letter, which was
written in pencil, and read:


     DEAREST ZULEIKA: I can keep from you no longer. I must see you once
     more and again call you my own. I strove to attract your attention
     just now in the chestnut tree outside the wall. I uttered your
     beloved name, but you did not seem to understand me. This evening
     at twilight I will scale the wall. At that time be at the elm where
     you now stand and I will meet you there. Do not fail me, and, above
     all, do not be afraid. I assure you that no harm can possibly
     befall either of us. Meet me, darling.
                                  Your own,
                                                    GIOVANNI.


Zuleika stood staring at this passionate note with sensations made up
of amazement, rapture and dismay. Giovanni, her lover, was coming. He
would stand there, on that very spot, and she would see him in all the
glory of his youthful manhood, with the radiant love-light in his eyes.
But how if he were discovered? What then would become of him and of her?
She shuddered at the possibilities of danger. But on one point she was
resolved--she would meet him let the danger be what it might. How
Giovanni would manage to avoid observation she did not know, but she
would trust to his judgment and discretion.

She glanced in the direction of the pupils and Sister Agatha. They were
coming slowly towards her. Again secreting her lover's epistle in her
bosom, she went to meet them.


CHAPTER III.

THE INTRUDER IN THE CONVENT GARDEN.


As the hour for the evening promenade drew near, Zuleika became
painfully excited, and uneasy. She longed with all her heart to see
Giovanni Massetti again, to hear the ardent words of love he would be
sure to utter, but would she be doing right to meet him clandestinely
and alone? Her mind misgave her. Of course she could trust her young
Italian lover, for he was the very soul of chivalry and honor. But did
others know this? How would her conduct be judged should the other
pupils and Sister Agatha steal upon them unawares? Giovanni might escape
without recognition, but with her it would be altogether different. She
could escape only by coining an ingenious lie, and at that her whole
nature revolted. She could not stoop to an innocent deception, much less
to an absolute falsehood. Why had Giovanni tempted her? Why had he
sought to place her in a situation he must know would be perilous? There
was but one answer--because of his love--and that answer was sufficient
to induce her to take the risk, however great it might be. Yes, she
would meet him at the appointed time and spot.

At length the bell rang for the promenade, and Sister Agatha headed the
little procession for the garden. For a brief space Zuleika lingered
with her companions among the shady walks and gorgeous flowers, but at
the first opportunity stole away and sought the leafy elm, beneath the
friendly boughs of which she was to receive the welcome yet dreaded
visit from the Viscount Massetti. She gained the rendezvous unobserved,
with loudly beating heart. The young Italian was not there. She searched
eagerly but vainly for him in the gathering twilight. What had happened
to prevent his coming? She was on thorns of anxiety. Perhaps he had
attempted to scale the wall and had fallen, sustaining some severe
injury! Perhaps even then, while she was waiting for him, he was lying
outside the wall, bruised and bleeding! But what could she do? Only
wait, wait, with torturing thoughts seething in her troubled brain.

She listened intently. Not a sound. If Giovanni were wounded, disabled,
he was maintaining a most heroic silence. She drew a magnificent gold
watch, the exquisite case of which was thickly incrusted with diamonds,
from her belt and glanced at the dial. It was after seven o'clock, and
by eight all the scholars were required to be safely housed within the
convent. Besides, she was not sure that she would not be missed,
searched for and found. What should she do, what course should she take?

As she was debating within herself, uncertain whether to remain or
return, there was a rustle amid the foliage of the chestnut tree
immediately outside the garden enclosure, and a man's form swung from
one of the branches to the top of the wall. Zuleika's emotion well-nigh
overcame her. She had recognized Giovanni. In another instant he had
leaped from the wall to the ground and was at her side. He stretched out
his arms to her and the girl, all of a tremble, impetuously cast herself
into them.

"Oh! Giovanni!" she murmured. "At last. I feared some terrible accident
had befallen you."

"I am safe, darling Zuleika," answered the young Italian, folding her in
a close embrace and showering ardent kisses upon her forehead and lips.
"But you, dearest, you are well? You have not forgotten me, have not
ceased to love me?"

"Forgotten you, ceased to love you, Giovanni!" whispered the quivering
girl, in a tone of slight reproach, gazing fondly into his eyes. "Have I
not given you my solemn promise to love you only?"

"Forgive me, my own!" cried the youthful Viscount. "What is a lover
without fears and doubts? They are the proof of the strength of his
adoration!"

They seated themselves at the foot of the branching elm, the friendly
shelter of which shut them in. Then Zuleika said, with apprehension in
her voice:

"Why did you come here, Giovanni? Are you not aware that you are running
a great risk and putting me in peril? If we are found together, you will
be ignominiously expelled and I severely punished. Besides, think of the
disgrace for us both in such an event! The matter will get abroad,
furnish food for gossip and certainly reach the ears of my father and
brother, whose displeasure I dread more than all else! Think, too, that
Espérance will call you to account for your conduct, and I could never
bear a quarrel between you and him in which, perhaps, blood might be
shed!"

"Never fear, Zuleika," replied Massetti, gallantly. "Should we be
discovered I will shield you. As to your father and brother, they cannot
be displeased, for I will explain all to them and end by demanding you
in marriage. Why have I come here? Simply because I could hold aloof
from you no longer. I felt that I must see you, speak with you, renew my
vows of love. Oh! Zuleika, the world is all dark to me without your
smile!"

"But you promised me to wait!"

"I know it; but I miscalculated my strength when I made that promise.
Could I see you I might be patient; but to wait for weeks and weeks
without even a glimpse of your dear face, without once hearing the sound
of your beloved voice, is utterly beyond me. I cannot do it!"

"You must. Nothing else can be done. My father wishes me to remain at
the convent school for a year, and the rules positively prohibit your
visits. Be patient yet awhile, Giovanni. We both are very young and have
a life of happiness to look forward to. Besides, we can see each other
at the Palazzo Costi during vacation, and that is something."

"It is nothing to a man who wishes to see you constantly, to be always
with you. Oh! Zuleika, I cannot bear our separation, I cannot do without
you!"

The young man had risen to his feet and uttered these words loudly,
recklessly. Zuleika sprang up and caught him by the arm, her face white
with terror.

"Control yourself, Giovanni, control yourself!" she whispered, in a
frightened tone. "Speak lower, with more caution, or other ears than
mine will hear you!"

But the Viscount did not heed her. He was fearfully agitated and his
entire frame shook with excitement and emotion.

"Fly with me, Zuleika, fly with me now, this very moment, and be my
wife!" he exclaimed, in a voice so strangely altered that Monte-Cristo's
daughter scarcely recognized it. "I am rich, and my family has wealth
and power sufficient to protect us against everything and everybody,
even your father, with all his untold gold and influence! The Count of
Monte-Cristo seeks to part us; that is the reason he has sent you here,
to this convent, where you are little less than a prisoner!"

He caught her wildly in his arms and held her against his breast as if
defying fate. Zuleika, more terrified than ever, struggled in his
embrace and finally released herself. She faced Giovanni, and said,
warmly:

"You do my father injustice. He does not seek to part us. He esteems you
greatly, Viscount Massetti, loves you for the service you rendered me,
his daughter, and will reward that service with the highest recompense
in his power to bestow--my hand. But he considers me a child as yet,
wishes me to have education and experience before I marry, that I may
be a wife worth having and not a mere useless doll. Respect his wishes,
Giovanni, respect him. He is a good, kind-hearted man, and will do
right. His wisdom has been shown too often for me to doubt it!"

"His wisdom!" cried Massetti, bitterly. "Yes, he is wise, too wise to
bestow your hand upon me, a mere Viscount! What is my family in his
eyes? Nothing. What is my wealth? An utter trifle compared to his. I
tell you, Zuleika, he does not wish us to marry. He designs you for some
high potentate with riches to match the princely marriage-portion you
will have!"

"No, no!" cried the girl. "You are despondent, and in your despondency
misjudge him. He cares nothing for wealth or exalted station, but values
a good name and an unstained reputation above all else."

"But will you not be mine, will you not fly with me from this wretched
prison, in which I can see you only by stealth and like a criminal?"

The Italian's eyes sparkled in the twilight and his voice was full of
eloquent persuasion. He fell upon his knees at Zuleika's feet, and,
seizing her hand, kissed it passionately again and again. The trembling
young girl was deeply touched by his love and entreaties. For a moment
she wavered, but for a moment only; then reason asserted its sway and
cooler reflection came to her aid.

"Rise, Giovanni," she said, with comparative calmness, "rise and be a
man. This proposition is altogether unworthy of you, and, should I
accept it, we would both be disgraced. I am yours, my heart is in your
keeping, and I will be your wife at the proper time with my father's
full consent. But I cannot fly with you, I will not!"

The young man sprang to his feet as if an electric bat had struck him.

"You have no confidence in me, then!" he cried, impulsively. "You do not
love me!"

"Do not love you!" exclaimed the girl, winding her shapely arms about
his neck, as her lovely head sank upon his bosom. "I love you with all
my heart, with all my soul, and it is because I love you that I will not
fly with you!"

Giovanni kissed her hair rapturously, excitedly, and the beautiful girl,
looking ten times more beautiful in her pleading earnestness, added,
sweetly, persuasively:

"Leave me now, darling. The bell for the pupils to return to the convent
will soon ring and I must not be missed from among them. Leave me, but
remember the maxim, 'Wait and hope!'"

The lover was about to reply when the sound of footsteps suddenly broke
upon their ears. They glanced at each other, startled, uncertain what to
do. Giovanni was the first to recover self-possession. He noiselessly
parted the boughs of the elm and peered cautiously in the direction of
the sound.

"Three men are rapidly approaching," he said, hastily, in a whisper.
"They are almost here!"

Zuleika looked, in her turn, through the branches.

"The gardener and his assistants," she whispered, nearly petrified by
consternation. "They have evidently learned that you scaled the wall and
are in quest of you!"

"See," said Giovanni, breathlessly, pointing to a group behind the men.
"A number of nuns are also coming!"

"They are searching for me! Oh! Giovanni, fly, fly instantly!"

"And leave you to suffer, to bear the weight of my imprudence! Never! I
will stay and protect you!"

"You will not protect me by remaining. You will only compromise us both
the more. Go, I beseech you, go, while there is yet time!"

With tears in her imploring eyes, Zuleika pushed her lover gently
towards the wall. He gazed at her for an instant and then at the
approaching men and nuns, who were now very near.

The girl clasped her hands supplicatingly, then mutely pointed to the
wall.

"It is your wish?" asked Massetti, hurriedly.

Zuleika nodded her head affirmatively, and still more imperatively
pointed to the wall.

"I will obey you," whispered the young Italian, "and I will 'wait and
hope!'"

She had gained the victory. A joyous love-light came into her eyes, for
the moment eclipsing her terror. Giovanni could not resist the
temptation to embrace her, even in the face of the danger that
threatened him. He wound his arms about her yielding form, drew her to
him with a crushing strain, showering burning kisses upon her upturned
lips.

"Farewell," he murmured, reluctantly releasing her, "farewell, my own!"

He turned from her and ran to the wall, scaled it with the agility of a
cat and vanished.

When the gardener and his assistants reached the elm, they found Zuleika
standing there alone. Had they seen Massetti scale the wall? Had they
recognized him? These thoughts shot through the girl's agitated mind.
She gave no attention to her own peril.

The men came to a halt and stood silently by, waiting for the nuns to
arrive. Horror was pictured on their aged countenances, and they stared
at Monte-Cristo's daughter as if she had committed some heinous,
unpardonable crime.

The group of nuns speedily arrived, headed by Sister Agatha, who held an
open letter in her hand. Zuleika gazed at this letter in silent dismay.
It was hers, the one Giovanni had written her! How had it got into
Sister Agatha's possession? She mechanically felt in her bosom where she
had secreted it, as she thought, safely. Her hand touched only the empty
envelope. The note must have fallen upon the floor of the school-room
and been found by some malicious pupil, who, after reading it and
discovering its compromising contents, had surrendered it to the nun,
thus divulging the weighty secret.

Zuleika stood abashed and terror-stricken. No chance of escape now. No
chance for deception had she wished to essay it. The letter told the
whole story, and the proof of its truth was furnished, for was she not
at the appointed rendezvous, and was it not probable that the men and
the nuns had seen Giovanni quit her and scale the garden wall?

The nuns looked as horrified as the old servants, but they were more to
be dreaded; they possessed the power of reprimanding and punishing, and
what punishment would they think too severe in this extreme case? Sister
Agatha spoke. Her tone was milder than Zuleika had expected.

"Oh! mademoiselle," she said, reproachfully, "what is this? A meeting
with a lover, and within these holy precincts dedicated to celibacy,
chastity and sacred things! What will your father, the Count of
Monte-Cristo, say when your conduct is reported to him? You are young,
and allowance must be made for youthful blood and passionate impulses;
but still you have done wrong, very wrong! Is this man, who signs
himself Giovanni and who just left you, your betrothed?"

"He is," murmured Zuleika, blushing and holding down her head.

"With your father's permission, mademoiselle?"

"My father does not object to him," replied the girl evasively.

"In that case your fault is not so great as I at first supposed," said
the nun. "You are pardonable for receiving the man, who, with your
father's consent, is in time to become your husband; but, nevertheless,
in meeting him within the convent grounds you are censurable for lack of
discipline, and also for conniving at a breach of our rule which
excludes all male visitors, save parents or guardians."

Zuleika bowed her head in submission.

"The punishment," continued Sister Agatha, "shall be as light as
possible, however, if you have never before met this man within the
convent grounds."

"I have never met him here before," said Zuleika, "and I only met him in
this instance because--because--"

She hesitated and burst into tears.

"Because what, my poor child?" asked the nun, kindly.

"Because I love him so, and because I was afraid, if I did not meet him,
in his desperation he would seek me out in face of you all!"

"Have you ever written to him since you have been in this school?"

"Never!"

"Has he ever written to you before?"

"You hold his first letter to me in your hand!"

"How was this letter delivered, by what means did it reach you?"

Her face one mass of crimson, trembling from head to foot, Zuleika told
the whole story of her adventure at noon that day. How she had strayed
from her companions without any definite intention; how she had seated
herself within the screening branches of the elm to meditate; how she
had heard the singular noise in the chestnut tree, and, finally, how the
letter, fastened to a stone, had come fluttering over the wall and
fallen at her feet.

The nuns glanced at each other, horrified and amazed at the audacity of
the young Italian.

"Zuleika," said Sister Agatha, "I told you your punishment should be as
light as possible. You have been exposed and reprimanded; the blush of
shame has been brought to your cheek! This, I think, is penalty
sufficient for a first offense, considering also that it was, in a
measure, forced upon you. But beware of a second infraction of our
rules! Now, return to your companions."

So it happened that Zuleika suffered but slightly for the imprudence and
headlong devotion of her lover. Fearing gossip, the Sisterhood of the
Sacred Heart suppressed the matter, and the Count of Monte-Cristo never
heard of it. Zuleika expected ridicule from her companions, but the
warm-blooded, romantic Italian girls, instead of ridiculing her, looked
upon her as a heroine and envied her the possession of a lover daring
and devoted enough to scale the wall of a convent garden.


CHAPTER IV.

A STORMY INTERVIEW.


When Captain Joliette entered the dressing-room of Mlle. d' Armilly,
after quitting the Count of Monte-Cristo at the Apollo Theatre on the
sudden termination of the performance of "Lucrezia Borgia," he found the
prima donna lying upon a sofa and slowly recovering from the effects of
her swoon. Her maid and the ladies of the company, the latter still in
their stage attire, were giving her every attention. It was a strange
and somewhat grotesque scene--a real drama with theatrical surroundings.
The blazing lights, enclosed by their wire spheres, threw a ruddy glare
upon the faces of those present, making them appear weird and witch-like
in their paint and powder. On chairs and tables lay Mlle. d' Armilly's
changes of dress for the performance and her street garments, while upon
a broad shelf in front of a mirror were the various mysterious articles
used in her make-up--rouge, grease-paint, poudre de riz, etc., together
with brushes and numerous camel's hair pencils. A basin filled with
water stood on a washstand, and on the floor was the pitcher, in company
with a heterogeneous collection of stage and street boots belonging to
the eminent songstress. The director of the theatre was standing
anxiously beside the suffering prima donna, mentally calculating the
chances of her ability to appear the following night. Léon d' Armilly
was walking back and forth in the small apartment, wringing his hands
and shedding tears like a woman, while at the open door lounged the
tenor and baritone of the troupe, their countenances wearing the usual
listless expression of veteran opera singers who, from long habit, are
thoroughly accustomed to the indispositions and caprices of prima donnas
and consider them as incidental to the profession.

As Captain Joliette came in, Léon ran to him and exclaimed amid his
tears:

"Oh! how could you bring that odious man to your box! See how the very
sight of him has affected my poor sister!"

At these words Mlle. d' Armilly roused herself and, springing to her
feet, faced the young soldier in a fit of uncontrollable rage.

"How dare you," she cried, her eyes flashing and her voice tremulous
with anger, "come here, to me, after what has occurred to-night!"

"I was not aware, Louise," answered he, apologetically, "that you had
such a terrible aversion to the Count of Monte-Cristo."

"The Count of Monte-Cristo!" exclaimed the director. "Was he in the
house this evening? What an honor!"

The irate prima donna flashed upon him a terrible glance.

"If you consider it an honor to have that monster in your theatre," she
fairly hissed, "I will sing for you no more!"

The humiliated director walked away without making a reply. He deemed
it the part of wisdom not to embroil himself with an eminent artiste who
was capable of bringing him in so much money, and who also was capable,
he thought, of breaking her engagement if she saw fit to do so. He,
therefore, left the dressing-room. The others, seeing that Mlle. d'
Armilly was evidently about to have a hot dispute with her admirer and
that she was sufficiently restored to need no further care, also quitted
the apartment.

When they were alone, the prima donna turned fiercely upon the Captain,
exclaiming:

"And you profess to love me, too! Was it love that induced you to bring
my worst enemy here to-night? It was hatred rather! Captain Joliette,
you hate me!"

"You know I do not, Louise," said the young soldier, warmly. "You know I
love you to desperation!"

"Why then was the so-called Count of Monte-Cristo in your box?"

"I was not aware that you knew him; indeed, I felt convinced that he was
a total stranger to you, and his conduct to-night tended to confirm that
conviction. He looked at you without the slightest sign of recognition;
and so far from being your enemy is he that he gave you louder and more
enthusiastic applause than any other man in the entire theatre."

"It is his art, Captain Joliette! I tell you that man is as cunning as a
serpent and as remorseless as a tiger. Only this morning he sought to
gain access to me, with what iniquitous motive I know not; but I
returned his letter, with an answer that must have galled his pride to
the quick!"

"I saw that answer," said the Captain. "Monte-Cristo showed it to me
himself at his residence, the Palazzo Costi."

"What!" cried Mlle. d' Armilly, with augmented anger. "You saw it, read
my very words, and yet brought him to your box?"

"Listen, Louise, and be reasonable. He told me that your name seemed
familiar to him and yet he could not recall where or under what
circumstances he had heard it. He was astonished at the tone of your
reply to his formal and, I must say, very civil note. I was sure there
must be some mistake on your part, that you had confounded him with some
other person. I had gone to the Palazzo Costi expressly to invite him to
hear you sing, to have such a great man present and assist at your
triumph! I felt proud of you, Louise, proud of you as an artiste and as
a woman, and I wanted my friend of friends to share my exalted
appreciation of you. Such were the reasons that induced me to bring him
to my box to-night, and, surely, if I committed an error, I deserve
pardon for my motives!"

"I will never pardon you, be your motives what they may!" cried Mlle. d'
Armilly, vindictively. "His presence ruined the performance and
disgraced me, me, Louise d' Armilly, in the eyes of all Rome!"

The Captain stood speechless, appalled by her fury. White with rage, her
eyes flashing and her bosom heaving, she looked like some beautiful
demon.

"I would have triumphed as usual had he not been here," she continued,
furiously and bitterly, "and to-morrow the Eternal City would have been
at my feet, I would have been an acknowledged queen, nay, even greater
than any sovereign alive, but now I have failed and am nothing! Captain
Joliette, for all this you are to blame, and yet you think you deserve
pardon for your motives! Why, man, you are worse than an idiot! No, I
will never pardon you, never!"

She strode about the dressing-room as she spoke, her small, white hands
working as if ready to tear the young soldier to pieces. Joliette
watched her for an instant and then said:

"You are a singular creature, Louise, a problem that I must admit I
cannot solve. What is the Count of Monte-Cristo to you that you swoon at
the mere sight of him? You certainly could not have been in any way
associated with his past life, have suffered from the signal vengeance
he took upon his enemies years ago!"

Mlle. d' Armilly paused suddenly in her excited walk, and, seizing the
Captain by the arm with so strong a clutch that a thrill of pain shot
through him, cried, menacingly:

"If you dare to mention Monte-Cristo's fiendish vengeance to me again, I
will banish you forever from my presence!"

At that moment one of the officials of the theatre appeared at the
dressing-room door.

"A note for mademoiselle," said he, bowing profoundly.

The prima donna took the missive from the man and glanced at the
address upon the envelope. As she did so, she knitted her brows and
cried out:

"His handwriting! Another insult! I will not read it!"

The official withdrew in confusion.

"Whose handwriting?" asked Joliette, his curiosity and jealousy
simultaneously excited. Mlle. d' Armilly had frequently referred to her
numerous admirers and the letters she received from them, and the
Captain naturally jumped to the conclusion that this note had been sent
by some ardent Roman suitor. He considered the artiste's exclamation and
assumption of displeasure as mere artful tricks designed to deceive him.

"Whose handwriting?" repeated Mlle. d' Armilly; scornfully. "Must I
explain everything to you?"

The young man had borne all his companion in her anger had heaped upon
him with comparative equanimity, but he could not bear the idea of a
rival, the very thought was torture.

"Louise," he pleaded, "let me see that letter, let me read it."

"What! Must you needs examine my private correspondence! Captain
Joliette, you are going too far! You have done enough to-night, without
adding insult to injury!"

"I did not seek to injure you, Louise, God knows! Neither do I wish to
insult you; but that letter I must and will read!"

"You talk as if I were already your wife and slave. Adopt another and
less authoritative tone, monsieur. Captain Joliette, you are not yet my
husband!"

"Would that I were and were sure of your love, Louise! The continual
uncertainty in which you keep me is insupportable! You refuse to let me
read that letter?"

The young man, in his turn, began to pace the dressing-room excitedly,
his jealous suspicions growing stronger and stronger.

Mlle. d' Armilly gazed at him triumphantly. She was proud of the vast
influence she exercised over this brave and manly warrior. He would
stand unmoved before the cannon's mouth, but she could make him quail
and tremble!

"You refuse to let me read that letter?" he repeated.

"What if I do not refuse?" said she, in a softer tone.

"You will make me a very happy man!"

"Then read it, for I will not! Thus I show my contempt for its miserable
and cowardly author!"

She crumpled the note in her hand and cast it on the floor. Then she
placed her foot upon it.

Joliette stooped and took it from beneath her boot. He straightened out
the envelope, opened it, removed the missive and read as follows:

"The Count of Monte-Cristo presents his respects to Mlle. d' Armilly,
and begs leave to express his deep regret that his presence in Captain
Joliette's box was the cause of such a grave catastrophe. He is utterly
at a loss to realize why Mlle. d' Armilly should entertain so profound
an aversion for him, and why the sight of him should so seriously affect
her. If Mlle. d' Armilly would condescend to explain, he would regard it
as a special favor. He trusts that Captain Joliette will in nowise be
blamed for what has occurred, as that gentleman, when he invited the
Count to share his box, was as thoroughly convinced as the Count himself
that Mlle. d' Armilly did not know and would not recognize him."

As Joliette read the last lines that so completely cleared him, he could
not suppress an exclamation of joy.

"Louise," he cried, "the Count of Monte-Cristo has written to exculpate
me!"

"Indeed!" replied the prima donna, contemptuously.

"Yes; he also apologizes to you and asks you to explain why the sight of
him so seriously affects you."

"He asks an explanation, does he?" cried Mlle. d' Armilly, her anger
resuming sway. "He shall never have one!"

"But you will pardon me, as you see I am altogether blameless?"

"I will hold your pardon under advisement, Captain. My action towards
you will be greatly influenced by your future conduct in regard to the
wretch who calls himself Monte-Cristo!"

"You surely do not wish me to cast him off, to shun him?"

"Do you prefer him to me?"

"I love you, Louise, love you better than anything or anybody else in
the whole world! But I greatly esteem the Count of Monte-Cristo. There
are ties between us that you do not understand."

"I do not care to understand them. I have told you that this man is my
enemy. That should be sufficient for you. My lover and my enemy cannot
be friends. Choose between us!"

"Would you have me quarrel with him?"

"Quarrel with him? Yes; and not only that! I would have you fight him,
kill him!"

The young man stood aghast. He was totally unprepared for this
explosion, this savage, vindictive demand.

"Fight him, kill him, Louise! You cannot, you do not mean what you say!"

"Am I in the habit of using idle words?"

"Louise, Louise, I entreat you, do not impose such horrible conditions
upon me!"

"Are you afraid of Monte-Cristo?"

"I am afraid of no man living, Louise; but I cannot challenge
Monte-Cristo to a duel even for you!"

"Then you refuse to protect, to champion me?"

"Oh! Louise, how can you speak thus! I would gladly shed every drop of
blood in my veins for you, gladly lay down my life for you, but do not
ask me to lift a hand against the Count of Monte-Cristo!"

The beautiful woman looked at the energetic speaker haughtily and
discontentedly. She was not a little disappointed. She had thought her
influence over her suitor unbounded, but now it appeared that it had
its limits. She, however, did not despair. Well knowing the wonderful
fascination she possessed for men, she determined to bring all its
batteries to bear upon Captain Joliette. She was bent on wreaking a
terrible vengeance upon the Count of Monte-Cristo for some mysterious
injury he had inflicted on her in the past, an injury in regard to which
she refused to be communicative even to her accepted lover, and was
resolved that Joliette should give the highest proof of his devotion to
her by becoming the instrument of that vengeance.

With the shrewdness of an experienced woman of the world, she readily
saw that a special effort would be required on her part to bend the
gallant soldier to her will and compel him to execute her inexorable
purpose. She would make that special effort and, in making it, would
render herself so captivating, so enticing, so desirable that Joliette
could not fail to be intoxicated with her charms and fascinations. Then
under the mad sway of his blind passion, excited to the utmost, he would
be ready to do anything for her, anything, even to the commission of a
crime, even to shedding the blood of his dearest friend!

At this juncture Mlle. d' Armilly, turning from the Captain as if in
high displeasure, for it was an important part of her plan to assume a
certain degree of coldness towards him at first, touched a bell and
immediately her brother Léon and her maid appeared.

"Franchette," she said, addressing the latter, "assist me with my street
toilet. I have sufficiently recovered to return to the Hôtel de France."

Unmindful of the presence of the Captain and Léon, the designing prima
donna at once began to remove the costume she had worn during the opera.
The maid aided her in this operation with the outward impassibility of
theatrical servants, though she imperceptibly smiled as she realized
that this display of her mistress' personal charms was made solely for
the purpose of rendering the young soldier still more the slave of that
artful siren.

As Mlle. d' Armilly stood in her corset and clinging skirts of spotless
white that delicately outlined her faultless shape, her fine throat,
shoulders and arms displaying their glowing brilliancy, Captain Joliette
gazed at her like one entranced. Never in all his life, he thought, had
he looked upon a woman so thoroughly beautiful, so goddess-like. She was
as perfect as a painting of Venus, and a thousand times more lovely for
being alive. He held his breath as he saw her bosom palpitate and felt
that he would give all he possessed in the world to call her his own, to
be with her forever.

Léon seemed somewhat abashed by his sister's proceeding and blushed like
a girl, the crimson tide giving his countenance a beauty altogether
feminine.

The toilet operation completed, Mlle. d' Armilly surveyed herself
triumphantly in the mirror. She was well aware that she had riveted her
chains very tightly upon her lover, but, for all that, she could tell
only by actual experiment if he were sufficiently under her dominion to
accede to her wishes concerning the Count of Monte-Cristo. Hence she
determined to make that experiment without delay, ere cool reflection
had come to the dazzled warrior's aid and enabled him to realize that a
trap had been laid for him.

Quitting the mirror, she went to Captain Joliette's side and, placing
her hand on his arm, as she threw into his eyes all the magnetism of her
glance, said, in a dulcet tone:

"Will you accompany me to the hôtel, Captain?"

The young man joyously assented, and soon an elegant equipage was
bearing him swiftly towards the prima donna's apartments.


CHAPTER V.

ANNUNZIATA SOLARA.


It was a bright, warm afternoon in spring, and the Piazza del Popolo,
Rome's great promenade, was crowded with gay pleasure-seekers of both
sexes, while the Corso and the two other principal thoroughfares
diverging from this extensive public square were also thronged with
young and old. The trees were covered with fresh green foliage, and
multitudes of blooming flowers adorned the Piazza and the windows of the
adjacent palaces and humble dwellings. Sounds of joy and mirth were
heard on every side, while now and then strains of soft music were
audible. It was truly a most inspiring scene of light and life.
Flirtations were frequent between beautiful dark-visaged girls, with
hair and eyes like night, in their picturesque attire, and manly-looking
youthful gallants, while here and there sullen and sombre glances spoke
of jealousy as fierce as fire, hinting of marital vengeance and love
tragedies characteristic of the hot-blooded, impetuous Italians.

In the midst of the throng on the Piazza two youths were strolling, arm
in arm. They were the Viscount Giovanni Massetti and Espérance, the son
of Monte-Cristo. Fast friends they seemed, and gayly they chatted as
they passed leisurely along. Their spirits were in full harmony with
the animated scene around them, and they were evidently not insensible
to the charms of the many pretty maidens they encountered and upon whom
they cast admiring glances.

Suddenly a peasant girl of dazzling beauty appeared in the Piazza very
near them. She was apparently about seventeen, glowing with sturdy
health, her full cheeks the hue of the red rose. Her sleeves, rolled
above the elbows, displayed perfect arms that would have been the envy
of a sculptor. Her feet were bare and her short skirts afforded dazzling
glimpses of finely turned ankles and limbs of almost faultless form. Her
face had a cheery and agreeable expression, not unmixed with piquant
archness and a sort of dainty, bewitching coquetry. She was a
flower-girl, and was vending bouquets from a basket jauntily borne on
one arm. She addressed herself glibly to the young men she met, offering
her wares so demurely and modestly that she seldom failed in finding
appreciation and liberal customers. There was not even a suspicion of
boldness or sauciness about her, but she had that entire self-possession
engendered by thorough familiarity with her somewhat risky and perilous
vocation.

Giovanni and Espérance caught sight of her simultaneously. Both were
struck by her appearance and demeanor, to which her gaudy but neat and
clean peasant costume gave additional éclat.

"What a handsome girl!" exclaimed Espérance, involuntarily.

"A divinity!" replied the Viscount, excitedly.

Then they glanced at each other and laughed, evidently rather ashamed
of the admiration they had so enthusiastically expressed.

"Her first words, however, will scatter the illusion to the winds," said
Espérance, cynically. "She is, no doubt, as ignorant as she is pretty."

"Quite likely," rejoined Giovanni. "The outside beauty of these peasant
girls generally conceals much internal coarseness, not to say
depravity."

They were about pursuing their way, when the girl advanced, offering
them her bouquets. Her voice was so sweet, so melodious, so deliciously
modulated, that the young men paused in spite of themselves. She stood
in a most graceful attitude, her parted coral lips exhibiting teeth as
white and glittering as pearls. A subtile magnetism seemed to exhale
from her that was not without its influence upon the two youths.
Besides, her words did not betoken that ignorance alluded to by
Espérance or that depravity the Viscount had spoken of.

"Buy some bouquets for your fair sweethearts, signors," she said. "They
will gladden their hearts, for the perfume speaks of love!"

"Love!" exclaimed Giovanni, smiling at her earnestness and poetic
language. "What do you know of love?"

"Ah! signor," she answered, blushing deeply and averting her eyes, "what
girl does not know of love! Even the meanest peasant feels the arrow of
the little blind god!"

The young men were amused and interested. Though belonging to the lower
class, this poor flower-girl had certainly received some education and
was endowed with a fair share of the finer feelings. Espérance felt
attracted towards her, and Giovanni experienced a fascination not
difficult to account for. Separated from Zuleika, filled with a lover's
despair, the ardent Viscount was not averse to a little flirtation, more
or less innocent. Here was his opportunity; he would cultivate this
romantic and handsome girl's acquaintance. Where was the harm? He did
not design being unfaithful to Zuleika, and this piquant peasant would
be none the worse for brightening some of his sad hours. No doubt she
was accessible and would welcome such a diversion, especially as he
would pour gold liberally into her lap.

"I will buy some flowers of you, my girl," he said, encouragingly.

"Here is a beautiful bouquet, signor," said the girl, smiling joyously
at the prospect of making a profitable sale, and handing him a
magnificent selection of fragrant buds and bloom.

Giovanni took the bouquet and, at the same time, gently pressed the
girl's taper fingers. They were soft and velvety to his touch. A
delightful thrill shot through him at the contact. The flower-girl
evinced no displeasure. Clearly she was accustomed to such advances. The
Viscount slipped a gold coin of considerable value into her hand, again
experiencing the delightful thrill.

"This is too much, signor," said the girl, looking at the coin, "and I
have not the change. You must wait a moment until I get it."

"Never mind the change," answered Giovanni. "Keep the whole."

The girl looked astonished at such liberality, then a joyous smile
overspread her beautiful visage.

"Oh! thank you, thank you ever so much, signor," she said, effusively,
the color deepening on her tempting cheeks. Giovanni with difficulty
restrained himself from kissing them.

"What is your name, my girl?" he asked, as she moved to depart.

"Annunziata Solara, signor," she replied, surprised that such a question
should be asked her.

"Where do you live?"

"In the country, just beyond the Trastavere."

"Do you live alone?"

"No; with my father, Pasquale Solara."

"What is his occupation?"

"He is a shepherd, signor."

The girl bowed to the two young men and, with a glance at Giovanni that
set his blood tingling in his veins, passed on and was speedily lost in
the throng of promenaders.

Espérance, who had watched this scene with amused curiosity, broke into
a hearty laugh as the Viscount turned towards him with something very
like a sigh.

"Giovanni," said he, "the pretty Annunziata Solara has bewitched you!"

"Not quite so much as that, Espérance," replied the young Italian. "But
she is a glorious creature, isn't she?"

"Yes, as far as looks go; but all is not gold that glitters, and this
fair Annunziata may turn out a perfect fiend or fury upon a closer
acquaintance!"

Giovanni gave his friend a glance of reproach.

"Do not insult her with such wretched insinuations," he replied, warmly.

Espérance smiled and said:

"You are smitten with her, that's plain!"

"I am not, but I admire her as I would anything beautiful."

"Put it as you please. At any rate, you will hardly be likely to see her
again. She was a vision and has faded."

"But I do not intend to lose sight of her."

"You do not mean to say that you design seeking her out?"

"That is exactly what I mean to say."

Espérance looked at his friend quizzically and, at the same time,
uneasily.

"When do you design seeking her out?"

"This very night."

"In the Trastavere?"

"No. You did not hear her aright. She said she lived in the country,
just beyond the Trastavere. I will seek her there."

"What! Alone?"

"Alone."

"Beware, Giovanni! Her bright eyes may lead you into danger! How do you
know that she has not some fierce brigand lover, who will meet you with
a stiletto?"

"Nonsense! Your fears are childish!"

"I am not so sure of that. The country beyond the Trastavere is
infested by daring robbers, who would not hesitate to seize you and hold
you for a ransom. Only the other day the notorious Luigi Vampa performed
just such an exploit, exacting a very large sum for the release of his
prisoner, who was a wealthy nobleman like yourself."

"I will take the chances!"

"You are mad!"

"I am not. I have no fear of brigands. They would not dare to lay even a
finger upon a Massetti!"

The young Viscount drew himself up proudly as he spoke. He believed the
power of his family invincible.

Espérance was at a total loss to understand the firm hold this sudden
infatuation had taken upon his friend. Of course, he fully comprehended
the influence of female beauty over hot, headstrong youth, and he
acknowledged to himself that Annunziata was really very beautiful and
alluring; still, she was not more so than hosts of other girls who would
be glad to win a smile from the Viscount Massetti at almost any price,
and whose pursuit would be altogether unattended with danger. It was
well known that the shrewd brigands frequently sent handsome young women
to Rome to entice their prey to them, and might not Annunziata Solara,
with all her apparent demureness, be one of those dangerous Delilahs?

After several further attempts to dissuade the Viscount from the rash
venture he had decided upon making, all of which were vain, Espérance
resolved that his impetuous friend should not go alone that night in
quest of the fascinating Annunziata. He would follow him unseen and
endeavor to protect him should the necessity arise. He knew the
Viscount's nature too thoroughly to propose accompanying him, as such a
proposition would undoubtedly be received with scorn, if not as an
absolute insult. He would, however, keep track of him and, if all went
well, Massetti would be none the wiser. If, on the contrary, his aid
should be needed, he could come forward and give it. In that event,
gratitude on the Viscount's part would prevent him from demanding an
explanation of his presence.

Meanwhile the young men had continued their stroll and had passed from
the Piazza del Popolo to the Corso. Giovanni was taciturn and moody. He
looked straight ahead, failing to notice the gayly attired beauties
thronging that great thoroughfare, who at ordinary times would have
engrossed his attention. Not so with Espérance; he admired the vivacious
ladies on the sidewalk or in their handsome carriages drawn by spirited
horses. Now and then he recognized an acquaintance among them and bowed,
but Giovanni recognized no one. He seemed plunged in a reverie that
nothing could break. Scarcely did he reply to Espérance's occasional
remarks, and when he did so it was with the air of a man whose thoughts
are far away.

At the broad portico of the magnificent Palazzo Massetti, Espérance, the
son of Monte-Cristo bade his friend farewell. As he turned to depart, he
said:

"Is your determination still unaltered, do you yet intend to seek
Annunziata Solara in the country beyond the Trastavere?"

Giovanni glanced at him keenly, as he replied, somewhat impatiently:

"My determination is unaltered. I shall seek her!"

"To-night?"

"To-night!"

Espérance said nothing further, but departed, full of sad forebodings.
He felt a premonition of evil, and was certain that his infatuated
friend would meet with some dire mishap during the romantic and
hazardous expedition of that night. It was now quite late, and the young
man hurriedly bent his steps towards the Palazzo Costi, maturing his
plan as he walked along. He would inform the Count of Monte-Cristo that
he had been invited to accompany some friends on a pleasure excursion,
requesting his permission to absent himself from Rome for a few days.
This permission obtained, he would assume the garb of an Italian
peasant, make his way to the Ponte St. Angelo and there, in the shadow
of the bridge, await the coming of the Viscount Massetti. When the
latter had passed his place of concealment, he would follow him at a
distance, keeping him in view and watching him closely.

Monte-Cristo made no objection to his son's proposed absence, and the
young man, after a hasty supper, hurried to his sleeping chamber, where
he soon assumed a peasant's dress he had worn at a recent masquerade.
Stepping in front of a toilet mirror, he applied a stain to his face,
giving it the color of that of a sunburnt tiller of the fields. When his
disguise was completed, he surveyed himself triumphantly in the glass.
Even his father could not have recognized him, so radically had he
altered his appearance.

Gaining the street by a private door without being observed, he was
speedily at the bridge. As he stepped into the shadow of one of the
abutments, he heard the great clock of the Vatican strike seven. It was
twilight, but everything around him was as plainly visible as in broad
day. He glanced in every direction. No sign of Giovanni. Had the ardent
young Viscount already crossed the Tiber?

He thought not, and waited patiently for a quarter of an hour. Still no
sign. Then he began to grow anxious. Massetti had certainly passed over
the bridge and he had missed him. He waited a few minutes longer,
devoured by impatience and anxiety. At last he reached the conclusion
that Giovanni had preceded him, had gone on alone, unprotected. He must
have done so; otherwise he would certainly have appeared ere this. The
thought was torture. To what unknown, what deadly perils was he exposing
himself amid the marshes without the city walls? But perhaps he had not
yet left the city walls behind him! A ray of hope came to Espérance. If
Massetti were still within the limits of the Trastavere, he might by
using due speed overtake him! He would make the attempt at any rate. As
he formed this resolution, he emerged from the shadow of the abutment.
At that instant a man came upon the bridge and passed him. He passed so
closely that they almost touched, uttering a suppressed oath at finding
an intruder in his path. His pace was rapid, so rapid that he was soon
far away. He had not even looked at Espérance, and it seemed to the
latter that he had endeavored to conceal his face. The man was of
Giovanni's size and had Giovanni's bearing, but there the resemblance
ended. He was certainly a peasant; his attire betokened it; besides, his
countenance, of which Espérance had caught a glimpse, was rough and
tanned. The son of Monte-Cristo felt a pang of keen disappointment; then
he glanced at his own garments, thought of his own stained visage, and a
revelation came to him like a flash of lightning--the man was
Giovanni--Giovanni in disguise! He hurriedly looked after his retiring
figure; it was now but a mere speck in the distance, scarcely
discernible in the fading twilight. He started swiftly in pursuit,
almost running across the bridge. After a hot and weary chase, he at
length gained so much on the object of his solicitude that he was as
near as he deemed it prudent to approach. He was now sure that the man
ahead of him was the Viscount Massetti.

Espérance paused a second to recover his breath; then he went on at a
slower pace. The pursued had not discovered the pursuit; he trudged
along steadily and sturdily, never once looking back. Thus the two men
crossed the Trastavere, and each in turn, emerging from a gate in the
wall of the Leonine City, passed out into the marshy country beyond.
They had not gone very far, when Espérance saw Giovanni suddenly give a
start; at the same time he heard a loud, harsh voice cry out:

"In the name of Luigi Vampa, halt!"

Straining his eyes, Espérance finally succeeded in piercing the
semi-darkness of the surroundings, and perceived a gigantic ruffian, who
wore a black mask, standing in the centre of the road and presenting a
pistol at the head of the man he had every reason to believe was
Giovanni Massetti.


CHAPTER VI.

THE POWER OF A NAME.


The young Viscount, for it was, indeed, he whom the gigantic masked
brigand had halted, was staggered for an instant by this unlooked for
interruption of his journey in pursuit of the beautiful flower-girl. He
gazed at the huge ruffian in front of him first in bewilderment and then
in anger. The robber calmly continued to cover him with his pistol; as
Giovanni made a movement with his hand towards a stiletto he wore at the
belt of his peasant's dress, the man's quick eye detected his intention
and he exclaimed, in a rough tone of command:

"Touch that stiletto and I will blow your brains out!"

The Viscount dropped his hand; he was as brave as a lion, but the bandit
had the advantage of him and, courageous as he was, he instantly
recognized the folly of disregarding his warning. His rage and
indignation, however, were too great for him to control. He cried to his
stalwart adversary:

"Why do you stop a poor peasant from whom you can obtain nothing?"

"You are not a poor peasant, signor!"

"I am not, eh? Well, search me and see!"

"You are neither a poor peasant, signor, nor any peasant at all! I have
seen you too often in Rome to be deceived by the flimsy disguise you
wear so unnaturally! I know you! You are the Viscount Giovanni
Massetti!"

"Well, what if I am?" retorted the young man, sharply. "The fact will
not benefit you or any member of your accursed and cowardly band!"

"Have a care how you talk, signor!" exclaimed the bandit, threateningly.
"Insolence to your captors may cost you more than you would be willing
to pay!"

"Indeed?"

"Yes; I mean exactly what I say. It may cost you your life!"

Giovanni glared at the brigand with unflinching eyes. He returned threat
for threat.

"Take my life, if you will," he said. "It would be the worst piece of
work you have ever done!"

"May I ask why, signor?"

"It would raise my family against you and the result could not fail to
be your extermination!"

The man laughed loudly, and caustically replied:

"You are joking! What can your family do against Luigi Vampa and his
comrades, who have long been countenanced by the highest authority!"

This was the climax of insult, and Giovanni, driven to the highest pitch
of fury, unable longer to control himself, tore his stiletto from its
sheath and, raising it aloft, made a frantic dash at the gigantic
brigand. Instantly the latter fired. Giovanni dropped his weapon; his
right arm fell useless at his side.

Espérance meanwhile had not been idle. His excitement was intense, and
with it was mingled terrible fear for the safety of his friend.
Nevertheless, he eventually succeeded in sufficiently calming and
collecting himself to form a plan of action and put it in execution. He
had provided himself with a pistol, which he had freshly charged prior
to his departure from the Palazzo Costi. He drew this weapon from its
place of concealment at the first intimation of danger, noiselessly
cocking it. The road was skirted with tall thick bushes from which
projected a fringe of heavy shadows. Along this dark fringe Espérance
stole with cautious tread towards the huge bandit, as soon as he
perceived him standing in the centre of the highway and noted his
threatening attitude. As he stealthily advanced, the moon suddenly rose,
flooding the scene with its silvery light. Its rays, however, did not
disturb the line of skirting shadows, and Espérance passed on unseen.
When the brigand fired he was very near him. Seeing Giovanni's arm fall
and realizing that he was wounded, the son of Monte-Cristo promptly
raised his weapon and, covering the gigantic ruffian, discharged it
directly at his heart. Blood gushed from the man's breast. He sank to
the ground, where he lay quivering convulsively; in another instant he
expired without even uttering a groan.

Giovanni, whose arm was badly shattered and who was suffering frightful
pain, stood speechless with amazement at this sudden, unexpected
intervention in his favor. Espérance instantly sprang to his side. The
young Italian stared at him as if he had been an apparition from the
other world. He failed to recognize him in his peasant's dress, with his
stained visage.

"Who are you?" he gasped, as soon as he was able to find words.

"Do you not know me?" asked Espérance, astonished. In his excitement he
had forgotten his disguise.

"You are a stranger to me," replied the Viscount, "but my gratitude is
none the less on that account. You have rescued me from captivity,
perhaps saved my life!"

"I am no stranger, Giovanni. I am your friend, Espérance."

"What! Espérance in that dress, with that sunburnt countenance! I
thought your voice had a strangely familiar sound, but your disguise
proved too complete for me to penetrate it!"

These words recalled to the mind of the son of Monte-Cristo the changes
he had made in his appearance. No wonder that Viscount had failed to
recognize him!

"Why did you disguise yourself, and how came you here at this critical
juncture?" demanded Giovanni, after a pause.

"I disguised myself that I might follow you without fear of detection.
You would not listen to reason, and I determined to protect you during
your rash adventure so far as might lie in my power."

"From the bottom of my heart I thank you, Espérance. You are a brave as
well as a devoted friend, fully worthy of your illustrious father! But
how did you know me? I too, am disguised."

"The fact of my own disguise enabled me to penetrate yours. I
recognized you almost immediately after you passed me on the Ponte St.
Angelo."

"What! Were you the peasant I nearly ran down as I crossed the bridge?"

"I was. But let us lose no more time; we have lost enough already.
Besides, more of Luigi Vampa's band are probably prowling in the
vicinity, and I imagine we both have had sufficient of the banditti for
one night! Prudence dictates that we should return at once to Rome. With
your shattered arm, you surely do not count upon continuing your search
for the fair Annunziata at present?"

"No; that is impossible, I regret to say. I will return with you to
Rome."

As the Viscount spoke a sudden tremor seized upon him, and he leaned on
his friend's shoulder for support.

"You are faint from loss of blood!" exclaimed Espérance, much alarmed.
"How thoughtless in me not to bind up your wound!"

Taking his handkerchief from his pocket, he wiped the blood from his
friend's arm, carefully, tenderly bandaging the hurt; then he made a
sling of Giovanni's handkerchief, placing the wounded member in it. The
Viscount felt easier thus, though still somewhat faint.

"You are quite a physician, Espérance," said he.

"Not at all," replied the son of Monte-Cristo; "but my father taught me
how to manage hurts; he said the knowledge would at some time be useful
to me, and his words have proved true."

"Your father is a wonderful man; he seems to think of everything, to
provide for all contingencies. Thanks to the skill he imparted to you, I
am now in a condition to start on the homeward journey."

The young men turned their faces towards Rome, but scarcely had they
taken a dozen steps when the road in front of them literally swarmed
with rough-looking armed men, who effectually barred their progress. In
an instant they were surrounded. Resistance was impossible; the two
friends glanced at each other and about them in dismay. The new comers
were evidently bandits, members of Luigi Vampa's desperate band.

One of the miscreants, who appeared to be the leader and was very
picturesquely attired, confronted Giovanni and Espérance. He had a
pistol in his belt, but did not draw it.

"You are my prisoners!" said he, in a tone of authority.

"Who are you, and by what right do you detain us?" demanded Espérance,
haughtily.

"Who I am," replied the brigand, in a stern voice, "does not concern
you. The right by which I detain you is the right of the strongest!"

"We cannot oppose your will, however unreasonable and unjust," returned
Espérance; "my friend is wounded and my pistol is discharged. We can
only throw ourselves upon your mercy; but we are gentlemen in spite of
our dress, and demand to be treated as such!"

"How came your friend to be wounded and your pistol discharged?" asked
the bandit, suspiciously.

"My friend was attacked and I went to his assistance," answered
Espérance.

"You were in a fight, then," resumed the leader. Turning suddenly to his
men, he asked: "Where is Ludovico?"

"He went up the road half an hour since, and has not yet returned,"
answered a short, thick-set young fellow, who seemed to be the leader's
lieutenant.

"Just like him," said the leader. "Always rash, always seeking
adventures alone. I heard a pistol-shot some time back," he continued,
looking menacingly at Espérance. "Perhaps Ludovico has been
assassinated! If so, it shall go hard with his murderers! Let him be
searched for."

The short, thick-set lieutenant, accompanied by several of the band,
immediately departed to obey the order.

Espérance glanced anxiously at Giovanni. A new danger threatened them.
The gigantic brigand who had been slain was, without doubt, this
Ludovico. His body would be found and summary vengeance taken upon them.
Giovanni also realized the additional peril; but neither of the young
men gave the slightest evidence of fear; inwardly they resolved to face
death stoically, to meet it without the quiver of a muscle.

In a brief space the lieutenant and his companions returned; two of the
men bore the corpse of the huge robber; they placed it on the grass by
the roadside where the full moonlight streamed upon it, showing the
wound in the breast and the garments saturated with blood. A frown
contracted the leader's visage; he glanced at Espérance and the Viscount
with a look of hate and rage; then, turning to the lieutenant, he said:

"Well?"

"We found Ludovico lying in the road a little distance from here,"
replied the short, thick-set man, with a trace of emotion in his rough
voice. "He was shot in the heart and had been dead for some time."

The brigands had gathered about the prostrate form of their comrade;
they seemed to be much affected by his fate; Ludovico was evidently a
favorite.

As soon as the leader had received his subordinate's report, he turned
to the prisoners, asking, sternly:

"Which of you murdered this man?"

"No murder was committed," returned Espérance, indignantly. "The huge
ruffian shot my friend, shattering his arm, as you see; he was killed as
a measure of defence."

"Your pistol is discharged," continued the leader, harshly; "that you
have admitted; you killed Ludovico!"

"I defended my friend, whom he had basely attacked," said Espérance,
sullenly.

"You killed this man? Yes or no!"

"I killed him!"

"Enough!" cried the leader, grinding his teeth. "You shall pay the
penalty of your crime! Both of you shall die!"

He motioned to his lieutenant and in an instant Espérance and Giovanni
were securely bound. The young men read desperate resolution and fierce
vengeance upon all the rough countenances around them. There was not the
faintest glimmer of hope; death would be dealt out to them at once and
in the most summary fashion. Indeed, nooses were already dangling from a
couple of trees by the roadside, waiting to do their fell work. The
sight of these dread preparations roused Giovanni. With flashing eyes,
he faced the leader of the band.

"Beware!" he cried. "If you murder us, you will have all Rome to deal
with! We have told you we are gentlemen and not peasants. I am the
Viscount Giovanni Massetti and my companion is the son of the famous
Count of Monte-Cristo!"

As the young Italian uttered these words, a new comer suddenly appeared
upon the scene for whom all the rest made way. He was an intellectual
looking man, unostentatiously attired in a peasant's garb.

"Who spoke the name of the Count of Monte-Cristo?" demanded he.

The leader silently pointed to Massetti, who instantly replied:

"I spoke the name of the Count of Monte-Cristo, and he will surely take
bitter vengeance upon you all for the murder of his son!"

"His son?"

"Yes, his son, who stands here at my side, ignobly bound and menaced
with a shameful death!"

The stranger turned to Espérance and examined him closely.

"Are you the son of Monte-Cristo?" he asked, visibly agitated.

"I am," answered Espérance, coldly.

"Give me some token."

"'Wait and hope!'"

"His maxim!"

"Ah! you recognize it. Do you also recognize this?"

As he spoke the young man held up his left hand, and a magnificent
diamond ring he wore flashed in the moonlight. The new comer took his
hand and glanced at the jewel, one that the Count of Monte-Cristo had
worn for years and which he had but a few days before presented to his
son.

"I am convinced," said the stranger. Then, turning to the leader, he
said, in a tone of command: "Release these men!"

"But they have slain Ludovico!"

"Release them!" thundered the stranger. "Ludovico should have known
better then to have interfered with _my_ friends!"

He was instantly obeyed, and the two young men, greatly astonished,
stood relieved of their bonds.

"You are at liberty," continued the stranger, "and can resume your
route. Say to the Count of Monte-Cristo that Luigi Vampa remembers his
compact and is faithful to it!"

As he spoke the notorious bandit chief gathered his men together, and
the whole band vanished among the trees like so many spirits of the
night.


CHAPTER VII.

IN THE PEASANT'S HUT.


For a moment the two young men stood silent and astounded. So sudden had
been the change from imminent peril to safety that they could hardly
comprehend it. Luigi Vampa had come and gone like a flash, and both
bandits and danger had been dispelled by the wonderful magic of
Monte-Cristo's name. The brigand chief had styled Giovanni and Espérance
his friends, and as such they knew the entire country in the vicinity of
Rome was free to them; they could travel it by day or by night without
fear of molestation. Espérance cared little for this, but Giovanni was
elated by it, for it would enable him to seek out Annunziata Solara
without risk of interruption or impediment. But what was the Count of
Monte-Cristo's mysterious power? That was a question difficult, indeed,
to answer. At any rate, even the fierce Luigi Vampa bowed to it, and it
was as undisputed as it was strange.

The Viscount Massetti was the first to realize the necessity of a rapid
push for Rome. He was faint from loss of blood and excitement; besides,
his shattered arm throbbed violently and gave him twinges of
excruciating pain. He felt himself sinking and urged his friend to
hasten. Espérance acquiesced, and, supporting the young Italian as best
he could, they resumed the homeward journey. Scarcely a mile had been
traversed, however, when Giovanni threw himself upon the sward at the
foot of a great tree, declaring that it was altogether impossible for
him to advance another step. The throbbing in his arm had become
unbearable, taking his breath away and filling him with a sickening
sensation.

They were yet far from Rome, and not a sign of a habitation could be
discerned in any direction. Waiting for daylight to come was not to be
thought of; it would be some hours before dawn, and even when the sun
had arisen it was by no means certain that assistance would be
procurable. Meanwhile Giovanni would suffer torments, to say nothing of
the danger of being exposed in his condition to the influence of the
malaria from the surrounding marshes.

Espérance, though unwilling to leave his friend's side for an instant,
decided at last that it was imperative for him to go in search of
succor. Meanwhile a raging fever had set in and Giovanni was rapidly
growing worse. As the son of Monte-Cristo was about to start on his tour
of investigation, he heard a man's voice singing at some distance away,
but gradually coming nearer. The sound was cheery and reassuring, for
certainly the man who could sing so sweetly and joyously must have a
good, kind heart. As the man approached Espérance recognized his
song--it was that beautiful and expressive serenade, "Cara Nina," a
melody dear to all youthful Italian lovers whether humble or of high
degree.

The man at length came in sight; he was walking leisurely, but with a
long, swinging gait. His voice was a clear, full tenor robusto, and the
notes of his delicious love song trilled from his throat with wonderful
effect in the still, balmy air of the tranquil, glorious night. He was
not over twenty, was a stalwart peasant, and the moonlight showed that
he possessed a manly, open countenance. So engrossed was he by his
serenade that he failed to notice Giovanni lying at the foot of the huge
tree and Espérance standing beside him. He was passing on when the
latter hailed him. He paused, somewhat alarmed, and his hand
instinctively grasped a weapon concealed in his bosom. Espérance
hastened to reassure him.

"Have no fear," he said. "We are merely travelers, and one of us is
grievously wounded. In Heaven's name, render what assistance you can!"

The young peasant turned and came cautiously towards them.

"This is a dangerous neighborhood," said he; "it is infested by bandits
of the most reckless and daring description."

"We have abundant reason to know it," answered Espérance, "for we have
just had a very narrow escape from a horrible death at the hands of some
of Luigi Vampa's men."

"Luigi Vampa's men!" echoed the peasant, in astonishment.

"Yes."

"And they released you of their own accord? I never heard of such a
thing! It is not their custom to free their prey, at least without a
heavy ransom. Did they rob you, or did you pay them for your liberty?"

"Neither," replied Espérance.

The peasant's amazement was redoubled. He glanced inquiringly at the
prostrate Viscount.

"How came your comrade to be wounded?" he asked.

"His arm was shattered by the pistol of a gigantic bandit."

"Ludovico?" demanded the peasant, glancing around him, as if he expected
to see the huge assailant.

"I believe that was his name," returned Espérance. "But he will do no
more injury!"

"You do not mean to say that you killed him?"

"I do."

"And yet you were allowed to go free! I cannot understand it!"

"Perhaps not, but you can understand that my friend is badly hurt and
needs immediate aid and shelter. Is there not some hospitable cabin in
the vicinity to which he can be conveyed, where he can be attended to
until assistance arrives from Rome?"

The peasant hesitated for an instant; then he said:

"My father lives at a short distance from here; he could shelter you if
he would, but he is in such terror of the bandits that, under the
circumstances, he would probably close his door against you."

"He need have no fear of the brigands in this case, for Luigi Vampa has
just given us a signal proof of his protection. Besides, he assured us
that he was our friend."

"This is singular, indeed," said the peasant, again hesitating. "Luigi
Vampa is a friend to but very few, and they are those with whom he is in
league. You certainly are not in league with him, or you would not have
killed Ludovico!"

"This is no time for parley," replied Espérance. "My friend is
suffering, and humanity alone should cause your father to receive him. I
will engage to appease Luigi Vampa's anger, should it be aroused; at the
worst, I pledge myself to surrender with my friend at the first summons
to do so, and to assure the brigand chief that your father is altogether
blameless. Come, can I not prevail upon you to be generous and humane?"

"Well," said the peasant, partially satisfied, "I will trust you, though
I am taking a great risk. Should Vampa be offended, he will burn our hut
over our heads and murder us all without pity. However, both your
wounded friend and yourself shall have such poor shelter as our humble
roof affords."

Giovanni was aided to arise, and, taking him between them, Espérance and
the peasant began their walk. Fortunately they did not have far to go,
otherwise the young Viscount's failing strength would have been unequal
to the task. They quitted the highway, plunging into a narrow footpath
closely wooded on either side; so thickly, in fact, did the tree
branches interlace overhead that the moonbeams were effectually excluded
and almost impenetrable darkness reigned. For an instant Espérance was
apprehensive of treachery, but this fear was dispelled when he thought
of the manly bearing of the youthful peasant and the dread of the
brigands he had expressed. The three could scarcely walk abreast in the
narrow pathway, and every now and then Giovanni stumbled against some
protruding root or other obstacle invisible in the obscurity; but the
peasant knew the road perfectly, and with no uncertain step hurried his
companions on as rapidly as possible.

Soon the path widened somewhat, the light commenced to sift through the
dense foliage, and the gurgling of a noisy brook was heard at no great
distance. Suddenly they made an abrupt turn, coming in sight of a small,
neat-looking cabin, covered with clustering vines and embowered in
verdure. The brook dashed along within a few yards of it, the fresh odor
of the water mingling gratefully with the perfume of honeysuckles and
the aromatic scent of the surrounding forest. It was, indeed, a
beautiful and highly romantic spot, a cosy, sequestered nook, such as
that in which King Henry hid away his love, the Fair Rosamond, from the
prying glances of the inquisitive world. Espérance gazed at it with
rapture, and even Giovanni, wounded and exhausted as he was, could not
refrain from uttering an exclamation of astonishment and admiration. The
cabin was closed and not a sign of life was visible.

"We have arrived," said the peasant, in a low voice. Quitting his
companions, he went to a window, against which he gave three distinct
raps.

The signal was almost immediately answered by three similar raps from
within; then the window was thrown open and a woman's head appeared. The
moonlight fell full upon her face, and both Espérance and Giovanni
suddenly started as they recognized Annunziata Solara, the bewitching
flower-girl of the Piazza del Popolo.

"It is she--it is Annunziata!" whispered the young Viscount in his
comrade's ear.

"Hush!" returned the latter, in a guarded undertone. "Do not betray
yourself! She will never recognize us, disguised as we are! Besides, our
guide's suspicions must not be aroused! He might yet refuse us shelter!"

"You are right, as you always are," answered Massetti. "We must maintain
our incognito, at least until we are sure of our ground."

Meanwhile the peasant was speaking hastily with Annunziata.

"Sister," he said, "I am not alone; two travelers, peasants like
ourselves, are with me. They were attacked by Luigi Vampa's men, and one
of them is sorely wounded."

"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed the girl, evidently filled with terror.

"They claim our hospitality for the night and our assistance until aid
can be procured from Rome. In my father's name I have accorded them
shelter. Open the door and admit us."

The girl disappeared from the window and in another instant had flung
the door open. As she stood there in the silverly light, the state of
her garments and hair indicating that she had hurriedly risen from her
couch, her bright, picturesque beauty was vastly heightened. The young
men thought they had never beheld a more entrancing vision of female
loveliness.

"Where is father?" asked the peasant, anxiously.

"He has not yet returned," replied the girl.

The guide uttered a sigh of relief.

"I am glad," said he, "for Pasquale Solara does not like strangers. Were
he here he might refuse to exercise hospitality towards this wounded man
and his companion, even though they are, as they assert, friends of
Luigi Vampa."

"Friends of Luigi Vampa!" echoed the girl, becoming greatly alarmed.
"The Blessed Virgin protect us!"

"They are not brigands, at any rate," said the peasant, "and I believe
them honest men. If, however, they are deceiving me, I shall know how to
act!"

There was an ominous flash in his eye as he spoke, and his hand again
sought the weapon concealed within his bosom. Espérance, who had been
intently listening to this conversation and had marked every motion of
the young peasant, felt his suspicions revive; but there was no time for
hesitation; shelter and aid for his friend were of the first necessity;
they must be obtained at once and at any cost. He had refrained from
offering the peasant money, not wishing to betray that he and his
companion were other personages than they seemed, and now that
Annunziata had appeared upon the scene he congratulated himself on the
wisdom of his course. He, nevertheless, feared Giovanni's impulsiveness
in the presence of the girl he so much admired, and determined to watch
him as closely as possible, in order to promptly check all damaging
disclosures. If Giovanni remained in this attractive nook long enough to
open and carry on a flirtation with the beautiful flower-girl, he must
do so solely as a peasant and under the cover of his clever disguise. It
was hardly likely that Annunziata would recognize in Massetti and
himself the two youthful gallants she had encountered but for a moment
amid the gay throng and crush of the brilliant Piazza del Popolo.

While these thoughts went flashing through his mind, the young Viscount,
leaning heavily upon his arm, had not taken his eyes from the handsome,
tempting girl before him. Suffering as he was, he longed to be at her
side, to clasp her lovely shape, to feel her warm, voluptuous breath
stream over his face and imprint kiss after kiss on her ripe red lips.
He had not forgotten Zuleika. Oh! no! But Annunziata Solara was an
altogether different being, a girl to delight him, intoxicate him, for a
moment as the other for life. For Monte-Cristo's daughter his feeling
was love, for the fascinating flower-girl of the Piazza del Popolo it
was a passion to be sated.

After a few more words to his sister, the peasant returned to the young
men, aiding Espérance to transport Giovanni into the cabin. The interior
of this humble abode was as neat and picturesque as the exterior. The
room they entered was small and cheaply furnished, but feminine taste
was everywhere displayed. A single candle was the only light, but the
scanty illumination sufficed to show the refining touches of a woman's
hand. In one corner stood a bed, the covers of which were turned down,
and upon which was impressed the shape of its late occupant. At the head
of the bed a brass crucifix was suspended from the wall, while over the
back of a chair hung articles of a woman's apparel. Giovanni could not
doubt that he was in Annunziata's chamber, and that the imprint on the
bed was hers. He felt a thrill of joy at the idea that he was to occupy
the bewitching flower-girl's couch, to occupy, perhaps, the very place
where she had lain but a short time before.

Annunziata, who had thrown a cloak over her shoulders and night clothes,
but whose feet were still bare, had accompanied her brother and his
companions to the apartment. She eyed the strangers timidly, but
curiously, though it was quite plain she failed to penetrate their
disguise. With deft hands she rearranged the bed and removed her
garments from the chair. Then she retired to another room, and the
wounded Viscount was aided to undress and assisted into the couch by the
peasant and Espérance, where he eventually fell asleep in a delirium of
bliss, after his hurt had been properly cared for.

Espérance was duly bestowed for the night, and soon unbroken silence
brooded over the solitary cabin in the forest.

Thus was enacted the initial scene of a drama that was destined to be
fruitful in disastrous results, results that clouded more than one happy
life.


CHAPTER VIII.

A SYLVAN IDYL.


In the morning the Viscount Massetti's arm was found to be so much
swollen and his wound so painful that it was deemed advisable to send
for a physician, who resided in a neighboring hamlet not more than a
mile distant from the cabin of the Solaras. The man of medicine was soon
at Giovanni's bedside. After examining and dressing his hurt, he
declared that the patient ought not to be moved for at least a week, a
piece of intelligence at which the young man inwardly rejoiced,
notwithstanding all the torture he suffered, for his sojourn involved
nursing at the hands of the beautiful Annunziata, who had already shown
him that she possessed tenderness and a kind heart, as well as good
looks.

Espérance held a conference with his friend after the physician's
departure to decide upon what should be done. He proposed to go at once
to Rome and acquaint the Viscount's family with what had happened and
Giovanni's condition, but the young man firmly opposed this plan,
declaring that he would be well in a few days at most and protesting
that informing his relatives of his situation would involve explanations
he had no desire to give. Giovanni also begged Espérance to remain with
him and give no sign as to their place of retreat; so earnestly did he
solicit these favors that the son of Monte-Cristo, much against his will
and with many forebodings, finally consented to grant them.

Pasquale Solara returned home late on the day following the arrival of
the strangers at his hut. He was an old, but sturdy shepherd, whose
rough, sunburned visage spoke of exposure to the weather and hard toil.
He frequently was absent for days and nights in succession, absences
that he never explained and about which his son and daughter did not
dare to question him, for Pasquale was a harsh man, who grew angry at
the slightest pretext and was inclined to be severe with all who sought
to pry into his affairs. He expressed great fear of the bandits who
infested the vicinity of Rome and especially of Luigi Vampa's band, but
those who knew him best shook their heads doubtingly, and, though they
did not say so, it was plainly to be seen that they deemed this fear
merely assumed for purposes of his own. At any rate, it was a
significant fact that Pasquale was never disturbed in his wanderings,
while the brigands always left his dwelling and its inmates unmolested.

The old shepherd frowned darkly when informed by his children that they
had given shelter to a couple of travelers, one of whom had been wounded
in a fight with a brigand, but he said nothing and appeared disposed to
accept the situation without even a grumble. He did not, however, enter
the chamber in which Giovanni lay and avoided coming in contact with
Espérance, who caught but a passing glimpse of him ere he departed
again on another expedition, which he did after a stay of only half an
hour at his cabin.

The young peasant and Espérance soon became quite friendly, indulging in
many a ramble in the forest and beside the gurgling brook. The peasant's
name was Lorenzo, and he appeared to lead a free life, totally
unencumbered with avocation of any kind, save occasionally looking after
a few sheep that never strayed far from the banks of the little stream.

Annunziata for the time abandoned her visits to Rome, installing herself
as Giovanni's nurse. She was almost constantly beside him, and her
presence and care were more potent medicines than any the physician
administered. Her smile seemed to exercise a bewitching effect upon the
young Viscount, while her voice sounded in his ravished ear like the
sweetest music. The handsome girl was the very picture of perfect
health, and her well-developed form had all the charm of early maturity,
added to youthful freshness and grace. She wore short skirts, and her
shapely limbs were never encumbered with stockings, while her feet were
invariably bare. A low, loose body with short sleeves displayed her
robust neck and shoulders, and plump, dimpled arms that would have been
the envy of a duchess. Her hands as well as her feet were not small and
the sun had given them a liberal coat of brown, but they were neatly
turned and attractive, while her short, taper fingers were tipped with
pink, carefully trimmed nails. Altogether she looked like the spirit of
the place, a delicious wood nymph as enchanting as any a poet's fancy
ever created and yet a substantial, mortal reality well calculated to
fire a man's blood and set his brain in a whirl. If she had appeared
beautiful in Rome, amid the aristocratic fashion queens of the Piazza
del Popolo, she seemed a thousand-fold more delightful and fascinating
in her humble forest home, where she shook off all restraint and showed
herself as she really was, a bright, innocent child of nature, as pure
as the breath of heaven and as free from guile as the honey-fed
butterfly of the summer sunshine.

The more Giovanni saw of her the more he came under the dominion of her
irresistible charms, the empire of her physical attractiveness.
Gradually he mended, and as his wound healed his strength returned. At
length, towards the close of the week, he was able to quit his bed and
sit in a large chair by the window of his room. It had been agreed upon
between him and Espérance that, during their sojourn at the Solara
cabin, they should be known respectively as Antonio Valpi and Guiseppe
Sagasta, and already Annunziata had bestowed upon her patient the
friendly and familiar diminutive of Tonio, a name to which he answered
with wildly beating heart and eyes that spoke volumes.

By means of shrewdly managed questions the young Viscount had
ascertained that the flower-girl had no lover, that her breast had never
owned the tender passion, and this intelligence added fuel to the flame
that was consuming him. It is not to be supposed that Annunziata was
ignorant of the strong impression she had made upon her youthful and
handsome patient. She was perfectly aware of it and secretly rejoiced at
the manifest exhibition of the power of her charms. Perhaps she did not
as yet love Giovanni, perhaps it was merely the general physical
attraction of a woman towards a man, or it might have been that innate
spice of coquetry common to every female, but the fact remained that she
tacitly encouraged the young Viscount in his ardent attentions to her.
She, moreover, lured and inflamed him in such a careless, innocent way
that she acquired additional piquancy thereby. Had Annunziata been a
designing woman of the world intent upon trapping a wealthy lover,
instead of a pure and artless country maid totally unconscious of the
harm she was working, she could not have played her game with more
effect. Giovanni had become altogether her slave. He hung upon her
smiles, drank her words and could hardly restrain himself in her
presence. No shipwrecked mariner ever more greedily devoured with his
dazzled eyes the fateful loreley of a rocky, deserted coast than he did
her. Had she been his social equal, had her intelligence and education
matched her personal beauty, he would have forgotten Zuleika, thrown
himself impetuously at her feet and solicited her hand. As it was, while
Monte-Cristo's daughter possessed his entire heart, Annunziata Solara
enslaved his senses.

She received his approaches as a matter-of-course, without diffidence,
without a blush. His gallant speeches pleased her, she did not know why.
So thoroughly unsuspicious was she, that she failed to notice his
language was not that of the untutored peasant he claimed to be, that
his bearing as well as his words indicated a degree of culture and
refinement far above his assumed station. She was dazzled, charmed by
him as the bird is by the glittering serpent with its wicked,
fascinating eyes. She thought of nothing but the present and its novel
joys. She had never heeded the future--she did not heed it now.

One morning as she sat at his side by the open window, through which
stole the balmy air of the forest laden with the intoxicating perfume of
a thousand wild, intensely sweet flowers, Giovanni suddenly took her
brown hand, covering it with passionate kisses. The girl did not resist,
did not withdraw her hand from his; she did not even tremble, though a
slight glow came into her cheeks, making her look like a very Circe.

"Annunziata," said Giovanni, in a low voice scarcely above a whisper,
"do you care for me?"

"Care for you, Tonio?" replied the girl, gazing sweetly into his glowing
and agitated countenance. "Oh! yes! I care a great deal for you!"

He threw his arm about her neck, and, as his hand lay upon her shapely
shoulder, a magnetic thrill shot through him like a sudden shock from a
powerful electric battery. Annunziata did not seek to withdraw herself
from his warm embrace, and he drew her to him with tightening clasp
until her full, palpitating bosom rested against his breast. Her
tempting red lips, slightly parted, were upturned; he placed his upon
them in a long, lingering, delirious kiss. Then the color deepened in
her cheeks, and she gently disengaged herself. She did not, however,
avert her eyes, but gazed into his with a look of mute inquiry. All this
was new to her, and the more delicious because of its entire novelty.

"Neither my father, nor my brother, nor my dead mother ever kissed me
like that!" she said, artlessly.

Giovanni was enraptured; the girl's innocence was absolutely marvelous;
he had never dreamed that such innocence existed upon earth. Was she
really what she appeared?

"Annunziata," he said, abruptly, his heart beating furiously and his
breath coming thick and fast, "you have never experienced love, or you
would know the meaning of that kiss!"

"Love?" answered the girl, opening her large, lustrous eyes widely. "Oh!
yes, I have felt love. I love my father and Lorenzo, I love--everybody!"

"But not as you would love a young man, who would throw himself at your
pretty feet and pour out the treasures of his heart to you!"

"No young man has ever done that," said Annunziata, smiling and nestling
closer to him.

"But some one will before long, perhaps before many minutes! How would
you like me to be that one!" cried the Viscount, in his headlong
fashion.

"I cannot tell," answered the girl, "I do not know!"

"Then let me try the experiment!" said Giovanni, rising from his chair
and sinking on his knees in front of her. "Annunziata, I love you!"

The girl stroked his hair and then passed her taper fingers through his
flowing locks. She was silent and seemed to be thinking. Her bosom
heaved just a little more than usual, and the glow on her cheeks became
a trifle more intense. Giovanni, yet kneeling, seized her hand, holding
it in a crushing clasp.

"Do you hear me?" he cried, impatiently. "Do you understand me? I love
you!"

"You love me, Tonio?" replied the girl, slowly. "Well, it is only
natural! Every young man must love some young girl some time or other,
and I think--I think--I love you a little!"

"Think!" said Giovanni, amazed. "Do you not know it?"

"Perhaps!" answered Annunziata, still fondling his hair.

Giovanni threw his arms about her waist, an ample, healthful waist, free
from the restraints of corsets and the cramping devices of fashion. As
he did so the sound of footsteps was heard without, and he had scarcely
time to leap to his feet when Espérance entered the room.

Massetti was confused and his friend noticed the fact. He also remarked
that Annunziata was slightly flushed and seemed to have experienced some
agreeable agitation. Espérance instantly leaped to a conclusion.
Giovanni's flirtation with the fair flower-girl had gone a trifle too
far, had assumed a serious aspect. He would interfere, he would
remonstrate with him. It might not yet be too late after all.
Annunziata was a pure and innocent creature, unused to the ways of the
world and incapable of suspecting the wickedness of men. She was on the
point of falling into a deadly snare, on the point of being wrecked upon
the most dangerous shoal life presented. Her very purity and innocence
would make her an easy victim. Giovanni was not wicked; he was merely
young, the prey of the irresistible passion of youth. Annunziata's
surpassing loveliness had fired his blood, had driven him to the verge
of a reckless action, a crime against this beautiful girl that money
could not repair. This crime should not be committed, if he could help
it, and he would risk the Viscount's friendship to save him from
himself. Giovanni could not marry the humble peasant girl; he should not
mar her future.

When Espérance came into the chamber, his presence recalled Annunziata
to herself and also dampened Massetti's ardor. The girl arose and,
smiling at Espérance, tripped blushingly away. Giovanni was flushed and
somewhat angry at the intrusion at the critical moment of his love
making. Espérance's face was grave; he felt all the weight of the
responsibility he was about to assume.

"Giovanni," said he, in a measured tone, "I do not blame you for being
fascinated by a pretty, amiable girl like Annunziata Solara, far from
it. She is certainly a paragon of beauty, a model of rustic grace, a
very tempting morsel of rural virtue and innocence. She is well fitted
to turn the head of almost any young man--I freely acknowledge that. It
is pardonable to wish to enjoy her society--nay, a harmless flirtation
with her is, perhaps, not censurable; but that is the utmost length to
which a man of honor can go! Remember she has a reputation to lose, a
heart to break!"

"What do you mean by that long sermon?" demanded the Viscount, setting
his teeth and frowning savagely.

"I mean that you have been making love to this poor girl, that you have
been seeking to requite her care of you in a manner but little to your
credit!"

"I owe you my life, Espérance," replied Massetti, "but even my gratitude
will not shield you from my fury, if you step between me and Annunziata
Solara!"

"You mean to pursue her then, to soil her name, to blast her future, for
surely you are not courting her with marriage as your object?"

Giovanni flushed scarlet at this open accusation.

"I mean to pursue her--yes! What my object in the matter is concerns
only myself; you have nothing whatever to do with it!" he exclaimed,
hotly.

"But I have a great deal to do with it!" replied Espérance, firmly. "You
shall not pursue Annunziata Solara to her destruction! Between her good
name and your reckless intentions I will oppose a barrier you cannot
surmount--myself!"

"Do you mean to champion her to the extent of challenging me?" demanded
Massetti, fairly foaming with ire.

"If you persist in your nefarious designs, yes!" answered the son of
Monte-Cristo, with equal warmth. "You are my friend, my friend of
friends, Giovanni Massetti, but the instant you menace that innocent
girl's honor my friendship for you crumbles to dust and you become my
deadly foe! Take your choice. Either leave this hospitable cabin with me
as soon as the state of your wound will permit you to do so, meanwhile
respecting Annunziata Solara as you would your own sister, or meet me
pistol in hand on the field of honor! Take your choice, I say! What is
your decision?"

"I will not give up Annunziata!"

"Then you must fight!"

"I shall not hesitate!"

"So be it! My life against yours! I will defend this poor girl's honor
to the last drop of my blood!"

"When shall we fight?"

"To-morrow at dawn."

"Where?"

"In the clearing beyond the chestnut copse on the further side of the
brook. There is no need of witnesses; this matter is between us and us
alone!"

"So much the better, for it will be a duel to the death! I cannot as yet
hold my right arm aloft long enough to fight with it, but I will make my
left hand serve!" Then, as a sudden thought struck him, Massetti added:
"Do you propose to betray me, to carry your story to Annunziata and her
brother?"

Espérance surveyed his companion with intense scorn flashing from his
eyes.

"I am no traitor!" he said, coldly, and, turning, quitted the apartment.


CHAPTER IX.

THE ABDUCTION.

The remainder of that day Espérance and Giovanni did not meet again;
they purposely avoided each other, the former because he did not wish to
have a further quarrel with the Viscount, and the latter because he
dreaded a repetition of the accusations of dishonorable conduct, which
had stung him deeper than he would own even to himself.

Espérance disdained to play the spy upon Massetti, but, nevertheless, he
determined not to quit the immediate vicinity of the cabin and to be as
watchful as circumstances would permit. Nothing, however, occurred to
arouse his suspicions as long as daylight lasted. Once or twice Giovanni
quitted his chamber and walked back and forth excitedly on the sward in
front of the hut, but his promenades were of very short duration,
seeming to have no other object then to calm his seething brain.
Annunziata did not go near him, though whether coquetry or fear caused
her to pursue this course Espérance was unable to determine, but her
action gratified him because it gave Giovanni no opportunity to follow
up whatever advantage he might have gained with the flower-girl.

Lorenzo appeared to have no suspicion whatever that anything was amiss
either with the young men or his sister. He was as light-hearted and
cheerful as ever, going about his usual trifling occupations with gayety
that was absolutely contagious, and displaying even more than his
accustomed amiability. Espérance had grown to esteem this youthful
peasant highly; he had found him manliness and generosity personified
and had resolved, on his return to Rome, to interest the Count of
Monte-Cristo in his welfare and advancement. With regard to Annunziata,
Espérance was as yet altogether undecided; she was a problem he could
not solve. Her innocence and virtue were apparent, but her childlike
simplicity and utter lack of worldly experience, while so charming and
delightful to behold, added to her wonderful beauty, exposed her to
risks that were frightful to contemplate. Had she only possessed a lover
in her own rank of life, all would have been well with her; but she
possessed no lover, was absolutely alone; if she escaped Giovanni, and
Espérance was determined she should escape him if he could effect it,
the chances were that she would eventually fall into the clutches of
some other admirer still more reckless and unscrupulous. The son of
Monte-Cristo could not think of the lovely girl and her future without a
pang that made his very heart ache. He, too, admired her beauty, her
grace and her artlessness, but his admiration was confined within the
proper bounds, and could he have seen her suitably and happily wedded,
he would have rejoiced to the depths of his soul.

Late in the afternoon Pasquale Solara reappeared suddenly and without
the least warning. The old man was covered with dust, as if he had been
journeying far on foot. He plainly showed that he was greatly fatigued,
also that something had occurred to irritate him. He entered the cabin
unobserved, and was there for some moments before his presence was
discovered. Annunziata was the first to see him, sitting upon a rude
wooden bench with his stout oaken staff in his hand on which he leaned
heavily. She threw her arms about his neck with a cry of joy,
endeavoring to snatch a kiss from his tightly-closed lips, but he
sternly and silently repulsed her. Lorenzo, in his turn, met with no
warmer reception at his father's hands. But his children were used to
Pasquale's moods and were, therefore, altogether unaffected by his
present morose deportment; they speedily left him to himself, giving
themselves no further trouble concerning him. Once when Espérance came
into the room the old man stared at him inquiringly, as if he had
utterly forgotten the fact that strangers were enjoying the shelter of
his roof; then he appeared to recollect and scowled so savagely that the
young man beat a hasty retreat, going to seek Lorenzo, whose cheery
voice was heard singing beyond the brook.

As Espérance came in sight of the little stream, he nearly stumbled over
a peasant, lying at full length beneath the spreading branches of an
aged willow. The stranger was reading a book, and Espérance was amazed
to notice that it was "Cæsar's Commentaries." He uttered an apology for
his awkwardness, but the peasant only smiled and, in a gentle voice,
begged pardon for being in the way. That voice! Espérance was certain
he had heard it before, but where or when he could not recall, though
it thrilled him to the very marrow of his bones, filling him with vague
apprehensions. The man's face, too, was familiar, as also was his
attire; but there was great similarity between the Italian peasants in
the vicinity of Rome in general looks and dress; it was quite likely
that he had not seen this man before, but some other resembling him;
still, the voice and face troubled Espérance, and he decided to question
the peasant; the rarity of strangers' visits to this sequestered
locality would be a sufficient pretext for his curiosity.

"My friend," said he, addressing the recumbent reader, who had resumed
his book, "are you a relative or acquaintance of the Solaras?"

"I am neither," replied the man, carelessly, glancing up from his volume
and allowing his penetrating eyes to rest on his questioner, "I strolled
here by chance, and this cosy nook was so inviting that I took
possession of it without a thought as to the intrusion I was
committing."

The peasant's language was refined; Espérance noted this fact and was
not a little surprised thereby; in addition, he could not understand why
the stranger should be reading "Cæsar's Commentaries," a work far beyond
the range of the usual peasant intellect.

"You are committing no intrusion," said he. "Lorenzo and Annunziata, I
am sure, would be glad to welcome you. Old Pasquale is somewhat of a
savage, it is true, but luckily he does not bother himself much about
anything or anybody."

"Pasquale has arrived then?" said the man, dropping his book and
evincing a sudden interest.

"Yes; he is in the cabin now," answered Espérance, his astonishment
increasing. "Do you want to speak with him?"

"No," said the peasant, lightly springing to his feet. He hastily closed
his book, thrust it into his belt, and, bowing to Espérance, disappeared
in the forest.

The young man looked after him for an instant; then he joined Lorenzo
and informed him of the meeting. At his first words Annunziata's brother
ceased singing; a cloud overspread his brow, and he asked, in an eager
tone, for a description of the curiously behaved stranger. Espérance
gave it to him, remarking as he did so that his companion turned
slightly pale and seemed frightened.

"Who is this man?" he asked, as he concluded. "Do you know him? He
appeared strangely familiar to me."

"Do I know him?" repeated Lorenzo, with a shudder. "Yes--that is no!"

Espérance stared at his comrade in surprise and uneasiness; the youthful
peasant evidently had more knowledge of the singular intruder than he
was willing to admit. There was surely some mystery here. What was it?
Did the presence of this stranger menace the peace, the tranquillity,
the safety of the Solara family? Was he in some dark way associated with
the movements and actions of old Pasquale? Espérance attempted to
question Lorenzo further, but he only shook his head and declined to
make any disclosures. He, however, stipulated that his sister should
not be informed of what had occurred, urging that there was no necessity
of uselessly alarming her. Alarming her? What could he mean? Espérance
grew more and more perplexed, and his conviction that he had met the
stranger previously, increasing in strength, added to his anxiety and
discomfort.

For some hours Giovanni had kept his room and given no sign. What was he
meditating? Was it possible that he was concocting some cunning plan by
which to circumvent intervention and gain undisturbed possession of the
girl who had so powerfully influenced his passions? Could it be that he
was in some mysterious way associated with the strange peasant, whose
sudden advent seemed of such ill omen? Espérance thought of all these
things and was infinitely tortured by them, but, one by one, he
succeeded in dismissing them from his mind. Giovanni was certainly under
a potent spell that might lead him to the commission of any
indiscretion, but he was at bottom a man of honor, and there was some
chance that his better feelings might obtain the mastery of his mere
physical inclinations. At any rate, Espérance felt that he could trust
him for one night more at least. Perhaps in the morning he would awaken
to a true sense of his position and acknowledge his error; he might even
implore his friend's pardon, admit that he was right and consent to
return to Rome, leaving the bewitching Annunziata in all her innocence
and purity. Upon reflection Espérance decided that the stranger could be
in nowise the associate or accomplice of the Viscount, for the latter
had communicated with no one, had not even gone a dozen steps from the
Solara cabin during his entire period of convalescence. The idea of
collusion was untenable. Espérance resolved to watch and wait. There was
no telling what a few hours might bring forth; but at the worst he would
fight; if he fell he would not regret it, and, if Giovanni perished at
his hands, his death would be due to his own headlong impulses and his
blood, under the circumstances, could not be a disgraceful, dishonorable
stain.

Towards nightfall old Pasquale Solara began to display unwonted
activity, showing, at the same time, signs of considerable agitation. He
was yet uncommunicative and morose, spoke only at rare intervals; often
he did not reply at all to the questions addressed to him, and when he
did answer it was only in gruff, snappish monosyllables. He went from
place to place uneasily, frequently leaving the cabin and gazing
peeringly and stealthily into the forest as if he expected some one or
was looking for some secret signal known only to himself. He glanced at
Lorenzo and Espérance suspiciously, seeking, as it were, to penetrate
their very thoughts. When he encountered Annunziata, he examined her
from head to foot with a strange mixture of satisfaction, anxiety and
tremulousness. At such times there was a greedy, wolfish expression in
his glittering eyes, and his hands worked nervously.

When twilight had given place to darkness, he suddenly left the hut and
did not return. His unusual conduct had occasioned somewhat of a
commotion in the little household, but quiet reigned after his departure
and his singular behavior was speedily forgotten by his children. Not
so, however, with Espérance. The young man, agitated as he was with the
turmoil of his own feelings, could not get old Pasquale and his behavior
out of his mind. It filled him with sinister forebodings and made him
look forward to the night with an indefinable dread, not unmingled with
absolute fear. It seemed to him that the old shepherd was meditating
some dark and desperate deed that would be put into execution with
disastrous results ere dawn.

The evening, nevertheless, passed without incident, and in due course
sleep brooded over the Solara cabin, wrapping all its inmates in silence
and repose. All its inmates? All save the son of Monte-Cristo, who
tossed restlessly upon his couch and could not close his eyes. At
length, however, he managed to calm himself somewhat and was just
sinking into a sort of half slumber when he was suddenly roused by a
wild, far echoing cry that caused him to leap instantly from his bed.
The cry was a woman's, and he thought he recognized the voice, of
Annunziata Solara. A second's thought seemed to satisfy him on this
point, for the flower-girl was the only female in the vicinity and the
voice was certainly hers; but it sounded from a distance, without the
cabin, and this fact bewildered him. Promptly old Solara's conduct
returned to his mind, and instinctively he connected the morose shepherd
with the cry and whatever was happening. The young man had not removed
his garments; it was, therefore, only the work of an instant for him to
grasp his pistol, which he kept loaded beneath his pillow, and rush from
the hut in the direction of the cry, which had been repeated, but was
growing fainter and fainter.

As he emerged from the cabin, he heard a shot echo through the forest,
and almost immediately a man rushed into his arms, bleeding profusely
from a gaping wound in the temple. The night was moonless and dark, but
in the feeble and uncertain light Espérance recognized Lorenzo.

"My sister--my sister--poor Annunziata!" the young peasant gasped,
painfully. "Your friend--abducted--gone! Oh! my God!" and he sank to the
ground an unconscious mass, quivering in the final agonies of
dissolution.

Espérance was horror-stricken. Annunziata abducted by Giovanni! He could
draw no other conclusion from the young peasant's broken exclamations!
Lorenzo slain, too, and doubtlessly also by the impetuous Viscount's
hand! Oh! it was horrible!--it was almost beyond belief! He bent over
Lorenzo's prostrate form, straightened it out and felt in the region of
the heart; there was no beat; it was as he had divined--Annunziata's
manly and generous brother was dead--the victim of a cowardly,
treacherous assassin--and that assassin!--oh! he could not think of it
and retain his faith in men!

Espérance left Lorenzo's corpse lying upon the sward, and, pistol in
hand, started forward to go to Annunziata's aid, to rescue her from her
dastardly abductor, if it lay within his power to do so. He reached the
forest and plunged into its sombre depths. Scarcely had he gone twenty
feet when a man carrying a flaming torch rushed wildly by him, in his
shirt sleeves, hatless, his short, thick gray hair standing almost erect
upon his head. In the sudden flash of light his haggard eyes blazed like
those of a maniac. In his left hand he held a long, keen-bladed knife.
He glanced neither to the right nor the left, but kept straight on, as
if he were a ferocious bloodhound in pursuit of human prey. Espérance
came to an abrupt pause, and stared with wide-open eyes at the startling
apparition. It was old Pasquale Solara! The son of Monte-Cristo
shuddered as he thought that the father, with all his Italian ferocity
thoroughly aroused, was in pursuit of the man who had abducted his
daughter and murdered his son. In that event the Viscount's death was
sure, for he could not escape the vengeance of the distracted and
remorseless shepherd! Should he raise his voice and warn him? No, a
thousand times no! Giovanni deserved death, and did the furious old man
inflict it, he would be only advancing the just punishment of the
outraged law!

Quickly resolving to follow in the footsteps of Pasquale Solara,
Espérance dashed on, utterly regardless of the bushes and briars that
impeded his progress and tore great rents in his garments. Soon excited
voices reached him, then the noise of a violent struggle. He pushed
rapidly forward, intent upon reaching the scene of conflict, where he
did not doubt the hapless Annunziata would be found. Soon he
indistinctly saw two men engaged in a hand to hand strife. One was
evidently Pasquale Solara, for a torch was smouldering on the ground
half-extinguished by the damp moss, and the young man caught an
occasional flash of a knife such as the shepherd had carried when he
passed him, but beyond these circumstances all was supposition, for the
identity of the contending men could not be made out in the obscurity.

Grasping his pistol tightly, Espérance was about declaring his presence
when the figure of a man sprang up before him with the suddenness of a
flash of lightning, seeming to emerge from the very ground at his feet.
At that instant the torch gave a brilliant gleam and went out, but in
that gleam Espérance recognized the man who opposed his progress as the
strange peasant he had seen reading "Cæsar's Commentaries" the previous
afternoon by the brook in the vicinity of the Solara cabin. Was he, too,
mixed up in the abduction, and how? Again the suspicion returned to
Espérance that he was the confederate, the accomplice of the Viscount
Massetti.

"Remain where you are!" commanded the intruder, sternly. "If you advance
another step, the consequences be upon your own head!"

"Stand aside and let me pass!" thundered the young man, presenting his
pistol at his opponent's head. The other gave a low laugh, made a quick
movement and Espérance's weapon went whirling swiftly through the air.
Meanwhile the sounds of strife had ceased, and the almost impenetrable
darkness of the forest effectually prevented the young man from
distinguishing anything a yard distant. As his pistol was hurled from
his grasp he closed his fists tightly, set his teeth firmly together and
made a frantic dash at the peasant. The latter leaped aside with
surprising agility, vanishing instantaneously among the clustering
trees. So sudden was his leap that Espérance, carried on by the strong
impetus he had given himself, plunged wildly into a clump of bushes and
fell headlong upon a thick growth of moss, the softness of which
prevented him from sustaining even the slightest bruise. As he came in
contact with the moss, his hand touched something cold that sent an icy
shiver through him from head to foot. Instinctively he recognized the
object as a human face, and passing his hand along he felt the body and
limbs. Great heavens! who was this? Had another murder been done? Would
there ever be an end to the horrors and mysteries of this dreadful
night? The body was that of a man. Espérance arose to his knees and
drawing a match-safe from his pocket struck a light. As the flame
flashed upon the countenance of the unconscious man, the features of
Giovanni Massetti appeared! Espérance was stunned. How was this? The
Viscount there, beneath his hand, cold and motionless! Who then could
have been the individual with whom old Pasquale Solara had been
struggling but a moment since? Truly the mysteries of this night were
becoming too complicated for solution! And where was the unfortunate
Annunziata? Had she escaped from her captor or captors, had she been
rescued, had she perished like her ill-fated brother, or had the
abduction been successfully accomplished? None of these questions could
Espérance answer. One thing, however, was plain--there was no trace of
her now; no clue that he could follow; therefore, further pursuit for
the present was useless. Sadly he determined to wait for day and then
resolve upon some plan to put into immediate execution to retrieve, as
far as possible the great wrong that had been done.

But Giovanni must be attended to. Guilty or innocent, dead or alive, he
could not be abandoned where he was. Humanity demanded that some effort
be made in his behalf. Perhaps, too, if he were in a condition to speak,
some key to the strange, bewildering and terrible transactions of the
night might be obtained. Espérance raised him in his arms and carried
him to the brook near the Solara cabin. By this time the moon had arisen
and in its silvery rays he examined him thoroughly. There was no trace
of blood, no wound; only a large bruise on his forehead, as if he had
been struck with some heavy object and knocked down unconscious. He was
alive, for his heart was beating, and once or twice he had moved on the
sward where Espérance had placed him. The young man made a cup of his
hands, and, dipping some cool water from the stream, dashed it in the
Viscount's face. Instantly he opened his eyes, gazing about him in
bewilderment. He sat up and stared wildly at Espérance.

"What is the matter? How came I here?" he asked, in astonishment. Then
suddenly putting his hand to the bruise on his forehead, as if it
pained him, he continued: "Ah! yes! I remember it all now! Luigi Vampa
struck me!"

"Luigi Vampa struck you?" cried Espérance, more amazed than ever.

"Yes, after he had forced me to take a fearful oath to remain silent!"

"Silent about what? The abduction of Annunziata Solara?"

"Hush! hush! Do not mention that girl's name! Vampa or some of his men
may be lurking in the vicinity and hear!"

"What has become of her? At least tell me that! You know!"

"As God is my judge, I do not!"

"Were you not with her to-night? Did you not forcibly take her from the
cabin?"

"No! no!"

"Who did then?"

"Alas! my oath compels silence on that point!"

"Your oath! That is a very convenient excuse! Giovanni, Luigi Vampa was
not here to-night."

"He was. He lurked around the cabin all day, that when darkness came he
might commit the blackest deed that ever sullied the record of mankind!"

Instantly Espérance recollected the peasant he had met that afternoon
beside the brook, the man who, but a short while before, had opposed his
passage and disarmed him in the forest. His vague familiarity with his
voice, face and dress was now accounted for. The man was Luigi Vampa.
There could be no doubt of it. But why had he abducted Annunziata
Solara, as Giovanni's words would seem to infer? Why, save as the
confederate and accomplice of the Viscount Massetti? But then how had
Giovanni communicated with him, and in what manner had they contrived to
arrange the details of their dishonorable plot? Was it possible that old
Pasquale had been the medium of correspondence between the two men. Had
he been base enough to sell his child? In that case, with whom had he
fought so fiercely and desperately in the forest? Why also had the
brigand chief sworn Giovanni to silence? Vain questions, admitting of no
satisfactory replies. The Viscount's story was incredible; it was,
without doubt, a mere fabrication intended to cover and conceal his own
guilt in the premises. Still Espérance could not reconcile this theory
with the fact of finding Giovanni senseless in the forest.

The young Italian had by this time fully recovered from the effects of
the shock he had received. He arose to his feet, and, approaching
Espérance, said, earnestly:

"My friend, let the past be forgotten. I was wrong and you were right. I
ask your pardon. As to the abduction of this unfortunate girl, I assure
you that I am entirely innocent of it!"

"But who fired the shot that killed Lorenzo?" asked Espérance, sternly.

"Killed Lorenzo!" cried Giovanni, with unmistakable horror. "Was Lorenzo
killed?"

"He was shot to-night and died in my arms!"

"Oh! this is terrible!" exclaimed the Viscount, beads of cold
perspiration breaking out upon his forehead. "I assure you, Espérance, I
had no hand in this foul murder--I knew nothing of it! I did hear the
report of a pistol, but who discharged the weapon or at whom it was
fired I could not tell. Everything seemed like a disordered dream!"

As Espérance said not a word in reply, the Viscount continued:

"Again I assert my innocence of the dark crimes that have been committed
to-night! Do you not believe my protestation?"

"I know not what to believe," answered the young man. "But I will not
consider you guilty until you are proved so."

"Then," cried Giovanni, joyously, "I have a proposition to make to you.
Swear that you will be silent about everything that has occurred since
we met Annunziata Solara in the Piazza del Popolo, including the
terrible events of to-night, and I will start with you for Rome this
very instant!"

"And you will renounce your pursuit of the flower-girl?"

"I will renounce it!"

"Do you swear to do so?"

"I swear it!"

"Then, on my side, I here take the oath of silence you require!"

"You forgive me for having quarreled with you?"

"I forgive you!"

"Then let us leave this accursed spot without another moment's delay!"

"So be it!"

They hastily quitted the bank of the little stream and went to the cabin
to prepare for their immediate departure. As they passed the spot where
Lorenzo's body had lain, Espérance noticed with a start that it was no
longer there. They entered the cabin. It was dark and deserted.
Espérance lighted a candle and, as he did so, perceived a scrap of paper
upon the floor. He stooped mechanically and picked it up. It was rumpled
as if it had been crushed in the hand and cast away. The young man
straightened it out. It was a brief letter. He held it to the candle
and, with a sickening sensation at his heart, read as follows:


     DEAREST ANNUNZIATA: All is prepared. We will fly to-night. Be
     ready.                                           TONIO.


The note was in Massetti's handwriting. Espérance silently passed it to
him. The Viscount read it with eyes bulging from their sockets, his
fingers trembling so he could scarcely hold the paper.

"The evidence is conclusive!" said Espérance, icily, as Massetti
finished reading. "It is a confession! You abducted Annunziata Solara!"

"What can I say to justify myself?" cried Giovanni, bitterly. "Oh! that
accursed oath!"

"And you have sworn me to silence, also, wretched man!" said Espérance.
"Why was I so weak!"

He looked scornfully at the Viscount, who stood with bowed head. Then he
added:

"I understand you now! You did not wish me to betray you, to set the
hounds of Justice on your track, to cause you to be punished, branded
and disgraced! You were shrewd and imposed upon me. But my oath is
sacred--I will keep it! Let us return to Rome at once as we originally
proposed. There I will challenge you in due form for an alleged insult,
and we will settle this matter at the pistol's mouth!"

In a few moments more they were on their road to the Eternal City,
leaving behind them the cabin into which they had brought ruin and
death!


CHAPTER X.

THE COUNTESS OF MONTE-CRISTO.


Rome was agitated by a vague scandal, so vague, in fact, that nobody
seemed to know the precise details. It had arisen from a newspaper
account, given in the indefinite, unsatisfactory way characteristic of
Roman journalism. One of the city journals had published the statement
that a young and very handsome peasant girl, living with her father in
the country beyond the Trastavere, had recently been abducted, report
said, by a youthful member of the Roman aristocracy; that the reckless
scion of nobility had courted and won her in the guise of a peasant, had
carried her off to a bandit fastness and there had eventually deserted
her. No names were given. Inquiry at the office of the journal elicited
the fact that the proprietors had undoubted authority for the
publication of the statement, but no further information could be gained
from them. A few days later, however, the same newspaper gave the
further particulars that the nobleman had been assisted in effecting the
abduction by a young foreigner residing in Rome, and that the brother of
the unfortunate girl had been killed in attempting to rescue her. That
completed all the intelligence ever vouchsafed to the public in regard
to the mysterious affair, and thereafter the journal maintained an
unbroken silence respecting the matter. The rumor ran that its
proprietors had been bribed by interested parties to say nothing
further, but this rumor could not be traced to any reliable source and
was, therefore, by many considered a fabrication. No steps were taken by
the authorities in the premises, and it was evident that the affair was
to be allowed to die out. Still Roman society was considerably excited,
conjectures as to the identity of the guilty party and his accomplice
being rife in all the fashionable and aristocratic quarters of the city.
These conjectures, however, did not grow to positive statements, though
insidious hints were thrown out that those who guessed the Viscount
Giovanni Massetti to be the culprit were not far out of the way.
Massetti, it was known, had been absent from Rome for several days about
the period the abduction was supposed to have taken place, but he did
not deign to notice the hints current in regard to himself and no one
was hardy enough to question him. Nevertheless some color was given to
the rumors concerning him by the fact that, immediately on his return to
the city, after the absence above referred to, he became involved in a
violent quarrel with a young Frenchman, generally supposed to be
Espérance, the son of Monte-Cristo, who at once challenged him to a
duel, but the duel was not fought for some reason not made public, the
difference between the two fiery youths having been arranged through the
mediation of mutual friends. It was observed, however, and widely
commented upon that, although the twain had previously been almost
inseparable companions, Espérance after this quarrel studiously avoided
the Viscount Massetti, refraining from even mentioning his name.

Meanwhile at Civita Vecchia another act in the drama of Annunziata
Solara's clouded life had been played. In that city was located a famous
asylum for unfortunate women, founded and managed by a French lady of
enormous wealth and corresponding benevolence, Madame Helena de
Rancogne, the Countess of Monte-Cristo.[6] This lady was untiring in her
efforts to reclaim and rehabilitate the fallen of her sex. She was the
Superior of the Order of Sisters of Refuge, the members of which were
scattered throughout Europe, but made their headquarters at the asylum
in Civita Vecchia, where a sufficient number of them constantly aided
Madame de Rancogne in carrying out her good and philanthropic work.

The Refuge, as the asylum was called, was a vast edifice of gray stone
with a sombre and cloister-like look. Over the huge entrance door on a
tablet of polished metal this sentence was incrusted in conspicuous
letters of black: "Be Not Led to Consider Any Unworthy!" It was an
utterance of the Countess of Monte-Cristo in the past and had been
adopted as the guiding rule and maxim of the Order of Sisters of Refuge.
The interior of the building in no way corresponded with its gloomy,
forbidding outside. Tall, wide windows freely admitted the ardent rays
of the glowing Italian sun, flooding the corridors and apartments with
cheerful light and warmth. Crimson hangings and magnificently wrought
tapestry of fabulous price adorned the walls, while costly and beautiful
statues and paintings, the work of old masters and contemporaneous
artists, added to the attractiveness of the numerous salons and
drawing-rooms. The great refectory and the dormitories possessed charms
of their own, bright colors everywhere greeting the eye and nothing
being allowed that could inspire or promote melancholy moods or painful
thoughts. There was an immense library, to which all the inmates of the
Refuge had free access. It was sumptuously furnished, and the floor was
covered with a gorgeous Turkey carpet, so thick and soft that footsteps
made no sound upon it, while the brilliant figures of tropical flowers
profusely studding it gave the impression of eternal summer. Desks
abundantly supplied with writing materials, tables loaded with the
latest newspapers and periodicals in all the languages of Europe,
luxurious sofas and inviting fauteuils allured those succored by the
Countess of Monte-Cristo and her vigilant aids. On every side the
library was surrounded with book-cases, containing absorbing romances,
volumes of travel, the productions of the celebrated poets, histories
and essays, with a liberal sprinkling of religious works, mostly
non-sectarian and invariably of a consolatory character. In addition
elegantly and thoroughly equipped work-rooms were provided, in which
those who were so inclined could practice embroidery, sew or manufacture
the thousand and one little fancy knick-knacks at which female fingers
are so skilful. Nothing, however, was compulsory, the main object being
to afford the inmates of the Refuge agreeable occupation, to elevate
them and to prevent them from looking back regretfully to the agitated
lives they had led and the vices that had held empire over them in the
past. Truly a more generous, unselfish lover of her sex than the noble
Countess of Monte-Cristo did not exist.

The protégées of the Sisters of the Order of Refuge embraced women of
all ages, all nationalities and all conditions in life. They included
Parisian grisettes and lorettes, recruited by Nini Moustache in her
coquettish apartment of the Chaussée d' Antin, for Nini had proved a
most effective missionary; young girls, who had fallen a prey to
designing roués and been abandoned to the whirl of that gulf of
destruction, the streets of Paris; Spanish senoritas, who had listened
too credulously to the false vows of faithless lovers; Italian peasant
girls, whose pretty faces and charms of person had been their ruin;
unfortunate German, English, Dutch and Scandinavian maidens; and even
brands snatched from the burning in Russia, Turkey and Greece. This
somewhat diverse community dwelt together in perfect sisterly accord,
chastened by their individual misfortunes, encouraged and upheld in the
path of reform by the Countess of Monte-Cristo, who was to all the
unfortunates as a tender, thoughtful and considerate mother.

One quiet night, just as darkness had settled down over the streets of
Civita Vecchia, a timid knock at the entrance door of the Refuge
aroused the portress on duty there. Such knocks were often heard and
well understood. The portress arose from her bench, partly opened the
door and admitted a trembling young girl, whose crouching and shrunken
form was clad in a mass of tattered rags. A thin red cloak was thrown
over her shoulders, and her pale, emaciated face spoke plainly of
poverty, hardship and suffering. Even Giovanni Massetti would have with
difficulty recognized in this wretched outcast the once shapely and
beautiful flower-girl of the Piazza del Popolo, for the applicant at the
Refuge door was no other than the ill-fated Annunziata Solara. Her
beauty had faded away like a summer dream, vanished as the perfume from
a withered hyacinth. She stood before the portress silently, with
clasped hands, the incarnation of misery, distress and desertion.

"What do you require, my poor child?" asked the portress, tenderly and
sympathetically.

"Shelter, only shelter!" replied the girl, beseechingly, in a hollow,
broken voice, the ghost of her former full and joyous tones.

"The Superior must decide upon your case," said the portress. "You shall
go to her at once."

The woman touched a bell, directing the Sister of the Order of Refuge
who answered it to conduct the applicant to the apartment of Madame de
Rancogne. The trembling Annunziata was led through a long corridor and
ushered into a small, but cosy office in which sat an elderly lady of
commanding and aristocratic presence, whose head was covered with curls
of silver hair, and whose still handsome countenance wore an expressive
look in which compassion and benevolence predominated. This lady was the
celebrated Madame Helena de Rancogne, whose adventures and exploits as
the Countess of Monte-Cristo had in the past electrified every European
nation. She arose as Annunziata entered, welcoming her with a cordial,
comforting smile.

"Sit down, my child," she said, in a rich, melodious voice. "You are
fatigued. Are you also hungry?"

Annunziata sank into the chair offered her, covering her face with her
thin hands.

"Alas! signora," she replied, faintly, "I have walked many weary miles
and have not tasted a morsel of food since dawn!"

"Take the poor child to the refectory," said the Countess to the Sister,
who had remained standing near the door. "After her hunger has been
appeased, I will see her again and question her."

Half an hour later, Annunziata, refreshed and strengthened by her meal,
once more sat in the office with the Countess of Monte-Cristo.

"My child," said the latter, "what is your name?"

"Annunziata Solara."

"You have applied for shelter here the portress informs me. Do you know
that this is an asylum for the fallen of your sex?"

"I know it, signora; that is the reason I came."

"Have you repented of your sin and do you desire to lead a better life?"

"I have repented bitterly," answered the girl, bursting into a flood of
tears, "oh! how bitterly God alone knows! I wish to hide myself from the
world; I wish to atone for my shame by whatever good action my hands can
find to do."

"It is well," said the Countess, her eyes lighting up with enthusiasm.
"The field is wide, and the Order of Sisters of Refuge, although large,
is always open for new additions. Much good has already been done, but
more remains to be accomplished, infinitely more. You shall be received
and given an opportunity to share in the great work."

"From the depths of my soul I thank you!" sobbed the girl. "I will try
earnestly to be worthy of your benevolence!"

"Tell me your story now," said the Superior. "I cannot believe that the
guilt was altogether yours."

"I am grateful, signora, for those words. I was thoughtless and
indiscreet, but not criminal. Happy and contented in my humble peasant
home, I was pure and innocent. I knew nothing of the wickedness of men,
of the snares set to entrap unwary young girls. I lived with my father
and brother in the vicinity of Rome, selling flowers in that city from
time to time. I had never had a suitor, never had a lover. My heart was
free, filled with the joyousness of youth. I had been told that I
possessed a fair share of beauty, but that neither made me vain nor
inclined me to coquetry. Oh! signora, I shall never be so happy again!"

Emotion overcame her and her tears started afresh. The Countess soothed
her and she continued:

"One fatal night, my brother brought two strange young men to our
cabin. They appeared to be peasants like ourselves, and one of them had
been wounded in a fight with a brigand. They remained with us for some
days. I nursed the wounded man, who, when he grew convalescent, made
love to me. I listened to his ardent declarations, submitted to his
endearments. I grew to love him in my turn, and, oh! signora, I believed
in him, trusted him. At that period I had nothing to reproach myself
with, and Tonio, that was my admirer's name, seemed sincerity itself.
One day he asked me to fly with him, but our conversation was
interrupted and I gave him no answer. I was confused, I did not know
what to do. That evening I received a letter from him--I found it on the
table in the room I occupied, concealed beneath my work-box--telling me
that everything was prepared for our flight that night, and asking me to
be in readiness. I was terrified. I could not understand why he wished
me to fly with him if everything was as it should be, as my father and
brother would not have objected to any proper suitor for my hand on whom
I had bestowed my heart. For the first time I was suspicious of Tonio,
and I resolved to pay no attention to his letter. On the morrow I would
see him and tell him to speak to my father and brother. Alas! that
opportunity was not given me. Oh! that horrible, horrible night!"

She covered her face with her hands and shuddered. When she looked up
she was ghastly pale, and her voice quivered as she resumed:

"That dreadful night, as I lay upon my bed, wrapped in slumber, I was
suddenly aroused by hearing some one in my chamber. It was very dark and
I could not see the intruder. I started up in terror, but a hand was
placed firmly over my mouth. I was torn from my bed and borne in a man's
arms from the cabin. I struggled to release myself, but in vain. My
abductor appeared to possess the strength of a giant. There was no moon,
but in the dim starlight I could see that the man was masked. He
hastened with me into the neighboring forest. There he accidentally
struck his right arm against the trunk of a tree and his hand dropped
from my mouth. Instantly I uttered a loud, piercing cry, but the hand
went back to its place again almost immediately, and I was unable to
give vent to another sound. My cry, however, had been heard by my
brother, who hastened to my assistance. He overtook my abductor in the
forest, and, though unarmed, at once attacked him. The man dropped me
and turned upon my brother. A fierce struggle ensued, during which the
mask was struck from my abductor's face and, to my horror, I thought I
recognized Tonio. Suddenly there was a report of a pistol. I had watched
the conflict, unable to move. I saw my brother stagger; blood was
gushing from him. I could endure no more; I fell to the ground in a
swoon.

"When I recovered my senses, I was in a strange hut. Savage looking men,
whom I took to be bandits, were guarding me. How long I remained in the
hut I do not know, but it must have been several days. At times a
masked man came to me, telling me that he was Tonio and pressing his
suit upon me. I refused to listen to him, upbraiding him for tearing me
from my home and wounding my brother. I told him his conduct was not
that of a lover, but of a villain. I implored him, if he possessed a
spark of manhood, to set me free, to send me to my father. He informed
me that I was his captive and should so remain until I yielded to his
wishes. I repulsed him with scorn, with the energy of desperation.
Ultimately he overpowered me by sheer force, and compelled me to yield.
Then I saw him no more. I wandered about the hut like one demented. My
cup of sorrow was full to overflowing. I was in despair. Shame and
degradation were henceforth my portion.

"After my abductor's departure, a new comer appeared among the brigands.
He seemed to be their chief. He expressed pity for me, and told me that
my abductor was not a peasant, but a young Roman nobleman, the Viscount
Giovanni Massetti. I cared nothing for this revelation. I had no thought
of vengeance; my sole desire was to hide myself from the gaze of the
world, to avoid the pitiless finger of scorn. Eventually the bandit
chief took me back to my home. There I found my father, learning from
his lips that my brother was dead. This intelligence made my sorrow
utterly unbearable. My father was moody and morose. For days at a time
he did not speak to me. He appeared to have lost all paternal affection.
Finally I left the cabin. I had heard of the Refuge and determined to
seek its shelter. I walked to Civita Vecchia, and to-night found myself
at your door. Such, signora, is my sad history. I have told you the
whole truth. You see I am not altogether to blame."

As Annunziata concluded, the Countess of Monte-Cristo drew her upon her
bosom.

"My poor girl," said she, in tender, pitying tones, "you have, indeed,
tasted the bitterness of life and have been more sinned against than
sinning. But you are my daughter now. The Sisterhood of the Order of
Refuge has covered you with its protecting shield."

FOOTNOTE:

[6] For a full account of the life and career of "The Countess of
Monte-Cristo," see that powerful, romantic and absorbing novel, "The
Countess of Monte-Cristo," published by T. B. Peterson & Brothers,
Philadelphia.


CHAPTER XI.

THE BEGGAR AND HIS MATES.


A year had elapsed since the events already recorded. Zuleika, having
finished her studies at the convent school of the Sisterhood of the
Sacred Heart, the Count of Monte-Cristo had quitted Rome and, with his
family, was established in Paris in the palatial mansion, No. 27 Rue du
Helder, formerly occupied by the Count de Morcerf. He was a member of
the Chamber of Deputies, representing Marseilles, and was wedded to his
first love, Mercédès, who had mysteriously reappeared and nursed him
through a severe illness, which was immediately followed by their
marriage. The revolution of 1848, which had placed M. Lamartine at the
head of the Provisional Government, had put power and office within his
grasp, but he had declined both, preferring to work in the wider field
of universal human freedom. His eminent services during the revolution
had rendered him immensely popular with the masses, and the fame of his
matchless eloquence added to the vast influence he so modestly wielded.
His colossal wealth, which he lavishly used to promote the great cause
he championed, also tended to make him a conspicuous figure in the
political and high social circles of the capital, though he strove to
court retirement.

Zuleika and Espérance fairly adored their mild, kindly stepmother, who,
on her side, was as devotedly attached to them as if they had been her
own children. The Count noted this mutual attachment, which time only
served to strengthen, and it filled his heart with joy and
gratification. The family was, indeed, a happy one, and even the
servants shared the general felicity.

Mlle. d' Armilly's influence over Captain Joliette great as it
undoubtedly was, had been insufficient to induce that gallant and
honorable young soldier to seek a rupture with the wonderful man to whom
he was so vastly indebted and whom he so highly revered. This had at
first caused a coldness between the revengeful prima donna and her
admirer, but a reconciliation had ultimately taken place between them
and they were now man and wife. Prior to their marriage Mlle. d' Armilly
had acknowledged herself to be Eugénie Danglars, and thus the motive of
her bitter hostility to the Count of Monte-Cristo was revealed. She had
retired from the operatic stage, and had received a large sum of money,
stated to be a legacy from her father, but generally believed to be a
gift from the Count, intended by him in some degree to make amends to
her for the sufferings she had endured by reason of his vengeance on the
banker Danglars. The prima donna's brother Léon had turned out to be a
woman masquerading in male attire, no other than Mlle. d' Armilly
herself, Eugénie's former music-teacher, who had loaned her name to her
friend when the latter started on her operatic career. These
transformations had been immediately followed by another, Captain
Joliette discarding his pseudonym and appearing as Albert de Morcerf.
Paris had talked over and wondered at all this for a week, and then had
completely forgotten it, turning its fickle attention to newer and more
engrossing sensations. Albert's marriage and the legacy healed the
breach between Eugénie and the Count of Monte-Cristo, and the young
couple, together with the real Mlle. d' Armilly, had been added to the
happy family in the mansion of the Rue du Helder.

The Viscount Giovanni Massetti had appeared in Paris. Immediately after
his reckless visit to Zuleika in the convent garden and his wild
interview with her there, he had gone to the Count of Monte-Cristo,
avowed his love for Haydée's child and solicited her hand in marriage.
He had been told to wait a year, a period he had passed he scarcely knew
how, but it had been an eternity to him, an eternity fraught with
restless anxiety, with alternations between ardent hope and the depths
of despair. The expiration of his probation found him in the mansion of
the Rue du Helder, renewing his earnest suit with the Count, who had
granted him permission to win his daughter if he could. The young
Italian had at once sought Zuleika, who had welcomed him as her lover
and betrothed. Then a clash had suddenly arisen; Espérance had expressed
his abhorrence of his sister's suitor, had given mysterious hints that
had recalled the half-forgotten Roman scandal, and a separation between
Giovanni and Zuleika had ensued, the former refusing to speak out and
clear himself, pleading his terrible oath of silence. In the course of
his vague, unsatisfactory disclosures, Espérance had unguardedly
mentioned the name of Luigi Vampa, and the Count of Monte-Cristo had
written to the brigand chief, requesting such information as he
possessed in regard to the impenetrable mystery. Vampa's reply had been
a fearful arraignment of the youthful Viscount, but Zuleika could not
believe her lover the depraved and guilty wretch the brigand chief
represented him to be, asserting that there was something yet
unexplained, something that would effectually exculpate him could it be
reached. The Count of Monte-Cristo had at first inclined to the belief
that Massetti was merely the victim of circumstances, of some remarkable
coincidence, but Vampa's letter scattered this belief to the winds and
he demanded that the Viscount should conclusively prove his innocence.
Zuleika had meanwhile banished her lover from her presence, but her
heart yearned for him and defended him in spite of everything. She
therefore sent him Vampa's letter, assuring him of her belief in his
innocence and commanding him to prove it to her and to the world.
Thereupon Giovanni had instantly quitted Paris. His sudden disappearance
seemed like a flight; it caused scandal's thousand tongues to wag
remorselessly; but, although he left no word for her, Zuleika knew her
command had sent him to Italy to clear his name and record in her eyes;
she was firmly convinced that she would see him again, that he would
return to Paris rehabilitated.

Such was the general condition of affairs, as affecting the
Monte-Cristo family, at the time the thread of this narrative is
resumed.

It was the month of July. The heat in Paris was intense, absolutely
stifling; a white glow seemed to fall from the breezeless, yellow
atmosphere, scorching the very pavements; for weeks there had been no
rain, not the slightest sign of a cloud in the pitiless heavens. The
streets were almost deserted; even that favored thoroughfare of fashion,
the Rue de la Paix, boasted of but few promenaders; the only spot in
request was the Bois de Boulogne, with its magnificent trees and
deliciously shaded avenues; the Champs-Elysées, throughout its entire
extent, from the Place de la Concorde to the Arc de l' Étoile, was like
a sun-swept desert, and its picturesque marchands de coco, with their
shining mugs, snow-white aprons and tinkling bells, found only a limited
demand for their liquorice water and lemon juice, while even the
Théâtres de Guignol failed to arrest the rare passers.

In the vast garden of the Monte-Cristo mansion, notwithstanding its
power elsewhere, the sun seemed to have been successfully defied; there
the trees, shrubs and plants were not parched, but preserved all their
freshness and beauty, suggesting the coolness of early spring rather
than the sweltering heat of midsummer, while the parterres were
brilliant with gorgeous bloom and penetrating perfumes loaded the air.
Near a little gate opening upon the Rue du Helder, early one morning,
Zuleika and Mlle. d' Armilly were sitting on a rustic bench beneath an
ample honeysuckle-covered arbor. They had come to the garden from the
breakfast-room to rest and chat after their meal. The former
music-teacher was telling her companion of her stage experience and of
the many adventures she had met with during her operatic career. In the
midst of a most interesting recital, she suddenly paused, fixing her
eyes upon the little gate, with a cry of surprise and terror. Zuleika
followed the direction of her glance and gave a start as she saw,
leaning against the bars of the gate, a sinister-looking man, clad in
dusty, tattered garments, who was peering at her companion and herself
with eyes that glittered like those of some venomous serpent. When he
noticed that he was observed, the man pulled a greasy, weather-stained
cap from his head, disclosing a profusion of matted, whitened locks,
and, stretching a grimy hand, with hooked fingers that resembled the
claws of an enormous bird, through the bars, said, in the hoarse tones
peculiar to the outcasts of the streets:

"Charity, for the love of God!"

The man seemed more like a thief than a beggar. Nevertheless, Mlle. d'
Armilly, who was the first to recover her self-possession, drew a few
sous from her pocket and advanced to place them in his palm. As she came
closer to him, the mendicant acted very strangely. Instead of taking the
money, he suddenly withdrew his hand, staring at Mlle. d' Armilly with
an expression of mingled terror and amazement upon his evil countenance.
Then he quickly turned from the gate, thrust on his cap and started off
at a rapid pace. Mlle. d' Armilly also was singularly affected; she
dropped the sous, became ashy pale and would have fallen to the ground
had not Zuleika sprung to her side and caught her in her arms.

"What is the matter, Louise?" cried the girl, astonished at the beggar's
behavior and still more so at the effect he had produced upon her
companion.

"I have seen a ghost!" replied Mlle. d' Armilly, in a startling whisper.

"A ghost?"

"Yes! Oh! let us quit the garden at once!"

"The ghost of whom?"

"I dare not say! Come, come, I cannot remain here another second! How
fortunate that young Madame de Morcerf was not with us! She would have
been driven mad!"

"Albert's wife? You talk wildly, Louise. What interest could she feel in
that wretched outcast?"

"What interest? Do not ask me. I cannot, I must not tell you! Oh! it is
terrible!"

"Will you tell Albert's wife of what you have seen?"

"No! a thousand times no! She must not even suspect that man's return
from the grave! I entreat you to say nothing to her or any one else!"

"I shall be silent upon the subject; but that beggar was not a ghost; he
was a most substantial reality. Something frightened him away,
something, doubtless, that he saw in the street, perhaps a sergent de
ville. Your recognition of him was fancied."

"It was not fancied. But we must not stay here; I would not see that
face, those eyes again for worlds!"

Zuleika took her friend's arm and walked with her towards the mansion,
endeavoring as they went along to reassure her, to reason her out of her
fright. Her efforts, however, proved altogether futile. Mlle. d' Armilly
was utterly unnerved and at once retired to her room.

Notwithstanding her willingness to believe that Mlle. d' Armilly had
been deceived with regard to the identity of the beggar and, in her
confusion, had confounded him with some one else, Zuleika could not
altogether shake off a feeling of vague apprehension, of ill-defined
terror when she thought over the singular conduct and wild agitation of
the former music-teacher in the quiet and solitude of her own chamber.
Why had Mlle. d' Armilly been so stricken at the sight of the mendicant?
Why had she so earnestly entreated her to say nothing of what had
occurred to any one, and, especially, to avoid all mention of the matter
to Albert de Morcerf's wife? Mlle. d' Armilly had seen too much of the
world to be frightened by a mere trifle. Was it possible that the ragged
outcast had been in some way identified with young Madame de Morcerf's
operatic career, that he had been her lover? The latter supposition
would furnish a plausible cause for the former music-teacher's terror,
as the reappearance of a lover might lead to disclosures well-calculated
to seriously disturb the happiness and tranquillity of the newly-made
husband and wife. Zuleika had heard that Eugénie had been much courted
during the period she was on the stage, that she had numbered her ardent
admirers by scores, but this man seemed too old, too forlorn, to have
recently been in a position to scatter wealth at the feet of a prima
donna. Besides, Mlle. d' Armilly had spoken of him as a ghost and had
appeared to refer him to a period more remote. Zuleika had also heard of
Mlle. Danglars' broken marriage-contract away back in the past. Could
this beggar be the scoundrel who had masqueraded under the assumed title
of Prince Cavalcanti and had so nearly become her husband? Perhaps; but
even if he were that unscrupulous wretch, what harm could his
reappearance do at this late day, now that the old story had been
thoroughly sifted and almost forgotten? Albert was well aware of all the
details of the Cavalcanti episode, and it was hardly likely that
anything further could be exposed that would disturb either him or his
wife. No, the grimy, white-haired, sinister-looking stranger could not
be the quondam Prince; he was some one else, some one more to be feared.
But who was he, if not the miserable son of Villefort? Zuleika was more
perplexed and disturbed than she was willing to admit, even to herself.
If she could only speak with the Count of Monte-Cristo, tell him all,
some explanation of the mystery might, doubtless, be obtained, an
explanation that would, at least, calm her vague fears; but that was
impossible; her promise to Mlle. d' Armilly to be silent sealed her lips
as effectually with her father as with young Madame de Morcerf. Whatever
might be her fears, she would have to bear them alone, or, at the best,
share them with Mlle. d' Armilly, who, evidently, would give her no
further satisfaction.

Meanwhile the man who had caused all this trouble after having almost
run quite a distance along the Rue du Helder, utterly oblivious of the
attention he drew to himself from the rare passers, turned into the Rue
Taitbout, thence reached the Rue de Provence and finally found himself
in the Cité d' Antin. There he made his way into a small drinking-shop
or caboulot, patronized by some of the worst prowlers about that section
of Paris. The room he entered was unoccupied save by a slatternly young
woman, who sat behind the counter reading a greasy copy of the Gazette
des Tribunaux. The man went to the counter and, throwing down the price,
demanded a glass of brandy, which he swallowed at a gulp. Then he
addressed the slatternly young woman, who, with her paper still in one
hand, was half-smiling, half-scowling at him.

"Is Waldmann here?" he asked, with the air of a man who feels himself
thoroughly at home.

"Yes," answered the young woman, resuming her seat and her reading; "he
is in the back room, playing piquet with Peppino, Beppo and Siebecker."

"Good!" said the man. "I am in luck. I scarcely expected to find them
all in at this hour."

With this he opened a glazed door, and, stepping into the back room,
closed it behind him. The players, who were seated at a table, with mugs
of beer beside them, glanced up quickly from their game as he came in,
and one of them, a heavy-framed, beetle-browed German, called out to
him, speaking French:

"How now, Bouche-de-Miel, what is the matter? You are out of breath and
as pale as if you had been shadowed by an Agent de la Sureté!"

"I have not been shadowed, Waldmann," answered the beggar or
Bouche-de-Miel, "but I have made a startling discovery."

The players at once put down their cards and leaned forward to hear.
They were a rough, desperate-looking set; on their ill-omened and
sunburnt visages thief could be read as plainly as if it were written
there, and perhaps, also, the still more significant word, assassin! Two
of the men were Italians, evidently the Peppino and Beppo referred to by
the slatternly young woman at the counter in the outer room. Besides
Waldmann there was another German. This was Siebecker. Tall, slim, with
yellow hair and moustache, he had some claim to good looks; his attire
was quite respectable compared to that of the rest; had he not possessed
a pair of restless, demoniac eyes, he might have passed for a person of
tolerably fair repute, but those glaring, tiger-like orbs betrayed his
true character and stamped him as a very dangerous member of the
criminal fraternity. Waldmann appeared to be the leader of the coterie.
The Italians wore blue blouses, but the distinctive garment of the
Parisian workman could not conceal a certain brigandish air that was
second nature to them.

"Let's hear about your startling discovery, Bouche-de-Miel," said
Waldmann. "Take a seat and tell us."

The beggar dropped upon a wooden chest, saying, in a tone of deep
dejection, as he did so:

"Much as I long to take a hand in to-night's little job, I'm afraid
you'll have to let me off!"

"Stuff!" cried Waldmann. "You are afraid of meeting that terrible
fellow, the Count of Monte-Cristo! But the startling discovery--out with
it, man!"

"Yes; the discovery, the discovery!" demanded the others, impatiently.

"Well," said Bouche-de-Miel, "I went to the Rue du Helder this morning,
as agreed upon, and made a survey of Monte-Cristo's mansion. Nothing
easier than to get in, as no watch is kept at night, and the Count is
not in the least suspicious although he has millions of francs in his
safe, to say not a word of jewels and other valuables. As I was about
leaving the premises, I stopped at a little gate giving access to the
garden from the street, having noticed that the key had been carelessly
left in the lock on the outside. I was leaning against the gate, taking
a wax impression of this key, which would assure us entrance without
trouble, when, happening to glance through the grating into the garden,
I saw two women; they had noticed me and seemed greatly frightened.
Instantly I thrust my hand through the bars and asked for charity. One
of the women summoned up sufficient courage to arise and approach me;
she was about to give me some money, when suddenly she recognized me in
spite of all the changes in my appearance. I also recognized her and
hastened away as rapidly as I could."

"Well, what of all this?" said Waldmann, calmly. "It amounts to nothing
whatever."

"It amounts to so much that I cannot go with you to Monte-Cristo's house
and run the risk of meeting that woman!"

Waldmann gave vent to a loud laugh; the others smiled.

"I never before heard of a Frenchman who was afraid to meet a woman!"
said Siebecker, much amused.

"I tell you I cannot go; you must let me off," said Bouche-de-Miel,
obstinately.

"What!" cried Peppino. "Do you allow a woman to stand between you and
your vengeance against the Count of Monte-Cristo? Remember Luigi Vampa's
bill of fare!"

Bouche-de-Miel glared at the Italian savagely.

"There is no need for me to remember it," returned he, bitterly. "I have
never forgotten it. Neither have I forgotten your share in that infamous
business!" he added, between his teeth.

"It was my duty to do as I was bidden!" retorted Peppino.

"I will have my revenge on you yet!" muttered Bouche-de-Miel,
menacingly.

"We shall see!" answered the Italian, defiantly.

Waldmann interposed and said, sternly:

"No quarreling! We are brothers and are united for mutual gain.
Bouche-de-Miel, you must go with us to-night. I order you to go and will
take no excuse! Besides, if, as Peppino says, you have vengeance to
gratify against the Count of Monte-Cristo, the opportunity is too
precious for you to neglect it! At any rate, go you shall! Where is the
wax impression of the key?"

Bouche-de-Miel handed the German a small package which, he took from
his pocket. Waldmann gave it to Siebecker, directing him to fashion a
key in accordance with it. In the meantime the beggar had been thinking.
His face showed that a fierce struggle was taking place in his mind, a
struggle between fear and a burning desire for revenge. The latter
ultimately triumphed, and the beggar, rising from the chest, went to the
table, bringing his fist down upon it with a resounding blow.

"I will accompany you, mates!" he said, with wildly flashing eyes and in
an excited voice. "Monte-Cristo robbed me, ruined me and drove me into
the world a penniless vagrant! I will have my revenge!"

"Spoken like a hero!" said Waldmann, enthusiastically. "We will meet at
the little gate on the Rue du Helder at midnight. Siebecker will give
you the key, Bouche-de-Miel, and you will open the gate. You need not
fear recognition, even if you should meet the woman you have spoken of
face to face, for you will be masked like the rest of us. If you are
anxious about her safety, I will tell you now that we only want
Monte-Cristo's millions; we do not mean murder."

"But what if murder should be necessary, if it cannot be avoided?"

Waldmann shrugged his shoulders.

"Then we must protect ourselves," he answered, phlegmatically.

Thereupon the coterie of miscreants separated, to pass away the hours as
best they might, until the time for the brilliant stroke they meditated
arrived.


CHAPTER XII.

FATHER AND DAUGHTER.


The Count of Monte-Cristo was in his study, pacing to and fro; he was
plunged in thought, and an expression indicative of deep concern was
upon his pale, but resolute countenance. Ever and anon he would pause in
front of a small table on which was a telegraphic outfit for the sending
and receiving of messages, listening with close attention to the sounds
given forth, for, although sound reading was not much practiced by the
telegraphers of that period, Monte-Cristo, who seemed to have all the
accomplishments of his own age and those of ages to come, was a
proficient at it, as well as a remarkably rapid and correct operator.

It was nearly midnight. The entire family in the mansion of the Rue du
Helder had retired to rest, with the exception of its head, who had
remained up in response to a summons from Berlin to be ready to receive
the details of a secret meeting of a vast society of Prussian patriots,
which would be sent to him in cipher by one of his most enthusiastic and
active agents for the promotion of the cause of universal human liberty.
The intense heat that had prevailed all day had been but slightly
moderated by the advent of a close, sultry night; there was not the
faintest breeze in the heavy, oppressive air, and the blue sky, full of
stars and flooded with brilliant moonlight, was without a cloud. The
silvery brightness poured in through the open windows of the study, so
illuminating the apartment that the Count had extinguished his lamp.
Fantastic shadows were projected on the floor by the book-cases and
various articles of furniture, looking like gigantic and dwarfed shapes
of demons and elfs and lending the scene a weird, supernatural aspect.
Monte-Cristo walked amid these distorted shadows like some master
magician communing with the dark, mysterious spirits that received his
commands in silence and then vanished to execute them without question
or debate.

The Count's thoughts were of a sombre nature; he was pondering over the
problem of French freedom, wondering how long the volatile, changeful
nation with which he had cast his lot would retain the liberty acquired
by the revolution that had overturned Louis Philippe's throne and given
the people power. He distrusted the events of the near future. Already
the Bonapartists were active and Louis Napoleon was looming up as a
formidable figure. The nephew of the great conqueror of Europe professed
republican sentiments, but Monte-Cristo doubted his sincerity as well as
his ability to govern the restless population of Paris. He foresaw
imitation of the famous Emperor; his prophetic eye pierced through Louis
Napoleon's presidential aspirations and saw beyond them a second Empire
not less brilliant but not more substantial than the first. The policy
of the Bonapartes was to dazzle the masses, the men of the barricades,
by a show of grandeur and amuse rather than force them into submission.
The Count had held aloof from Louis Napoleon, had even opposed him to
the full extent of his mighty influence; he had done so not from any
personal considerations, but for the good of the entire French people,
for the preservation intact of the fabric of freedom, the fruit of the
revolution of 1848.

Meanwhile, as these thoughts coursed through Monte-Cristo's active
brain, the telegraphic instrument went ticking steadily on, but the
information he expected was not conveyed. News flashed to him from every
centre of political agitation save Berlin; there an obstinate, ominous
silence prevailed. Several times he sought to open communication with
his confederate in the Prussian capital, but his signals were
unanswered. At last he paused wearily in his walk, throwing himself in a
huge arm-chair; fatigue weighed upon his eyelids and he speedily sank
into an uneasy, broken sleep, from which he started at intervals,
disturbed by some vague, disquieting dream. Ever and anon, as he dozed,
that smile that made him so handsome would steal over his manly
countenance, bringing out into bold relief all his wonderful nobility
and benevolence of expression.

As midnight struck in every clock-tower in Paris, the usual solitude of
the Rue du Helder at that dead hour was broken by the appearance of a
sinister figure at the little gate of Monte-Cristo's garden. This figure
was almost instantly followed by another hardly less forbidding. Both
wore masks and moved as stealthily as cats. The second figure addressed
the first, speaking in a cautious whisper:

"Bouche-de-Miel, is that you?"

"Yes. Siebecker, have you the key?" muttered the other, scarcely above
his breath.

"Here it is, old man. Now to work. The others will be on hand in a
moment. Open the gate and let us get in."

Bouche-de-Miel took the key, which was covered with oil to prevent
grating, and inserted it in the lock. It fitted to a charm and turned
noiselessly. Bouche-de-Miel gave the gate a gentle push; it yielded,
swinging open without a sound. The two men passed inside, partially
closing it after them. The moonlight fell upon the seat that Zuleika and
Mlle. d' Armilly had occupied beneath the honey-suckle-covered arbor
that morning; Bouche-de-Miel gave a sudden start as he glanced at it,
half-repenting of having yielded to Waldmann's command under the impulse
of his hatred for Monte-Cristo and his desire for revenge; he trembled
violently in spite of all his efforts to maintain composure and his face
became one mass of sweat beneath his protecting mask. Siebecker noticed
his agitation and gave vent to a smothered curse.

"Sacré nom d' un chien!" he muttered, between his teeth, "if you go on
like that, old man, it would have been better had Waldmann let you off.
You can't do this job with an unsteady hand. Brace up, brace up,
Bouche-de-Miel! What's that?"

There was a slight noise at the gate. Grasping his tremulous companion
by the arm, Siebecker hurriedly drew him behind a clump of small
chestnut trees. No sooner were they hidden than three masked men
cautiously opened the gate and came on tip-toe into the garden.
Waldmann, Peppino and Beppo had arrived and were ready to do their share
of the nefarious work. Siebecker and Bouche-de-Miel silently emerged
from their hiding-place and joined them.

Waldmann glanced about him, evidently satisfied.

"So far so good," said he, in an undertone. "We are all here on time. Do
not let us waste an instant. Have you steadied your nerves with plenty
of brandy, Bouche-de-Miel?"

"I'm all right," replied the latter, doggedly, though there was a
perceptible quiver in his voice as he spoke.

"He has just had another fit of fear," said Siebecker, disdainfully. "I
think we would do well to leave him with Peppino and Beppo to keep watch
in the garden! It won't be safe to take him with us into the house,
Waldmann!"

The leader went up to Bouche-de-Miel and gave him a rough shake.

"You are a coward!" said he, savagely. "That woman story you told us was
all bosh. You are afraid of meeting Monte-Cristo, as I saw very plainly
this morning!"

This taunt stung Bouche-de-Miel to the quick and restored to him all his
courage. He faced Waldmann unflinchingly and retorted:

"I am no coward and I am not afraid of Monte-Cristo!"

"Then what is the matter with, you?"

"That is my business, but it shan't damage this night's work. I will go
with you to the house and do my part as well as you or Siebecker. You
said not to waste an instant. What are you waiting for? Go on!"

"Do you swear to stand by us to the last whatever happens?"

"I swear it!"

"I will trust you."

"And you will have no reason to repent of your trust. If I meet
Monte-Cristo I will kill him as I would a mongrel cur! Does that satisfy
you?"

"How about your mysterious woman?"

Bouche-de-Miel could not repress a start, but he clenched his fists
firmly and replied, with an effort:

"Never mind her! She must take care of herself!"

"Who is she?"

"Never mind her, I say! If harm comes to her it will be her own fault!"

Waldmann appeared reassured; nevertheless he whispered in
Bouche-de-Miel's ear with a terrible earnestness that plainly showed he
meant what he said:

"I told you I would trust you, and I will. But if you weaken, if you
seek to act the traitor to save that woman, I will blow your brains out
where you stand!"

Bouche-de-Miel shrugged his shoulders.

"If I weaken, if I seek to betray you, shoot me on the spot! I give you
leave! But if you use your pistol, it will be on other game than me! Let
us to work!"

Leaving the two Italians on guard at the gate, Waldmann and Siebecker,
with Bouche-de-Miel between them, went stealthily towards the house,
walking on the grass that the sound of their footsteps might be muffled.
They kept well in the shadows of the trees, reaching the rear of the
mansion unobserved and without incident. Waldmann removed his shoes and
the others followed his example.

"Everything is silent," he whispered. "No doubt all the members of the
household, including the redoubtable Count himself, are fast asleep. We
shall have an easy thing of it."

He went upon the back porch and tried the door of the servants'
quarters. It had been carelessly left unlocked. He opened it and peered
within. Only darkness and silence there. He beckoned to his comrades;
they also came on the porch. Waldmann produced a dark lantern from under
his coat; the three robbers entered Monte-Cristo's house.

"The Count's study where he keeps his money is on the second floor,"
whispered Bouche-de-Miel. "We can reach it by going up the servants'
stairway over there."

He pointed across the small corridor in which they stood. Waldmann
cautiously opened his lantern and the narrow thread of light that came
from it revealed the stairway. The miscreants mounted it and, guided by
Bouche-de-Miel, who seemed to be thoroughly familiar with the
topography of the mansion, were soon in front of Monte-Cristo's study.
The door was ajar. Bouche-de-Miel glanced in, but instantly withdrew his
head, motioning Waldmann and Siebecker to look. They did so, and saw a
man asleep in an arm-chair; simultaneously a sharp click in the room
alarmed them; they clenched their teeth, set their lips firmly together
and drew their pistols. The sharp click was repeated, followed in rapid
succession by several others. It was the telegraphic instrument--the
news from Berlin had come!

Instantly the Count was wide awake. He leaped from his chair and ran to
the instrument, to the clicking of which he eagerly and intently
listened. The vast society of Prussian patriots had met. The delegates
had been long in arriving, for, although the utmost secrecy had been
used, the royal police had got wind of their presence in the capital and
of the proposed assemblage. Still, it was hoped that the meeting would
not be disturbed, as the rendezvous was in a secluded locality, of
which, it was thought, the authorities were not suspicious. Scarcely,
however, had the president taken his seat when the police poured in
through every door and window. All the patriots were arrested, save
Monte-Cristo's confederate, who by a lucky chance succeeded in deceiving
the myrmidons of the law.

The Count's brow clouded as he heard this startling intelligence ticked
off by the telegraphic instrument. He put his hand to his forehead at
the conclusion of the ominous message and staggered like a drunken man
back to his arm-chair, into which he sank. As he did so, Waldmann,
Siebecker and Bouche-de-Miel, who immediately rushed forward, seized him
and held him there with the strength of iron. Waldmann slipped a gag
into his mouth and Siebecker bound him firmly to the chair with a stout
cord he took from his pocket. The binding accomplished, the robbers
quitted their hold of the Count and turned in search of the plunder they
had come for--the millions of Monte-Cristo!

Suddenly there was a loud cry. It came from Bouche-de-Miel. The others
turned and looked at him, their pistols in their hands. He was staring
at a white-robed woman, who stood like a ghost in the open doorway of
the study. At that juncture another door opened and Ali, the faithful
Nubian, followed by all the valets of the household, sprang into the
room, falling upon the bewildered scoundrels ere they had recovered from
their surprise. There was a brief struggle, but the servants were
unarmed, and the robbers, disengaging themselves from the clutches of
their adversaries, kept them at bay with their pistols and slowly backed
from the apartment. In the conflict, however, Bouche-de-Miel's mask was
torn from his face, and his countenance was no sooner visible than the
white-robed woman ran towards him with outstretched arms, breathlessly
exclaiming:

"My father! my father!"

Bouche-de-Miel motioned her from him; then he moved as if to approach
her, urged on by a feeling he was altogether unable to master; but
Waldmann, still keeping his pistol pointed at Ali and his companions,
seized him by the arm with a grip of iron and drew him away. The foiled
robbers succeeded in making their escape from the house, and the garden.

The Count of Monte-Cristo had been unbound and ungagged by Ali when the
robbers had left the study. Alarmed by the unwonted noise and commotion,
Captain de Morcerf, Zuleika and Mlle. d' Armilly had appeared upon the
scene, but too late to witness the conflict with the miscreants. In a
few words the Count explained to them what had happened. Zuleika glanced
at Mlle. d' Armilly as if she suspected that the strange beggar of that
morning had something to do with this midnight invasion of their home;
Louise looked uneasy and agitated, but preserved a stony silence.

The white-robed woman still stood as if stupefied. Mlle. d' Armilly went
to her and asked, solicitously:

"Eugénie, what is the matter?"

This question aroused young Madame de Morcerf, for it was she, from her
stupor. She threw herself into a chair and covered her face with her
hands, moaning piteously:

"Oh! Louise! Louise! I have seen my father! He was one of the robbers!
It is terrible, terrible!"

Captain de Morcerf, who had gone to his wife's side and tenderly taken
her hand, gazed inquiringly at the Count.

"I saw the man she speaks of perfectly," said Monte-Cristo, in reply to
his look, "and he was certainly the Baron Danglars!"


CHAPTER XIII.

MORCERF'S ADVENTURE.


The Count of Monte-Cristo took no steps to have the miscreants who had
invaded the sanctity of his home tracked and apprehended; he did not
even instruct the Commissary of Police of the quarter in regard to what
had happened. He was entirely satisfied that the sole aim of the
wretches had been robbery, and, as that aim had been defeated, he did
not desire to court further publicity by putting the matter in the hands
of the authorities. One thing, however, gave the Count considerable
uneasiness, namely, the fact that Danglars had been one of the robbers.
He did not doubt that the former banker, whom he had financially wrecked
and forced to fly ignominiously from Paris in the past in pursuit of his
scheme of wholesale vengeance against the enemies of his youth, had
planned the robbery in order to gratify his burning thirst for revenge;
he also felt equally certain that Danglars meant further mischief, if he
could accomplish it, and that his presence in the city would be a
constant menace to his tranquillity and prosperity, nay, even to his
domestic happiness; but his feelings had undergone a radical change
since the old days of restless, inexorable retribution, and he now
pitied the man he had so ruthlessly overthrown as much as he had
formerly hated him. Danglars had fallen very low, indeed, to be the
companion and accomplice of midnight marauders, and the Count's very
soul ached as he thought to what depths of poverty and ignominy he had
been the means of reducing him. He would have sought him out amid the
dangerous criminal population of Paris, traced him to his den of
depravity and wretchedness, and offered him money and the means of
social rehabilitation had there been the slightest reason to hope that
he could thereby rescue the miserable man from the slough of iniquity
into which he was plunged, but he knew too well Danglars' implacable
character and deep-seated hatred against himself to attempt anything of
the kind. Should he penetrate into his haunts and meet him the result
could only be disastrous, for Danglars would take a fiendish delight in
betraying him to his desperate associates, who would not hesitate even
to murder him at his bidding, and the former banker was fully capable of
compassing his assassination in the most horrible fashion as a crowning
stroke of diabolical revenge. There was a time when Monte-Cristo valued
life very little, when he would gladly have accepted death as a welcome
avenue to endless rest and peace, but that time had passed; since then
he had contracted ties that bound him to existence with insurmountable
strength; he had now a family, was surrounded by beings he tenderly
loved and cherished, beings for whom he must live and over whose
destinies he must closely watch. He was wedded to Mercédès, who lavished
upon him in her maturity all the wealth of overwhelming affection she
had showered upon him before the fateful conspiracy that had consigned
him as the sailor Dantès to the dark, noisome dungeon of the Château d'
If and given her to the arms of Fernand, the Catalan. Haydée had
fluttered over the page of his stormy, agitated history, leaving him
Espérance and Zuleika as reminders of a happy, but all too brief dream,
an elfin vision of enchantment that had vanished as swiftly as it had
come. But his son and daughter had twined themselves about the fibres of
his heart as the clinging ivy twines about the shattered fragments of
some grand and imposing ruin, and each day, each moment, as it sped by,
only served the more to reveal to him the longings and the devotion of a
father's soul. Besides, Albert de Morcerf and his young wife Eugénie
were now thoroughly endeared to him, and he felt that by doing
everything in his power to augment their happiness he was gradually
paying off the heavy debt he owed to Danglars' so long abandoned child.
Yes, the Count of Monte-Cristo wished to live, first for his family,
then for the great cause of human liberty with which he had become so
thoroughly identified. If Danglars came in his way he would endeavor to
reclaim and propitiate him, but he could not seek him out.

Mercédès at the period of the attempted robbery was absent on a visit to
some friends in Marseilles, and by common consent it was resolved not to
inform her of Danglars' reappearance, as the intelligence could not fail
to be a prostrating shock to her.

Ever since that memorable midnight scene in Monte-Cristo's study young
Madame de Morcerf had acted like one overwhelmed. She said nothing, even
to her husband or Louise d' Armilly, concerning her wretched father, but
it was plain that intense grief and shame were preying upon her. This
greatly distressed Albert and, seeing his beloved wife droop day by day,
he, without saying a word to any one, formed a startling and perilous
resolution. He determined to find Danglars' abode, to see his
father-in-law and endeavor to persuade him to relinquish his career of
crime. In this he was actuated by two powerful motives--the desire to
relieve Eugénie's distress and suspense and the wish to avoid the
scandal that would be sure to come should the former banker be caught
red-handed in the commission of some fearful crime and a legal
investigation reveal his identity.

Zuleika studiously avoided referring to the attempted robbery and the
recognition of Danglars by her father and Eugénie. She was aware of the
part Monte-Cristo had played in his enemy's fall and disgrace, and did
not deem it prudent to awaken the bitter recollections of the lurid and
dreadful past.

Mlle. d' Armilly also said nothing in reference to the reappearance of
Danglars, but it was very clear to the observant Zuleika that she
expected and dreaded further harm from Monte-Cristo's revengeful enemy.
At night she locked herself in her chamber, and, notwithstanding the
almost unbearable heat of the weather, securely closed and fastened all
her windows.

The Count himself was as reserved as ever, never once mentioning either
the midnight invasion of his mansion or the unexpected advent of his
most deadly foe. To everybody in the household he seemed either to have
forgotten or to have succeeded in dismissing from his mind those events
so fraught with excitement and possibilities of future disaster. But
Monte-Cristo, though he preserved an impassible exterior, had neither
forgotten nor dismissed them. He had simply applied to himself his own
famous maxim, "Wait and Hope." He was waiting and hoping for the best,
for God in His inscrutable wisdom to bring mysterious good out of
apparent evil.

Meanwhile Captain de Morcerf had been busily engaged in making thorough
but cautious investigations. He had formed the acquaintance of a former
Agent de la Sureté, who had been of great use to him in describing the
various outlaws and prowlers of Paris, and in pointing out to him their
secret dens and the secluded places of rendezvous where they met, drank
vile liquors, and, under the maddening influence of absinthe and
alcohol, plotted their crimes and atrocities of every description. This
man, another Quasimodo in point of hideous aspect, had been dismissed
from the detective service because of his inability to keep sober, but
he had not forgotten the resources of his profession, and money lavishly
bestowed upon him made him Captain de Morcerf's most obedient and
faithful slave. Cash in hand rendered him indefatigable and the prospect
of obtaining more kept him discreet. He had taught his employer the art
of effectually disguising himself, of passing for a veritable zigue,
and, as he was well-known to the desperadoes he had formerly shadowed
and was welcomed by them as a sterling good fellow, he was enabled to
take the Captain with impunity among scoundrels who would not have
hesitated to cut his throat had they known who he was.

As Albert did not know what name Danglars had assumed and was unwilling
to give the ex-detective his true cognomen, the latter had nothing to
guide him in this respect. Neither was the Captain cognizant of the
changes that time and his mode of life had wrought in the former
banker's personal appearance, so he could only describe him as he had
looked in the years gone by. This afforded Mange, such was the name of
the dismissed policeman, no indication whatever by which he could
profit. He, nevertheless, was not disconcerted by the paucity of
information. He knew that young Morcerf was searching for a man who had
been one of the party engaged in the attempt to rob the Monte-Cristo
mansion on the Rue du Helder, and that knowledge was sufficient for him.
He very soon discovered that Waldmann, Siebecker, Bouche-de-Miel and two
Italians had formed that party, and Bouche-de-Miel being the only
Frenchman in the coterie he had no difficulty whatever in fixing upon
him as the individual wanted. He imparted his discovery and conclusion
to his employer, together with the intelligence that the men were in the
habit of congregating in the little caboulot of the Cité d' Antin.
Albert rewarded Mange liberally for his zeal and promised him a very
much larger sum should Bouche-de-Miel turn out to be his man. It was
immediately arranged that Mange should conduct the Captain to the
caboulot that very night and, if possible, bring him face to face with
the Frenchman supposed to be Danglars.

In accordance with this agreement, as soon as night had fallen, Mange
was waiting for his employer at the corner of the Rue Taitbout and the
Rue de Provence. He was not kept long at his post, for Albert speedily
made his appearance, dressed in a blouse like a workman; his rough
trousers were tucked in the tops of his dusty boots and on his head he
wore a battered slouch hat that looked as if it might have seen service
behind the revolutionary barricades. Mange surveyed him with a long
glance of admiration; then taking him to a neighboring street lamp, he
critically examined his face, which was stained to represent the
bronzing effect of the sun and smeared with dirt.

"Capital!" exclaimed the ex-detective, as he finished his scrutiny. "You
are a zigue out and out! Not a trace of the boulevardier to be seen! The
most keen-scented vache in the caboulot would be completely deceived!"

Albert smiled at his companion's enthusiasm.

"Well, as I pass examination," he said, "let us go on at once. Do you
think our man will be at the caboulot?"

"Do I think water will run down hill!" cried Mange, with a laugh that
resembled nothing so much as the discordant croak of a crow. "He never
misses a night, and this is the hour when the brandy begins to flow!"

Albert shuddered at this remark, suggesting as it did the certainty that
he would find Eugénie's father a sot as well as a thief. He, however,
took Mange's arm and together they strolled leisurely into the Cité d'
Antin, making their way to the caboulot without meeting a single
suspicious prowler.

They entered the front room where Bouche-de-Miel had found the
slatternly young woman reading her greasy copy of the Gazette des
Tribunaux on the morning preceding the attempted robbery. She was at her
accustomed place behind the counter, but was not reading; eight or ten
stalwart ruffians monopolized her attention and, as she furnished her
thirsty customers with the various fiery beverages they demanded, she
showered her most captivating glances right and left among them. She was
as slatternly as ever, but her hair was shining with bear's grease and a
strong odor of musk pervaded her garments; a paste diamond of enormous
size but of doubtful brilliancy ornamented her breastpin and on her
stumpy, grimy fingers were numerous brass rings containing dull
imitations of rubies, amethysts and topazes.

As the new comers came in, Waldmann, standing in front of the counter
with a bottle in one hand and a glass in the other, was chaffing her.

"See here, Beurre-Sans-Sel," he said, with a well-counterfeited air of
intense admiration, "you are looking like a real beauty to-night. I will
wager anything you expect a lover. I never saw you put on such style
before. I declare you far outshine the demoiselles of the public balls!"

"Oh! Monsieur Waldmann, how you talk!" returned the girl, with an
affected simper and an unsuccessful attempt to blush.

Just then the German looked around and caught sight of Mange, who was
looking his ugliest. The spirit of mischief was strong upon him and he
instantly cried out:

"I knew it; I knew you were expecting a lover and here he is promptly on
time! Come now own up, my little Beurre-Sans-Sel, did you not put on all
your pretty fixings for Mange?"

"For that ugly old gorilla!" exclaimed the girl, unceremoniously and
disdainfully. "I can get better-looking lovers than either a monkey or a
Swab, I'd have you to know, Monsieur Waldmann!"

There was a general laugh at this sally, and none laughed louder than
Mange, who had a taste for coarse jokes and sharp retorts.

"So!" said Waldmann, after the merriment had subsided. Then he perceived
Mange's companion for the first time. He examined him closely and
suspiciously. Albert did not shrink from his scrutiny, but the
ex-detective deemed it prudent to set matters right at the start by a
formal introduction of his employer; he, therefore, motioned to Albert
to follow him and walked up to the German, offering him his hand, which
the latter shook cordially.

The Captain now stood beside Waldmann in front of the counter and Mange
presented him without delay.

"Monsieur Waldmann," said he, "permit me to make you acquainted with my
friend Fouquier, from Dijon, a bon zigue."

"Monsieur Fouquier," said the German, taking Albert's outstretched hand,
"I am glad to know you, especially as you come so well recommended."

Mange bowed in acknowledgment of this little tribute to himself.

Morcerf replied that the pleasure was mutual.

Waldmann's suspicions seemed to be allayed.

"Take something," he said. "Here, Siebecker and Bouche-de-Miel, join us
in drinking the health of Monsieur Fouquier from Dijon!"

Albert was instantly on the alert and Mange watched him attentively as
the two individuals named emerged from a corner of the room and lounged
up to the counter. There was another presentation, a double one this
time, Waldmann doing the honors. Mange required no introduction.
Everybody appeared to know him. Beurre-Sans-Sel put forth brandy and
glasses, and the health of Monsieur Fouquier was drunk enthusiastically.
When this ceremony ended Morcerf called for cigarettes and distributed
them among the coterie; then he had leisure to examine Bouche-de-Miel;
the latter had turned his back to the counter and leaned his elbows upon
it; in this position, with his cigarette between his teeth, he looked
the perfect picture of vagabondish idleness. Mange was still watching
Morcerf, but saw no sign that he had recognized in Bouche-de-Miel the
man for whom he was seeking. This made him uneasy, for it was an
indication that the reward his employer had promised him would not be
earned.

Presently Waldmann and Siebecker were called to another part of the
room. Bouche-de-Miel remained, continuing to smoke his cigarette, with
his elbows on the counter where he had placed them after the
health-drinking. The Captain's thoughts were of a conflicting nature.
Everything pointed to the fact that the man before him was his
father-in-law, but, unlike Mlle. d' Armilly, he saw nothing in him
suggestive of the Baron Danglars of other days. Could this vagabond,
this wretch, be Danglars? If so, how was it to be proved to his
satisfaction? How, above all, in this place, in this den of thieves and
cutthroats? The man was certainly the party Eugénie had recognized on
the night of the attempted burglary as her father, the party
Monte-Cristo himself had so positively pronounced to be the former
banker. But was it not probable that his wife and the Count had been
mistaken? Was it not probable that they had been deceived by some
fancied resemblance when excitement had possessed them to such a degree
that it had deprived them of the full use of their mental faculties? At
any rate he had come to the caboulot to experiment with Bouche-de-Miel
and he would not shrink from cautiously applying the test.

Their cigarettes were now consumed. Albert, in pursuance of his scheme,
invited Bouche-de-Miel and Mange to take seats at a table and have some
more brandy. They accepted the invitation with alacrity, and the three
were soon drinking and chatting. Repeated potations finally opened
Bouche-de-Miel's lips; he began to be confidential.

"You may not believe me, messieurs," said he, "but I was not always as
you see me now!"

Mange winked triumphantly at his employer. Revelations which might be
important were coming. Perhaps he would yet earn the promised reward.
Morcerf was listening attentively.

"No, sacré nom d' un chien, I was not always a zigue! Once I had immense
wealth, I counted my money by millions! I had position, too, and I may
say without egotism that I was honored by the best people of Paris!"

He paused and drained another glass of brandy.

"What were you?" asked Mange.

Albert waited breathlessly for the answer to this question.

"What was I?" repeated Bouche-de-Miel. "You may laugh, but I was a
banker!"

Morcerf could not avoid giving a start. The vagabond, half-drunk as he
was, noticed it and asked:

"What is the matter with you, Fouquier? Do you think the lie so
tremendous that you can't keep still?"

The young man was glad to accept this interpretation of his behavior; he
touched his glass to his lips and said, with a forced smile:

"Well, I do think you are going it rather strong!"

"Not half strong enough, mon Dieu!" cried Bouche-de-Miel, bringing his
fist down on the table with such force that the glasses were nearly
knocked off. "Not half strong enough, I tell you, messieurs, for I was
a Baron as well as a banker!"

Albert groaned. Mange looked at him with sparkling eyes; he was now sure
that the promised money was within his reach, that his clutch would soon
close on it. His enforced sobriety since he had been in the Captain's
employ made him anxious for a prolonged, reckless spree, frightfully
anxious, and his guarded potations since he entered the caboulot had
whetted his devouring appetite for alcohol to such an extent that he
could scarcely keep it in subjection with the plentiful supply of brandy
on the table, almost at his very lips.

Bouche-de-Miel did not hear Morcerf's groan; his misty eyes were fixed
upon space, seemed to be peering into the depths and recesses of the
distant past. The Captain judged that the time had come to draw the
final, the crowning admission from his lips. He touched him lightly on
the arm. The man turned and glanced at him inquiringly. Morcerf's heart
beat wildly; it was with great difficulty that he kept his agitation
under control. He hurriedly scanned the other occupants of the
room--some were very drunk and stupid, others noisy and demonstrative,
but all were too busy with their own concerns and pleasures to pay even
the slightest attention to the little party at the table; Waldmann and
Siebecker were asleep on opposite ends of a bench in a corner.
Bouche-de-Miel had meanwhile relapsed into his misty reverie. Albert
touched his arm again.

"Don't bother me!" said the man, impatiently, without removing his eyes
from space. "Can't you let a fellow dream!"

"Baron Danglars!" whispered Morcerf in his ear.

"Eh? What?" cried Bouche-de-Miel, coming back to reality with a start,
half-sobered by hearing this name.

"Baron Danglars," repeated the Captain, in a guarded undertone, "I know
you!"

The man got upon his feet lumberingly and unsteadily; he clutched
Albert's shoulder convulsively.

"You are an Agent de la Sureté!" he hissed. "You have come here to
arrest me!"

The attention of some of the less intoxicated ruffians was being excited
by Bouche-de-Miel's behavior, but their ears had failed to seize his
words amid the prevailing din. Mange, with his usual keenness and
quickness, saw that something must instantly be done to quiet Albert's
companion or all the miscreants who could stir would be aroused and come
thronging about them to throttle the supposed Agent de la Sureté. He,
therefore, gave a loud laugh and said to Bouche-de-Miel:

"Don't be a fool, old man! Monsieur Fouquier belong to la rousse! That's
a good joke! ha! ha! Why he is as much in danger of the violon as you
are! ha! ha!"

He arose, still laughing, and, playfully taking Bouche-de-Miel by the
collar, gently forced him back into his chair. As he did so, he glanced
at Beurre-Sans-Sel. The slatternly young woman had her hand on the screw
of the huge lamp suspended above the counter, by which alone the room
was lighted, ready to turn it out and leave the whole place in darkness
at the first alarm. She was evidently accustomed to police descents and
knew how to act in such cases. Mange's words and merriment, however,
reassured her and she withdrew her fingers from the screw.

But Bouche-de-Miel was not altogether satisfied. He sat uneasily in his
chair, facing Morcerf and anxiously scanning his countenance.

"What did you mean by calling me Baron Danglars and saying that you knew
me?" he asked, in a low, somewhat tremulous voice.

Instead of replying directly to this question, the young man said,
slowly and in a half-whisper:

"I am Albert de Morcerf, the husband of your daughter Eugénie!"

"What!" exclaimed Bouche-de-Miel. "Eugénie married--and to you!"

"Yes," said the Captain, "Fate has again brought us together after a
long and painful separation."

"I saw Eugénie in the house of the Count of Monte-Cristo, no matter how,
no matter when. What was she doing there?"

"Monte-Cristo is married to my mother, Mercédès, and we are living with
him."

"Living with him--Eugénie, my daughter, living beneath the roof of the
man who ruined her father and made him what he is!"

Bouche-de-Miel grew absolutely livid with rage; he was entirely sobered
now and all his evil instincts had full possession of him.

"I will never forgive her--or you!" he hissed.

"Listen to me," said Albert, with comparative calmness. "I have come
here to-night at the risk of my life to offer you money, the means of
rehabilitation. Be advised. Leave these miscreants with whom you are
associated and become a man again!"

"I reject both your offer and advice!" said Bouche-de-Miel, excitedly.
"They are insults, coming as they do from the stepson of Monte-Cristo,
my relentless enemy! But I will have vengeance upon you for them and
through you on Edmond Dantès! Ho, Waldmann Siebecker!"

The two Germans awoke, sprang from their bench and advanced towards the
table.

Mange uttered a groan of despair. He could do nothing now to avert the
impending danger.

Bouche-de-Miel had leaped to his feet and grappled with Albert de
Morcerf. Waldmann and Siebecker, realizing that something was wrong and
at once connecting the alleged Monsieur Fouquier with it, drew long,
keen-bladed knives as they rushed forward.

All the thieves and marauders who were sober enough to stand were now on
their feet, ready to hurl themselves upon the suspected man. Weapons
flashed in every direction--daggers, knives and pistols. Loud oaths and
abusive epithets were heard on all sides; it was a perfect pandemonium,
a babel of evil sounds.

Amid all the confusion and danger Mange's self-possession did not desert
him. Seeing that it was useless to attempt to pacify the surging pack of
desperadoes, he determined upon a bold measure, one that would enable
him to save Captain de Morcerf and, at the same time, keep up his
reputation with the criminal frequenters of the caboulot, with whom he
desired for reasons of his own to be on good terms. He ran to the
counter, where Beurre-Sans-Sel already had her hand on the screw of the
hanging lamp, waiting for events to decide what action she should take.
He leaned over the counter and whispered to the girl:

"Beurre-Sans-Sel, I was deceived in Monsieur Fouquier. He imposed upon
me. He told me he was from Dijon. He turns out to be a Parisian and an
Agent de la Sureté. He has betrayed himself. More Agents are coming!
They will be here in a moment! Put off the light!"

The girl did not hesitate a second; she gave the screw a quick twist and
the caboulot was instantly as dark as a tomb.

Having executed this manoeuvre, Mange sprang to Albert de Morcerf's
side, striking Bouche-de-Miel a crushing blow in the face that caused
him to lose his grip of the young man. Then, seizing his employer in his
brawny arms, he lifted him as if he had been a child and ran with him to
the front door; this he opened, leaping into the street with his burden.

"Now run for your life!" he exclaimed, depositing the young man on the
sidewalk.

With this he started off at a tearing pace, closely followed by Morcerf.
They did not pause until they had reached the Rue de Provence, where, in
the blaze of the lights, amid the throngs of honest citizens, they were
safe.


CHAPTER XIV.

ZULEIKA AND MME. MORREL.


Quite a long time had elapsed since the sudden departure of the Viscount
Massetti from Paris, but Zuleika was still in complete ignorance as to
his whereabouts and actions. He was in Rome, of that she had not the
slightest doubt. She was equally convinced that his errand there was to
establish his innocence of the terrible crime imputed to him by Luigi
Vampa, to obtain proofs that would clear him in the eves of her father
and herself, if not of all the world. Why, therefore, did he not write,
why did he not give her some sign that she would understand? His silence
discouraged the young girl, filled her with uneasiness. It seemed to
indicate that he had not succeeded, had not been able to wipe the stain
from his record. If so she would never see him again, for Giovanni was
too proud to reappear in her presence with a dishonored name, a sullied
reputation. This thought was torture, and Monte-Cristo's daughter felt
that should her lover desert her she could not live.

As the days rolled by without a word of intelligence from the Viscount,
Zuleika's fears assumed greater consistency and weight. She grew sad,
inexpressibly sad; her look lost its brightness, her voice its cheery
tone and her step its elasticity. The bloom faded from her youthful
cheeks, giving place to an ashen pallor. She was no longer interested in
her accustomed occupations and amusements, and would sit for hours
together with her hands crossed in her lap, dominated by sorrowful and
dismal forebodings.

Mercédès noticed her condition, and, ascribing it to its proper cause,
strove in a motherly way to rouse and console her, but without effect.
She spoke to the Count about it, begging him to use his influence to
cheer his child, but Monte-Cristo only shook his head, saying that they
must trust to the soothing power of time which could not fail ultimately
to do its work. Espérance pitied his sister sincerely, but refrained
from interfering, well knowing that nothing he could say would be
productive of good. Albert de Morcerf, his wife and Mlle. d' Armilly,
who had learned of Zuleika's love affair and the dark shadow that had
fallen upon it, felt a delicacy about alluding to the matter and,
therefore, held aloof; besides, they were too much depressed by the
circumstances under which Danglars had reappeared to be able to exert a
cheering influence.

When Mercédès returned from Marseilles she was accompanied by Maximilian
and Valentine Morrel, who immediately went to the mansion on the Rue du
Helder and paid their respects to the Count of Monte-Cristo, their
benefactor. It was their intention to make only a brief call, taking up
their residence during their sojourn in Paris at that famous
stopping-place for strangers, the Grand Hôtel du Louvre on the Rue de
Rivoli adjoining the Palais Royal, but Monte-Cristo would not hear of
such a thing, insisting that the young soldier and his wife should be
his guests and partake of his hospitality. They were not reluctant to
consent to this agreeable arrangement, as it would enable them to enjoy
uninterruptedly the society of their dearest friends.

Mme. Morrel at once took a deep interest in Zuleika. She saw that some
sorrow was heavily weighing on the young girl, and, rightly divining
that the tender passion had much to do with it, immediately endeavored
to inspire her with a degree of confidence sufficient to bring about
revelations. In this Mme. Morrel was not actuated by curiosity. Her
motive was altogether laudable; she desired to serve the Count of
Monte-Cristo, to do something to show her gratitude for the overwhelming
benefits he had in the past showered upon her husband and herself, and
could conceive no better or more effectual way than by striving to
relieve Zuleika. She, therefore, promptly set about her praiseworthy but
difficult task, resolved to bring back the roses to the young girl's
cheeks and restore hope to her sad and dejected heart.

She began by using every womanly art to induce Zuleika to love her and
look upon her as a friend of friends. In this initial step she succeeded
even beyond her most ardent anticipations. From the first Monte-Cristo's
daughter was attracted towards her, and it required very little effort
on Mme. Morrel's part to win her completely. Valentine's disposition
was so sweet and her sympathy so sincere that Zuleika could not help
loving her; besides, the romantic story of her love for Maximilian and
the terrible trials she had undergone before being united to him through
Monte-Cristo's potent influence, with which she was thoroughly
acquainted, predisposed Giovanni's betrothed to regard her as a woman to
whom she could open her heart and from whom she might derive supreme
solace, if not consolation. Valentine's quick and penetrating eyes read
the young girl like the pages of an open book, and she was not slow in
utilizing the advantages she acquired.

Things had been going on in this way for several days, when one evening
Mme. Morrel proposed a promenade in the garden to Zuleika with a view of
bringing matters to a crisis. She gladly acquiesced in the proposition
and soon they were strolling in the moonlight amid the fragrant flowers
and centenarian trees. It was a sultry night, but there was a pleasant
breeze that agreeably fanned the cheeks of Valentine and her youthful
companion. Mme. Morrel had matured her plan, but Zuleika herself
unexpectedly came to her aid, assisting her to put it into immediate and
practical execution.

After walking for a short space, they seated themselves in a magnificent
pavilion or summer-house situated at the extremity of the garden. It was
built of white stone, the walls being perforated by several tall
archways that supplied the place of both windows and doors. Ivy and
other clustering vines clambered about the exterior, creeping through
the archways and furnishing the ceiling with a verdant canopy
exceedingly inviting and refreshing to the eye weary of contemplating
the dust and dryness of the streets parched by the summer sun. Without
were several great silver maple trees and numerous ornamental shrubs.
Mme. Morrel drew close to Zuleika on the rustic bench they occupied and,
taking the young girl's hand, said to her, in a soft voice:

"This is a delicious spot, my child."

"Yes," replied Monte-Cristo's daughter, "it is, indeed, delicious. When
here, I always feel as if I could pour out my whole heart into the bosom
of some faithful friend."

"Do so in this instance, my dear," said Mme. Morrel, persuasively. "I
trust I am a faithful friend, as well as a discreet one."

"I believe you," rejoined Zuleika. "Ever since you have been in our
house I have felt so and longed to make you my confidante, but I have
hesitated to take such a step, fearing to burden you with troubles that
might distress you."

"Have no further fears on that score then, but speak freely and with the
certainty that in your sorrows, whatever they may be, you will find me a
sincere sympathizer and comforter."

Zuleika took Valentine's hand, and, gazing into her face with tearful
eyes, said:

"You have noticed that I had sorrows, Mme. Morrel?"

"Yes; how could I help it? But I have done more; I have divined their
cause!"

Zuleika gave a slight start.

"Divined their cause, Mme. Morrel?"

"Yes," answered Valentine. "You are in love!"

The young girl blushed, but appeared relieved. Mme. Morrel had divined
her love, had divined that her sorrows arose from it, but she had not
divined the nature of the shadow that clouded her budding life and
filled her with grief and apprehension.

"Zuleika," continued Valentine, with the utmost tenderness and
consideration, "I, too, have loved, deeply and desperately; I, too, have
felt all the bitter pangs that arise from separation; but I have
realized my dream at last, and the shadows that surrounded me have been
swept away by the blessed sunshine of union and happiness. Confide in
me, my child. If I cannot drive your shadows from you, I can at least
give you true sympathy and the consolation that it affords."

"They will be welcome to me, unspeakably welcome, madame," replied
Zuleika, tremulously.

"Then tell me all."

"I cannot, madame; I have no right to; but I can tell you enough to
wring your heart, to show you how unfortunate I am."

"My poor girl, I understand and appreciate your scruples. You do not
wish to compromise your lover, and you are right. Your decision does you
honor. Is the man you love in Paris?"

"Alas! no. I believe he is in Rome."

"Then you do not know his whereabouts with certainty?"

"No, madame."

"Does your father disapprove of his suit?"

"He did not at the outset, but very painful circumstances have since
arisen, causing him to alter his determination, or, at least, hold his
consent in abeyance. Still, I think, he believes Giovanni can and will
refute the dreadful charge that has been made against him."

"Giovanni? Your lover is then an Italian?"

"Yes, the Viscount Giovanni Massetti."

"You became acquainted with him here in Paris?"

"No, madame; in Rome."

"And you think he has gone thither to clear himself of the charge you
mention?"

"Yes, madame. He came to Paris to solicit my hand, but suddenly
disappeared after the terrible charge was made. I have not heard from
him since and his silence weighs upon me like lead."

"I do not wonder at it; but, perhaps, after all, he is only waiting for
a complete vindication and does not wish to write until he has
everything satisfactorily arranged. I do not ask you the nature of the
charge, Zuleika, and would not allow you to state it to me even if you
were so disposed. But answer me one question. You have entire faith in
Giovanni's innocence, have you not?"

"I have, madame."

"You are sure he loves you, that he has not trifled with your
affections?"

"I am sure, madame."

"He is young, is he not?"

"Yes, madame, he is young."

"Doubtlessly his fault, whatever it may have been, was simply an
indiscretion due to his years that has been magnified and made to assume
unwarranted proportions by the tongues of envy and scandal. If so, he
will repair it and return to you. If he is altogether innocent, as you
feel convinced, he will move heaven and earth to justify himself in your
father's eyes and yours. Love is potent, Zuleika, and will accomplish
miracles. Trust Giovanni and trust Heaven! All will yet be made right
between your lover and yourself!"

"Would that I could feel so, madame, but I cannot!"

"And why, pray?"

"Because Giovanni evidently has powerful enemies in Rome and its
vicinity who, no doubt, are at this moment operating against him and
using all their efforts to prevent him from succeeding in his mission."

"What makes you think he has such remorseless enemies?"

"A letter my father received from Rome in response to inquiries he made
and the illusion--it must be an illusion--under which my brother
Espérance labors in regard to Giovanni."

"Your brother Espérance! Then he believes in young Massetti's guilt?"

"Alas! yes; he firmly believes in it and stigmatizes the Viscount as the
worst of scoundrels."

"Has he given you the reasons for his belief, has he stated them to your
father?"

"He has dealt only in vague, mysterious allusions; an oath of silence,
it appears, prevents him from speaking out."

"An oath of silence?"

"Yes, and Giovanni is also likewise bound."

"Indeed! What is your lover's reputation in Rome?"

"Of the very best; he is there regarded as the soul of honor."

"Save by his enemies. So far so good. Do you know the standing of his
family?"

"It is one of the oldest, most respected, most aristocratic and
wealthiest in the Eternal City."

"Another strong point in the young man's favor. Zuleika, I am satisfied
that the mystery surrounding your lover can be cleared away; but I am
also satisfied that he needs assistance, the assistance of persons
deeply interested in you, who have your welfare at heart and cherish
your happiness as their own."

"But such persons cannot be found, madame. Of course my father and
brother are deeply interested in me, have my welfare at heart and desire
to see me happy. They, however, are not disposed to aid Giovanni, my
brother for reasons of his own and my father because he thinks that the
Viscount should work his own rehabilitation. No, madame, such persons as
you mention cannot be found."

"They can be found, Zuleika, and you will not have far to look for them
either!"

Mme. Morrel gazed at Monte-Cristo's daughter with enthusiasm in her fine
eyes. The girl was at a loss to understand her.

"Surely you do not mean Albert de Morcerf and Eugénie?" she said.

"No," replied Valentine. "They love you, undoubtedly, but the needful
assistance is not to be obtained from them."

"Certainly you cannot allude to Mlle. d' Armilly or Ali, my father's
devoted Nubian servant?"

"No, I do not allude to them!"

"Whom then do you mean?"

"Cannot you guess, Zuleika?"

A sudden thought came to Zuleika, filling her with intense amazement.

"You cannot mean yourself and your husband, Mme. Morrel?" she gasped.

"And why not, my child?" answered Valentine, sweetly. "All the
assistance we can render you will be but a weak, inadequate return for
what your father has done for us. He saved me from death, withdrew the
suicidal pistol from Maximilian's hand, comforted us in our time of
darkest despair, and finally brought us together after a separation that
even M. Morrel deemed eternal, simultaneously placing in our hands
wealth sufficient to make us altogether independent of the accidents and
disasters of this world. Besides, before that he was the benefactor of
M. Morrel's father, saving him also from suicide, suicide that he had
determined upon as the only means of avoiding terrible disgrace. You
see, Zuleika, that we have abundant motives for aiding you."

"Oh! madame--Valentine--you utterly overwhelm me! How can I show my
gratitude to you?"

"By accepting my offer!"

These words were accompanied by a look of ineffable tenderness and
sincerity. They instantly brought hope to Zuleika's heart. She burst
into a flood of tears, but they were tears of joy. Still, she hesitated.
What would her father say if she accepted Mme. Morrel's generous
proposition?

"Do you accept, Zuleika?" pursued Mme. Morrel.

"I thank you from the depths of my soul, madame; but I cannot accept the
sacrifice you and your kind, manly husband would make for me! My father
would censure me, would never forgive me for adopting such a selfish
course!"

"Trust your father to me, my child."

"Oh! madame! Accept your offer without consulting him?"

"There is no need to consult him, there is no need for him to know
anything whatever about the matter, for the present at least. It will be
time enough to tell him what we have done when success has crowned our
efforts. Should we unhappily fail, a thought that I cannot for an
instant entertain, there will be no occasion to tell him anything at
all."

At that moment a man's voice was heard calling at a distance:

"Valentine, Valentine, where are you?"

"It is Maximilian," said Mme. Morrel to Zuleika. "He comes very
opportunely!" Then raising her voice she answered him: "Here,
Maximilian, here, in the summer pavilion at the extremity of the
garden!"

The husband hastened to the spot, and Valentine, making him seat
himself beside her and Monte-Cristo's daughter, told him all she had
just learned. She also communicated to him the offer she had made to
Zuleika, adding:

"You will consent to it, I know, Maximilian!"

"Gladly," answered the young soldier. "Had you not made the proposal, I
should have made it myself!"

"Then we have but to induce Zuleika to authorize us to act. The poor
child, however, hesitates, fearing the Count's displeasure."

"She need not authorize us," said Maximilian quickly. "We will assume
the entire responsibility on the step! But it will be necessary for her
to confide in us more fully, to give us the data upon which to build our
plans. I will get letters of introduction to the Viscount Massetti and,
once acquainted with him, the rest will be easy."

Later that night Zuleika told Mme. Morrel everything without reserve,
even giving her a little note to Giovanni which stated that Valentine
and Maximilian were her dearest friends and had come to Rome expressly
to aid him in his troubles.

A week after the momentous interview in the pavilion M. and Mme. Morrel
set out for Italy, informing their friends in the mansion on the Rue du
Helder that they intended being absent some time, but refraining from
giving even the slightest hint of the object of their journey.


CHAPTER XV.

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING.


One morning shortly after the departure of the Morrels for Rome, the
Count of Monte-Cristo was driving along the Champs-Elysées in his
elegant barouche drawn by a pair of spirited, blooded bays, when, near
the Rond-point, his progress was suddenly checked by a great, tumultuous
concourse of people. Leaning from his carriage, he asked a workman the
cause of the unwonted commotion and was informed that two Italians had
been arrested for theft and were being taken to the poste of the quarter
by a couple of gardiens de la paix. He thought nothing of the
circumstance and was calmly waiting for an opportunity to proceed when
the crowd about the barouche opened and the officers appeared with their
captives. The Count was not much interested, but, nevertheless, bestowed
a passing glance upon the malefactors, who were loudly protesting their
innocence in broken, almost unintelligible French, and offering a stout
resistance. They were roughly attired in blue blouses, wearing felt hats
that were pulled down and obscured their countenances. One of the men in
custody caught hold of a spoke of a wheel of Monte-Cristo's vehicle,
grasping it with such iron firmness that all the efforts of the
policeman in charge of him failed to shake off his clutch. The Count
ordered Ali, who was acting as coachman, to hand him the reins, dismount
and assist the gardien.

At the sound of his voice, the man who had grasped the spoke looked up
with a start and, without relaxing his hold, cried out in Italian:

"Say a word for me, your Excellency! The Count of Monte-Cristo should
have as much power over the myrmidons of the French law as over Luigi
Vampa and his band!"

This exclamation amazed and startled the Count, so strange and unlooked
for was it. He gazed penetratingly at the malefactor who had uttered it,
but his scrutiny was unrewarded by recognition.

"Who are you?" he asked, as soon as his amazement permitted him to
speak, also making use of the Italian language. "You are a perfect
stranger to me, yet you know my name and seem acquainted with some of my
actions in the past. Who are you?"

"I am Peppino," answered the man, without taking his eyes from the
Count. "My companion who is being dragged away yonder is Beppo."

"Peppino?--Beppo?" said the Count, musingly. "Surely I have heard those
names before, but they are common in Italy, especially in Rome, and I
have been there frequently. Be more explicit, man."

"I will," replied the Italian. "I am the Peppino who served you so well
when Luigi Vampa held the French banker, Danglars, in captivity at your
behest. As for Beppo, you cannot have forgotten him; he also was a
member of Vampa's band at that period."

"Yes," said Monte-Cristo, "I remember both of you now, but what can I
do for you? Paris is vastly different from Rome, and my influence with
the French police is not by any means equal to that I wielded over Vampa
and his brigands at the time you speak of."

"The Count of Monte-Cristo's power is unbounded anywhere in the entire
world," rejoined the man, his brightened visage showing clearly the
extent of his faith. "A word from him will release both Beppo and
myself. Speak that word, your Excellency, and set us free!"

Ali had refrained from interfering when he heard this singular
conversation, which he fully understood. He was waiting for further
orders from his master.

The policeman grew impatient and, giving the Italian a rough shake, said
to him:

"Come now, let go that spoke and submit. Don't you see that you are
disturbing the Count of Monte-Cristo? His Excellency will do nothing for
such a scoundrel as you. Come, let go that spoke, I say!"

Peppino, however, would not obey and continued to supplicate the Count
to interfere in behalf of Beppo and himself. At last, driven to
desperation by Monte-Cristo's inaction, he cried out to him:

"If your Excellency will do nothing for us without recompense, I will
give that recompense; I will tell you in exchange for your efforts in
our behalf all I know concerning the black conspiracy against the
Viscount Giovanni Massetti!"

The Count was visibly moved by this speech. He stared at Peppino as if
he thought that he had not heard aright.

"The Viscount Giovanni Massetti! A black conspiracy against him! What do
you mean?" he inquired, quickly.

"Just what I say, your Excellency," answered the Italian. "I know that
the Viscount visited the Palazzo Costi in Rome when you inhabited it
with your family, and that he fell in love with your daughter. I also
know the details of a plot by which a network of crushing circumstances
has been woven about him with the view of burying him beneath a weight
of shame, dishonor and even of crime! I can reveal those details and
will do so if you aid my companion and myself in our present difficulty.
Do I interest you, Signor Count?"

"Vastly," answered Monte-Cristo, his face assuming a serious look. "Go
quietly with the gardien to the poste. I will follow immediately and see
what can be done."

"Yes, your Excellency," said Peppino, submissively, and abandoning his
grasp of the spoke he allowed the policeman to bear him away without
further trouble. Meanwhile Beppo and the officer in whose custody he was
had disappeared in the distance.

Those who had been near enough to the Count's barouche to witness this
extraordinary scene were greatly astonished that such a famous character
as the eloquent Deputy from Marseilles should stoop to converse with a
malefactor in the public street, but their astonishment was immeasurably
augmented when they saw the influence the celebrated orator exercised
over the depraved Italian. They had not been able to understand the
conversation, but the effect of Monte-Cristo's last words seemed little
less than miraculous to them and they rent the air with loud and
enthusiastic cheers.

"Long live the noble Count of Monte-Cristo! Long live the Deputy from
Marseilles, the people's friend!" was shouted on every side.

Further on the cry was taken up and repeated, ringing forth far along
the broad and beautiful Champs-Elysées!

Monte-Cristo arose in his barouche and, removing his hat, stood
bareheaded, bowing to the excited populace.

This was the signal for new and heartier cheers. But the criminals
having been removed, the crowd soon began to disperse. At length the
thoroughfare was cleared and the Count's vehicle could proceed. Ali had
impassibly resumed the driver's seat and, at a nod from his adored
master, started the spirited horses down the immense avenue. As the
blooded bays went prancing along with proudly arched necks, the Count
bent over and said to Ali:

"Drive at once to the poste of the quarter."

The Nubian skilfully wheeled the animals about and in a few minutes
Monte-Cristo had reached his destination.

At the door of the poste a gardien received him and, at the mention of
his name, obsequiously conducted him to the officer in charge. The
latter, a short, determined-looking man with a bristling gray moustache
and gray hair that stood almost on end upon his little round head,
recognized his illustrious visitor at a glance. He hastily arose from
the desk at which he was seated, engaged in examining the reports of his
subordinates, and politely offered him a chair. Then he asked,
deferentially:

"To what am I indebted for so distinguished an honor as a call from the
Count of Monte-Cristo?"

"Monsieur," replied the Count, taking the proffered seat, "two Italians
were arrested a short time ago on the Champs-Elysées and brought
hither."

"Yes," said the chief of the poste, "and great scoundrels they are, too!
We have been shadowing them for some time, but could never detect them
in any overt act until to-day. They belong to a very dangerous gang of
prowlers, led by a shrewd German named Waldmann, whose headquarters are
in a wretched caboulot of the Cité d' Antin."

"Of what are these Italians accused, that is what is the present
specific charge against them?"

"They were caught picking pockets in the crowd thronging about a
marionette show."

"Is the evidence against them conclusive?"

"It is."

"That is unfortunate," said the Count, "as one of them is in possession
of information of the utmost importance to me. He has made partial
revelations, but sets as the price of a full disclosure my interference
in behalf of himself and his comrade in crime. What can be done?"

"I do not see," replied the chief, in perplexity. "It is impossible for
me to let the men off."

"But is there not some way in which I could obtain a mitigation of their
punishment?"

"Oh! as for that, yes," said the officer, brightening. "If you would
speak to the Procureur de la République, I am sure he would grant you
the minimum sentence in such cases. Perhaps," added he, as a sudden
thought struck him, "he might even be induced not to press the
prosecution, in which event the men would be discharged."

"Thank you, monsieur," said the Count, rising. "I will act upon your
wise suggestion without delay. But can you grant me a small favor? Can
you allow me a brief interview with the man calling himself Peppino?"

"Undoubtedly," answered the chief, in a cordial voice, "and I shall be
very glad to do so if it will assist you any."

"It will enable me to assure the man that I am at work and have some
hope of success."

"Then follow me."

The chief, who had remained standing out of compliment to the Count,
took a large key from a rack behind his desk and opened a door leading
into a long, dimly-lighted corridor. Monte-Cristo followed him through
this gloomy passage until they came to a cell before which the chief
stopped. The large key grated in the lock, the door of the cell swung
open with an ominous sound and the Count found himself face to face with
the former Roman bandit.

Peppino was sitting on the edge of an iron bedstead, the very picture
of despair. He thought that Monte-Cristo had deserted him, that he would
not interfere even with the prospect of obtaining the details of the
plot against young Massetti. As the Count entered the cell his
countenance brightened instantly and hope was renewed in his bosom. The
chief discreetly withdrew, saying as he did so:

"I will wait without, in the corridor."

With these words he closed the door of the cell and Monte-Cristo found
himself alone with Peppino.

All the light that made its way into the gloomy cell came through a
small grated window high up in the wall, placed at such a distance from
the floor that no prisoner could reach it even by climbing upon his
bedstead. The walls and ceiling were of stone.

"Well," asked Peppino, "how has your Excellency succeeded?"

"I have made but little progress as yet, though I hope to be able to do
something for you and Beppo in a very short time," answered the Count,
in a reassuring voice.

"I am satisfied," said Peppino, cheerily. "If your Excellency only
determines upon it, Beppo and myself will shortly be free!"

"I cannot go that far, my good fellow, but I can and do promise you all
my aid and influence can effect."

"They will effect everything necessary, Signor Count," replied the
Italian, confidently.

"Do not hope for too much, Peppino. I have told you that Paris is
different from Rome."

"I have occasion now to know that," rejoined the outlaw, bitterly. "But
the power of the Count of Monte-Cristo is the same here as in the
campagna!"

"Keep up a stout heart, at all events, my good fellow. We shall soon
know what can be done."

"I will keep up a stout heart, Signor Count, for I have perfect faith in
you!"

"So be it. Now, my man, what do you know about the plot against the
Viscount Massetti?"

"Pardon me, Signor Count," said the Italian, shrewdly, "but I will tell
you that when Beppo and myself are at liberty!"

Monte-Cristo smiled at the man's cunning.

"At least," he said, "tell me if you have seen the Viscount recently."

"I will do that, your Excellency. I saw him a very short time ago in
Rome and afterwards with Luigi Vampa and Pasquale Solara in the marshy
country beyond the Trastavere."

"What brought you and your companion to Paris?"

"We had a disagreement with old Solara, whom Luigi Vampa insisted we
should obey implicitly. Solara was a tyrant; besides, he was as greedy
and avaricious as a miser; he wanted everything for himself and would
allow us nothing; he demanded that all the booty we acquired should be
brought directly to him without division, stating that he would parcel
out our shares; this he invariably failed to do and naturally we
rebelled. Vampa, who has become, if he was not always so, old
Pasquale's fast friend, decided against us whenever we carried our
complaints to him. Finally we could stand it no longer; we were
absolutely starving while Solara was heaping up riches, so we determined
to quit the band. We did so and came to Paris, where we have been ever
since."

"I will not ask you what you have been doing in Paris," said
Monte-Cristo, smiling faintly; "in fact, I need not ask you, for I know;
the chief of the poste has told me; but will you promise me to lead a
better life in future and to try to induce Beppo to do the same, if I
should succeed in effecting your release?"

"I cannot promise you that," replied the Italian, with averted eyes,
"but I will promise you to return to Rome and take Beppo with me."

"That will do as well, or almost as well," said the Count. "Armed with
such a promise, I think I can obtain your freedom. But you must swear to
me to leave France immediately after you have been set at liberty, and I
shall consider your oath as binding upon Beppo also."

"I swear to leave France the very moment I am free! I swear, too, that
Beppo shall accompany me!"

"It is well," said the Count. "I shall be here again this afternoon or
to-morrow at the furthest; but remember that before you leave this cell
you must give me the full details of the conspiracy against young
Massetti!"

"I shall remember it, Signor Count; have no fear of that! When I have
spoken old Solara must look out for himself!"

"What do you mean by that?" asked Monte-Cristo, sharply.

"Never mind at present, Signor Count! I will make everything clear to
you on your return."

The Deputy from Marseilles quitted the cell and the poste, after having
thanked the chief for his courtesy. He drove without delay to the office
of the Procureur de la République in the Palais de Justice, and it was
not long before he had matters satisfactorily arranged. The Procureur
cheerfully agreed not to push the charge against the Italians on
condition that Monte-Cristo pledged himself they should leave Paris
immediately after the Juge d' Instruction had discharged them. This
pledge the Count made without the slightest hesitation, and it was
decided that the Juge d' Instruction should hold his formal examination
at the poste that afternoon, when the Procureur would appear through his
Deputy and order the cessation of the proceedings for full and
sufficient reasons. The Procureur agreed to notify the Count of the
exact hour of the examination that he might be present and ready to
execute his share of the compact.

As Monte-Cristo drove back to the mansion of the Rue du Helder he could
not help feeling considerably agitated. What was he about to learn from
Peppino, and how would the Italian's disclosures affect Massetti? These
were problems that the next few hours were destined to solve.


CHAPTER XVI.

AMID THE COLOSSEUM'S RUINS.


One of the first things Maximilian Morrel did, after he and his wife
were comfortably installed at the Hôtel de France in Rome, was to make a
formal call at the Palazzo Massetti and present his letters of
introduction to the aged Count, Giovanni's father.

The old nobleman, who was at least seventy and very patriarchal in
appearance because of his flowing white locks and long snowy beard,
received the young Frenchman with great urbanity and condescension in a
sumptuously furnished salon full of rare art treasures and dazzling with
gold and satin. He met him with outstretched hand and said, warmly, at
the same time glancing at the Captain's card as if to refresh his
memory:

"I am delighted to have the honor of welcoming so distinguished a
visitor as Captain Maximilian Morrel to the Palazzo Massetti. Pray be
seated, Captain, and consider my residence as yours."

The Count spoke French fluently, without even the faintest trace of a
foreign accent, and this fact as well as his charmingly cordial manner
caused the young soldier immediately to feel at ease in his presence.

"I assure you, Count," returned Maximilian, bowing and then seating
himself, "that the pleasure is mutual."

The aged nobleman also took a chair, and for a time they conversed
agreeably on various subjects. The Count had been a brave, active
soldier in his day and was much interested in French military affairs.
The visitor, who was thoroughly posted on this topic and devotedly
attached to his profession, gave his inquisitive host every detail he
demanded and was particularly enthusiastic when he spoke of the Parisian
workmen, who, as he asserted, could leave their accustomed toil at a
moment's notice and encounter the perils of the battlefield with the
endurance of trained veterans.

At length Maximilian thought he could venture to feel the ground in
regard to his mission. It was certainly a very delicate matter, but the
Count's politeness and bonhomie encouraged him to proceed. Looking the
old nobleman straight in the face he said:

"I believe, Count, you have a son named Giovanni, who was recently in
Paris."

Instantly the aged Roman's brow clouded and he cast a scrutinizing
glance at his guest. Then he said, coldly:

"I have no son!"

Maximilian in his turn gazed searchingly at the Count, but the latter's
visage had already assumed a stony and defiant look that seemed to
oppose an insurmountable barrier to further conversation on this
subject. There was an awkward pause, during which the two men continued
to gaze at each other. M. Morrel, though much embarrassed and
disconcerted by the prompt check he had received, was the first to break
the ominous silence.

"I ask your pardon, Count," said he, "but the young man of whom I spoke
represented himself to be the Viscount Giovanni Massetti. Is it possible
that he was an impostor?"

The Count's aspect became more frigid; he replied, icily:

"I repeat that I have no son!"

Maximilian was sorely puzzled. He knew not what to think or say. The old
nobleman arose as if to terminate the interview. He showed no trace of
excitement, but M. Morrel felt certain that he was a prey to an internal
agitation that he with difficulty controlled. There could be no doubt
that Giovanni was what he had represented himself to be, for had he not
passed as the Viscount Massetti in Rome as well as in Paris? But one
solution to the mystery offered itself--the Count had disowned his son,
disowned him because of the terrible crime with which he was charged,
from which he had been apparently unable to clear himself. M. Morrel
also arose, but he was unwilling to depart thus, to be summarily
dismissed as it were. He determined to make one more effort to get at
the truth.

"Count," he said, "I do not wish you to misunderstand me, to impute to
mere idle curiosity my desire to be informed concerning this unfortunate
and unhappy young man. I know that a black cloud hangs over him, that
at present he is branded and disgraced. I was not aware, however, that
his family had cast him off."

"Monsieur," returned the Count, impatiently, "you are strangely
persistent."

"I am persistent, Count," said Maximilian, earnestly, "because the
Viscount Massetti is not alone in his misfortune. Another, an estimable
young lady, is now languishing in Paris on his account."

"I pity her!" said the old nobleman, impressively.

"So do I," rejoined Maximilian; "from the bottom of my heart I pity them
both and that is the reason I am here."

"May I ask the name of this estimable young lady?"

"Certainly. Her name is Zuleika; she is the daughter of the world-famous
Count of Monte-Cristo."

Old Massetti gave a start and the muscles of his face twitched
nervously, but he managed to control himself and said:

"Indeed! Permit me to inquire what relations the young man sustained
towards the daughter of the Count of Monte-Cristo."

"She is or rather was betrothed to him."

"My God! Another victim! Does the girl love him?"

"She does, with all her soul!"

"Did he betray her, did he lead her astray?"

"No; his conduct towards her was in all respects that of a man of the
strictest honor."

"Heaven be praised for that! Then no damage has been done! Let her
forget him!"

"I fear, I know, she cannot!"

"She is young, isn't she?"

"Very young."

"Then time will heal her wounds. She must forget him, for he is unworthy
of her love!"

"But do you feel no affection, no pity, for your son?"

"I tell you I have no son! How many times must I repeat it!"

The Count's look was harder than ever; all the pride and haughtiness of
the Massettis seemed concentrated in the expression of his venerable
countenance. Maximilian opened his lips to speak again, but the old
nobleman stopped him and said, sternly:

"We have had enough of this! Captain Morrel, let what has passed between
us on this wretched subject be forgotten. I shall be glad to receive you
at any hour as a friend, but, if you value my acquaintance, my
friendship, never mention that young man to me again! Farewell,
Monsieur!"

The Count touched a bell and a valet appeared. Maximilian bowed to his
host and, guided by the servant, quitted the palazzo. In the street he
stood for a moment like one utterly bewildered. It was plain that the
elder Massetti had fully made up his mind as to Giovanni's guilt, and if
the father deserted his son what hope was there that the cold, heartless
world would not follow his example? Maximilian was in despair. At the
very first step in his mission he had been unceremoniously and firmly
halted. What was he to do? Should he acknowledge himself finally
defeated because his initial attempt had failed so disastrously? No;
that would be miserable cowardice! He would persist, he would make
further investigations. He had undertaken this work for Zuleika, to
restore happiness to her heart and light to her eyes, and he would not
abandon the task, no matter how arduous it might be, until he had
cleared Giovanni or obtained tangible, incontrovertible proof of his
guilt!

Fortified by this resolution M. Morrel returned to the Hôtel de France.
Valentine met him with a look of anxious inquiry. He endeavoured to seem
cheerful, to make the best of the situation, but the effort was a
pitiful failure. He sank into a chair and said to his wife in a dejected
tone:

"I have seen the Count Massetti. He believes his son guilty and has
disowned him!"

Valentine seated herself beside her husband and tenderly took his hand.

"Maximilian," she said, "it is a bad beginning, I confess, but you know
the proverb and, I trust, the good ending will yet come!"

"It will not be our fault if it does not," replied her husband,
heroically. "At all events, we will do our best."

"And we shall succeed! I feel confident of that!"

"Thank you for those words, Valentine! You are a perfect enchantress and
have brought my dead hope to life!"

That evening the Morrels' decided to visit the Colosseum. They desired
to see the gigantic remains of that vast fabric of the Cassars by
moonlight, to inspect amid the silvery rays the crumbling courts and
galleries that ages agone had echoed with the proud tread of the élite
of barbaric old Rome! Conducted by a guide belonging to the Hôtel de
France, they set out and were soon standing among the ruins of the great
amphitheatre. There they were seized upon by a special cicerone, who
seemed to consider the huge wreck of Flavius Vespasian's monument as his
particular property and who could not be shaken off. He joined forces
with the hôtel guide and the twain, jabbering away industriously in an
almost unintelligible jargon, led the helpless visitors from one point
of interest to another, showing them in turn broken columns, the seats
of the Vestals, dilapidated stone staircases, the "Fosse des Lions" and
the "Podium des Césars." Maximilian and Valentine were filled with
unspeakable awe and admiration as they contemplated the remnants of
ancient grandeur, and mentally peopled the wondrous Colosseum with
contending gladiators, stately Patricians and the applauding herd of
sanguinary Plebeians, Mme. Morrel shuddering as she thought of the
thousands of high-bred dames and beautiful maidens who in the old days
had pitilessly turned down their thumbs as a signal for the taking of
human life! Although the moon was brilliant and flooded the antique
amphitheatre with argentine light, the guides carried torches, which
served to spread a flickering and wan illumination through the dark
recesses of the cavernous vomitariums, now the refuge of bats, owls,
goats and serpents.

As they were passing through a long and unusually sombre gallery, the
guides suddenly paused with a simultaneous cry and began making the sign
of the cross. Maximilian and Valentine halted in affright, the former
hurriedly drawing a small pistol to defend his wife and himself against
the unknown and mysterious danger. They glanced about them but could see
nothing, the torches revealing only huge stones and dust-covered vaults.
M. Morrel demanded of the guides what was the cause of their terror, but
for some moments could glean no intelligence from their vague,
unintelligible replies. At last one of the cicerones managed to explain
that they had seen the maniac! This was comforting information to the
visitors! A maniac at large and ranging at night about amid the
Colosseum's ruins! Valentine, trembling with fear, clung to her husband
for protection.

"Is it a man or a woman?" asked Maximilian of one of the guides.

"A man, signor."

"Is he violent, dangerous?"

"No, signor, neither; but his appearance gives one a terrible shock, he
is so wild-looking, and, besides, he mutters fearful curses! Holy
Virgin, protect us!"

Maximilian felt his curiosity aroused; a strange desire took possession
of him to see and speak with this singular madman, who frequented the
gladiators' courts and muttered fearful curses to the broken columns of
the Colosseum.

"Where is the maniac now?" he demanded of the guides. "Do you see him?"

"Heaven forbid!" replied one of the men, glancing about him uneasily.

"But where is he? Can you take us to him?" persisted Maximilian.

The cicerones looked at each other in amazement; the young soldier's
questions startled them. Valentine was not less amazed and startled than
the guides; she stared at her husband, speechless at the strange
interest he displayed in this miserable outcast.

"Can you take us to him?" repeated Maximilian.

"Signor," said the guide belonging to the hôtel, "you are jesting!"

"I am not jesting, I am in earnest," said M. Morrel. "Answer my
question."

"Of course, we can take you to him, signor," answered the guide; "but
you had best avoid him; the sight of the wretched Massetti will drive
your lady out of her wits!"

At the name Massetti both Maximilian and Valentine started; they glanced
at each other and at the man who had spoken, thinking that they had not
heard aright.

"Massetti!" cried M. Morrel, when his astonishment permitted him to find
words. "Did you say Massetti?"

"Yes, signor, I said Massetti. The maniac is old Count Massetti's
disowned and disinherited son!"

"What! The Viscount Giovanni?"

"The same, signor!"

"Oh! this is dreadful, dreadful, Maximilian!" whispered Valentine,
clinging still closer to her husband.

"It is, indeed, dreadful; doubly so because entirely unexpected," said
M. Morrel. "But I must see young Massetti--it was, no doubt, some
mysterious influence, some indescribable magnetic power, operating
between us, that made me wish to see this man, this maniac, as soon as
he was mentioned!--I must see him and at once!"

As the guides possessed but a very slight knowledge of the French
language, in which the dialogue between the husband and wife had been
carried on, they failed to grasp the full import of the brief
conversation; they, however, understood that their patrons were in some
inexplicable way interested in the maniac of the Colosseum and appalled
by the sudden discovery of his identity. The situation puzzled and
dissatisfied them.

After thinking for an instant, Maximilian said to his wife:

"I will instruct the guide from the hôtel to conduct you back to our
apartments. It is best that I should meet poor Massetti alone; seeing
the wretched man in his present terrible condition would certainly shock
and unnerve you."

Valentine gazed pleadingly into her husband's face. All her fear had
left her. She was calm now and resolved. She had proposed the trip to
Rome, the project of aiding the Viscount, and she did not wish to recoil
from taking a single step that might be beneficial to Giovanni and
Zuleika. She said, bravely:

"Do not send me from you, Maximilian! I will be stout-hearted and
courageous! I am not afraid of this poor young man now, maniac though he
be! Perhaps I may be able to help you in dealing with him, for a woman's
wit and tenderness, they say, can sometimes subdue and pacify those
whose minds are disordered when all a man's efforts have failed."

Maximilian looked at her lovingly and admiringly.

"So be it, Valentine," he replied, much affected. "You shall remain with
me and we will face the trial together!"

His wife's eyes expressed her satisfaction at this display of
confidence; she simply grasped her husband's hand, but though she
uttered not a word the warm pressure she gave it spoke volumes.

M. Morrel turned to the cicerones, who were waiting in silent
bewilderment.

"Take us to this maniac without an instant's delay!" he said.

The guides exchanged glances, shook their heads as if in protest and
again began making the sign of the cross. Maximilian was compelled to
repeat his command somewhat sternly and imperatively before they made a
movement to obey it; then very reluctantly they motioned their patrons
to follow them and took the lead, muttering prayers to the Blessed
Virgin.

The little party quitted the sombre gallery and made their way into the
open air. After they had gone about twenty yards the guides came to an
abrupt halt and one of them pointed to the centre of the vast
gladiatorial arena.

"Look, signor!" he said to M. Morrel. "There stands the maniac of the
Colosseum!"

Maximilian and Valentine peered quickly and anxiously in the direction
indicated but saw nothing.

"There, signor!" repeated the cicerone, still pointing.

Then, all of a sudden, Maximilian and Valentine beheld the figure of a
man standing as motionless as a statue beside a vast fragment of stone.
The moonlight fell full upon a manly, noble form, revealing a handsome
countenance that might have belonged to one of the old Roman gods. The
man's dress was in picturesque disorder and on his bare head was a crown
of ivy leaves. In one hand he held a tall staff, while the other was
lifted menacingly.

"Hark!" said one of the guides, with a shudder. "He is cursing!"

M. and Mme. Morrel listened, horror-stricken, filled with a nameless
dread. A faint, but distinct murmur reached them, gradually swelling in
volume. It was a fierce, bitter malediction, full of intense, burning
hatred, seeming to embrace God, man and the entire universe in its
scope.

The guides fell upon their knees, uncovered their heads and prayed to
the Virgin in low tones.

Maximilian took Valentine by the hand.

"Come," said he, "let us go to him!"

Mme. Morrel trembled slightly, but answered, firmly:

"I am ready!"

Then, hand in hand, slowly, cautiously, not knowing what might happen,
they advanced towards the maniac of the Colosseum.


CHAPTER XVII.

PEPPINO'S STORY.


At the appointed hour, of which he had been duly notified by the
Procureur de la République, the Count of Monte-Cristo entered the room
set apart for the use of the Juge d' Instruction at the police poste
where Peppino and Beppo were confined. The magistrate was already on the
judicial bench and by his side stood the Deputy Procureur, who was
explaining to him the wishes of his superior. As Monte-Cristo came in he
bowed to the Juge and the Deputy, who returned his salute with all the
respect due to so exalted a personage.

"Messieurs," said the Count, after this exchange of civilities, "you
are, of course, aware of the reason of my presence here this afternoon,
so we can proceed to business at once, but before the Italians are
brought in I have a slight favor to ask."

"Name it, M. the Count," said the Juge d' Instruction, blandly. "We
shall be happy to grant it if it lies within our power to do so."

"Well, messieurs," said the Count of Monte-Cristo, stepping upon the
platform and leaning on the Juge's desk, "it is simply this. The
prisoner calling himself Peppino is in possession of certain details to
which I attach considerable importance. He has promised to reveal them
to me as the price of his liberty and that of his companion. It is
needless to say that the sole motive of my interference in this matter
is to obtain these details. Now, from long experience I know all the
trickery and treachery of the Italian nature. Once free, this man might
snap his fingers in my face and refuse to speak. After the formalities
of the law have been duly complied with, I wish the prisoners remanded
to their cells and informed that their liberation will take place only
when Peppino has given me the promised intelligence."

"That will be but a trifling stretch of my authority," replied the Juge
d' Instruction, smiling, "if it is any stretch whatever, for, as I
understand the case, the prisoners are to remain virtually in your
custody until their departure from France, for which you have pledged
your word to the Procureur de la République. Hence the favor you ask
shall be cheerfully granted."

As he concluded the Juge d' Instruction glanced at the Deputy Procureur,
who nodded assent.

The magistrate touched a bell that stood on his desk and said to the
gardien de la paix who answered the summons:

"Bring in the prisoners."

Monte-Cristo and the Deputy retired from the platform, seating
themselves in a couple of fauteuils placed at a table immediately in
front of the Juge's desk.

As the two Italians were brought in Peppino glanced first at the
magistrate on the bench and then at the Deputy. Finally his eyes rested
on the Count, when his countenance instantly lighted up; he
instinctively felt that Monte-Cristo's mysterious influence had been
fully as potent with the authorities of Paris as with Luigi Vampa and
his band, that the wonderful man had succeeded in effecting the
liberation of himself and Beppo.

"Place the prisoners at the bar," said the Juge d' Instruction,
addressing the gardien.

This order was instantly complied with and the two Italians stood facing
the magistrate.

"Remove your hats."

The prisoners obeyed, Peppino with a confident smile, Beppo with a
sullen scowl.

"Prisoners at the bar," said the Juge d' Instruction severely, "you are
charged with the offense of picking pockets upon the public street. What
have you to say?"

This formal and rather menacing beginning was both a surprise and a
disappointment to Peppino. He glanced inquiringly at Monte-Cristo, but
could read nothing in his pale, handsome face; then with a dark frown he
made answer to the Juge, in a harsh, defiant tone:

"I am not guilty!"

The magistrate glanced at Beppo who in his turn repeated his comrade's
words.

Here the Deputy Procureur arose and said to the Juge d' Instruction, in
a full, clear voice:

"May it please you, honored Juge, as the representative of the Procureur
de la République I desire to state that it is not my intention to push
the charge against the prisoners at the bar. For this course I have a
good and sufficient reason. I, therefore, in my official capacity demand
that the persons calling themselves Peppino and Beppo be discharged."

This demand was another surprise to Peppino, but he instantly divined
that Monte-Cristo counted for a great deal in it and gazed at him with a
look of gratitude. Beppo was absolutely astounded, for he could not
understand the sudden, favorable turn in the situation.

The Juge d' Instruction, in pursuance of the form prescribed by law,
said to the Deputy:

"May I ask the worthy representative of the Procureur de la République
what are his good and sufficient reasons?"

"Certainly, honored Juge," replied the functionary. "His Excellency the
Count of Monte-Cristo, here present, has entered into a compact with the
Procureur, pledging himself in the event of the prisoners' discharge to
induce them to quit France immediately."

At this Monte-Cristo arose and facing the judicial bench said, in that
impressive manner which always marked his public speeches:

"Honored Juge, what the Deputy Procureur has just said is perfectly true
in every respect. In the event of the prisoners' discharge I stand
pledged to his superior in office to see that they return to Italy
without delay."

The Deputy and the Count resumed their seats. The Juge d' Instruction
appeared to think for a moment; then he said:

"My duty in the premises is plain. No evidence is presented against the
prisoners and the official statement and demand of the Procureur de la
République, expressed through his worthy and esteemed representative,
preclude the necessity of a formal interrogation of the accused. I
shall, therefore, discharge them, subject, however, to the control of
his Excellency, the Count of Monte-Cristo. Prisoners at the bar," he
added, addressing Peppino and Beppo, "I remand you to your cells, your
liberation to take place at such time as his Excellency, the Count of
Monte-Cristo may determine."

He resumed his seat upon the judicial bench, motioning to the gardien to
remove the prisoners.

Ten minutes later Monte-Cristo was in Peppino's cell. The Italian was
radiant with delight and very effusive in the expression of his thanks
to his powerful and mysterious benefactor.

The Count waved his hand impatiently.

"A truce to thanks," he said. "Time presses, and the sooner you give me
the details of the conspiracy against the Viscount Massetti the sooner
you and your companion will be free."

Peppino threw himself half down upon his bed and Monte-Cristo seated
himself on a rickety stool, his usually impassible countenance plainly
showing the absorbing interest he felt in what was to follow.

The Italian cleared his throat and began.

"Signor Count," said he, "in the first place I must tell you that young
Massetti has been disowned and disinherited by his proud, stern father,
who believes him one of the guiltiest and most depraved scoundrels on
earth!"

Monte-Cristo gave a start; his face grew a shade paler than was habitual
with him, but he said nothing; he was eagerly awaiting further
developments.

"That is not all, however," continued Peppino, after a slight pause to
note the effect of his communication upon his auditor, "nor is it the
worst! The unfortunate Viscount, upon being ignominiously expelled from
the Palazzo Massetti by the old Count's orders, immediately lost his
senses; he is now a raving maniac!"

"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!" exclaimed Monte-Cristo, springing to his feet and
pacing the cell, a prey to intense agitation he did not endeavour to
control. "A raving maniac!--Giovanni a raving maniac! Oh! my daughter,
my daughter!"

"All I say is the truth," resumed the Italian. "As I hope for Heaven I
swear it!"

"But what has become of Massetti? Where is he?" demanded the Count,
abruptly pausing in his walk. "Has he been consigned to some asylum?"

"He is an outcast and a wanderer," replied Peppino. "All Rome frowns
upon him, avoids him as a pestilence is avoided. When I left Italy he
had sought refuge amid the ruins of the Colosseum, where he was the
terror alike of visitors and the superstitious guides. I saw him there
with my own eyes the day before my departure. He was in rags, carried a
tall staff, wore a crown of ivy leaves and spent his time cursing God
and man. They say he never leaves the ruins, save to beg a few scraps
upon which to subsist, and that he sleeps at night in the depths of a
dark vomitarium in company with bats, spiders and other unclean things."

"This is incredible!" cried Monte-Cristo, gazing piercingly at his
companion and half suspecting that he was drawing upon his vivid Italian
imagination for some of his graphic details.

"But it is true, Signor Count," protested Peppino, earnestly; "every
word of it is true!"

"Go on," said Monte-Cristo, hoarsely, again seating himself on the
stool. "Tell me about the conspiracy."

"I am coming to it, Signor Count," said the former bandit, assuming a
sitting posture upon the edge of the bed. "You know, of course, that the
cause of all the Viscount Massetti's trouble was a certain handsome
young peasant girl named Annunziata Solara?"

"I have heard it was some woman, but that does not matter; proceed."

"This girl sold flowers in the Piazza del Popolo and on the Corso; there
she attracted the attention of Massetti and your son Espérance."

"Espérance!" exclaimed Monte-Cristo, his hands working nervously. "Oh!
mon Dieu! the light is commencing to break!"

Peppino smiled reassuringly.

"Have no fear, Signor Count," said he; "in all the unhappy occurrences
that brought the poor Viscount under suspicion your son bore a part as
noble as it was honorable; you have abundant reason to be proud of him!"

Monte-Cristo uttered a sigh of relief.

"Can you prove this?"

"I can. Luigi Vampa and his whole band know your son to be entirely
innocent so far as the flower-girl is concerned and will so express
themselves. Even old Solara himself, hardened and despicable wretch as
he is, will not seek to inculpate him. Rest assured that the proof of
your son's innocence is ample."

"Luigi Vampa has already written to me that no guilt attaches to
Espérance, but I must have more reliable vouchers than the letter or
even the oath of a notorious brigand."

"Such vouchers can be procured without much difficulty. The unfortunate
girl herself, who is now in the Refuge at Civita Vecchia, will exculpate
him."

"But the details of the plot, the details of the plot!"

"Well, the Viscount learned from Annunziata that she dwelt in the
country beyond the Trastavere and that evening set out to find her. Your
son, who knew his object, followed him to protect him against the
bandits. Massetti was halted by one of Vampa's men, who wounded him in
the struggle that ensued, your son appearing in time to kill the brigand
and rescue his friend. Shortly afterwards they encountered a large
number of Vampa's band and narrowly escaped being hung to the nearest
trees in revenge for the death of the man slain by your son. They were
set free by Vampa himself as soon as he learned that Espérance was your
son, Massetti having disclosed both his own identity and that of his
comrade. The young men, it seems, had determined to return to Rome
immediately after the Viscount received his wound, but Massetti grew
faint from pain and loss of blood and it was resolved to seek for
shelter. A peasant appeared at this juncture and, after some hesitation,
agreed to conduct them to his father's cabin where they could pass the
night. He was as good as his word. To be brief, the young men, who were
disguised as peasants, soon found themselves in Pasquale Solara's hut
and in the presence of the fair Annunziata herself."

Peppino paused for an instant and then continued:

"These preliminary details, Signor Count, are necessary to enable you to
understand the conspiracy which was speedily to be hatched. The peasant,
who had conducted Massetti and your son to the very spot the former had
left Rome to seek, was Annunziata's brother. Old Pasquale Solara was
absent from home at the time of the arrival of the strangers, but
returned shortly afterwards. I have no doubt that he had long been in
league with Luigi Vampa and had been secretly acting as his agent and
confederate. At any rate, when he arrived he was well aware that the
young men were at his cabin and was also thoroughly informed as to their
identity, though, with his habitual cunning, he concealed both facts,
feigning surprise and dissatisfaction when it was announced to him by
his children that he had guests. Secretly he was delighted, for the
presence of young Massetti gave him an opportunity at once to take a
signal revenge on the old Count, whom he had long bitterly hated, and to
divert the crashing stigma of a fiendish act he meditated from himself
to the name and fame of another."

"Do you mean to assert that this wretched old man had base designs
against his own daughter?" said the Count, his visage expressing all the
horror he felt.

"Exactly," answered Peppino, coolly. "Old Solara, miserable miser as he
is, had for a very large sum of the gold he so ardently coveted sold his
own child, his beautiful daughter Annunziata, to the bandit chief Luigi
Vampa!"

"The black-hearted demon!" exclaimed Monte-Cristo. "He is unworthy of
the name of man! In Paris the indignant populace would crush him to
death beneath their feet!"

"So, you see," resumed the Italian, "the arrival of Massetti was
opportune, and Pasquale Solara, after having seen that the Viscount was
safely housed beneath the roof of his cabin, hastened back to Luigi
Vampa and together they laid the foul plot that succeeded but too well.
A more shrewdly devised and thoroughly concealed piece of diabolical
villainy has never stained the annals of the civilized world!"


CHAPTER XVIII.

MORE OF PEPPINO'S STORY.


Monte-Cristo was horrified by what he had heard. His whole soul revolted
at the idea of a father who could deliberately and in cold blood sell
his daughter, at the idea of a wretch who with equal deliberation could
cast the blame of a villainy committed by himself upon an innocent man.
It had seemed very strange to the Count, at the time Luigi Vampa had
written to him, that the brigand chief should be so thoroughly posted in
regard to the innocence of Espérance and the guilt of the Viscount
Massetti, but in the light of the astounding revelations just made by
Peppino it became abundantly clear that Vampa in the young Italian's
case had been actuated by the strongest possible motive, namely, the
desire to shield himself, and that in order to do so effectually he had
not shrunk from the vilest and most complete falsehood. Of course, Vampa
had not wished to inculpate Espérance because of the old-time compact,
the relations that had subsisted between him and Monte-Cristo in the
past; that was equally plain; besides one victim was sufficient, and in
selecting Massetti as that victim the brigand chief had evidently acted
at the instigation of old Pasquale Solara.

Peppino proceeded with his disclosures.

"Signor Count," said he, "I had long suspected that something was on
the carpet between Vampa and old Solara. The moody and morose shepherd
did not at first come to the bandits' haunt, but in response to a signal
he used, a peculiar vibrating whistle, the chief would go out alone and
meet him. This signal and Vampa's actions aroused my curiosity; more
than once I followed the chief and, securely hidden behind a tree or a
rock, witnessed the secret meetings, overhearing portions of the
conversation. Annunziata Solara was frequently mentioned, and the father
seemed to be endeavouring to drive a hard bargain with Vampa. At last
one night they came to an understanding. I heard the chief agree to pay
old Pasquale an enormous sum of money upon the delivery of Annunziata
into his hands, and then I realized that the nefarious sale had been
concluded. It was decided that the ill-fated girl should be passed over
to Vampa at the first opportunity, and that opportunity came when the
Viscount Massetti and your son Espérance were domiciled at the isolated
cabin in the forest.

"I was on the alert and when, after assuring himself of the arrival of
the two young men at his hut, old Pasquale sought the bandits'
rendezvous and sounded his vibrating signal, I heard it. Stealthily
following Vampa, I concealed myself as I had done on previous occasions.
I was now thoroughly familiar with the details of the base transaction
in progress between the precious pair and could readily comprehend even
their most obscure and guarded allusions. Old Solara informed the chief
that the young men had arrived, proposing that Vampa should abduct
Annunziata at the earliest possible moment, so arranging matters that
suspicion would fall upon the Viscount Massetti. This the chief agreed
to do. The shepherd was to keep him posted, and the abduction was to
take place when circumstances were best calculated to promote the
success of all the phases of the villainous plot. With this
understanding the conspirators separated.

"Fate sided with old Pasquale and Vampa. His wound kept the Viscount at
the cabin and the fair Annunziata nursed him. He had become smitten with
her beauty the day he met her in the Piazza del Popolo. Intimate
association with her intensified her influence over him, and when he had
been in the cabin nearly a week and convalescence had begun he made
violent love to her, even going so far as to ask her to fly with him.
Espérance divined his friend's intentions and, knowing that Massetti
could not marry the girl, interposed to save her. The result was a
quarrel and your son challenged the Viscount to fight him. The challenge
was instantly accepted and it was arranged that the duel should occur on
the following morning.

"Faithful to his promise to Vampa, old Solara, while pretending to be
absent from home, lurked in the vicinity and kept track of all that was
going on. He was hidden beneath the open window when Massetti or Tonio,
as he called himself, for both the Viscount and Espérance were passing
under assumed names, proposed flight to his daughter. Instantly he
hastened to the brigand chief, who had been prowling in the
neighborhood of the hut all day, and gleefully communicated to him what
he had heard. It was immediately decided that the time for the abduction
had come and preparations were made to carry off Annunziata that very
night. Vampa wrote a criminating letter to the girl purporting to come
from Massetti, and old Solara, stealing unobserved into the hut, placed
it beneath his daughter's work-box on her table where she afterwards
found it. It was not for a moment supposed that the girl would consent
to fly with the Viscount, for though gay and light-hearted she was pure
and innocent; the note was simply intended to fill Annunziata's mind,
after the abduction, with the idea that Massetti was her abductor."

"What shrewd, far-seeing villainy!" muttered Monte-Cristo, between his
teeth.

"That night there was no moon," continued Peppino, "and, after all the
inmates of the cabin had retired to rest, old Pasquale waited outside
with a torch while Vampa made his way to Annunziata's chamber, tore her
from her couch and carried her to the forest, preventing her from giving
the alarm by placing his hand over her mouth. He was masked and the
shepherd kept at such a distance that it was utterly impossible for his
daughter to recognize him. As Vampa ran through the forest with his
burden, he struck his arm against a tree and the pain caused him to take
his hand for a second from Annunziata's mouth. The poor girl profited by
this opportunity to scream and her cry brought first her brother, then
the Viscount and then Espérance to her aid.

"The brother on reaching Vampa attacked him fiercely. Dropping the
girl, who stood rooted to the spot, the chief drew a pistol and fired at
his assailant. The latter was hit and staggered back, the blood gushing
from his wound. Somehow during the struggle Vampa became unmasked and,
in the prevailing obscurity, Annunziata naturally imagined that the face
suddenly uncovered and as quickly masked again was that of her suitor,
the so-called Tonio. Having disposed of the brother, who afterwards ran
back towards the cabin, met Espérance, rushed into his arms and then
fell to the ground where he died, the brigand chief seized Annunziata,
who meanwhile had swooned, and resumed his flight through the forest.
Hearing the sound of further pursuit, Vampa paused in dismay and
listened. Three persons seemed to be rapidly approaching. The chief
thereupon concealed the unconscious girl behind a huge fragment of rock
and threw himself flat upon the ground, hoping thus to escape
observation. As he did so he saw the glare of old Solara's torch. It
flashed full in the face of a peasant, a perfect stranger, who had heard
Annunziata's cry and come to the rescue. The shepherd had a knife in one
hand; he instantly cast away his torch and closed in desperate conflict
with the new comer. At that moment the Viscount came upon the scene,
moving as if to take the part of the stranger. Vampa leaped up, grasped
him by the throat and, under the threat of instant death if he refused,
forced him to take an oath of silence in regard to the events of the
night. Massetti was so bewildered that he scarcely knew what he was
doing. No sooner had he taken the oath than Vampa treacherously dealt
him a crushing blow that sent him reeling to the ground, where he lay
motionless and unconscious. Then the chief again threw himself upon the
soil, springing up once more to face Espérance. The latter aimed a
pistol at him, but he whirled it from his hand. Then the young man
struck fiercely at him, but Vampa dodged the blow and his adversary fell
forward from his own impetus on a thick growth of moss beside Massetti's
prostrate form. Taking prompt advantage of his opportunity, the chief
secured possession of the yet unconscious Annunziata and this time
succeeded in bearing her in triumph to a hut he had provided for her
reception."

Peppino then proceeded to relate what the reader has already learned
from Annunziata's pitiful recital to Mme. de Rancogne in the Refuge at
Civita Vecchia. When he had concluded, he glanced at his auditor and
said:

"Are you satisfied, Signor Count?"

"I am," answered Monte-Cristo, in a hoarse voice that sounded strangely
unlike his own. "You have fully earned the freedom of yourself and your
comrade Beppo. The tale of black iniquity you have so vividly told me
might seem improbable in other ears but to me it bears the impress of
truth. One point, however, is obscure. I cannot imagine in what manner
you learned the particulars of certain events in your narrative, events
which you could not have witnessed with your own eyes. Enlighten me on
this point."

"Willingly," answered Peppino, without the slightest hesitation. "I
learned the details you speak of partly from Vampa himself and partly
from old Solara. The twain compared notes after the latter had openly
joined the bandits, and I took good care to overhear their
conversation."

Monte-Cristo had arisen and now paced the cell for several moments
plunged in deep thought. His brow was cloudy and dark, but his eyes
sparkled fiercely and his hands were clenched so tightly that his nails
left red marks in his flesh. The Italian still sitting on the edge of
his bed watched him narrowly, not knowing what to make of his
preoccupation and agitated by a vague fear lest he might refuse to
fulfil his promise. At length Monte-Cristo appeared to have solved the
knotty problem that had perplexed him and to have arrived at a decision.
He came in front of the Italian, halted and, gazing steadfastly at him,
said:

"My good fellow, I have, as you know, obtained freedom for yourself and
Beppo by pledging my word to the Procureur de la République that both of
you shall at once quit the country. On your side you have done as you
agreed and I am now about to execute my part of the bargain."

Peppino's countenance assumed an expression of the utmost delight. All
his apprehensions instantly vanished.

"Now," continued Monte-Cristo, impressively, "I have a proposition to
make to you. You can be exceedingly useful to me if you will and at the
same time acquire a large sum of money honestly and honorably."

The Italian's eyes glittered with pleasure.

"Name your proposition, Signor Count," he said, enthusiastically. "I
accept it in advance. But is Beppo included in it?"

"He is," answered the Count. "The revelations you have made to me have
decided me to go to Rome at once. I shall take my daughter with me, as
well as my Nubian servant Ali. I desire you and Beppo to enter my
service and accompany me. Humanity demands that I use all my influence
to right the unfortunate Viscount Massetti, and I wish you to aid me in
the work."

"I will do as you desire, Signor Count," said the Italian, "and I will
promise that Beppo shall also comply with your wishes."

"Very well," rejoined Monte-Cristo. "It is understood and agreed upon.
One condition, however, I must exact. You and Beppo must hold no
communication with Luigi Vampa or any of his band, at least not until I
so direct."

"The condition shall be scrupulously observed, Signor Count. While in
your service your commands shall be our only law."

"It is sufficient. Now I am going to set you and Beppo at liberty. You
will at once accompany me to my residence and there the preparations for
our departure will immediately be made. We shall start for Rome
to-morrow."

"As your Excellency pleases," said the Italian.

Monte-Cristo summoned the gardien on duty at the poste, directing him
to produce Beppo, and soon the Count and the Italians were seated in the
former's barouche and being rapidly driven by Ali towards the mansion on
the Rue du Helder.

No sooner had they arrived at their destination than the Count, giving
the new additions to his retinue into the charge of the faithful Nubian,
repaired to his study, summoning Zuleika to him. The girl hastened to
obey the summons, and the sight of her father's pale, stern countenance
instantly told her that something very unusual and important had taken
place.

"My child," said the Count, taking her tenderly in his arms and gazing
fondly into her upturned, anxious face, "I have to-day received some
very startling intelligence."

Zuleika's heart beat wildly at this announcement; she felt convinced
that the very startling intelligence concerned her unfortunate,
long-silent lover.

"Father," said she, in a tremulous voice, "have you received word from
the Viscount Massetti?"

"No, my child," answered Monte-Cristo; "but tidings of the gravest
nature relating to him have been imparted to me."

"Tidings of the gravest nature, father! Is it possible that he is dead?"

As she uttered the last words, the poor girl burst into a flood of
tears.

"No, my child," replied the Count. "Young Massetti is not dead."

"Has he succeeded in clearing himself of that terrible charge?" the
girl asked, trembling with anxiety.

"Alas! no! But he is innocent, Zuleika, as innocent of the dreadful
crime imputed to him as the babe unborn! Of that you can rest assured,
for the proof of his innocence is in my hands!"

Zuleika gave a wild cry of joy and flung her arms about her father's
neck.

"Calm yourself, my child," resumed Monte-Cristo; "all will yet be well.
I start for Rome to-morrow with Ali and two of Giovanni's friends. Be
ready to accompany me!"

Zuleika's ecstasy was almost beyond bounds; but alas! she did not know
that Giovanni's mind had been overthrown by the shame and disgrace that
had been heaped upon him!


CHAPTER XIX.

THE MANIAC OF THE COLOSSEUM.


After quitting their guides at the Colosseum Maximilian and Valentine
advanced towards the centre of the gladiatorial arena where the demented
Giovanni Massetti was standing. He did not notice them, did not seem to
pay even the slightest attention to his surroundings, but kept his eyes
upturned towards heaven, the murmur of bitter malediction constantly
issuing from his lips. As M. and Mme. Morrel approached his words became
clearer and clearer and they had no difficulty whatever in fully
understanding their terrible import. No wonder the guides were
frightened by such a flow of bitter scathing curses!

The afflicted Viscount maintained his motionless, statue-like attitude,
resembling more the weird creation of some sculptor's vivid fancy than a
living, breathing mortal. Valentine was filled with indescribable sorrow
as she gazed at him and realized that this wreck of noble, glorious
manhood was the beloved of Zuleika's heart, the being with whose unhappy
destiny that of Monte-Cristo's daughter was inextricably entwined. Oh!
that by some miracle, such as the fabled divinities of old Olympus were
said to have performed, he might be restored to reason and the
possession of an unblemished name! But the days of miracles were over,
and if the young Italian was to be brought back to sanity and cleared
from the fearful charge against him that had wrought all this harm, this
misery, it must be by earthly and ordinary means. Perhaps she and her
husband were destined to work these apparently impossible changes! Who
knew? Many things equally improbable had happened, and why should not
this wondrous transformation, a transformation worthy of the wand of
some potent Prospero, be effected? Valentine was a devoted friend and an
enthusiast, and Monte-Cristo's maxim, "Wait and Hope," was her guiding
star. "Wait and Hope!" Oh! how cheering, how reassuring was that simple,
trustful motto!

Maximilian, on his side, felt unutterable pity for both the wretched man
before him and the lovely Zuleika, the sweet and tender child of his
benefactor, languishing and despairing far away in her father's
luxurious, palatial home. The poor girl was surrounded by all the
blessings that unbounded wealth could confer; she had the Count's love,
Mercédès' love, Espérance's love and the sincere affection of all who
knew her; but alas! princely riches, parental, brotherly love and the
affection of friends were as nothing compared to the passion that was
gnawing at her vitals, a desperate, hopeless passion that was but a
heavy weight of woe! But was this passion altogether desperate and
hopeless? Time alone could show!

M. and Mme. Morrel were now within a few feet of the hapless, crazed
young man, but his attention was so engrossed by the mad thoughts
surging through his bewildered brain that he yet failed to detect their
presence.

Bidding Valentine remain where she was, her husband drew close beside
Giovanni and suddenly placed his hand on his shoulder. The Viscount
started at this unexpected interruption of his sombre reverie and
hastily glanced at the intruder. His eyes, however, had a stony,
uncomprehending stare, expressing neither surprise nor fear.

"Giovanni Massetti," said Maximilian, "listen to me! I am a friend!"

The young man replied, in a low, discordant voice:

"Who is it mentions Giovanni Massetti? There was once a man who bore
that name, but he is dead, dead to the world!"

"I have told you I am a friend," resumed M. Morrel. "I have come to save
you!"

"A friend!--a friend!" cried the maniac, with a burst of bitter, mocking
laughter that pierced Maximilian through and through like a
sharp-pointed, keen-edged stiletto and made Valentine shudder as if she
had come in contact with polar ice. "A friend!--a friend! Come to save
me--me! ha! ha! ha! A labor of Hercules with no Hercules to accomplish
it! You are mad, my poor fellow! Besides, I am not Giovanni Massetti--I
am a King, an Emperor! Behold my sceptre and my crown!"

He pointed to his tall staff and the wreath of ivy leaves encircling his
head, pointed triumphantly and with all the dignity of a throned
monarch.

It was a pitiful sight, in the highest degree pitiful, this spectacle
of intellect overthrown, of the glorious mental light of youthful
manhood which had became clouded and obscured.

Maximilian was deeply affected, but, knowing full well that all his
firmness, resolution and resources would be requisite in dealing with
the wretched man he had come so far to aid, he controlled his emotion
and said, in a comparatively steady voice:

"Giovanni Massetti, in the name of the woman you love, in the name of
Zuleika, Monte-Cristo's daughter, I conjure you to be calm and hear me.
I am her ambassador, I come to you from her!"

The young man put his hand to his forehead and seemed to be striving to
collect his scattered senses.

"Zuleika?--Zuleika?" he murmured. "Monte-Cristo's daughter? Yes, yes, I
have heard of her before--a long time back in the dreary past! I read of
her in some book of history or the verses of some oriental poet. She was
a Queen!--yes, she was a Queen! Well, what of this Zuleika?"

He stood as if waiting for some Arabian romance to be unfolded to him,
with parted lips and a vacant smile sorrowful to see.

Since his interview with the old Count Massetti Maximilian's hope for
the success of his difficult mission had been but a very slender thread.
Now that thread was stretched to its utmost tension, and Zuleika's
ambassador felt that it must shortly snap asunder and vanish
irrecoverably. Love is ever a potent influence with man but this poor
demented creature appeared to have lost even the faintest conception of
the crowning passion of life, since Zuleika's name, the name of his
betrothed, had failed to awaken his memory or touch a sympathetic chord
in his bosom.

As Maximilian stood uncertain what to do next, but as yet reluctant to
abandon the miserable Viscount to his fate, Valentine came to him and,
placing her hand on his arm, said:

"My husband, it is useless to endeavor to move this unfortunate man in
his present condition; his mind is incapable of rational action. Only by
care and soothing influence can he be restored to himself. He must be
induced to accompany us to some asylum, some institution where he can be
treated for his dreadful malady."

"You are right, Valentine, as you always are," answered M. Morrel. "The
course you suggest is the only one to be taken at this juncture. But how
is Giovanni to be induced to accompany us? Force cannot be employed--we
have no legal right to use it--and I greatly fear that the Viscount will
not follow us of his own accord, no matter to what solicitations we may
resort."

"Trust that to me, Maximilian," rejoined Valentine, sweetly and
persuasively. "Remember what I said about a woman's wit and tenderness."

"I remember it, and now, if ever, is the time for the trial of their
power, for I have utterly failed. But, surely, Valentine, you do not
propose to risk dealing with this poor man whose mind is reduced to
chaos and who might, in a sudden access of unaccountable fury, do you
harm even before I could interfere?"

"I certainly do propose dealing with him! I am an enchantress, you know,
and now you shall witness a further and more convincing proof of the
potency of my spells than was shown in bringing your dead hope to life!"

Maximilian was not altogether satisfied with his wife's heroic
resolution, but she firmly persisted in it and finally he allowed her to
have her way. She quitted his side and approached Giovanni, her fine
countenance wearing a bewitching smile as seductive as that of a
Scandinavian valkyria ministering at the feast of heroes in the fabled
Valhalla.

The guides, who amid their petitions to the Blessed Virgin had steadily
watched the singular proceedings of their patrons, were both astounded
and horrified when they saw Valentine leave her husband and boldly walk
towards the maniac. They redoubled the fervency of their prayers and
breathlessly waited for what was about to happen.

The Viscount had not yet observed Valentine. When she came in front of
him and paused, still smiling, he saw her for the first time. Dropping
his staff, he clasped his hands and gazed at her in an ecstasy of
admiration.

"What beautiful, what heavenly vision is this?" he exclaimed, ardently,
his voice assuming more of the characteristics of humanity than it had
yet displayed.

Valentine was silent; she wished to get Massetti completely under her
influence before speaking to him. Motionless and statuesquely she stood,
allowing the maniac to gaze his fill at her.

"Who are you, divine vision?" continued the Viscount, seeming to think
himself the prey of some passing dream. "Oh! you are a spirit!--a
goddess such as of old presided over the sports of the
Colosseum!--perhaps Juno herself! Do not vanish from my sight, do not
become a filmy cloud and dissolve in ether! Oh! speak to me, glorious
apparition! Let me hear the celestial melody of your voice and die
listening to its marvellous cadences!"

Valentine, humoring the caprice of the demented man, said, in the most
enticing tone she could assume:

"You have guessed aright, oh! mortal! I am, indeed, Juno, the Queen of
the goddesses of Mount Olympus! By the direct command of Jupiter I have
sought you out this night!"

She came closer to him and took his hand. He raised hers to his lips and
devotedly kissed it. Then he gazed into her eyes like one entranced.
Woman's wit and tenderness had triumphed. The maniac whom even the
mention of Zuleika's name had failed to touch was completely under Mme.
Morrel's influence. She had subdued him; she could do with him as she
wished.

"A miracle! a miracle!" cried both the cicerones simultaneously. "The
Blessed Virgin be praised!"

Maximilian was not less astonished than the guides, but with his
astonishment joy and gratitude were mingled--joy that Giovanni was now
tractable and gratitude to his noble and fearless wife who had effected
the wondrous transformation. He said to himself that Valentine was,
indeed, an enchantress, but a modern Circe, who, unlike her ancient
prototype, employed her spells and fascinations to promote good,
results. He glanced at Valentine, with a smile of encouragement and
approbation, eagerly waiting for the next step she should take, for the
next audacious effort she should essay.

Giovanni made no reply to Valentine's fantastic speech, and, after
preserving silence for an instant, she resumed:

"I am here for your welfare, to aid you in your overwhelming
misfortunes!"

"Ah! yes; I have misfortunes, but I had forgotten them," said the young
man, musingly.

"I am sent to relieve you of them," continued Valentine. Then, throwing
into her voice its most persuasive quality, she added, fixing a magnetic
gaze upon the Viscount: "My mission is to take charge of you, to see
that you are restored to health and happiness. Come with me!"

"I will follow you, sweet vision, to the very end of the earth!" said
Giovanni, enthusiastically.

Valentine hastily beckoned to her husband; he hurried to her and she
whispered in his ear:

"Send one of the guides for a coupé. We must not lose a single moment.
Poor Massetti will follow me as a dog follows its master! While he is
under my influence it is imperative that he be removed to an asylum
where he can be properly looked after and if possible cured. No doubt
the guides can tell you of such an institution. Use the utmost dispatch,
Maximilian!"

The young soldier needed no repetition of these wise and humanitarian
injunctions. He gave the requisite directions and soon the desired
vehicle was in readiness without the Colosseum. Maximilian had also
ascertained the address of a proper curative institution.

Meanwhile Valentine had continued to employ her successful tactics with
the Viscount, who every moment yielded to her more and more. When the
coupé was announced, she said to him:

"My chariot is waiting to convey you to my Olympian abode. Will you come
with me?"

"Your wishes are my laws, oh! beautiful goddess!" replied Giovanni.
"Take me where you will, so that you do not desert me and leave me to
perish in despair!"

Mme. Morrel led the unresisting young man to the coupé, Maximilian and
the guides following the pair at a short distance in order to guard
against any unforeseen freak on the part of poor Massetti. There was no
occasion for their services, however, and the Viscount was soon safely
installed in the coupé with Valentine upon one side of him and her
husband upon the other.

After a brief drive, during which Giovanni, who seemed to have lost all
comprehension of the presence of any one save Valentine, remained
quietly gazing at her, the vehicle drew up in front of the insane
asylum.

Massetti was induced to enter the institution without the slightest
trouble. Maximilian thereupon made all the necessary arrangements, and
the young man was placed in comfortable quarters. The physician who
examined him stated that his case was not beyond hope.


CHAPTER XX.

THE ISLE OF MONTE-CRISTO.


At the appointed time the Count of Monte-Cristo and Zuleika, accompanied
by Ali, Peppino and Beppo, the two Italians attired in the traveling
garb of French servants, left Paris for Marseilles. On their arrival at
the latter city they proceeded immediately to the harbor, where
Monte-Cristo's yacht awaited them in obedience to instructions
telegraphed by the Count to the Captain of the craft, whose name was
Vincenzo, and who was a son of Jacopo, the former smuggler, long in
command of the ill-fated Alcyon, lost in the frightful storm and
volcanic disturbance in the Mediterranean some years before. The present
yacht was a new and superb vessel, as fleet and as beautiful as a bird.
It was fitted up in the most complete manner; the cabin, superbly
carpeted and furnished, was hung with elaborately wrought, costly
tapestry, while here and there on the walls were curiously arrayed
clusters of ancient barbaric weapons gathered from the site of old
Carthage, the ruins of historic Babylon and even from the crumbling
tombs of those redoubtable warriors who far back in the dim ages of
antiquity had defended distant Cathay against the incursions of the
fierce Tartar hordes. The yacht was named the Haydée in honor of the
loving and devoted Greek slave, the mother of Espérance and Zuleika, who
had filled such an important part in Monte-Cristo's life and had left
behind her such tender memories.

As soon as the Count and his little party were safely on board the craft
it set sail, gliding swiftly out upon the wide, sparkling expanse of
water. Monte-Cristo and Zuleika stood upon the deck, conversing
pleasantly and enjoying the ever-changing panorama presented to their
gaze. The Haydée glided swiftly past the Île Ratonneau, conspicuous by
reason of its towering lighthouse; then came the Pointe des Catalans,
with its beach where Mercédès had once dwelt and where the unfortunate
sailor Dantès had seen the light in her chamber window on that memorable
night when he was being conducted to captivity. At length a black and
frowning rock rose before them, surmounted by a gloomy fortress. As he
caught sight of this dismal crag, Monte-Cristo knitted his brows and
through his clenched teeth muttered an imprecation upon the tyranny of
man.

"What is it that so moves you, father?" asked Zuleika, in a soft voice,
gazing solicitously into his face.

"Look yonder, my child," replied the Count, with strong emotion; "the
fortress upon that rock is the accursed Château d' If!"

Zuleika glanced at the fortress with a feeling of terror and dread. She
knew the story of her father's long imprisonment and keen suffering in
the dark dungeon of that forbidding pile, of his meetings with the Abbé
Faria there and of his subsequent daring escape; but she knew nothing of
what had passed between the Abbé and the sailor Dantès relative to the
famous treasure concealed by Cardinal Spada within the grottoes of the
Isle of Monte-Cristo, the treasure that diverted from the grasp of Pope
Alexander VI. had made the Count so enormously rich. On this topic her
father had never yet seen fit to enlighten her. The sight of the Château
d' If made her shudder and turn pale, though at the same time it
fascinated and enchained her. She clung closely to Monte-Cristo and
said, tremulously:

"Oh! what a frightful place it is! My very heart is chilled by its
dismal aspect!"

"Dismal as it looks from here, my child," returned the Count, "it is a
thousand times more so within! It is the chosen abode of gloom and
despair!"

He gently put his daughter from him and gave way to a profound reverie
in which he remained plunged for some moments. All the details of his
imprisonment and the startling adventures that succeeded it passed
through his mind in rapid review, and an ardent, irresistible desire to
revisit the locality where he had unearthed Spada's millions took entire
possession of him. Suddenly he said to Captain Vincenzo:

"Make for the Isle of Monte-Cristo!"

"Aye, aye, Signor Count," answered the Captain, and the necessary orders
were at once given. The Haydée, promptly obeying her helm, swung about
swiftly and gracefully, instantly darting off in the direction of the
famous island.

Zuleika, on hearing her father's command, cast upon him a look of
astonishment and anxiety. She had expected that they would proceed
directly to Italy and this change in the yacht's course betokened
another programme.

"My child," said the Count, divining her thoughts, "I propose to stop at
the Isle of Monte-Cristo only a few hours; the delay will not be
important, especially as we can make up the time lost by crowding sail,
while I wish to show you some spots intimately connected with my history
that will interest you."

"I shall be delighted to visit the Isle of Monte-Cristo, father,"
replied Zuleika. "I have heard so much about it and its wonders. You
have a mansion there, have you not?"

The Count smiled, as he answered:

"Not exactly a mansion, Zuleika, but something that might be made to
serve as a substitute for one did we need a temporary refuge, though I
greatly fear that from long neglect we shall find it at present in a
most deplorable condition."

Zuleika's curiosity was now considerably excited. What could this
mysterious residence, or, as her father quaintly styled it, this
substitute for a mansion be like? What knowledge she possessed of the
Isle of Monte-Cristo had been derived from fragmentary recitals made to
her by Mercédès and her son Albert de Morcerf, but as neither of these
informants had ever set foot upon the island their information was
necessarily very vague, though it made up in the marvellous what it
lacked in distinctness.

At length, towards afternoon, the rocky shore of the Isle of
Monte-Cristo became visible. The Count's visage brightened as he saw it
and a thrill of pleasure passed through him. Though the Haydée was yet
at a considerable distance he could plainly descry the lofty peak upon
which he had stood and watched the smugglers depart in their tartane, La
Jeune Amélie, on that eventful morning when, with his gun and pickaxe,
he had started out to prosecute his search destined to be fraught with
so much excitement and to be crowned with such a glorious, dazzling
result. The golden sunlight fell full upon this peak and the surrounding
masses of stone, making them glitter as if encrusted with sparkling
diamonds of great price. Here and there grew olive trees and stunted
shrubs that stood out distinctly against the blue, cloudless sky; as the
yacht drew nearer their green tints formed a striking contrast with the
prevailing hue of the rocks, adding vastly to the picturesqueness of the
wild and romantic scene presented.

"How beautiful the island looks!" exclaimed Zuleika, enthusiastically,
as she leaned against the bulwarks of the vessel and gazed out over the
sea.

"Yes," replied Monte-Cristo, who was standing beside her, "it does,
indeed, look beautiful from here, but a closer view will dispel the
charm for the island is nothing but a barren waste."

"What! Is it a desert?" asked Zuleika, in surprise.

"A perfect desert, my child," answered the Count, "uncultivated and
uninhabited."

"Uninhabited!" cried Zuleika, gazing intently at the shore. "I
certainly see life there! Look! What was that?"

"A wild goat leaping from one rock to another," returned Monte-Cristo,
smiling. "The island is full of them. When I said it was uninhabited I
meant by human beings."

The Haydée by this time had approached as near the island as possible;
she was therefore anchored. The Count then ordered a boat lowered, into
which he descended with Zuleika and Ali. A stout sailor took the rudder,
two others grasped the oars, and, in a few minutes, a little cove was
gained and the disembarkation effected.

"Men," said the Count, addressing the sailors, "you can now row back to
the yacht. When you see me come upon the beach and wave my handkerchief
thrice, return for us."

"Aye, aye, Signor Count," answered the coxswain for the boat's crew. His
words were accompanied by the fall of the oars and the boat shot off
towards the Haydée.

"You are now on the Isle of Monte-Cristo," said the Count to Zuleika as
he took her hand to lead her forward. "Prepare to see what you have
termed its wonders!"

"They will, no doubt, prove wonders to me, at any rate," returned the
girl, smiling.

The Nubian stood before his master with uncovered head, respectfully
waiting for orders.

"Go in advance, Ali," said the Count, "and see that all is right."

The Nubian made a profound salaam in oriental fashion and hastened
away.

The Count and his daughter leisurely followed. As they walked they
disturbed hosts of grasshoppers, that leaped with a whirring flutter of
wings from the bushes and fled before them. This amused Zuleika, but she
could not repress a cry of affright as now and then a green, repulsive
looking lizard emerged from under the loose stones beneath her very feet
and shot hastily away in search of a more secure hiding-place.
Occasionally, too, they saw wild goats that pricked up their ears and
stared at them with wide open eyes, then gathering themselves for a
spring bounded off up the rocks and vanished.

At last Monte-Cristo and Zuleika came upon the Nubian, who had stopped
beside a huge bowlder that seemed to have lain for ages where it had
fallen from the cliffs above. A thick, bushy growth of wild myrtle and
flowering thorn had sprung up around it, and its surface was covered
with emerald hued moss. The Count and his daughter also stopped, the
former glancing around him and at the vast stone with evident
satisfaction.

"Nothing has been touched since I was here last," said he, as if to
himself; then, turning to Ali, he added: "Unmask the entrance to the
grottoes!"

The Nubian produced a rusty crowbar from some nook where he had
evidently concealed it in the past, thrusting the point beneath the
bowlder; then he exerted a strong, steady pressure upon the crowbar and
the great rock slowly moved aside, disclosing a circular opening in the
midst of which was a square flagstone bearing in its centre an iron
ring. Into this ring Ali inserted his crowbar and with a mighty effort
raised the flagstone from its place. A stairway descending apparently to
the bowels of the earth was disclosed, and from the sombre depths
escaped a flow of damp, mephitic air.

Zuleika drew back in affright. All that had passed since they came to
the bowlder was strange, bewildering and terrifying to her. Had the days
of enchantment returned? Was Ali some potent wizard like Aladdin's
pretended uncle in the old Arabian tale or was she simply under the
dominion of some disordered dream? Her knees trembled beneath her and
she moved as if to flee, but her father caught her by the arm and his
smiling countenance reassured her.

"Fear nothing, Zuleika," he said, soothingly. "We are about to visit my
subterranean palace. That is all."

By this time the atmosphere of the stairway had become purified and
Monte-Cristo said to Ali:

"Descend and light up the grottoes. When all is ready give the usual
signal."

The faithful servant entered the opening and vanished down the stairway.
Soon a delicious oriental perfume ascended. This was followed by a vivid
illumination of the gaping chasm and then came a long, reverberating
whistle.

"Ali notifies us that all is prepared for our reception," said
Monte-Cristo to Zuleika. "Come, my daughter!"

He descended the stairway first, Zuleika following him in a state of
mind difficult to describe. She was not afraid now, but her sensations
were of an exceedingly peculiar nature. The novelty and singularity of
the adventure rather attracted her, though, at the same time, she felt a
sort of reluctance to attempt it. However the opening was now as light
as day, and as they descended the intoxicating perfume increased in
intensity until it was almost as if acres of tube-roses had suddenly
bloomed and filled the caverns with their heavy fragrance.

At the bottom of the stairway Ali received them, conducting them into a
vast chamber that had evidently once possessed great splendor, but was
at present dingy and dust-covered as if it had been long deserted. It
was the apartment in which Monte-Cristo as Sinbad the Sailor had
welcomed the Baron Franz d' Epinay years before, but the crimson
brocade, worked with flowers of gold, though it still lined the chamber
as it did then, was now faded and moth-eaten, while the Turkey carpet in
which the Baron's feet had sunk to the instep, as well as the tapestry
hanging in front of the doors, was in the same condition. The divan in
the recess had been riddled by worms and the silver scabbards of the
stand of Arabian swords that surmounted it were tarnished, the gems in
the handles of the weapons alone retaining their brilliancy. The once
beautiful lamp of Venice glass hanging from the ceiling, which Ali had
filled and lighted, was also tarnished and its delicately shaped globe
was cracked from top to bottom. Monte-Cristo sadly contemplated this
scene of ruin and decay, but he contemplated it only for a moment. Then
he turned to Zuleika and said:

"My child, this was once my salon and its beauty riveted the eyes of all
who saw it, but I deserted it and time has done its work, aided by
neglect--its beauty is no more! Shall I raise another ghost of the past
and show you its former occupant?"

"Surely, I see him before me, do I not?" said Zuleika, gazing tenderly
at her father.

"Not as he was, my child, not as he was. Wait here a few moments, with
my faithful Ali as your guard and protector, and I will invoke the
fantastic apparition!"

As he spoke he raised the faded tapestry, revealing the door leading to
the inner apartment; opening this door and closing it behind him he was
lost to sight; the tapestry fell back to its place, masking the point of
entrance.

After a brief absence he reappeared dressed in his famous Tunisian
costume, but that, alas! had also lost its pristine glory like
everything else in this abandoned subterranean abode. Still the wrecks
were there--the red cap with the long blue silk tassel; the vest of
black cloth embroidered with gold; the pantaloons of deep red; the
large, full gaiters of the same color, embroidered with gold like the
vest; the yellow slippers; the cachemire around his waist, and the
small, crooked cangiar passed through his girdle.

Zuleika gazed at him in amazement. In his faded, tarnished, moth-eaten
finery he, indeed, looked like a fantastic apparition, a picturesque
ghost of the past.

"Come, Zuleika," said he, "as I am in my festal attire let us visit the
salle-à-manger!"

He moved aside the tapestry once more and again opened the door leading
to the other apartment. Zuleika entered and the Count followed her, Ali
remaining in the outer chamber to guard against surprise or intrusion.
The marvellous salle-à-manger was precisely the same as the Baron d'
Epinay had seen it. Here time seemed to have been defied. The marble of
which the magnificent apartment was built was as bright and beautiful as
ever, the antique bas-reliefs of priceless value were well preserved,
and the four superb statues with baskets on their heads were yet in
their places in the corners of the oblong room and yet perfect, though
no pyramids of splendid fruit now filled the baskets. In the centre of
the salle-à-manger the dining-table still stood with its dishes of
silver and plates of Japanese china. It was at this table that both the
Baron d' Epinay and Maximilian Morrel had taken that wonderful green
preparation, that key to the gate of divine dreams, the hatchis of
Alexandria, the hatchis of Abou-Gor. It was at this table that
Maximilian, when falling under the influence of the potent drug, had
caught his first glimpse of his beloved Valentine after her supposed
death; it was at this table that he had been reunited to her on awaking
from his hatchis dream. It was in this room that Haydée had confessed
her love for Monte-Cristo and had been taken to his heart.

All these recollections came thronging upon the Count as he stood gazing
about him. The thought of Haydée almost melted him to tears, but he
forced back the briny drops, and, taking Zuleika tenderly in his arms,
cried out, in a voice full of emotion:

"Oh! Haydée, Haydée, I have lost you, but you live for me again in this
blessed treasure you have bequeathed to me--our darling daughter!"

Zuleika flung her arms about her father's neck and kissed him fervently.

"I know not," she said, effusively, "what memories, what associations,
this room recalls, but it has made you think of my mother and I bless
it!"

When they both had grown calmer, Monte-Cristo said to his daughter:

"There is yet another apartment for us to see. Let us go to it."

They entered the adjoining chamber. It was a strangely furnished
apartment. Circular in shape it was surrounded by a large divan, which,
as well as the walls, ceiling and floor, was covered with what had been
magnificent skins of the large-maned lions of Atlas, striped Bengal
tigers, spotted panthers of the Cape, bears of Siberia and foxes of
Norway, but all these elegant furs that were strewn in profusion, one
over another, had been eaten by moths and worms and rotted by the
dampness until they scarcely held together. The divan was that upon
which the Baron d' Epinay had reclined, and the chibougues, with jasmine
tubes and amber mouthpieces, that he had seen, prepared so that there
was no need to smoke the same pipe twice, were still in their places and
were the only things in the whole room that had escaped from the clutch
of years unscathed. This chamber was brilliantly illuminated by the
blaze of several large lamps of tarnished silver and gold suspended from
the ceiling and protruding from the walls, and the salle-à-manger was
lighted in the same fashion.

Zuleika stood in the midst of all this decayed grandeur, lost in wonder,
utterly bewildered by what she beheld. She spoke not a single syllable,
for words were inadequate to express her deep amazement.

Monte-Cristo threw himself upon the divan from which a cloud of stifling
dust arose. Taking one of the chibouques in which a supply of Turkish
tobacco yet remained, he lighted it and began to smoke.

Zuleika now saw that the heavy, delicious perfume with which the grotto
palace was filled came from frankincense smouldering in a huge malachite
vase placed in the centre of this bewildering chamber.

After he had puffed a few whiffs of smoke from the chibouque,
Monte-Cristo removed the amber mouthpiece from his lips and rising said:

"You have now seen my subterranean abode, Zuleika, the abode where in
the past I sought refuge from the world and solace for my woes. It seems
to you like the product of some potent magician's spell and, in truth,
it was so, but that magician was good fortune and the spell was colossal
wealth, to the vast and subtle influence of which all nations and all
lands yield slavish submission and implicit obedience! You do not know
the romantic, incredible history of this abode, my daughter, and it is
not my intention to relate it to you, for your youthful brain could
scarcely comprehend it. Be satisfied then with what you have beheld.
Treasure it in your memory if you will either as a reality or merely as
a passing vision, but do not, I conjure you, ever mention this adventure
to me or any other living soul! I have had confidence in you, my child;
repay that confidence by strictly obeying this wish, nay, this command,
of mine! These grottoes belong to the past and to oblivion; to the past
and to oblivion, therefore, let them be consigned! Promise me to do as I
desire!"

Amazed by this strange speech, which the Count uttered in a voice
tremulous with emotion, as much as by any of the inexplicable wonders
she had seen, Zuleika replied, in a tone full of agitation:

"I promise, solemnly promise, father, to fulfil your injunctions in this
matter to the very letter! I have a woman's curiosity and a woman's
inclination to gossip," she added, with a faint smile, "but for your
dear sake I will repress them both, at least, so far as concerns this
truly marvellous subterranean palace and our visit to it to-day!"

"And you will keep your word, my noble child!" said Monte-Cristo, gazing
tenderly and admiringly at her. "Now I will remove this Tunis dress in
which I have been, without doubt, exceedingly ridiculous in your eyes,
for you are altogether unacquainted with the associations that surround
it and endear it to me, dignify it, so to speak, beyond any other
costume I have ever worn!"

Zuleika lifted her hands in protest, exclaiming:

"You could not, dear father, appear ridiculous in my eyes, no matter in
what garb you were clothed!"

Monte-Cristo smiled approvingly, but a trifle incredulously and quitted
the circular apartment. When he returned he was clad in the costume he
had worn on coming from the yacht.

"Take a last look around you, Zuleika," he said, in a tone he vainly
endeavored to render firm. "We are now about to quit this place
forever!"

He took her hand and led her from the room. Slowly and as if regretfully
they passed through the salle-à-manger and the apartment they had first
entered, gaining the stairway and preparing to ascend it. At the foot of
the steps Monte-Cristo paused and turned to Ali. He was ghastly pale and
trembled slightly. With a powerful effort he, however, controlled his
agitation.

"Ali," said he, in a voice that sounded strangely in Zuleika's ear, "is
everything in readiness?"

The faithful Nubian, scarcely less affected than his master, bowed
affirmatively.

"Then farewell, ye grottoes of Monte-Cristo!" cried the Count,
excitedly. "Farewell forever!"

He hastily mounted the stairway, almost dragging Zuleika with him. Ali
remained below.

When they reached the open air they paused until the mute joined them;
then the little party regained the beach, where Monte-Cristo waved his
handkerchief thrice. In obedience to this signal the boat immediately
left the yacht and was pulled swiftly to the shore.

A few moments later the Count, Zuleika and Ali were safely deposited on
the Haydée's deck and the gallant little vessel turned her prow towards
the Italian coast.

Monte-Cristo and his daughter, with Ali at a short distance from them,
stood closely watching the fast disappearing island. The Count was more
agitated and paler than he had yet been. Nervous tremors shook his frame
and his teeth were firmly clenched. The usually impassible countenance
of the faithful Nubian mute wore an expression of blank horror. Zuleika
gazed at her father and then at the servant. She knew not what to make
of their strange, inexplicable emotion. Placing her hand upon the
Count's shoulder, she was about to speak to him, to endeavor to calm his
agitation, when suddenly there was a loud explosion on the Isle of
Monte-Cristo and a huge column of black smoke shot up into the air.

The Count covered his face with his hands as if to shut out the sight.
Ali fell prostrate upon the deck, pressing his contorted visage against
his master's feet.

"What was that, oh! father, what was that?" cried Zuleika, clinging to
the Count in wild alarm.

"The subterranean palace of the Isle of Monte-Cristo is no more!" he
replied, sadly. "At my command it replaced with its magnificence the
rude and shapeless grottoes, at my command it has perished!"

As he spoke the rocky island was gradually lost to view in the distance,
and the Haydée sped over the waves of the Mediterranean like some
glorious water-fowl in full flight.


CHAPTER XXI.

ZULEIKA LEARNS THE TRUTH.


Nothing occurred to impede the progress of the Haydée and, after a rapid
and pleasant voyage, the beautiful craft cast anchor in the harbor of
Civita Vecchia, the principal seaport city of the Pontifical States,
which owes its origin to the Emperor Trajan. The strict quarantine
regulations of the place caused a brief delay, which Monte-Cristo and
Zuleika bore with ill-concealed impatience, but the period required by
law for purification at length expired and the travelers were accorded
official permission to proceed to Rome. Of this they immediately availed
themselves and in a short time were in the Eternal City comfortably
installed in the best apartments the Hôtel de France afforded.

The Count's first care was to send his card to M. and Mme. Morrel, who
at once hastened to his parlor, where the most cordial greetings were
exchanged. That Monte-Cristo should be in Rome did not in the slightest
degree astonish Maximilian and Valentine, who were fully aware of his
habit of suddenly making his appearance in unexpected spots apparently
without motive, but the presence of Zuleika at this critical juncture
both surprised them and filled them with consternation. What answer
should they make to her when she inquired concerning Giovanni? How was
the fact of his sad condition to be kept from her when all Rome knew of
it and it was the current gossip of the city? Valentine had written
several letters to the girl since quitting Paris, but in them had dealt
only in generalities; she had studiously refrained from informing her of
the true state of things, hoping against hope that she would eventually
have some cheering intelligence to impart. The Count, however, speedily
relieved the devoted husband and wife of their anxiety. He knew as well
as they that his daughter could not fail soon to learn that the Viscount
was a maniac and preferred to break the terrible news to her himself. As
soon, therefore, as the greetings were over, before Zuleika could
whisper to Mme. Morrel the question that was trembling on her lips, the
dreaded inquiry as to her lover and his whereabouts, he said, in a quiet
tone:

"Maximilian and Valentine, you, no doubt, wonder why we have come to
Rome, what is our business here. I will tell you. We have come to clear
an unfortunate man, the Viscount Giovanni Massetti, of a fearful charge
that has long hung over him."

M. and Mme. Morrel exchanged glances. Now was their time to speak, to
avow their mission to Monte-Cristo.

"Count," said Maximilian, pointing to his wife, "we also came hither on
the same errand. Zuleika confessed her love for the young Italian to
Valentine, who extracted from her the nature of the charge to which you
have just alluded. Pardon us for having acted without your
authorization, but we desired to succeed before confessing to you the
part we had taken in the affair."

Monte-Cristo smiled.

"You need no pardon from me," he said, gently, much affected by this
proof of devotion to his daughter and through her to him; "on the
contrary you have my gratitude as well as Zuleika's! But what success
have you met with?"

"Alas! none of any moment as yet," answered M. Morrel, sadly.

"Such a result was to be expected," returned the Count, gravely. "You
had no evidence to establish Giovanni's innocence and it was impossible
for you to obtain any. I have the evidence, conclusive evidence! When
the proper moment arrives I will produce it, remove the stain from his
name and confound his enemies!"

"Thank God!" simultaneously exclaimed M. and Mme. Morrel, Valentine
taking Zuleika in her arms, kissing her and clasping her to her bosom.

"But," continued Monte-Cristo, glancing anxiously at his daughter, "the
unfortunate young man must first be taken in hand and cured!"

Maximilian and Valentine again exchanged glances. They felt relieved.
The Count knew all. He was making the disclosure gradually,
considerately. They silently waited for further developments, holding
their breath. Valentine's heart beat almost audibly. Zuleika started
from her arms and gazed at her father with anxious, astonished eyes.

"Cured?" she repeated, in a tremulous voice. "Is Giovanni ill?"

"He is, my child," answered the Count.

What would he say next? How much was he going to disclose? Surely not
the whole of the dreadful truth! These thoughts shot like lightning
through the minds of M. and Mme. Morrel. Maximilian stood like a statue,
motionless, pale, gazing upon Monte-Cristo as a condemned criminal gazes
upon his executioner. Valentine seized her husband's hand and held it
like a vise.

Zuleika stared at the Morrels; she could not understand their action,
their breathless interest. Then her glance reverted to her father and,
for the first time, she saw that, notwithstanding his apparent calmness,
he, too, was under the dominion of some intense emotion.

"Father!" she cried, clasping her hands appealingly, "what do you mean?
You say that Giovanni is ill, but your look expresses more than your
words! With what fearful malady has he been stricken? Tell me, I conjure
you! I will be strong--I will bear it!"

"My child," said the Count, in a solemn tone, "then summon all your
courage, all your firmness to your aid! Young Massetti, overwhelmed by
his troubles, has fallen a prey to a mental disease!"

"Mon Dieu! mon Dieu!" groaned Zuleika, in anguish, "do you mean to say
that he has lost his mind, that he is a lunatic?"

"Such, alas! is the case! But, my daughter, trust in me! I will find
him and science will effect his cure!"

The poor girl, stunned by the terrible intelligence of her lover's
condition, stood for an instant with her eyes stonily fixed upon her
father. Tears refused to come to her relief. Then she tottered,
staggered as if she had been suddenly struck with a heavy missile, and
fell fainting into Valentine's outstretched arms. Maximilian assisted
his wife to place her in a fauteuil, after which he seized the bell
cord.

"For what are you going to ring?" asked Monte-Cristo, who had hurried to
his daughter's side.

"For brandy," answered M. Morrel, his hand still on the cord. "It will
revive her."

"Never mind the brandy," returned the Count, as he took a small vial
containing a red-looking fluid from his pocket and, opening Zuleika's
mouth, poured eight drops of the liquid down her throat. "This is the
Abbé Faria's elixir, a potent remedy that never yet failed of effect! It
will work like a charm! See! It is already doing its office!"

As he uttered these words Zuleika moved slightly in the fauteuil, then
opened her eyes and gazed about her in bewilderment. Almost immediately,
however, she realized that she had swooned and a full sense of her
father's terrible though considerately made revelation returned to her.
She buried her face in her hands, quivered from head to foot, and then
the glistening drops trickling through her fingers told that the tears
had at last come to calm her. Valentine bent over her, gently stroking
her raven hair and endeavoring in a womanly way to soothe her, while
the Count and Maximilian looked on with anxious countenances, waiting
for Mme. Morrel's touch and influence to do their work.

Suddenly Zuleika removed her hands from her tear-bathed visage,
straightened herself up in the fauteuil and, fixing her glance on
Monte-Cristo, said, in a low, faint and gasping tone that betrayed the
depth, the intensity, of her emotion:

"Father, you spoke of finding Giovanni! Has he disappeared?"

The Count compressed his lips, hesitating to reply. He wished to keep
back as much of the dread truth as possible. He feared the effect upon
his daughter of the startling announcement that young Massetti was
wandering about amid the ruins of the Colosseum like a second King Lear
on the blasted heath. But Maximilian came quickly to his aid.

"There is no need to find the Viscount," he said. "He has already been
found and is at present under treatment in a suitable institution, where
he is both comfortable and contented."

Zuleika cast a grateful look at M. and Mme. Morrel. Monte-Cristo seized
Maximilian's hand and pressed it warmly.

"You have done this, my friend," said he, his countenance brightening,
"and I thank you for it!"

"Do not thank me," replied the husband, gazing fondly and admiringly at
his wife; "thank Valentine, for she it was who formed the plan and
successfully carried it into execution!"

Mme. Morrel cast down her eyes and a heightened color overspread her
charming face.

"You are an angel, Valentine!" exclaimed Monte-Cristo, enthusiastically.
"Maximilian said awhile ago that no success of any moment had as yet
crowned your united efforts, but his statement was too modest. Your
success has been conspicuous; you have taken the first step that I
designed making and simplified my task to a marked degree. I am deeply
indebted to you both."

M. and Mme. Morrel lifted their hands and shook their heads in protest.

"The debt is all on our side," said Maximilian, deprecatingly, "and no
matter what we may do we can never discharge it. We owe you the
happiness of our lives!"

Monte-Cristo turned the conversation; he took but little credit to
himself for the benefits he had conferred upon his fellow-creatures,
considering that every good action on his part went towards atoning for
the terrible catastrophes he had caused in the prosecution of his
relentless vengeance against his old-time enemies.

"Tell me," said he, addressing M. Morrel, "what is the Viscount's
present condition. Is he recovering?"

Maximilian looked hastily in the direction of Zuleika; the poor girl was
intently watching him, eagerly waiting for his answer. His voice was
somewhat unsteady as he replied:

"Ever since he was placed in the institution of which I told you he has
received the closest and most skilful care, but his progress is very
slow, almost imperceptible, though the physician who is ministering to
him has never ceased to assure us that he will ultimately regain the
full possession of his health and senses."

"Oh! take me to him, take me to him at once!" cried Zuleika, starting to
her feet. "My place is by his side! I will nurse him, I will cure him!"

Monte-Cristo glanced at Maximilian, who shook his head negatively and
whispered in the Count's ear:

"It will never do to take her to him now; the shock of seeing him would
be too great! He would not even recognize her--he recognizes no one!"

Zuleika divined enough of what was passing to realize that Maximilian
opposed her wishes, was striving to prevent her from going to her lover,
from ministering to his wants. She sprang to her father, clasped her
arms about his neck, and, looking pitifully and pleadingly into his
face, exclaimed:

"Oh! take me to Giovanni, take me to him! Do not deny your loving,
dutiful daughter's most earnest prayer! Do not deny it, oh! my beloved
father, do not deny it!"

Monte-Cristo was touched to the very depths of his soul; M. and Mme.
Morrel were equally affected. The Count, however, instantly decided what
was to be done. Tenderly, compassionately, embracing his daughter, he
said to her, in a soothing voice:

"My child, for the present it is best that you do not go to Giovanni. I
will see him for you and without delay put a plan in operation that I do
not doubt will result in his speedy cure. I know a wondrous physician
whose skill is so great that he can almost restore the dead to life. He
belongs to the despised race of Jews, but is a good as well as a
marvellous man. His name is Dr. Israel Absalom and he resides here in
Rome, within the walls of the shunned and execrated Ghetto, near the
Capitoline Mount. I will go to him at once and take him to young
Massetti. My daughter, rest assumed that this learned Hebrew will work
another miracle and give your lover back to you and in all the glory of
his mind and manhood! Be content, therefore, to remain where you are for
a brief period, with our devoted friend Valentine as your companion and
comforter."

"Yes, Zuleika," said Mme. Morrel, persuasively, "be content to remain
with me. I will not quit you even for an instant. We will talk of
Giovanni, of the happiness and joy the future has in store for both of
you, and, believe me, the hours will pass on rapid wings!"

As Valentine spoke she gently disengaged the girl from her father's neck
and passed her arm lovingly around her slender waist. Zuleika's head
sank upon her friend's shoulder.

"I yield to my father's solicitations and to your own, Valentine," she
said, submissively. "You are older and wiser than I am and what you say
is without doubt for the best. I will remain and trust to the wondrous
physician."

"I have heard a great deal of this Dr. Absalom since I have been in
Rome," said M. Morrel, addressing Monte-Cristo. "The common people
regard him as a magician and the higher classes as a cunning charlatan,
but, if his legitimate scientific skill is generally denied, his
brilliant and marvellous success, even in cases that the best Roman
physicians have abandoned as hopeless, is universally admitted."

"Dr. Absalom is neither a magician nor a charlatan," answered
Monte-Cristo, warmly, "but a physician of the utmost experience and of
the highest possible attainments. He is bent beneath the weight of years
and arduous study, yet his eye is as keen and his perception as acute as
if he were a youth of twenty. No man knows either his age or his
history. I met him long ago in Athens, where I had the good fortune to
rescue him from the clutches of a howling mob of ruffians who had seized
upon him and were about to slay him as a sorcerer because he had taken
into his hut and cured of the plague a wretched Greek who had been cast
into the streets to die! For my sake he will save Giovanni!"

"But," said Maximilian, as a sudden thought occurred to him and filled
him with dismay, "Dr. Absalom can practise outside of the Ghetto only by
stealth and at the risk of being thrown into prison! He will not be
allowed to visit the Viscount Massetti!"

The Count of Monte-Cristo drew himself up proudly and his peculiar smile
passed over his countenance.

"I will take care of that!" he said, impressively.

Zuleika was left with Mme. Morrel, and, accompanied by Maximilian,
Monte-Cristo at once started for the Ghetto.


CHAPTER XXII.

THE WONDROUS PHYSICIAN.


A brisk walk of half an hour brought the Count and his companion to one
of the two gates in the wall of the Ghetto or Jews' quarter of Rome.
Monte-Cristo knocked at a wicket and a policeman immediately appeared.
He was a young man and wore a military dress. His coat was buttoned to
the throat, a yellow cord and tassel gracefully looped over the breast.
His hands were encased in white cotton gloves, a helmet adorned with
brass was upon his head and at his side hung a sword, while on the
collar of his coat the number of his regiment shone in gilt figures. The
man's bearing was soldierly and he had evidently seen service in the
field. The Count addressed him in Italian, informing him that he and M.
Morrel desired to visit the Ghetto, at the same time exhibiting their
passports. After examining the papers and seeing that they were in
proper form the policeman opened the gate and the visitors entered the
crowded and filthy precincts of the Jews' quarter.

"Mon Dieu! what vile odors!" exclaimed M. Morrel, placing his
handkerchief saturated with cologne to his nose, as they hurried through
the narrow, garbage-encumbered lanes.

"The atmosphere is not like that of a perfumer's shop!" replied the
Count, laughing. "But it seems to suit the children of Israel, for they
thrive and multiply in it as the sparrows in the pure air and green
fields of England!"

"I pity them!" said Maximilian.

"Tastes differ," returned Monte-Cristo, philosophically. "I will wager
that in this whole quarter we could not find a single Jew who would eat
a partridge in that state of partial decay in which a Frenchman deems it
most palatable!"

"What a strange, uncouth place this is," said M. Morrel, after a brief
silence. "It seems like some city of the far orient. No one, suddenly
transported here, would ever imagine that he was in the heart of Rome."

"It closely resembles the Judengasse at Frankfort-on-the-Main," replied
the Count, "and is quite as ancient though much larger. But the Germans
are more progressive and liberal than the Romans, for the gates that
closed the Judengasse were removed in 1806, while those of the Ghetto
still remain and are, as you have seen, in charge of the police, who
subject every person entering or quitting the place to the closest
scrutiny. Even as far back as the 17th century the gates of the
Judengasse were shut and locked only at nightfall, after which no Jew
could venture into any other part of Frankfort without incurring a heavy
penalty if caught, whereas here at the present time, in this age of
enlightenment and religious toleration, the gates of the Ghetto are kept
closed day and night, and the poor Israelites, victims of bigotry and
unreasoning prejudice, are treated worse than the pariahs in Hindoostan!
Rome is the Eternal City and verily its faults are as eternal as
itself!"

Monte-Cristo had evidently visited the Ghetto before, as he seemed
thoroughly familiar with its crooked lanes and obscure byways, pursuing
his course without hesitation or pause for inquiry. It apparently
contained no new sights or surprises for him. To M. Morrel, on the
contrary, who now was within its walls for the first time, it presented
an unending series of wonders. The buildings particularly impressed him.
They looked as if erected away back in remote antiquity, and were
curiously quaint combinations of wood and stone, exceedingly picturesque
in appearance. Most of them were not more than eight or ten feet wide
and towered to a height of four stories, resembling dwarfed steeples
rather than houses. Not a new or modern edifice was to be seen in any
direction. Many of the buildings were in a ruinous condition and some
seemed actually about to crumble to pieces, while here and there great
piles of shapeless rubbish marked the spots where others had fallen. As
they were passing one of these piles, much larger than the rest,
Maximilian called Monte-Cristo's attention to it. The Count glanced at
it and said:

"That was once the dwelling of old Isaac Nabal, known to his people as
Isaac the Moneylender, but styled by the Romans Isaac the Usurer. He was
enormously rich and loaned his gold at exorbitant rates to the
extravagant and impecunious Roman nobles. Isaac was wifeless and
childless, but so eager for gain was he that he kept his house
constantly filled with lodgers. The house was perhaps the oldest in all
the Ghetto. Strange noises were heard in it every night occasioned by
the falling of plaster or partition walls. It was no uncommon thing for
a lodger to be suddenly roused from his sleep by a crash and find
himself bruised and bleeding. Still old Isaac sturdily refused to make
repairs. He asserted that the rickety edifice would last as long as he
did, and he was not wrong, for one night it came down bodily about his
ears and he perished amid the ruins together with thirty others, all who
were in the aged rookery at the time. This catastrophe happened twenty
years ago."

"Do the houses often fall here?" asked M. Morrel, glancing uneasily
around him at the dilapidated buildings.

"Very often," answered the Count. "Age and decay will bring them all
down sooner or later."

"Then for Heaven's sake let us hasten lest we be crushed beneath some
sudden wreck!" said Maximilian. "The houses project over the street at
the upper stories until they almost join each other in mid air. If one
should fall there would be no escape!"

"Have no fear, Maximilian!" replied Monte-Cristo, smiling. "A famous
astrologer once assured me that I bore a charmed life, and if I escape
you will also!"

The ground floors of the houses were for the most part occupied as shops
of various kinds and the upper portions used as dwellings. Jewish
merchants stood at the doors of the shops and Jewish women, some of them
very beautiful, were occasionally seen at the upper windows. The streets
were thronged with pedestrians of both sexes and here and there groups
of chubby, black-haired children were at play.

Maximilian was amazed to notice that most of the men they met took off
their hats to Monte-Cristo and that some of them saluted him by name.

"You appear to be pretty well known to the Israelites," said he, at
length.

"Yes," answered the Count, "many of them know me. I have had frequent
occasion to consult with them on matters of importance. They are a
shrewd and trusty people."

By this time Monte-Cristo and M. Morrel had reached a lane narrower and
darker than any they had yet traversed. Into this the Count turned and
after he had taken his companion a short distance stopped in front of a
dingy but well-preserved building. It differed from its neighbors in
having no shop on the ground floor and in being tightly closed from
bottom to top. It looked as if it were uninhabited.

"We have reached our destination," said Monte-Cristo. "This is the
residence of Dr. Absalom."

Maximilian stared at him in astonishment.

"The house is deserted," said he. "Are you not mistaken?"

"No. This is the place."

"I fear then that the physician has left it and perhaps also the
Ghetto."

Monte-Cristo smiled.

"You do not know him," he said. "His habits and manner of living are
very peculiar. Prepare to be greatly surprised!"

Thus speaking he went to the door of the tightly-closed dwelling and
struck five loud raps upon it, three very quickly and two very slowly
delivered. The sounds seemed to reverberate through the house as if it
were not only uninhabited but also unfurnished. Several minutes elapsed
but no response was heard to Monte-Cristo's signal, no one came in
obedience to his summons. The Count held his watch in his hand and his
eyes were riveted upon the dial.

M. Morrel grew slightly impatient; he said to his companion,
triumphantly:

"I told you that the house was deserted and I was right!"

The Count smiled again, but made no reply, still keeping his eyes fixed
on the dial of his watch.

"Ten minutes!" said he, and he repeated his signal, but this time struck
only three rapid blows. As before no answer was returned.

Maximilian was much interested and not a little amused, the Count's
proceedings were so singular.

"Fifteen minutes!" said Monte-Cristo at length, putting up his watch and
giving one long, resounding rap upon the door.

The effect was instantaneous. The portal swung open through some unseen
influence, as if by magic, disclosing a long, bare, gloomy corridor, but
not a sign of human life was visible.

M. Morrel's interest and amusement changed to wonder and amazement; he
was thoroughly mystified and bewildered.

"The common people of Rome are not very far astray in their estimate of
this Dr. Absalom!" he muttered. "This certainly looks as if the man were
a magician!"

"Pshaw!" returned Monte-Cristo, with a display of impatience he rarely
exhibited. "The learned Hebrew is compelled to take his precautions;
that is all. Follow me, and no matter what you may see or hear, if you
wish our enterprise to be crowned with success utter not a word, not a
sound, until I give you permission!"

The Count entered the corridor, followed by his perplexed and astounded
friend. Immediately the door closed noiselessly behind them and they
found themselves amid thick darkness. Monte-Cristo took M. Morrel by the
hand, leading him forward until their progress was completely barred by
what appeared to be the end of the corridor. Here the Count paused and
said some words in Hebrew. A faint response came promptly from beyond
the corridor in the same language, and immediately the light of a lamp
flashed upon the visitors. A door had opened and on the threshold stood
the strangest looking specimen of humanity Maximilian had ever beheld.
The new comer was a very aged man, with stooped shoulders, a long white
beard that reached to his waist and a profusion of snowy hair that
escaped from beneath a cap of purple velvet at the side of which hung a
bright crimson tassel. He wore a long Persian caftan of pink satin,
profusely and beautifully embroidered with gold, full oriental trousers
of red velvet and elaborately adorned slippers of tiger skin. On his
long, bony fingers sparkled several diamond rings undoubtedly of immense
value and a cluster of brilliant emeralds magnificently set in gold
adorned his breast. This singular vision of eastern luxury, wealth and
sumptuousness held the lamp, which was of wrought bronze and resembled
those found among the ruins of ancient Pompeii, above his head and by
its light Maximilian could see that his eyes were keen and piercing and
that his countenance betokened the highest intellectuality.

"Who is it that thus summons the sage from his meditations?" asked the
old man, in a remarkably youthful voice. This time he spoke in Italian.

"One who served you in the past, oh! Dr. Absalom," replied Monte-Cristo,
also using the language of Italy, "and who now solicits a service of you
in return. Remember the mob of Athens and the Frank who interposed to
save you from destruction!"

The old man lowered his lamp and held it close to his famous visitor's
face; then he joyfully exclaimed:

"Welcome, Edmond Dantès, Count of Monte-Cristo! Welcome to the abode of
your devoted servant Israel Absalom! Whatever he can do to serve you
shall be done, no matter at what cost!"

Then, for the first time, he observed that the Count was not alone and
fixed his keen eyes on M. Morrel with a look of suspicion and inquiry.

"One of my dearest friends, M. Maximilian Morrel, Captain in the Army
of France," said Monte-Cristo, in answer to this look. "You can have as
full confidence in him as in me."

Dr. Absalom bowed profoundly to M. Morrel, and without another word led
the way to an inner apartment. It was a vast chamber, closed like the
front of the house, brilliantly illuminated by a huge chandelier
suspended from the ceiling in which burned twenty wax candles of various
hues. The room was provided with all the apparatus and paraphernalia of
a chemist's laboratory of modern days, also containing many strange
instruments and machines such as aided the researches and labors of the
old-time disciples of alchemy.

In the centre of the apartment stood a vast table covered with gigantic
parchment-bound tomes and rolls of yellow manuscript. Behind this table
was a huge, high-backed chair of elaborate antique workmanship
resembling the throne of some Asiatic sovereign of the remote past. In
this chair the physician seated himself after having installed his
visitors each upon a commodious and comfortable Turkish divan.

Maximilian noticed that the floor of the room was covered with soft and
elegant Persian rugs and that the walls were hung with exquisitely
beautiful tapestry. Monte-Cristo had warned him to prepare to be greatly
surprised, but Dr. Absalom's lavish display of wealth, luxury and taste
in the midst of the filthy, dilapidated Ghetto, nevertheless, absolutely
stunned him. The Count had also cautioned him not to speak without his
permission--a useless injunction, for the young Frenchman was too much
amazed to utter a syllable.

After seating himself the Hebrew sage, who seemed to be a man of
business as well as of science, requested the Count to state in what he
could serve him. Thereupon Monte-Cristo succinctly related the history
of the Viscount Massetti, told of his mental malady, his confinement in
the insane asylum and ended by asking the physician if he could and
would cure him.

"I have already heard somewhat of this unfortunate young man," replied
Dr. Absalom, "and the fact of his insanity was also imparted to me, but
before expressing an opinion as to what my science can do in his case, I
must have the particulars."

The Count motioned to M. Morrel, who, having by this time partially
recovered from his bewilderment, at once proceeded to give the aged
Hebrew the information he required. When he had concluded Dr. Absalom
said, in a quiet, confident tone:

"Count of Monte-Cristo, the case is plain. I can and will cure this
stricken young Italian!"

"I was sure of it!" cried the Count, joyously and triumphantly. M.
Morrel was not less delighted, but, at the same time, he could not feel
as confident as his friend of the Jew's ability to perform his promise.

The physician spoke a few words in Hebrew to Monte-Cristo. The reply of
the latter seemed to give him entire satisfaction, for he said in
Italian:

"In that event there will be no opposition from either the authorities
of Rome or those of the insane asylum. I will be at the asylum at noon
to-morrow, fully prepared to restore Massetti to health and reason!"

The Count and Maximilian arose and bidding the sage adieu were conducted
by him to the corridor. They were soon in the street and made their way
out of the Ghetto as speedily as possible.


CHAPTER XXIII.

A MODERN MIRACLE.


Monte-Cristo, whose power and influence seemed to be absolutely
boundless, presented himself on the following morning at the insane
asylum where the Viscount Massetti was under treatment armed with a
permit from the Papal Secretary of State, Cardinal Monti, for the Hebrew
physician, Dr. Israel Absalom, to assume charge of the case of the noble
patient. The director of the institution shrugged his shoulders when
this permit was exhibited to him by M. Morrel, who had accompanied the
Count for the purpose of introducing him to that official.

"Messieurs," said he, in very good French, "I am bound to respect this
paper, but I solemnly protest against trusting the patient to this
Hebrew charlatan and wash my hands of all responsibility in the
premises!"

"M. the director," replied Monte-Cristo, in a dignified tone,
"notwithstanding the repeated assertion of your physician who has been
in charge of young Massetti ever since his arrival here that his malady
was entirely curable, he has made but little if any progress with the
sufferer, who to-day is still insane. Dr. Absalom, even though he be a
charlatan as you maintain, but which, if you will pardon me, I must
decline to admit, could not make a more conspicuous and complete
failure!"

"M. the Count," said the director, coldly, evidently not relishing
Monte-Cristo's bluntness, "all that the most advanced science can do has
been done. Insanity is a disease slow and difficult of cure; time is
required to produce results and it will be fully a year before the
Viscount can, even under the most favorable circumstances, be thoroughly
restored."

"Your experience entitles your opinion to respect," returned the Count,
with equal coldness, "but still I cannot accept that opinion as final."

"As you please," said the official, haughtily. "After your Jewish
physician, if he really be such, has vainly administered his nostrums
and ineffectually mumbled his incantations, you will be glad enough to
have the regular practitioner of the asylum resume the functions of
which you now see fit so summarily to deprive him."

"Perhaps," answered the Count, smiling. "It is part of my creed never to
despise science in whatever form it may come!"

The director bowed with satirical politeness.

At noon precisely Dr. Absalom arrived. He had discarded his gaudy and
fantastic attire of the previous day and appeared in the ordinary street
dress of a European. If he had seemed imposing to Maximilian at his
house in the Ghetto, he looked still more imposing to him now, shorn as
he was of all oriental accessories and depending for effect upon the
wondrous intellectual aspect of his countenance alone. The only article
of luxury he had about him was a massive gold-headed cane on which his
years caused him to lean heavily.

Monte-Cristo and M. Morrel received him with the utmost courtesy and
deference, but the director hardly noticed him and with difficulty
concealed his disgust. The Hebrew sage, however, was used to the uncivil
manner in which the Italians treated the people of his nation and showed
not the faintest sign of displeasure, though the Count and Maximilian
could scarcely restrain themselves from resenting the official's
insulting behavior.

Without delay Dr. Absalom was conducted to young Massetti's chamber by
the physician who up to that time had attended the patient. He was an
elderly man, but though an Italian showed marked respect for the aged,
noble-looking Hebrew. Monte-Cristo and M. Morrel accompanied the two
savants, the former confident in Dr. Absalom's power to perform his
promise, the latter hoping for his success, yet doubtful of it.

As the party entered the apartment of the maniac the Italian physician
said to his Jewish confrère:

"Dr. Absalom, I would very much like to witness your mode of treatment.
Will you kindly permit me to remain in the room?"

"Certainly," replied the Hebrew. "I have nothing whatever to conceal;
but," he added, with twinkling eyes, "I warn you in advance that you
will be no wiser after you have witnessed my operations and their result
than you are at present!"

The Viscount was sitting in a large arm-chair, his face buried in his
hands. At the entrance of the four men he murmured, without looking up:

"Why has the beautiful vision left me? Why does the divine Juno deny me
the light of her presence?"

Dr. Absalom glanced inquiringly at his companions.

"He means Valentine, my wife," explained Maximilian. "She resorted to a
pardonable little artifice to lure him hither."

"Let her be sent for at once," said the Hebrew. "I shall have need of
her."

"But," objected Monte-Cristo, "Mme. Morrel is taking charge of my
daughter, this poor young man's betrothed, who is terribly cast down by
her lover's fearful misfortune and cannot be left alone."

"His betrothed!" exclaimed Dr. Absalom. "Better and better! Let her also
be brought! I shall have need of her too!"

"You shall be obeyed, Doctor," said Monte-Cristo, and M. Morrel was at
once dispatched to the Hôtel de France with instructions to return
immediately with his wife and Zuleika.

When they had arrived and their presence in an adjoining apartment was
announced to Dr. Absalom by Maximilian, the Hebrew said:

"M. Morrel, kindly conduct your wife hither, and you, M. the Count, go
to your daughter and remain with her until I summon you. Tell the poor
child to be of good cheer! that her lover shall be restored to her!"

Monte-Cristo quitted the chamber, followed by Maximilian, who instantly
came back with Valentine.

"Mme. Morrel," said the Jewish physician, "go to the patient and take
his hand."

Valentine did as directed. At her touch the Viscount started up,
exclaiming, in tones of the utmost delight:

"Divine Juno, pardon me! I have wronged you! I thought you had deserted
me, but I was in error, for you are here!"

He fixed his eyes upon her, gazing at her like one entranced, paying no
heed whatever to the others in the apartment. Valentine glanced at Dr.
Absalom, who slowly left his place, gliding stealthily to Massetti's
side. Erecting himself to his full height, he extended his hands above
Giovanni's head; almost instantly the demented man sank back into his
chair as if pressed down by some colossal, some irresistible force; then
he closed his eyes, falling into a calm, peaceful slumber. Valentine,
released from his clasp, stood looking on, lost in speechless wonder.
Maximilian was also amazed at this prompt exhibition of the Hebrew's
power, but the Italian physician, who had been intently watching,
whispered in his ear:

"The Jew is a mesmerist; that is all; at least, all that has been
developed so far!"

Meanwhile Dr. Absalom continued to hold his hands above the patient's
head that drooped more and more until it finally sank upon his breast.
For a moment longer the Hebrew maintained his position; then he withdrew
his hands, taking a small vial from the pocket of his coat and uncorking
it; immediately a powerful and subtle odor pervaded the apartment,
causing Valentine, Maximilian and the Italian physician to breathe
painfully, as if stifling.

"What is it?" gasped M. Morrel, catching the Italian by the arm.

"I do not know," answered the latter. "But look at Massetti--his face is
violet, the preliminary hue of death! If the Jew kills the patient
nothing can save him from the fury of the Roman populace!"

The subtle odor increased in intensity and the Viscount's face changed
from violet to an ashen paleness.

"He is dead!" cried the Italian. "Dr. Absalom, you are a murderer!"

The Hebrew waved his hand commandingly and, with a look of the utmost
dignity and sternness, said:

"Be silent and wait!"

He corked the vial, replaced it in his pocket and opened a window. The
fresh air flooded the place and gradually the oppressive odor vanished.

The patient was yet of a ghastly pallor. Dr. Absalom felt his pulse,
counting the beats by his watch. A smile of satisfaction overspread his
intellectual countenance.

"The remedy has done its work!" he said. "Now for the second and vital
application! Whatever may happen," he added, impressively, turning to
the Italian physician, "I charge you on your life not to interfere or
interrupt me!"

Producing another vial, larger than the first, he held it aloft and
shook it, examining its contents with the closest scrutiny. The deeply
interested and somewhat awed observers saw a bright green fluid flash
in the sunlight. Satisfied with his examination, the Hebrew uncorked the
vial; then, opening the patient's mouth, he poured the emerald liquid
gradually down his throat, drop by drop. For some seconds after this no
change in Massetti was perceptible. He still sat sleeping in his chair
with his head bowed, and the ghastly hue of his visage remained
unaltered. Dr. Absalom had again drawn his watch from his fob, dividing
his attention between noting the flight of time and intently observing
the patient. So profound was the silence in the room that the regular
tick of the watch was distinctly audible in all parts of it.

Suddenly Giovanni began to quiver. A violent convulsion followed,
shaking him from head to foot and fearfully contorting his face, his
hands curling up like a strip of paper that has been scraped with a
knife. His condition was frightful to behold. Maximilian and the Italian
looked on anxiously, holding their breath. Valentine unable to bear the
sight turned away, emotion and terror contending within her for the
mastery. The Hebrew, however, was all nerve and confidence. When a
quarter of an hour had elapsed he put up his watch. Massetti's
convulsion had passed away, his hands had uncurled and his unearthly
pallor had been succeeded by a faint flush. He reclined in his chair as
if wrapped in a healthful slumber. Presently his lips parted.

"Zuleika!" he murmured. "Oh! my beloved!"

Dr. Absalom glanced at the Italian physician significantly,
triumphantly.

"The patient is dreaming," he said, "and it is a good sign--he is
dreaming of his betrothed whom in his insanity he had entirely
forgotten--another good sign! My treatment is working! I shall succeed!"
Turning to Maximilian, he added: "Aid me to place the Viscount upon his
bed, if you please."

M. Morrel complied with alacrity and Massetti was immediately extended
on his couch in a comfortable position. Dr. Absalom again felt his
pulse, counting it as before by his watch; then he said:

"The patient may now awake at any time, but it is probable that fifteen
minutes will first elapse. Let the Count and his daughter be summoned."

Maximilian opened the door and beckoned without. Monte-Cristo and
Zuleika entered.

"My child," said the Hebrew, taking the latter by the hand and leading
her to her lover's bedside, "look upon your betrothed! He is sleeping
peacefully and dreaming of you! Awhile ago he uttered your name!
Courage, daughter, courage! The worst is over! The clouds are sweeping
from the young man's mind to leave it clear and perfect! Remain here
where I place you! It is important that upon awaking the patient's eyes
shall rest on you!"

Zuleika, astounded, bewildered, gazed at her lover and with difficulty
resisted the impulse to cast herself upon his neck.

Monte-Cristo, Maximilian, Valentine and the Italian physician grouped
themselves a short distance away, waiting and watching. Their eagerness
and anxiety were intense.

Five minutes, ten minutes passed, then fifteen. As Dr. Absalom's watch
told the quarter of an hour, the Viscount all at once opened his eyes.
They rested on Zuleika. The anxious interest of the spectators was now
at the highest pitch. The Count, M. Morrel, Valentine and the Italian
leaned forward breathlessly. Giovanni put his hand to his brow, uttered
a low sigh and then sat up, gazing at Monte-Cristo's daughter in
bewilderment. At last he spoke.

"Zuleika, darling Zuleika!" he said, faintly, but very tenderly, at the
same time extending his arms towards her. The girl glanced at Dr.
Absalom. He pointed to Giovanni and smiled. She instantly comprehended
his permission and threw herself into her lover's embrace.

"Giovanni, dear Giovanni," she murmured, "you are yourself again, are
you not?"

"Myself, Zuleika? Have I ever been otherwise?"

"You have been very ill, Giovanni."

"Ah! yes. That is the reason I am here." Glancing around him he added:
"There is your father, too, but who are those strangers with him?"

"The physicians, and two of our most devoted friends, M. Morrel and his
wife."

The Viscount sank back upon the couch and took Zuleika's hand in his,
clasping it warmly.

"I feel faint and feeble," he said, "oh! so very faint and feeble, but a
terrible, crushing weight seems to have been removed from my brain!"

He spoke rationally. Dr. Absalom had worked a modern miracle--the young
man's reason was fully restored!

The Count and Maximilian exchanged glances of delight. Valentine's eyes
were wet with tears of joy. As for Zuleika, her cup of happiness was
full. Dr. Absalom smiled placidly. The Italian physician advanced and
took him by the hand.

"I congratulate you," said he, cordially. "Your skill is simply
amazing!"

The Hebrew bowed profoundly.

"Doctor," said he, "I have fulfilled my promise and my portion of the
work is done. The rest remains for you to accomplish. You must resume
charge of the patient and restore his strength."

With these words the old savant resumed his hat, saluted all present
and, leaning heavily upon his gold-headed cane, passed slowly from the
apartment.

Monte-Cristo followed him, enthusiastically expressing his gratitude;
taking from his pocket a huge roll of bank-bills, he offered it to the
Hebrew, but the latter firmly refused to accept.

"I remember the Athenian mob, M. the Count!" said he, impressively.

As they passed the director's office, that official came out.

"Well?" said he to Monte-Cristo. "The Jew has failed, of course!"

"He has succeeded!" replied the Count, with a smile of triumph.

"You do not mean to tell me that the patient is restored to reason!"
exclaimed the director.

"That is exactly what I do mean to tell you!" retorted Monte-Cristo,
sharply.

"Humph! there is some cunning trick about this!" cried the official,
returning to his office and abruptly closing the door behind him.

The Italian physician resumed charge of the Viscount Massetti, Zuleika
and Valentine nursing him by turns. In two weeks the young man quitted
the asylum as fully restored in body as he was in mind.


CHAPTER XXIV.

A DESPERATE ENCOUNTER.


When the Viscount Massetti quitted the insane asylum, Monte-Cristo
provided quarters for him at the Hôtel de France where he could be near
both himself and his daughter. During the period of the young Italian's
convalescence the Count had refrained from communicating to him the
details of the foul conspiracy disclosed by Peppino, but no sooner was
Zuleika's betrothed installed in the hôtel than he gave him all the
startling particulars. Massetti was not astonished, for he had long
suspected a portion at least of the truth, but his indignation against
old Pasquale Solara knew no bounds, and inwardly he swore to take speedy
and complete vengeance upon him though the Count warned him to be
exceedingly prudent and not to imperil the success of his operations in
his behalf by any rash proceeding. Monte-Cristo did not inform the young
Italian of his plans, distrusting his natural hot-headedness and
impetuosity, but urged him to be content to leave the prosecution of the
scheme of rehabilitation entirely in his hands. The Count had also
instructed the Viscount that in consequence of Peppino's revelations he
had no further objections to his union with Zuleika and that the
marriage should take place immediately upon the full and open
establishment of his innocence in the eyes of the world. At this the
ardent young man was delighted to his heart's core; the certainty of his
approaching happiness and the tenderness the girl exhibited for him
compensated in a large degree for all his trials and tortures, but at
the same time he was impatient of the necessary delay in restoring him
to the possession of an unstained name and reputation, thinking that
Monte-Cristo was much too careful and slow.

He was now permitted to see Zuleika almost constantly and their love
tête-à-têtes were of the most delicious and impassioned description.
They passed hours together upon the vast upper balcony of the hôtel in
the soft Italian dusk and moonlight evenings, discoursing those sweet
and tender nothings so precious to lovers and so insipid to
matter-of-fact people whose days of romantic attachment are over.
Sometimes, however, their conversation was of a more practical
character; they spoke of their projects for the future--where they
should go on their bridal tour and what they should do before settling
down to the calm, peaceful existence of placid matrimonial joy. They had
decided to take up their permanent residence in Paris; thus they would
always be near Monte-Cristo, Espérance and Mercédès, near Albert de
Morcerf and his wife, near those friends of friends Maximilian and
Valentine Morrel; besides in the gay French capital, the city of cities,
while enjoying themselves to the utmost they could escape all allusions
to Giovanni's past which they could not possibly hope for did they
settle in Rome, where every time the youthful couple appeared in public
the old scandal, the old charge against the Viscount would undoubtedly
be freshly and perhaps venomously commented upon.

Occasionally, when Zuleika was with her father or in company with Mme.
Morrel, young Massetti would take long walks into the country for the
purpose of breathing the free air and increasing his strength by means
of healthful exercise. During these strolls he shunned every person he
met, it being Monte-Cristo's desire that he should studiously avoid
observation.

The news of Massetti's sudden and marvellous cure had spread throughout
Rome, but people shook their heads when they talked of it and agreed
with the opinion expressed by the director of the insane asylum that Dr.
Absalom had made use of some trick, the influence of which could not be
permanent, but would soon be dissipated, when the poor, deluded Viscount
would instantly fall into a worse mental condition than before.

Undoubtedly the Count Massetti heard of his son's restoration to sanity
and bodily health, but he paid no attention whatever to it, continuing
proudly and haughtily to ignore the fact of Giovanni's existence.
Monte-Cristo had not called upon the aged and inflexible nobleman for
two reasons--he feared that his indignation would get the better of him
in an interview and, besides, he knew it would be entirely useless to
approach the Count without being armed with young Massetti's complete
vindication.

During one of those strolls already alluded to the Viscount went much
further than usual. It was a bright, balmy and cheerful morning, and the
sun's gladdening radiance, the brilliant green of the trees, the
fragrant odors from flowers and grass, the chirping of insect life and
the wild, intoxicating songs of the birds all contributed to draw him on
and to make him forget Monte-Cristo's injunctions as to keeping out of
the sight of the passers-by.

He scarcely noticed in what direction he walked or what road he took,
indulging in a careless, delicious daydream full of dolce far niente
delights. He had fixed his eyes upon the ground and was sauntering
leisurely along when, all at once, he became conscious that some one was
approaching. He hastily looked up. The pedestrian was yet some distance
away, but his heavy shoes clattered upon the gravel of the highway with
a ringing sound. He was evidently an old man and a peasant. In his right
hand he held a staff and his large, broad-brimmed hat was drawn down
slightly over his visage as if to protect it from the heat of the sun.
Giovanni was about to step aside into a little grove of chestnut trees
beside the road there to wait until the new comer had passed, but on
taking a second glance at him something familiar in his aspect suddenly
arrested him, and by one of those inexplicable impulses which sometimes
take possession of a man he paused and waited.

The peasant had also noticed Giovanni and his action, but he did not
relax his pace, did not seem inclined to pay even the slightest
attention to him. He came tramping on, reached the Viscount and passed
him without as much as a nod of the head in salutation. But Massetti
with a start recognized him. With a flush of rage on his face and all
his blood boiling in his veins, he turned, sprang after the old man and
laid his hand upon his shoulder. The peasant abruptly halted, also
turned, and a fierce imprecation escaped his lips. He surveyed the irate
young Italian from head to foot, sneeringly, scowlingly.

"Why, do you stop me?" he said, roughly. "I do not know you."

"But, Pasquale Solara, I know you!" exclaimed the Viscount. "We have met
in good time and in a fit place! The opportunity for which I have long
and impatiently waited has at length arrived! You shall feel the
crushing weight of my vengeance! You shall answer to me for your
despicable, your unnatural crimes! Pasquale Solara, base wretch who sold
your own daughter to a fate worse than death, ignoble scoundrel who did
not respect the dictates of hospitality, I am Giovanni Massetti!"

As he spoke he leaped in front of the morose shepherd, barring his
passage with his body.

"Well, what if you are Giovanni Massetti!" replied old Pasquale, coldly
and defiantly. "I care not for you! Stand out of my path and let me pass
before I strike you to the earth as I would a mongrel, yelping cur!"

With these words he raised his staff menacingly over the young Italian.
The latter with the quickness and agility of a deer sprang at the staff,
grasped it and sent it whirling into the chestnut grove. Then he caught
old Solara by the throat and a terrible struggle at once began. The two
men closed with each other as if in a death-clutch, wrestling like a
couple of athletes. Massetti had not yet regained his full vigor, but
his rage lent him strength. On his side, Pasquale, though old, had
muscles of steel and a grasp like iron. He whirled his adversary round
and round, at times almost overturning him, but the Viscount struggled
manfully, occasionally wrenching the shepherd from his feet and lifting
him bodily in the air. The breath of both came forth in hot, quick,
labored gasps, while their faces were red with exertion. For a long
while the result was doubtful, the strife continuing fiercely without
any decided advantage on either side. Often the Viscount was borne
nearly to the ground but he invariably recovered, straightened himself
up and vigorously renewed the conflict. Not a word was uttered now. The
concentrated energies of the contestants were bent upon the strife,
depriving them of the power of speech. Finally by a rapid movement
Giovanni succeeded in tripping Solara, who fell with a crash, the young
Italian coming down upon his prostrate body with great force and for an
instant almost checking his respiration. Both were partially stunned by
the fall and lay motionless. Massetti was the first to regain possession
of his faculties. He half arose, placed his knees on old Pasquale's
breast and, drawing a pistol, cocked it.

"What are you going to do?" gasped the under man, his terror giving him
the power to speak.

"I am going to kill you, Pasquale Solara!" hissed the Viscount, between
his set teeth.

"Murderer!" shrieked the shepherd, desperately, making a frantic
struggle to rise, but not succeeding.

This ominous word, with all the terrible weight of meaning it conveyed,
struck upon the young Italian's ear like a sound of-doom. A murderer?
Yes, he would be a murderer, if he slew old Solara then and there, and
branded with an assassin's dark crime he must forever resign all hope of
possessing his beloved Zuleika, must abandon her to die of a broken
heart! Perhaps, too, he would be seized, tried, condemned and meet a
felon's fate upon the ignominious scaffold! True, Roman justice might be
silenced with money, but he was a disowned and disinherited son, a
penniless outcast! These thoughts brought him to a realization of the
black depths of the yawning gulf into which he was about to plunge and
made him hesitate. But a quick idea came to his relief--if he were to
fight a duel with old Solara and kill him thus the Roman law would not
pursue him, he would not be stamped with a murderer's crime! He would do
it, he would fight him! Springing to his feet, he drew a second pistol,
and, casting it upon the ground beside his astonished foe, said to him,
speaking slowly and impressively:

"Pasquale Solara, I will give you a chance for your life! Rise, take
that pistol and face me! We will fight!"

The shepherd arose with some difficulty; he was considerably bruised and
had, besides, seriously strained one of his legs. Taking up the weapon,
he cocked it and without a word, but with a look of demoniac ferocity
and triumph upon his evil countenance, assumed a position about twenty
paces distant from his opponent. Instantly both raised their pistols and
fired. When the light smoke cleared away it became evident that neither
of them had been hit. Old Solara cast his empty weapon from him with a
curse and, producing a pair of long, keen-bladed knives, threw one of
them towards the Viscount.

"You challenged me and I accepted!" he said, in a harsh tone. "Now I
challenge you! Take that knife and fight me!"

Massetti hesitated, with a look of horror upon his countenance. A duel
with knives! It was barbarous! It was worthy of the red savages of the
American wilds!

"Take the knife, I say!" thundered old Solara. "Take it and face me, or
by the canopy of heaven I will show you less mercy than you have been
weak enough to show me! I will stab you to the heart where you stand!"

He advanced with his murderous weapon in his outstretched hand, having
previously rolled up his sleeve and bared his brown, sinewy arm.

Massetti stooped and took up the knife from where it lay. He also bared
his arm, nervously grasping the hilt of the weapon.

Pasquale Solara's eyes gleamed like those of a tiger seen through the
darkness of a Hindoostan jungle. They had a terrible, a bloodthirsty
gleam. The shepherd now felt sure of his ground. With a pistol he was
nothing, with a knife he was a power! Giovanni could not cope with him;
he would fall an easy victim to his skill and cunning!

The Viscount watched the old scoundrel with feverish anxiety, fully
realizing what was passing through his mind. That Pasquale would
vanquish him, kill him, he could not doubt, for he knew no more about
fighting with a knife than an infant in its cradle. However, his courage
did not desert him, and he resolved to sell his life as dearly as
possible.

Seeing Giovanni take the knife and prepare for the combat, Solara bent
partially forward and rushed upon him. The long, keen blades met with a
flash of fire. The young Italian confined himself to acting upon the
defensive, the utmost activity and watchfulness being required on his
part to parry and ward off his opponent's skilful and incessant thrusts.
The shepherd fought with the bewildering rapidity of the lightning's
flash and seemed to be in a thousand different places at once so swiftly
did he advance, retreat and spring aside. His excitement made him forget
his hurts.

At length Massetti's arm became so strained and fatigued that it was
impossible for him to hold out much longer. His hand was tightly
clutched about the haft of his knife, but it was so benumbed that he
could not feel the weapon. Still with the energy and resolution of
despair he continued the unequal conflict, hoping against hope that some
unexpected turn of affairs might give him the advantage.

Meanwhile old Solara, fiendishly confident, was steadily and surely
closing upon him, narrowing the limit of his retreat after each blow.
Finally he retreated no more, but began pressing his adversary backwards
towards the chestnut grove, the while delivering blow after blow. Then
he suddenly gave his wrist a dextrous twirl and Giovanni's knife was
torn from his grasp, falling about ten feet away. Instantly the young
man was forced to the ground and old Pasquale stood over him with his
legs wide apart, firmly planted to give the death-dealing thrust. As
Massetti lay his eye caught the glimmer of his own knife beyond the
shepherd and slipping like a serpent between Solara's legs he seized it,
sprang to his feet and, before Pasquale could recover from his surprise
at this unlooked-for manoeuvre, buried the glittering blade in his
breast. Solara reeled and fell upon the grass, where he lay bathed in
blood.

"You have escaped me, Viscount Massetti!" he groaned.

Young Massetti could scarcely realize what had happened, what he had
done, so miraculous did the result of this strange duel appear to his
bewildered mind.

As he stood like one in a dream he heard a sound as of many feet.
Hastily dashing into the chestnut grove, he looked back and saw old
Solara surrounded by a group of Luigi Vampa's men.


CHAPTER XXV.

A VISIT TO THE REFUGE.


Among the details of the Count of Monte-Cristo's plan for the
rehabilitation of Giovanni Massetti was a visit to Annunziata Solara at
the Refuge in Civita Vecchia. This visit he made one morning in company
with Zuleika and M. and Mme. Morrel. Madame de Rancogne was delighted to
see the Count and cordially welcomed him and his party.

"So this handsome young lady is your daughter, Edmond," she said,
seating herself beside Zuleika and taking her hand. "How rapidly time
flies. To-day we are in the midst of the enjoyment of youth and
to-morrow we are the middle-aged people of our locality. Then in another
brief space we are the aged, after which comes death!"

Zuleika blushed at Helena's compliment to herself and looked at her
curiously while she delivered the closing part of her speech. But the
Countess of Monte-Cristo of the past was not of a sombre nature, and,
smiling, she added:

"The most dazzling and enchanting side to the picture of youth is love!
Has Zuleika, Count, ever experienced the tender passion? It will be
exceedingly strange if she has not."

Monte-Cristo's daughter blushed again.

The Count smiled as he replied:

"Yes, Helena, Zuleika has experienced the crowning passion of life. She
is betrothed to the Viscount Giovanni Massetti of Rome."

"What!" exclaimed Mme. de Rancogne, stricken with amazement and horror.
"That Giovanni Massetti who has been disowned and disinherited by his
father for the commission of one of the vilest and most dishonorable
crimes known to the world?"

"The same!" answered Monte-Cristo, calmly.

Mme. de Rancogne was now more astounded than ever.

"You know this man's record and yet you allow him to win your daughter!
Count, this is not like you! I cannot understand it!"

"Helena," returned Monte-Cristo, "this poor young man has been maligned,
falsely accused by persons inimical to him."

The Superior of the Order of Sisters of Refuge slowly but firmly shook
her head, looking the while at the Count and his daughter with an
expression of deep sympathy and compassion upon her noble countenance.

"You have been deceived, imposed upon, Edmond," she rejoined. "There can
be no doubt whatever as to the young man's terrible and damning guilt.
Besides, my assertion admits of immediate verification and proof.
Massetti's unfortunate victim, the beautiful peasant girl Annunziata
Solara, is now an inmate of this institution whither she dragged herself
when overcome by shame and suffering of the keenest description,
seeking to find here an asylum and a cloister where prying eyes could
not find her out and where the venomous tongue of scandal could not tear
open her wounds and set them to bleeding afresh. She is a member of our
Order, has devoted the rest of her days to the achievement of good
actions and the raising up of the fallen and betrayed of her sex.
Annunziata Solara is here, almost within sound of my voice, and will,
though with reluctance I am convinced, confirm every word I have uttered
relative to her cowardly and villainous abductor!"

"To hold an interview with this unfortunate creature is what has brought
me here with Zuleika and my friends the Morrels," said the Count. "Of
course, I wished to see you, Helena, and enjoy once again the pleasure
of your society," he added, his agreeable smile accompanying his words.

The Superior bowed gracefully and arose.

"I can understand then your anxiety to see and speak with Annunziata at
the earliest possible moment. Therefore, I will immediately summon her
to this apartment where the desired interview can take place without
delay."

As she uttered these words Mme. de Rancogne hastened from the salon,
shortly afterwards returning with the former flower-girl of the Piazza
del Popolo in Rome.

Annunziata stood for an instant in the centre of the apartment, gazing
inquiringly at the visitors, for Mme. de Rancogne had not informed her
of their business, preferring that Monte-Cristo in his wisdom and
experience should conduct the interview and develop his wishes in his
own peculiar fashion.

The Count and Maximilian gazed at old Pasquale Solara's daughter with
considerable interest, but it was an interest altogether masculine.
Valentine also looked at her attentively, with that searching,
penetrating look one woman invariably casts upon another. As for
Zuleika, her eyes literally devoured the peasant girl, flashing with
what was not exactly hatred for a rival but rather an instinctive fear
and distrust. She was well aware that Giovanni had flirted with this
girl, had been enthralled by her physical charms, had almost yielded to
her sway, and she felt a peculiar interest in the creature who had
temporarily at least stolen the heart of her lover from her.

Annunziata had been greatly benefited by her sojourn in the calm and
quiet Refuge. She had by a great and heroic exercise of her strength of
mind put aside from her all thoughts of her lamentable history, of her
suddenly clouded and terrible past. She had thoroughly abandoned herself
to the discipline and duties of the Sisters of the Order of Refuge, and
had sought with more or less success even to forget herself. Her
unruffled life, passed in the continual doing of good, filled her with
peacefulness and satisfaction, and for the first time in a long while
she fully realized what it was to be perfectly contented and happy. In
consequence her physical condition had improved, promptly responding to
her mental ease. She had recovered the beauty she had lost during her
confinement in the bandits' hut and her subsequent wanderings as a
homeless, starving outcast. Her plumpness had also returned, and her
glance had all the brightness and gayety that had formerly distinguished
it. Still a general refinement had taken possession of her, and
Annunziata was no longer the child of nature she had been when she lived
in the romantic cabin in the forest.

Madame de Rancogne was the first to speak.

"Sister Annunziata," she said, "here are his Excellency the Count of
Monte-Cristo, Zuleika his daughter, and M. and Mme. Morrel. Allow me to
make you acquainted with them and to assure you that they are true
friends of mine, firmly to be relied on. They wish to interrogate you in
regard to a certain matter. You can answer their questions without fear
and without the slightest hesitation. The Count of Monte-Cristo is the
very soul of chivalry and honor!"

The Count bowed in acknowledgment of this well-turned speech and,
addressing Annunziata, who, notwithstanding Mme. de Rancogne's
assurances, began to tremble and feel distressed, said:

"Sister Annunziata, I wish to ask you certain important questions as
your Superior has told you. I am pursuing an investigation that promises
to be fruitful in the very best results of the highest possible good.
Sister Annunziata, I wish your aid in clearing the record of an innocent
man, one who has suffered as greatly as you have and for whom you can,
therefore, feel pity and sympathy. I allude to the Viscount Giovanni
Massetti."

The girl gave a sudden start and turned ghastly pale.

"The Viscount Giovanni Massetti?" repeated she, interrogatively, half
doubting whether she could have heard the name aright.

"Yes," said Monte-Cristo, "the Viscount Giovanni Massetti, who has been
falsely accused of having abducted you!"

"Falsely accused!" cried Annunziata. "Why, Signor Count of Monte-Cristo,
the wretched young man is guilty of everything with which he has been
charged, whether the charges were made by persons inimical to him or
not!"

The visitors were still closely watching the peasant girl. They had
expected she would say exactly what she had said and, therefore, were
not in the slightest degree astonished or disconcerted. Her earnestness
and the circumstance that she certainly ought to know the identity of
her abductor were well-calculated to inspire confidence in her
statements and to induce a belief in the guilt of the young Viscount
Massetti.

Monte-Cristo answered Annunziata firmly but considerately.

"Sister," he said, "notwithstanding your belief that Massetti was your
abductor, I know the contrary to be true and have in my possession
indubitable proof of what I assert!"

Annunziata shook her head.

"The proof must, indeed, be conclusive that would shake my belief!" she
said, with a slight trace of bitterness in her tone.

"It is conclusive!"

"But if young Massetti is innocent of my abduction and of my poor
brother's murder, who then, in Heaven's name, is the guilty party?"

"Luigi Vampa!"

"Luigi Vampa?"

"Yes. He forced his way into your cabin on that eventful night, abducted
you and afterwards shot your brother Lorenzo in the forest."

"You say you have indubitable proof of this. How was it obtained?"

"From a man named Peppino, who overheard all the details of the
nefarious bargain and conspiracy entered into by the brigand chief and
old Pasquale Solara."

"Pasquale Solara? My father! Oh! Signor Count, what do you mean?"

"Be calm, my child, and listen to me. Your father despicably sold you to
Luigi Vampa for a large sum of money and they together so arranged the
abduction that all suspicion would fall with crushing force upon the
shoulders of the young Italian!"

Annunziata put her hand to her forehead and stood still, rooted to the
spot by horror and amazement. She had no great love for her moody and
morose father, who never had done anything calculated to inspire
affection for him in the bosom of his daughter, but, at the same time,
it seemed incredible and horrible to her that her parent should have
been guilty of this unnatural behavior towards her, of this unmanly
conduct with regard to an innocent guest who in all confidence was
partaking of the hospitality his roof afforded. She looked at
Monte-Cristo doubtingly and then at Mme. de Rancogne, who was smiling
upon her encouragingly.

"As God is my judge," said she, solemnly, "I believe Giovanni Massetti
to have been my abductor!"

"Of course," returned Monte-Cristo, "but you are in error!"

"I saw his face! Surely I ought to have been able to recognize that!"

"Certainly; but, I tell you, everything was so arranged as to deceive
you into believing the young Italian the criminal, the despicable wretch
who had failed to respect a woman's honor!"

"It may be as you assert, but I cannot rid myself of my firm and
deep-rooted belief in the matter. I have forgiven the Viscount Massetti
for the foul wrong he did me, but to the latest day of my earthly
existence I shall believe him guilty!"

Suddenly fixing her eyes upon Zuleika with a gaze of bewildering
intensity, Annunziata stood as if anxious to speak to her of some very
important topic.

Monte-Cristo's daughter divined this, and, going to the former
flower-girl, said to her:

"Is there anything I can do for you, Sister Annunziata? If so you have
only to ask it!"

Annunziata laid her hand upon Zuleika's shoulder, asking, in a tone that
notwithstanding all her efforts to control it was not a little unsteady
and tremulous:

"Do you love him?--do you love the Viscount Massetti?"

"Yes," answered Zuleika, lowering her eyes beneath the intensity of the
other's look.

"So I thought, but oh! daughter of a noble family, beware of the
perfidious young man! He will not hesitate to deceive you as he deceived
me! Then he will leave you to your fate as he left me to mine, and
life-long sorrow and misery will be your portion!"

Zuleika gazed pityingly at the peasant girl.

"You loved him once, did you not?" she asked.

"Perhaps I did, perhaps I did not!" replied Annunziata. "I do not know!
Certainly my heart spoke for him, but that may have been only friendly
esteem! However, after the abduction and the horrible and disgraceful
events that followed it, I grew to hate him with the bitterest
description of hate! I have told you that I have forgiven him and it was
the truth. I have forgiven and am endeavoring to forget him!"

There was a suspicious glitter in the girl's eyes as she spoke,
something that hinted of the presence of tears, but the glitter passed
away and, turning to Mme. de Rancogne, she said:

"Are your guests through with questioning me, Madame the Superior?"

Mme. de Rancogne glanced inquiringly at Monte-Cristo, who nodded his
head affirmatively.

"The interview is concluded," replied Helena, "and now, if you so
desire, you can return to your apartment."

Annunziata, more affected and agitated by what she had just passed
through than she cared to admit, bowed to the visitors and the Superior
and hastily quitted the salon.

"Poor girl! she remains perfectly unconvinced!" said Monte-Cristo, after
her departure.

"And she is right!" rejoined Mme. de Rancogne, warmly. "I have heard all
the details of her story and the chain of evidence against the Viscount
Giovanni Massetti is altogether complete. To doubt his guilt would be
sheer idiocy!"

After a sojourn of a few hours longer at the Refuge, Monte-Cristo and
his party returned to Rome to go actively to work in Massetti's cause.


CHAPTER XXVI.

VAMPA AND MONTE-CRISTO.


After his fearful and exhausting duel with old Pasquale Solara in which
he had been so nearly vanquished and so signally favored by Fate, the
Viscount Massetti dragged himself rather than ran through the chestnut
grove by the roadside, pausing now and then to glance back through the
trees and note what was taking place among Vampa's bandits. His wounded
antagonist was evidently unconscious, for the brigands were bending over
him, some of them seeming to be engaged in endeavors to restore him to
his senses. Another circumstance tending to confirm this supposition was
the absence of pursuit, for had the shepherd been able to give even the
most fragmentary information relative to the encounter, Vampa's men
would have immediately devoted their attention to a search for his
successful assailant, and in Giovanni's present condition of exhaustion
his capture could not have been doubtful.

The young Italian did not waste a moment, but made his way towards Rome
as rapidly as he was able, though his progress was necessarily toilsome
and painful in the extreme. Having at length reached the bank of a small
brook at a safe distance from the scene of the conflict, he washed the
dust and sweat from his face, and held his benumbed hand in the cool,
limpid water until the blood resumed its normal circulation. Then he
arranged his torn and disordered garments so as not to attract too much
attention from the curious pedestrians he would be sure to meet on the
outskirts of the city, resuming his journey strengthened and refreshed.
Contrary to his expectations he eventually gained the Hôtel de France
without exciting any special observation or comment. Once in his own
apartment he carefully locked the door and, casting himself upon his
bed, breathed freely for the first time since old Solara had fallen by
his hand.

His thoughts, however, were not altogether of a reassuring nature. He
had taken an Italian's vengeance upon the despicable old Pasquale
Solara, who certainly merited all he had received, but how would
Monte-Cristo look at the affair when he learned of it as he most
assuredly would when he began his campaign against Vampa, if not before?
Undoubtedly with strong disapprobation and displeasure. The Count had
cautioned him to keep out of sight, to restrain his impetuosity, and he
had done neither. On the contrary he had shown himself to the shepherd,
declared his identity and assumed the responsibility of dealing with
him, though, to be sure, he had given him a chance to defend himself. If
Solara was dead, if he had expired without making any revelation, his
secret was secure and even Monte-Cristo could not unearth it, but would
not the death of old Pasquale deprive the Count of a most important
witness, a most important factor in his rehabilitation? Perhaps so,
perhaps not, for it was by no means certain that Monte-Cristo could
force Solara to confess and make at least partial and tardy amends for
his atrocious misdeeds. It was highly probable that Annunziata's
wretched father, even if brought to bay, would persist in preserving a
stony and unbroken silence, would make no admissions whatever. Taking
this view of the matter the Viscount felt relieved and, composing
himself on his couch, yielded to the influence of extreme fatigue and
fell asleep. His slumber was profound and dreamless. Exactly how long he
slept he knew not, but meanwhile an event as unexpected as it was
portentous occurred almost within earshot of where he lay, an event
brought about by his rash and inconsiderate action of that morning.

Monte-Cristo's salon was opposite to Massetti's chamber, a wide corridor
separating the two apartments. It was late in the afternoon and the
Count, seated at his desk, was pondering over his plans in relation to
the Viscount. Matters had not progressed as swiftly as he had hoped.
Besides, much further delay seemed inevitable. Maximilian, of course,
could do nothing, for the present at least, and Valentine's ability to
be of use was limited to encouraging Zuleika and exercising a proper
degree of surveillance over the lovers when such surveillance was
possible. Peppino and Beppo, too, were comparatively useless, though by
careful and well-directed inquiries they had ascertained that Luigi
Vampa and his band had changed their quarters from the old rendezvous,
locating in a fastness that could not be approached without great
difficulty and danger. None of the brigands now visited Rome and even
Vampa himself seemed distrustful of the future. According to the
intelligence gathered by Peppino and Beppo he constantly went about in
various disguises that defied detection, studiously avoiding all his
accustomed haunts. With regard to the brigand chief's actions
Monte-Cristo could entertain but one of two opinions--either he was
filled with remorse for his shameful conduct towards poor Annunziata
Solara and for his complicity with old Pasquale in bringing the innocent
Viscount under suspicion, which was doubtful, or he was afraid that
Roman justice stimulated by young Massetti and such friends as he still
possessed would overtake him, which was the more probable. The Count had
not hoped for much from Annunziata Solara, though he had calculated
somewhat on the effect upon her of his assurance that he possessed
conclusive proof of Giovanni's innocence. His recent interview with the
girl, however, had established the fact that she firmly believed the
Viscount guilty, and it was fair to presume that she would retain her
belief in the face of everything with all the proverbial obstinacy of
woman. Besides, after all, what was his conclusive proof? Simply the
unsupported assertions of a former member of Vampa's band, who in making
them had clearly been actuated by a desire of wreaking personal
vengeance upon old Pasquale Solara!

The Count was not a little discouraged, but his own conviction of the
truth of Peppino's statement was as strong as ever and, notwithstanding
all the apparently insurmountable obstacles, he did not doubt that he
would eventually find some way to force Vampa and the shepherd into a
full confirmation of every diabolical detail related by the ex-bandit in
the cell of the police poste in Paris.

As he sat thus communing with his sombre thoughts and reflecting that
the delay might stretch out into many months, a knock was heard at his
door and in response to his permission Peppino entered the salon.

A glance at the man's pale and agitated countenance was sufficient to
tell Monte-Cristo that something unusual had happened.

"Well," said he, gazing keenly at him, "what is it?"

The man looked hastily about the apartment and, having satisfied himself
that his master was alone, came close to him, bending down and
whispering in his ear:

"Signor Count, a strange visitor is below, asking to see you. He is
garbed like a Roman noble and his face is made up with paints and
cosmetics like that of an actor on the stage of a theatre. Still, I
think I have pierced his disguise and that he is no less a personage
than Luigi Vampa himself!"

"Ah!" said the Count, rising, with a smile of satisfaction. "Heaven
grant that you are correct! If Vampa is here, his visit will simplify
matters."

"But you do not mean to see the brigand chief, do you, Signor Count?"
said Peppino, in a startled tone.

"Why, pray, should I not see him when for so long I have been
impatiently awaiting an opportunity to meet him?" asked Monte-Cristo, in
amazement.

"Because," answered the Italian, with an unmistakable display of fear,
"he may have divined your mission to Rome and his business with you here
to-day may be assassination!"

Monte Cristo laughed heartily.

"My good fellow," said he, in a reassuring tone, "dismiss your childish
terrors. Vampa will not dare even to attempt to harm me! Show the
mysterious visitor up and let the problem of his identity be solved!"

"I know your power over Vampa, Signor Count," returned Peppino,
hesitating, "but still in this peculiar instance it may fail you!"

"Pshaw!" said the Count, impatiently. "I tell you I do not fear Vampa.
Show him up at once."

Peppino very reluctantly quitted the salon, soon returning with the
suspicious visitor.

Monte-Cristo advanced to meet the new comer, who silently pointed to
Peppino, motioning towards the door. The Count nodded to the ex-bandit
and with a slow step he left the room.

Although Vampa was carefully disguised and even elegantly dressed in the
fashionable attire of the Roman aristocracy, Monte-Cristo, like Peppino,
had no difficulty whatever in recognizing him.

"Well, Luigi Vampa!" said he, facing his visitor and calmly folding his
arms as soon as they were alone. "What do you want with me?"

The brigand chief did not seem either disconcerted or surprised even in
the slightest degree. He boldly returned his host's gaze and said:

"I knew you would recognize me at once, for I am well aware of your
extraordinary keenness and penetration, Signor Count, but, to confess
the truth, my disguise was not intended to deceive you; its sole object
was to secure me safe entrance to and exit from Rome which of late has
become dangerous for men in my line of industry!"

The Count smiled in his peculiar way.

"What do you want with me, Luigi Vampa?" he repeated. "Your errand must
be of vast importance since you have taken so much trouble to execute
it!"

"It is of vast importance, Signor Count. This morning one of the most
efficient members of my band, old Pasquale Solara, was attacked and
severely wounded by your protégé the Viscount Giovanni Massetti!"

"Old Solara attacked and severely wounded by the Viscount Massetti?
Impossible!"

The Count was greatly disconcerted by this intelligence; he could not
conceal his chagrin. The Viscount's rashness and impetuosity would ruin
all!

"What I say is true," continued Vampa, "and I have come to you to
protest. You must restrain this Viscount Massetti, this reckless madman!
He professes to have a grudge against Pasquale Solara and there is no
telling to what length he may go if you do not control him. Had Pasquale
been able to speak when discovered lying bathed in blood upon the
highway by some of the members of my band, young Massetti would have
been pursued, captured and made to pay for his murderous assault with
his life; but it was only later, when brought into my presence, that he
became sufficiently conscious to relate what had happened. Signor Count,
I wish to respect your friends, but they on their part must respect me
and my band!"

"Luigi Vampa," replied Monte-Cristo, sternly, "you say that young
Massetti has a grudge against old Pasquale Solara! What you seek to
belittle with the name of grudge is simply just indignation for an
outrage such as human beings rarely commit! This you know!--you to whom
Solara basely sold his daughter!--you who plotted with the aged
scoundrel that the charge of abduction and murder might fall upon the
Viscount's innocent shoulders when you, Luigi Vampa, were the guilty
man!"

The brigand chief started and grew pale beneath the paint and cosmetics
with which his visage was thickly coated.

"You have been deceived, Signor Count!" he stammered, taken at a
disadvantage, but nevertheless speaking guardedly and endeavoring to put
on a bold front. "The girl herself, Annunziata Solara, will swear to you
that the Viscount Giovanni Massetti was her abductor and the author of
her ruin!"

"Yes," replied Monte-Cristo, bitterly, "she will and does say so, for
she has been completely blinded by the cunning, fiendish stratagems you
resorted to, aided and abetted by that infamous miscreant old Pasquale
Solara, for whom a lingering death upon the rack of the ancient Spanish
Inquisition would not be a sufficient punishment!"

"You speak very confidently, Signor Count," said Vampa, resuming his
cool self-possession. "Pray tell me how you are going to prove all
this?"

"I should be foolish, indeed, did I do so," replied Monte-Cristo, seeing
the brigand chief's trap and adroitly avoiding being caught in it.
"However, suffice it to say that I can and will make good all I have
asserted! Even Annunziata Solara herself shall be thoroughly convinced!"

"Signor Count," said Vampa, pleadingly, "we have long been good friends,
have long understood each other perfectly. Do not let the idle tales
designing persons have poured into your ears destroy that friendship and
that understanding!"

"I have heard no idle tales from designing persons," retorted the Count.
"What I have heard was a plain and simple statement of the truth. I know
how old Solara summoned you with his signal whistle, how you bargained
with him for his beautiful daughter and how you finally bought her of
him! I know how you abducted the girl while her infamous father waited
outside the cabin with a torch, how you bore her away in your arms
through the forest, murdering her brother and in turn encountering my
son Espérance and the Viscount Massetti. I know how you carried her to
the hut you had prepared, how you kept her a close prisoner there
guarded by members of your band until your shameful object was
accomplished! I know how you wrote that letter signed Tonio which was
intended to influence Annunziata's belief in the Viscount's guilt, and I
know how old Solara secreted it where his daughter afterwards found and
read it! Now, Luigi Vampa, are you satisfied? You said a moment ago that
we have long understood each other. I hope there will be no
misunderstanding on your part when I tell you that I mean to force both
you and old Solara to confess your crimes and make reparation for them
as far as possible!"

"Then you declare war against us?" cried the brigand chief.

"I do!" answered Monte-Cristo, coldly.

"Then in my own name and in that of Pasquale Solara, I defy you, Edmond
Dantès, Count of Monte-Cristo!"

He backed towards the door as if afraid the Count would attack him. When
he reached it, he turned, flung it open and stepped into the corridor,
instantly finding himself in the grasp of Peppino and Beppo, who at once
handed him over to a squad of policemen, the officer in charge of whom
said:

"I arrest you, Luigi Vampa! Follow me!"


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE BANDITS' REPRISALS.


Monte-Cristo was astounded when he saw Luigi Vampa arrested by the Roman
policeman and his squad; his first thought was that Peppino, unwilling
to let slip so fair an opportunity to obtain vengeance, had betrayed the
brigand chief to the authorities; this idea was apparently confirmed by
the part the two ex-bandits had taken in their former leader's capture;
hence after the officers and their prisoner had departed, he turned
fiercely upon Peppino and said, in a tone of anger:

"This is fine work for one of my servants to do, especially one so
trusted as you!"

"Signor Count," answered Peppino, humbly, "you are mistaken. I had no
hand in it whatever save obeying the order of the officer in command of
the police."

"Indeed!" cried the Count, incredulously.

"Yes," continued Peppino, in the same humble voice, "and Beppo here is
equally innocent. The officer tracked Vampa to the hôtel and was
informed that I had conducted him into your presence. He thereupon sent
for me, directing me without further ado to take Beppo, who chanced to
be in my company, and seize the chief, who was personally unknown to
him, the instant he quitted your salon. I trust your Excellency will
pardon us, as we could do nothing but obey."

"In that case," said Monte-Cristo, "no blame attaches to either of you,
but, nevertheless, Vampa's arrest at this critical juncture will
seriously interfere with my projected operations."

The police had conducted matters very quietly; still, the tramp of many
feet in the corridor had awakened the Viscount and filled him with
terror. Knowing the unparalleled audacity of the bandits, he at once
jumped to the conclusion that a body of them had entered Rome and taken
possession of the Hôtel de France with the object of seizing upon him as
the murderer of old Pasquale Solara, who, he did not doubt, was dead.
When the tramping feet, which the Count and Vampa were too much
engrossed to hear, paused in front of his very door he became fixed in
this conclusion and sprang from his bed in wild alarm. He looked hastily
around him for some avenue of escape, but there was none. If the
brigands were without he was trapped and would speedily be in their
hands. He listened with the utmost anxiety, expecting every instant that
his door would be forced and his relentless foes come thronging into the
chamber. No such movement, however, was made. A deathlike silence
prevailed. What was the meaning of all this? What was taking place or
about to occur? If the men in the corridor were not Luigi Vampa's
bandits, who were they? The Viscount lost himself in a bewildering maze
of conjectures. Make a personal examination and satisfy himself he dare
not. In the midst of his conjectures he heard a door open directly
across the corridor and knew it was Monte-Cristo's. Then a voice of
stern command broke the silence, but what was uttered he could not
distinguish, though he fancied he made out the ominous word "arrest,"
which was almost immediately succeeded by a renewal of the tramping of
feet. This sound speedily died away and silence again prevailed. Young
Massetti was more perplexed than ever. He could make nothing out of the
knotty problem presented to him for solution. Suddenly a thought struck
him that brought beads of cold perspiration out upon his forehead.
Monte-Cristo had been arrested and carried off to a Roman prison! Then
he heard the Count's well-known voice angrily addressing some one and
this alarming thought vanished as quickly as it had come to him. The
party arrested, if an arrest had been made, was, therefore, not
Monte-Cristo but some one else, some one who had come from the Count's
salon. Who could it possibly be? Maximilian Morrel? No, the idea was
absurd, for what had the young Frenchman done to provoke arrest?
Finally, unable longer to endure the uncertainty and suspense, the
Viscount cautiously opened his door and glanced out into the corridor.
His eyes rested upon Monte-Cristo, Peppino and Beppo. The former saw him
and at once came to him.

"What has happened?" demanded Massetti, eagerly.

"Luigi Vampa was here and has been taken away a prisoner by the police,"
answered the Count.

"Luigi Vampa!" cried the young Italian, in amazement.

"Yes, Luigi Tampa," returned Monte-Cristo, his brow clouding.

"What brought him to the Hôtel de France?"

"He came to complain of you!"

"Of me?"

"I have said so."

"And you caused him to be arrested?"

"I did not. His arrest was due entirely to his own rashness. The police
tracked him hither and apprehended him as he quitted my apartment."

While speaking Monte-Cristo made his way into Giovanni's chamber.
Closing the door behind him, he stood gazing at the Viscount with a
gloomy air.

"Giovanni Massetti," said he, in a slow, measured tone, "you have
disregarded my injunctions and by your impetuosity put all my plans in
jeopardy! You did wrong, very wrong, in attacking old Pasquale Solara
this morning!"

"I am keenly sensible of it now, after calm reflection," answered the
Viscount, penitently. "But still you must make some allowance for me. I
came suddenly upon the shepherd and my indignation and desire for
vengeance so mastered me at the sight of him that I could not control
myself. Nevertheless I gave him a chance for his life. We fought a
desperate duel and he was wounded, but whether mortally or not it is
impossible for me to say, as Vampa's men made their appearance
immediately after his fall, and I was forced into precipitate flight."

"Should Solara die," said Monte-Cristo, moodily, "you will have
deprived us of a most important witness, for I calculated upon
compelling him to speak, to disclose every detail of the infamous
conspiracy against you. But like you I do not know his present
condition, as Vampa did not vouchsafe me any information upon that head.
I can only hope that he is not seriously wounded and will recover."

"I am singularly unfortunate," said the Viscount, humbly. "Everything I
do seems to be wrong."

"Because you are governed by impulse alone and do not wait for your
calmer judgment to come to your aid," replied Monte-Cristo. Then he
added, firmly: "Giovanni Massetti, either you must submit wholly to me
for the future, be guided entirely by my wishes, or I will be compelled
to leave you to your fate! I need not say that I shall abandon you very
reluctantly, but abandon you I must unless you cease to trammel my
efforts in your behalf!"

The young Italian seized his benefactor's hand convulsively.

"Your Excellency," he exclaimed, supplicatingly, "do not abandon me, do
not leave me to my fate at this critical juncture! I will yield you
blind and implicit submission and obedience! For the future I will do
nothing, take not even the slightest, most unimportant step without your
direct authorization or express command!"

"It is well, Giovanni," said the Count, evidently much relieved to find
his ardent protégé so tractable. "I will continue the work I have begun
and also endeavor to bring it to a speedy and successful conclusion.
The arrest of Vampa and the wounding of old Solara have complicated
matters to a certain extent, but a brief time, I trust, will suffice to
straighten out the complications and tangles, and then the result will
be happiness for all of us, the richest possible reward!"

"God grant it!" cried Massetti, fervently.

"Now," said the Count, "you must not quit the Hôtel de France even for a
moment without my permission! Do you promise me that?"

"I not only promise it, I swear it!" exclaimed the Viscount, lifting his
eyes and his right hand towards Heaven.

"It is well," repeated Monte-Cristo, joyously, and turning he left
Massetti's chamber.

It had been planned that the Count should take Zuleika out riding the
following morning, but a desire to know what had become of Luigi Vampa
and what the authorities proposed to do in his case prevented
Monte-Cristo from fulfilling his promise to his daughter. He, however,
determined not to deprive Zuleika of the pleasure she anticipated from
her drive and, therefore, when the barouche and its spirited horses were
brought to the hôtel door installed Peppino in the driver's seat with
the faithful Ali to act as an additional guard and protector.

Zuleika, after bidding her father a tender farewell, was assisted by him
into the elegant vehicle and Ali drove off, managing the prancing and
mettlesome steeds, with all the dash and skill of a veteran Paris
coachman.

They passed along the Corso, which as usual was crowded with splendid
equipages and gay promenaders, finally making their way to the vast and
beautiful Piazza del Popolo, which presented even a more animated and
enlivening scene than the Corso. The elegant equipages were there
supplemented by superbly mounted cavaliers and the various paths were
alive with handsome girls and their gallants, while interspersed amid
the better classes were gorgeously attired peasants of both sexes, some
simply idling about, others vending small wares and flowers.

Tiring at length of the ordinary sights of Rome, Zuleika directed Ali to
drive a short distance into the country. He obeyed with considerable
reluctance for he was well aware of the dangers to be encountered in the
environs of the city, and Peppino, on his side, was also uneasy, though
he did not venture to protest against what he considered a most
censurable caprice of his youthful mistress.

However, they drove along for several miles without the slightest
incident occurring to warrant the fears of Ali and Peppino or trouble
the serenity of Zuleika. The young girl enjoyed the open country, with
its stately trees, verdure and refreshing odors, immensely, and
internally congratulated herself on having varied her programme by
leaving dusty Rome behind her for a time.

Meanwhile Ali, with the habitual fatalism of his nation, had resigned
himself in advance to whatever might happen and drove straight onward
with his eyes impassibly fixed upon the horses. Not so with Peppino;
the wily and well-posted Italian was constantly on the alert, scanning
every thicket, clump of trees or turn of the road with a searching look
long before they came to it; although nothing suspicious had as yet met
his gaze, he was not by any means either satisfied or reassured.

Finally they approached a small roadside inn and Zuleika, complaining of
thirst, directed the barouche to be stopped and Peppino to dismount from
his seat, enter the inn and procure some wine for her. Peppino made a
grimace at this command, but had not the courage to explain to
Monte-Cristo's daughter that in obeying her he ran the risk of
encountering some of his old comrades who might prove too inquisitive.
He slowly clambered down from the barouche and with an exceedingly
rueful countenance made his way into the inn. He had not been gone an
instant when he suddenly reappeared, running towards the barouche and
uttering loud cries of alarm. Half a dozen rough-looking men pursued him
and before he could reach the vehicle he was caught. Simultaneously
another party of ruffians issued from the inn, catching the horses by
the bridle as Ali was about to drive off.

"Not so fast, my sable friend!" said one of the men. "We must make the
acquaintance of your beautiful young mistress!"

Zuleika sat speechless, frozen with terror. Ali raised his whip to
strike the ruffian who had spoken so flippantly of Monte-Cristo's
daughter, but the indignant mute was instantly overpowered and dragged
to the ground.

Meanwhile the men who held Peppino in their clutches were examining him
closely.

"I would swear," said one of them, "that this is our old comrade,
Peppino, who ran away from us so unceremoniously, taking with him all he
could lay his hands on!"

"It is Peppino," put in another. "I know him in spite of his stained
face and livery! By the Holy Virgin!" he added, "I know the livery, too!
It's Monte-Cristo's!"

"Then the barouche and horses are Monte-Cristo's also!" said the first
speaker. "No doubt, too, that young woman there is a member of the
Count's family. We followed Peppino for a little fun, comrades, but have
fallen upon a slice of rare luck! Monte-Cristo is responsible for
Vampa's arrest yesterday, for the chief was taken as he left his room
Now we can make reprisals!"

"Excellent!" cried another of the band. "We can make reprisals and
obtain at least one valuable hostage for Vampa's safety! Signora," he
said to the terrified Zuleika, "who are you?"

The poor girl, commanding her voice as best she could, replied, with
some dignity:

"I am Zuleika, daughter of the Count of Monte-Cristo! In his name I
demand that you instantly release us!"

"So!" said the man, turning to his delighted companions. "His daughter!
We can now count on Vampa's safety without the shadow of a doubt!"

The leader of the bandits now came from the inn; upon being informed of
the important capture his men had made he rubbed his hands in glee.
Turning to his lieutenants, he said:

"Have a guard placed in the barouche beside Monte-Cristo's daughter and
let another comrade drive the equipage to the rendezvous of the band. As
for the colored driver, let him go back to Rome on foot and carry the
news to his master with the compliments of Vampa's men!"

"What shall be done with Peppino?" asked one of the lieutenants.

"Hang him to the nearest tree!" answered the leader, but, immediately
taking a second thought, he added: "No. Keep him! Perhaps Monte-Cristo
places some value on the scoundrel and it might not be bad policy to
retain him as an additional hostage!"

Peppino who had been listening intently to the leader's words heaved a
deep sigh of relief. He would certainly experience rough treatment, but
at least his life was safe. He, therefore, submitted to be bound without
a murmur and even smiled as he was being led away.

The leader's commands regarding Zuleika and the equipage were promptly
obeyed, and soon Monte-Cristo's daughter was a close prisoner in a rocky
cell of the bandits' subterranean fastness.

Ali, as soon as set free, started for Rome to give the alarm.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE RAID ON THE BANDITS.


When Ali reached the Hôtel de France and dragged himself to his master's
apartment, which was not until quite late in the afternoon, his
condition was truly deplorable. Footsore and ready to drop from extreme
fatigue, he staggered like a drunken man. He was thickly covered with
dust and profuse perspiration made his dark skin glisten. The faithful
mute at once threw himself at the Count's feet, embracing his knees and
in his marvellous pantomime eloquently entreating pardon.

Monte-Cristo, who was suffering torment because of his beloved
daughter's prolonged absence, instantly divined that some terrible
accident had befallen her and grew almost wild with grief and
apprehension. Raising Ali up, he said to him in a broken, anxious voice:

"Tell me what has occurred without circumlocution or delay, and tell me
all!"

The Nubian made a profound salaam in token of submission and obedience.
Then he proceeded, in his own peculiar mode of narrating events with
which Monte-Cristo was so thoroughly familiar and which in this instance
he translated only too readily and unerringly, to recount the
particulars of the fatal drive into the outskirts of the city and of
the capture of Zuleika, Peppino and the equipage by the brigands.

Monte-Cristo sat for an instant after he had concluded like one
stupefied, so utterly overwhelmed was he by the unexpected and
distracting intelligence. Then he sprang to his feet and began pacing
the room, muttering as he walked:

"So the wretches have seized my daughter and servant by way of reprisals
and intend to hold them as hostages for the safety of Luigi Vampa! What
is to be done? Let me think, let me think!"

He placed his hand to his forehead and accelerated his step, passing
back and forth with such feverish rapidity that even Ali, impassible as
he was by nature, showed alarm, dreading the effect of all this fearful
and exhausting excitement upon his adored master to save whom from the
slightest trouble or grief he would have freely and unhesitatingly given
his life. Monte-Cristo continued to mutter:

"Vampa is a prisoner, closely confined in a dungeon of the Castle of St.
Angelo. He is to be tried for his many crimes, among which I have caused
to be included the abduction of Annunziata Solara and his attempt to
blacken the fair fame of the Viscount Massetti. His conviction and
punishment as a bandit may be accepted as certain, whatever may be the
fate of the other counts in the black indictment against him, for hosts
of those whom he has robbed and maltreated are to testify, and the Roman
authorities have for some reason suddenly become his deadly, implacable
foes; they will show him no mercy! But the rest of the infamous band,
what is to be done with them? Nothing, absolutely nothing, so far as I
have been able to learn! Why? Possibly because the police fear to attack
the brigands in their stronghold! But I will change this item of the
programme--yes, I will change it! I will at once to Cardinal Monti,
complain that my daughter has been seized by the bandits and offer with
the aid of Captain Morrel to lead a detachment of soldiery against them.
Animated by Maximilian and myself, the military will show courage for
once. The result cannot be doubtful. We shall capture the whole band,
together with their famous fastness, and rescue Zuleika. Peppino, too,
shall be delivered. I will not take Massetti with me--no, he is too rash
and might imperil the success of the undertaking--no, I will not take
him, I will not even inform him of what I propose doing. The Cardinal
will scarcely venture to refuse me. Should he hesitate, however, I will
shame him into consenting, I will threaten him with invoking the aid of
the French minister! No, he will not refuse me! Now for the trial of my
power! Oh! Zuleika, my darling child, I will save you, I will save you!"

Hastily putting on his hat and throwing a light cloak about him, the
Count of Monte-Cristo departed on his mission, a mission certainly
altogether characteristic of the marvellous man.

Cardinal Monti received him cordially, heard his complaint and, after
demurring slightly, accepted his offer to lead the soldiers against the
redoubtable brigands, agreeing to place two hundred of the Swiss Guard
properly officered and equipped at the disposal of himself and Captain
Morrel. It was decided that the expedition should start from the Castle
of St. Angelo at ten o'clock that night and should be guided by a trusty
peasant, then in the Cardinal's service, who professed to know the exact
location of the bandits' retreat and the safest route to it.

These preliminaries satisfactorily settled, Monte-Cristo, his heart
overflowing with joy, immediately returned to the Hôtel de France to
notify M. Morrel and to make his preparations for the coming campaign.
Upon being informed of Zuleika's seizure by the outlaws and of the part
her father wished him to take in her deliverance, Maximilian instantly
consented, only too happy to have such a signal opportunity of serving
his benefactor. Zuleika's misfortune, however, distressed him greatly.

"Does Valentine know of your daughter's capture?" he asked of the Count.

"No," answered Monte-Cristo, "and I must ask you not to tell her until
after the result of the expedition is known. I wish to keep the whole
matter a close secret lest young Massetti should hear of it and mar our
plans by his usual hot-headedness. With this view I have already
instructed Ali, the only person save yourself in the Hôtel de France who
is aware of the terrible blow that has fallen upon me, to refrain from
communicating the intelligence to any one. It is better thus, for the
brigands undoubtedly have spies in Rome at this time and the utmost
caution is advisable."

M. Morrel readily assented to the wisdom of the Count's policy of
complete silence, and the twain separated to quietly prepare for the
night's perilous and exciting adventure.

At half-past nine o'clock Monte-Cristo and Maximilian entered the
court-yard of the grim Castle of St. Angelo, where the detachment of the
Swiss Guard was already drawn up under arms awaiting orders. The Count
wore a half military dress and had a sword at his side, while his friend
was clad in the full uniform of a Captain in the Army of France and
similarly provided with the regulation weapon. Both he and Monte-Cristo
had a couple of pistols in their belts, freshly and carefully loaded.

The Captain of the Swiss Guard received them and presented the peasant
whom Cardinal Monti had sent to act as guide. Then he turned over the
command of his men to Captain Morrel, who briefly addressed them in
French, a language with which they were well acquainted, informing them
that he and his Excellency, the Count of Monte-Cristo, relied on every
man to do his duty in suppressing the banditti and rescuing from their
rude clutches a beautiful young French girl, no other than the Count's
own daughter.

At the close of this address the soldiers saluted, the only way in which
the military regulations permitted them to respond.

Monte-Cristo and M. Morrel then had a brief conference with the peasant
guide, who seemed very intelligent and thoroughly posted as to the
bandits and their stronghold. The information he gave was in every
respect satisfactory and it was abundantly plain that the man could be
implicitly relied upon.

Everything was now in readiness and, as the hour of ten was sounded by
the clock of the Castle of St. Angelo, the troops headed by Captain
Morrel and the Count filed out of the court-yard and began their march.
When the open country was reached the guide took up a position a trifle
in advance of the detachment and led the way. Complete silence was
maintained and the utmost care taken to muffle the tramp of the
soldiers' feet.

After marching until nearly midnight, the guide in a low, cautious
whisper informed the Count and Maximilian that the bandits' fastness was
close at hand. A brief halt for rest and recuperation was immediately
ordered; then the advance was resumed, followed by a struggle with the
brigands' sentinel, who was seized and overpowered before he could give
even the slightest alarm.

"Now, men," said Captain Morrel, in a firm, commanding tone, "for a
prompt dash and we shall trap all the wolves in their subterranean den!"

The cave had two entrances. The Count at the head of half the troops
speedily possessed himself of one and Maximilian with the rest of the
detachment promptly seized the other.

So far the success of the expedition had been complete. The outlaws were
caged and could not escape, but, nevertheless, it was probable that they
would make a desperate and bloody resistance. Simultaneously
Monte-Cristo and Captain Morrel penetrated the gloomy depths with their
men and a dozen torches quickly lighted illuminated the cavern as if by
magic. Instantly there arose a chorus of wild shouts uttered by the
surprised bandits, who, armed to the teeth, came thronging from every
direction. A fierce hand to hand battle ensued, the cavern echoing with
the rattle of musketry, the reports of pistols and the clash of swords.

As had been anticipated the brigands contended desperately and with the
utmost fury. They were brave, hardy wretches, and though hemmed in on
all sides evidently hoped to triumph over the invaders of their
stronghold and drive them out in disorder and terror. Their former
experience with the Swiss Guard and the police warranted them in
entertaining this hope, but on the present occasion they reckoned
without their host, for the soldiers had never before had such intrepid,
determined and able leaders.

The battle lasted for over an hour and it was not until many had been
killed and wounded on both sides that the outlaws began to show signs of
wavering. Monte-Cristo and Captain Morrel performed prodigies of valor,
animating and encouraging their troops both by word and example. Finally
the outlaws were completely subdued, such of them as had not been slain
having been made prisoners. The Count escaped without a scratch, but
Maximilian was slightly wounded in the left hand.

When the firing and the clash, of swords had ceased, Captain Morrel
gave the order to search the cave for Zuleika and Peppino, first placing
sentinels at the entrances to guard against surprise and prevent the
escape of any of the bandits who amid the confusion might slip from
their captors.

"Where are the cells?" asked Monte-Cristo of the peasant guide, who had
manfully borne his part in the struggle.

"Follow me," answered the man. "I will take you to them."

Monte-Cristo now that the excitement of the fray had left him was filled
with anxiety for his daughter. What had happened to her since she had
been a captive in the bandits' den? Had her honor been respected as well
as her life? His suspense was the most terrible torture possible to
conceive. He could scarcely restrain himself until he should learn the
truth, be it fatal or favorable. Maximilian was almost equally agitated,
but managed to maintain a comparatively calm exterior that he might the
better support and cheer his friend in this his hour of bitter need.

The peasant, holding a torch above his head, conducted them into a dark,
damp corridor, several soldiers following in charge of a lieutenant. The
party had not gone many steps when a man's cries became audible,
proceeding from a cell near at hand. The door of this cell was fastened
only by a bar of iron, to remove which required but an instant, when it
was discovered that the cries came from Peppino, who having heard the
noise of the conflict and concluded that relief was near had at once
commenced to shout that he might disclose his whereabouts to the
invaders. The ex-bandit was set at liberty and the search was continued.

Presently a low moan struck the Count's attentive ear.

"What was that?" he asked, with a start.

"A moan that was no doubt uttered by your daughter!" answered the guide.

"My daughter!" cried the Count. "Then, thank God, she is alive!"

They reached another cell, the door of which, like that of Peppino's,
was fastened by a bar. Within the cell the low moaning continued.
Monte-Cristo seized the bar, whirled it aside and flung open the door;
then he sprang into the cell, calling wildly on his daughter.

Zuleika was lying in a corner upon a heap of straw and moaning
piteously. At the sound of her father's voice, however, she was on her
feet in an instant and cast herself rapturously into his arms.

"Are you safe, my darling child?" said the Count, covering her face with
kisses. "Did the bandits respect you?"

"I am safe, dear father," answered Zuleika, "safe and uninjured. The
bandits frightened me and the solitude and terrors of this dark, dismal
dungeon have been fearful to endure. But all my troubles are over now
that you are here!"

The Count then directed the guide to conduct them to the bandits'
stables and there his horses and barouche were found. The equipage was
taken to the open air, and after placing his daughter in the vehicle the
Count left her in charge of Peppino and several soldiers of the Swiss
Guard, returning to the cavern to bring the work of the expedition to a
close.

When Monte-Cristo reached the point where the Swiss Guard and their
prisoners were assembled, he found Captain Morrel superintending the
placing of an aged bandit upon an improvised stretcher.

"During your absence, Count," said he, his face radiant with joy, "we
made the most important capture of the night! This old man is Pasquale
Solara!"

"Where did you find him?" asked the Count.

"In a large cell used by the outlaws as an infirmary. He says he is
mortally wounded and slowly dying, that his wound was inflicted by a
Roman nobleman who met him upon the highway--a very likely story,
truly!"

"It is a fact," answered Monte-Cristo. "The Roman nobleman who wounded
him was Giovanni Massetti! But, thank God, he is still alive and will
probably last until Vampa's trial at which I may be able to force him to
speak out. Have him carefully attended to, Maximilian!"

The captives were formed in line and, none being too much disabled to
walk, save old Solara who was borne along on his stretcher, they were
marched to Rome surrounded by the triumphant Swiss Guard. Monte-Cristo,
Maximilian and Zuleika followed in the Count's barouche, Peppino
officiating as coachman.


CHAPTER XXIX.

VAMPA'S TRIAL.


The successful result of the raid upon the bandits made Monte-Cristo and
Captain Morrel the heroes of the hour in Rome. Everywhere they went
crowds assembled to gaze upon them and they were greeted with hearty
cheers and loud acclamations of joy. Truth to tell the Roman people both
high and low had very much to thank them for. The outlaws' band was
completely broken up and every member of it was safely bestowed in the
dungeons of the Castle of St. Angelo, where, as already stated, the
redoubtable leader the notorious brigand chief, Luigi Vampa himself,
also languished, awaiting whatever disposition the authorities might
choose to make of him with anything but stoicism, for he did not doubt
that it would go hard with him. Vampa's arrest was considered as
directly due to Monte-Cristo, for had he not come to visit the Count it
was improbable that he would ever have been captured. By the advice of
Monte-Cristo also the bandits' subterranean retreat had been filled with
powder and blown to atoms. No wonder, therefore, the Romans were
grateful to the illustrious Frenchman and his able assistant Captain
Morrel.

Old Pasquale Solara had been placed in a hospital where he was closely
watched and had the attendance of a competent physician, for the Count
had assured Cardinal Monti that he could perhaps be made an important
witness against Vampa at his forthcoming trial. After examining the
shepherd's wound the physician had given his opinion that it was fatal,
but that by resorting to proper and judicious measures the old man's
life could be prolonged sufficiently to enable him to testify.

Valentine was much affected when she heard from Zuleika's lips the story
of her seizure by the brigands and her imprisonment in the dark, damp
cell of their cavern fastness, but her emotion was tempered with joy
that her beloved friend had escaped with no other injury than the shock
resulting from her fright and natural apprehensions.

When Giovanni learned of his betrothed's dangerous adventure and the
perils that had encompassed her his indignation knew no bounds, and in
addition he felt considerably hurt that Monte-Cristo had not allowed him
to participate in her rescue. The Count and his daughter, however,
succeeded in calming him and in convincing him that all had been done
for the best. He was further propitiated by Monte-Cristo's assurance
that he could now act openly and without fear of prejudicing his case,
as the criminals were secured and the end was surely approaching.

Cardinal Monti decided that Vampa's trial should take place within a
week and that the first charge investigated should be that relating to
the abduction of Annunziata Solara and the conspiracy against the
Viscount Massetti. This decision was brought about by the influence of
the Count of Monte-Cristo, who represented to the Papal Secretary of
State the importance of utilizing the testimony of old Pasquale Solara
while he was yet in a condition to give it.

The Count resolved to make a final effort to convince Annunziata Solara
of Giovanni's innocence, though he had determined to employ her evidence
in any event, trusting to the lawyers and the Court to extract such
admissions from her as would tend to show that she was mistaken in
regard to the identity of her abductor. He knew the former flower-girl
was conscientious and firmly believed in her theory, but still he was
not without hope that she might be led to see matters as they really
were. Besides, if her father should see fit to confess she could not
fail to be convinced of Vampa's guilt and in that case the expression of
her conviction would be of the utmost value.

In pursuit of his plan Monte-Cristo at once communicated with Mme. de
Rancogne at the Refuge in Civita Vecchia, begging her to bring
Annunziata to Rome without an instant's delay. She promptly responded by
appearing at the Hôtel de France with her protégée and the Count
arranged an interview between the latter and young Massetti in his
salon. When Annunziata accompanied by the Superior of the Order of
Sisters of Refuge entered the apartment and found Giovanni waiting for
her there she flushed deeply and began to tremble.

"Courage, my poor child," said Mme. de Rancogne, soothingly, "courage!"

"Sister Annunziata," said the Count, who was also in the salon, "have
no fear. All we wish in this peculiarly unfortunate matter is to get at
the truth. Hear what the Viscount has to say in his own behalf--that is
only justice!"

The flush on the girl's handsome countenance was succeeded by an ashen
paleness, but she eventually managed to obtain control of herself.
Casting down her eyes, she said:

"I will hear what the Viscount Massetti has to say, but he will not, he
cannot, deny his shameful and dishonorable conduct towards me!"

Giovanni, hardly less affected than the girl who supposed herself his
victim, advanced to her and took her hand. She did not refuse to let him
hold it in his, but studiously refrained from looking him in the face.

"Annunziata," said Massetti, humbly, "I do not deny that my conduct
towards you in the past was altogether reprehensible and unpardonable. I
do not deny that circumstances so shaped themselves that I was made to
seem a wretched, despicable criminal in your eyes; but, Annunziata, I
stopped short of actual guilt, and as Heaven is my witness I had no hand
either in your abduction or the horrible events that accompanied and
followed it! This I swear, and this is God's truth!"

Annunziata lifted her eyes and gave him a searching glance.

"I understand your anxiety to clear yourself," she said, slowly. "With a
stain on your name you cannot marry the Count of Monte-Cristo's
beautiful daughter!"

It was a keen, cutting thrust and made Giovanni wince, but he recovered
himself instantly.

"I am anxious to clear my name that I may wed Zuleika," he replied,
steadily and firmly, "but I am also anxious because I am innocent of all
criminal action--innocent of your abduction, of your dishonor and of
your brother's blood! Annunziata, do you still decline to believe my
solemn assertions?"

"I would gladly believe them if I could," responded the girl; "but,
alas! I cannot! I saw your face when your mask fell from it that
dreadful night in the forest! I heard the tones of your voice afterwards
in the hut guarded by the bandits! What more convincing evidence could I
require?"

"You were mistaken, Annunziata, you were fearfully mistaken!" cried the
young Italian, overwhelming despair seizing upon him and crushing the
hope in his heart. He could not convince the former flower-girl, he
could not even shake her convictions! He had failed with her as
Monte-Cristo had previously failed at the Refuge in Civita Vecchia! Up
to this time he had continued to hold Annunziata's hand, but now he
dropped it as if it had been some venomous serpent.

Annunziata was deeply affected, but her emotion arose from an altogether
different cause. She felt her shame and disgrace and was, besides,
horrified at the idea that she had once hung upon the honeyed words of
such a scoundrel as in her view the Viscount Massetti had proved to be.

Monte-Cristo was now thoroughly satisfied that Giovanni could effect
nothing with Annunziata and that a further prolongation of the interview
would only be fraught with additional suffering for both the girl and
young Massetti; he, therefore, requested Mme. de Rancogne to take her
protégée to her apartment, and when they had quitted the salon said to
the Viscount:

"We must trust this girl to the lawyers and judges, Giovanni. They
perhaps may be sufficiently shrewd to shake her testimony even should
old Solara elect to maintain silence on the subject that vitally
concerns us."

At the appointed time the trial of Luigi Vampa began in the Judgment
Hall of the Vatican, which was crowded to its utmost capacity, both men
and women being present and striving to push forward so as to obtain a
glimpse of the notorious brigand chief and of the first witness
Annunziata Solara.

Cardinal Monti in person presided, assisted by two subordinate
Cardinals. In the portion of the hall railed off for the use of the bar
sat Monte-Cristo and the Viscount Massetti with their lawyers, the best
and most acute advocates in Rome, while just without the rail were M.
Morrel and Espérance, the latter having come from Paris expressly to
attend the trial, though at his request his testimony was not to be
demanded of him. Just within the rail and close beside Maximilian and
the son of Monte-Cristo Valentine and Zuleika were seated, both closely
veiled. Near them sat Mme. de Rancogne and the unfortunate Annunziata
Solara, clad in the dark gray habits of the Order of the Sisters of
Refuge, their white faces plainly visible beneath the nuns' bonnets of
spotless linen they wore. Peppino sat beside the Count.

There was a low murmur of conversation in the Judgment Hall, as the
audience discussed the probable issue of the trial and expressed diverse
opinions, though all were agreed that whatever might be the decision of
the Court in regard to the abduction and conspiracy Luigi Vampa would
not escape punishment for the crimes he had committed in his capacity of
chief of the bandits.

Presently Cardinal Monti arose, magnificent in his princely apparel and
glittering jewels, waving his hand for silence. His gesture was
instantly obeyed and the entire hall grew still as death. Then the
Cardinal resumed his seat on the judicial bench, and, turning to the
clerk of the Court, commanded him to proclaim the session opened. This
was done, whereupon the Cardinal said, in a voice distinctly audible in
all parts of the vast apartment:

"Bring in the accused!"

A moment later Luigi Vampa entered a raised enclosure serving the
purpose of a dock in the custody of two stalwart and thoroughly armed
military policemen. His face was ashen, but he glanced about him
nonchalantly and defiantly. When his eyes rested upon Monte-Cristo and
the Viscount Massetti he smiled in a peculiar sort of way as if he felt
convinced that all their labors would be in vain. Suddenly he saw the
two gray-robed women in their linen nuns' bonnets, starting slightly as
he recognized Annunziata Solara, but otherwise evincing no emotion.

The men and women in the distant portions of the hall got upon the
benches, craning their necks to see the accused, and there arose a
murmur, a faint hiss, that was promptly checked by the vigilant Court
officials who were marching here and there with their long white staffs
in their hands and their black caps upon their heads.

Then Cardinal Monti again arose, speaking in a deep, impressive voice:

"Luigi Vampa, prisoner at the bar," said he, "you stand here accused of
many grave crimes, but the charge which the Court will first consider is
blacker than all the rest; that charge, Luigi Vampa, prisoner at the
bar, is that you abducted and afterwards seduced a peasant girl named
Annunziata Solara and, in collusion with her father, Pasquale Solara,
conspired to throw the onus and suspicion of your crime upon an innocent
man, the Viscount Giovanni Massetti. What say you, Luigi Vampa, prisoner
at the bar, are you guilty or not guilty?"

"Not guilty, your Eminence!" responded the unabashed brigand chief.

At this there was another murmur in the hall which was promptly
suppressed as before.

"Accused, you can take your seat," said the Cardinal.

Vampa did as directed, the policemen remaining standing at his sides
with drawn swords in their hands.

"Let the first witness be called," said the Cardinal, addressing the
clerk of the Court.

That official arose and called out, in a loud voice:

"Annunziata Solara!"

The former flower-girl came forward, slowly and timidly, and went upon
the elevated witness stand, where the accustomed oath was administered
to her by the clerk.

Again there was a general craning of necks, the women showing the
strongest anxiety to behold the girl who was said to have been Vampa's
victim.

In a low, faltering voice Annunziata proceeded to give her testimony.
She repeated her sad story precisely as she had done before, entirely
exonerating the bandit chief and throwing the whole weight of the crime
upon the shoulders of the Viscount Massetti.

This was the reverse of what the audience had expected and the murmur of
surprise was universal.

The prisoner glanced at Monte-Cristo and Massetti with a radiant look of
triumph.

The Viscount's lawyers then took the witness in hand, but shrewd and
able as they were they utterly failed to make her swerve even a hair's
breadth from her evidence. She returned to her place beside Mme. de
Rancogne, confident that she had done her duty and uttered not a single
syllable that was untrue.

Peppino followed her. He repeated almost word for word the details he
had given the Count of Monte-Cristo in Paris. His recital was so vivid,
so circumstantial, that it made a wonderful impression both upon the
Court and the audience. When he spoke of old Pasquale Solara's infamous
sale of his beautiful daughter to Luigi Vampa the male auditors could
scarcely restrain their indignation and the women fairly screamed with
horror, the utmost efforts of the Court officers being required to force
them into anything like quietude. Another sensation was caused by
Peppino's exposure of the nefarious conspiracy by which the innocent
young Viscount was brought and kept under the suspicion of murder and
abduction. When he concluded his narrative and quitted the witness stand
he and Vampa exchanged glances of bitter and vindictive hate, and it
required all the strength of the policemen in charge of the prisoner to
keep him from leaping from the dock and attempting to take summary
vengeance upon the fearless and outspoken witness.

The Viscount Massetti now took the stand. He gave the full history of
his acquaintance with Annunziata Solara from the meeting in the Piazza
del Popolo to the encounter with Vampa in the forest and the
administration of the oath of silence, speaking with such evident
sincerity and feeling that his testimony acquired additional weight
thereby. The brigand chief watched him closely, listening to his
testimony with a contemptuous smile. When the young Italian returned to
Monte-Cristo and resumed his seat his pale visage was a mass of
perspiration and great agitation had possession of him.

"Call Pasquale Solara," said the Cardinal to the clerk, after referring
to a paper upon the desk in front of him.

"Pasquale Solara!" cried the clerk, immediately.

There was a stir in the audience and four soldiers of the Swiss Guard
advanced towards the judicial bench, bearing a stretcher upon which was
extended the emaciated form of the aged shepherd.

As her father was borne past her, Annunziata uttered a cry and arose to
go to him, but Mme. de Rancogne gently pulled her back into her chair,
whispering to her that he was in the custody of the Court and that she
could only see him after the trial was concluded, when the requisite
permission would be obtained for her.

Old Pasquale was lifted from the stretcher by a couple of soldiers and
aided to mount the witness stand. He was so faint and weak that it was
necessary to hold him in an upright position after he had with great
difficulty mounted the stand. Even then he trembled like a paralytic and
it was some moments before he could answer the questions addressed to
him. Vampa regarded him with intense anxiety, eagerly leaning forward to
catch the feeble, almost imperceptible sounds that issued from his lips.

"May it please your Eminence," said old Pasquale, painfully pausing
after every word, "I am a dying man. The hospital physician who has
accompanied me and is now in the Judgment Hall assures me that I can
last but a few days at most. I have been a great sinner, but I do not
desire to go before my angered God with all the weight of my iniquity
upon me; therefore, I have resolved to speak, to tell all I know!"

The spectators in the body of the hall shuddered. Old Solara's voice
did not reach them, but they felt instinctively that some dreadful
revelation was either being or about to be made. Monte-Cristo and
Massetti half arose in their seats; they were near enough to grasp the
purport of what the shepherd had said and its effect upon them was
absolutely overwhelming; they had expected that Pasquale would either
tell a cunningly fabricated tale calculated to shield Vampa or take
refuge in stony, stubborn silence, but instead he was going to make a
clean breast of the whole terrible crime! Annunziata had also heard and
was listening for what should follow with a countenance almost as white
as her nun's bonnet. Mme. de Rancogne caught her hands and held them
firmly; she too was startled beyond expression by old Solara's words and
feared the effect of further revelations upon her protégée. Zuleika,
Valentine, M. Morrel and Espérance were too far away from the witness
stand to comprehend a syllable, but like the spectators in the body of
the hall they divined what was on the point of coming, holding their
breath in fear and expectation. As for Vampa, he could hardly be kept
still; his fingers worked nervously as if he desired to strangle the
dying witness, and he glanced at him with the flashing eyes of a
ferocious tiger brought to bay.

Old Pasquale continued, amid the deepest silence:

"I do not seek to shield myself. Vampa is guilty both of the abduction
and of the plot to ruin the Viscount Massetti, but I was his tempter and
to me he owes his crime! However, with the murder of my son Lorenzo I
had nothing to do--the chief alone is responsible for that! But I
tempted him with the beauty of my poor daughter Annunziata! Greedy for
gold I sold her to him! The abduction was proposed by me and executed by
him! The plan to throw young Massetti under suspicion also originated
with me, Vampa and myself carrying it out together. In forming the plan
I was actuated by a desire to obtain vengeance upon old Count Massetti
for a wrong he did me in the past! Now, your Eminence, you know the
whole black history!"

Pasquale Solara ceased and sank back into the arms of the two soldiers
who were supporting him, totally overcome by the terrible exertions he
had made in delivering his crushing testimony, and lay there a helpless,
quivering mass. As they were about to remove him from the witness stand
a sudden thought occurred to him, and with a herculean effort he
straightened himself up, making a sign to the Court that he had
something further to communicate.

"Speak, witness," said Cardinal Monti, in response to this sign.

"Your Eminence," resumed the shepherd, slowly and painfully, "I wish to
say yet another word. I received my death wound at the hands of the
Viscount Massetti!"

There was a quick stir among those who heard this unexpected accusation
and a score of eyes, including those of Cardinal Monti and his
associates on the judicial bench, were instantly fixed upon the young
Italian, who glanced at Monte-Cristo and the lawyers with a look of
consternation. The Count was about to address the Court in explanation,
when old Solara, who had paused to recover breath, added:

"But I richly deserve what I received and it is fitting that I should
die by the hand of the man I sought to ruin! The wound, however, was
dealt me in a perfectly fair duel and with my latest breath I shall
exonerate the Viscount from all blame in the matter as I do now!"

The concluding portion of old Solara's last speech was a surprise.
Massetti drew a long breath of relief. It was scarcely probable that he
would be prosecuted by the Roman authorities for fighting a duel with
the shepherd under the circumstances, and the wounded man had
voluntarily removed every suspicion of foul play from him. Monte-Cristo
and the lawyers cast congratulatory glances at the young Italian. His
rehabilitation now only needed Vampa's conviction and sentence to be
perfect, and it could not for an instant be doubted that they would
speedily follow.

The effect of her father's testimony or rather confession upon
Annunziata had been startling. It completely shattered all her
convictions, placing her misfortunes in a new and horrible light. The
Viscount was innocent as he had steadily asserted, and her parent stood
revealed to her in all his moral hideousness; he was a monster, a demon;
he had made his fearful revelations only when death was upon him and
reparation was impossible; besides, there was nothing noble or elevating
about his remorse--it was thoroughly characteristic of the
man--altogether selfish, induced solely by the fear of consequences in
the world to come. Annunziata felt as if all faith in humanity had been
withdrawn from her, and as she gradually realized the full meaning of
her father's words she closed her eyes and with a gasp sank fainting
into the arms of Mme. de Rancogne, who, hardly less shocked and
surprised than the poor girl herself, used every effort to revive her,
finally succeeding.

In the little group consisting of Zuleika, Valentine, M. Morrel and
Espérance uncertainty prevailed for some moments. They had been unable
to catch what old Solara had said, to glean more than a general idea
that his testimony had been against Vampa. As soon, however, as his
emotion permitted him to do so Giovanni went to them and communicated
the glad tidings. Zuleika was almost overcome by the immensity of her
joy and with difficultly restrained herself from embracing her lover
directly in the face of the august Court and the assembled spectators.
Valentine was ready to weep with delight and her husband felt as much
triumph as if he had won a decisive victory over the combined enemies of
France. As for Espérance, he was both enraptured and ashamed--enraptured
that the dark stain was removed from Giovanni's name and ashamed that he
had been so blind and unjust as to wrongfully suspect him.

When the gist of Pasquale Solara's evidence was whispered around among
the audience the Court officers were powerless to suppress the
expressions of horror and enthusiasm. Had the shepherd not been closely
guarded by the soldiers he certainly would have been torn to pieces and
trodden under foot, so great was the tide of popular indignation against
him. At last, however, the tumult subsided and Cardinal Monti,
addressing the brigand chief, said:

"Luigi Vampa, prisoner at the bar, you have heard the testimony. What
have you to say in your defense?"

Vampa forced to his feet by the policemen replied, doggedly and
sullenly:

"Nothing!"

Cardinal Monti then turned to his associates on the judicial bench and a
brief conference ensued, after which he arose and facing Vampa said,
solemnly:

"Luigi Vampa, prisoner at the bar, the judgment of the Papal Court is
that you are guilty, first of the murder of Lorenzo Solara, though as he
attacked you the crime has been placed in the second degree, second of
the abduction of Annunziata Solara, and third of conspiracy to indelibly
blacken the character of a worthy Roman nobleman, the Viscount Giovanni
Massetti. Luigi Vampa, prisoner at the bar, the sentence of the Papal
Court is that you be taken hence back to your dungeon in the Castle of
St. Angelo, there to undergo solitary imprisonment for life. As this
sentence renders it unnecessary to proceed to an examination of the
other and less important charge against you, that of robbery on the
public highways and of maltreating your captives, your trial is now at
an end. Luigi Vampa, prisoner at the bar, may God have mercy upon you
and bring you to repentance and ultimate salvation!"

Cardinal Monti resumed his seat amid loud murmurs of applause and
satisfaction. When these died away the clerk declared the Court
adjourned, the convict was removed and the audience slowly dispersed.

Mme. de Rancogne and Annunziata Solara immediately returned to the
Refuge in Civita Vecchia, where the poor girl lay prostrated for many
weeks. After his confession of his infamous deeds she had no further
desire to see her despicable and degraded father.

Monte-Cristo and his party rode joyously back to the Hôtel de France in
the Count's barouche.

That evening no happier persons existed upon earth than Giovanni and
Zuleika.


CHAPTER XXX.

JOY UNBOUNDED.


The news of the result of Luigi Vampa's trial spread with the utmost
rapidity throughout Rome and occasioned the wildest rejoicing, still
further augmenting the popularity of Monte-Cristo and Captain Morrel,
who were credited by the Roman populace with having brought about the
dreaded brigand chief's conviction and inspired his sentence.
Everywhere, while the vast importance of old Pasquale Solara's testimony
was recognized and admitted, the wretched shepherd himself was execrated
as an unnatural, heartless father, as a diabolical scoundrel without a
single redeeming trait. The fact of his having turned State's evidence
saved him from the heavy hand of the law, but his mortal wound would
soon rid the world of him and this circumstance occasioned hearty
congratulation in all quarters.

The morning succeeding Vampa's trial a messenger arrived at the Hôtel de
France from the Count Massetti, bearing a brief note in which the aged
nobleman begged his son to come to him at once. Giovanni exhibited this
note triumphantly to Zuleika and the friends who had labored so
untiringly and successfully in his cause, and, together with the Count
of Monte-Cristo and M. Morrel, immediately repaired to the Palazzo
Massetti in Monte-Cristo's barouche. The old Count received his son with
open arms and cordially greeted Monte-Cristo and Maximilian.

"Giovanni," said he, frankly, "I admit that I was wrong, that I was led
astray by what seemed to me to be convincing proof. My pride and honor
revolted at the stain apparently cast upon them and I acted as almost
any Roman father would have done. I acknowledge that I was hasty, that I
proceeded to extremities without due reflection or examination. These
admissions in the presence of your noble, self-sacrificing friends cost
me dear, but, you observe that I do not shrink from them,
notwithstanding the deep humiliation. I humbly ask your forgiveness and
restore all I have taken from you. Again you are my beloved son and
heir."

The old nobleman paused, greatly affected; his eyes were full of tears,
tears of mingled contrition and delight. The Viscount's emotion was such
that for an instant he was unable to reply. He, however, recovered
control of himself with a mighty effort, and said, in a voice tremulous
with his colossal joy:

"Father, I have nothing to forgive. Appearances warranted all you did,
and I can only thank Heaven that the truth has been developed before it
was too late!"

With these words he threw himself upon the old Patrician's neck. The
Count embraced him, drawing him to his heart and their tears mingled
together, for Giovanni also was weeping now.

Slowly and as if reluctantly releasing his recovered and rehabilitated
son, the Count turned to M. Morrel.

"Captain," he said, "I owe you an ample apology for my haughty and
imperious treatment when you stated to me the object of your mission to
Rome. I tender it at this moment and venture to hope that you will
accept it even though it comes at the eleventh hour!"

"Count," replied Maximilian, "I should be worse than a boor did I not
accept it. Here is my hand in token of my renewed friendship and
esteem."

Old Massetti took the Captain's proffered hand and pressed it warmly.

"You fully sustain the reputation of the great nation to which you
belong," said he, with the utmost cordiality, "--you are as noble as you
are generous!"

"Count," answered M. Morrel, bowing profoundly, "you flatter me! Say
rather that I am a French soldier and as such never shrink from my duty
no matter in what shape it may come!"

"As you please, Captain," returned the aged nobleman, with an agreeable
smile. "To my apology I must, however, add my gratitude for all you have
done to aid Giovanni and in the expression of that gratitude I must
include Mme. Morrel, of whose heroic exploit in the Colosseum and
subsequent devotion to my son in his hour of mental darkness I have
heard."

Maximilian again bowed profoundly.

Advancing to the Count of Monte-Cristo the elder Massetti said:

"Now, your Excellency, it is your turn. Your name and deeds have long
been familiar to me, but to whom are they not familiar! Still, though
you have frequently honored Rome with your illustrious presence, never
have I had the pleasure of meeting you until this happy day when I, too,
am included in the long list of those who have received overwhelming
benefits at your hands. Edmond Dantès, Count of Monte-Cristo, I owe to
you my son's restoration to sanity brought about by little less than a
miracle, a blessing almost as great as his rehabilitation, for which
also I am on the endless roll of your debtors."

Monte-Cristo bowed, but made no reply.

"My debt, vast as it is," continued old Massetti, "is I learn to be yet
further augmented by an alliance between our two houses, and I need not
tell you that this increase of my obligations will be a burden of joy
that I shall accept with thanks to Heaven for the signal favor shown
me!"

Monte-Cristo repeated his bow and said:

"You ratify the compact between our two children then, Count Massetti?"

"With more delight than I can express!" replied the latter,
enthusiastically. "May I ask another favor of your Excellency?" he
added, suddenly.

"Certainly," said Monte-Cristo, somewhat astonished and casting a look
of inquiry at his venerable host.

"In that case," resumed the aged nobleman, "I would like to welcome your
daughter immediately to the Palazzo Massetti!"

"She shall be sent for without an instant's delay," answered
Monte-Cristo. "Giovanni, return in the barouche to the Hôtel de France
and bring Zuleika to your father!"

The young man joyously obeyed and in a very short space of time
Monte-Cristo's daughter came timidly and blushingly into the presence of
the Count Massetti, leaning upon the arm of her betrothed, whose
countenance fairly shone with happiness. The youthful pair were
accompanied by Mme. Morrel.

When the presentations had been made, the venerable Patrician stood for
a moment contemplating his future daughter-in-law.

"So this is Zuleika!" he said at length. "She is a beautiful and
charming girl, and I do not doubt that the attractions of her mind are
fully equal to those of her person! My child," he continued, addressing
Monte-Cristo's daughter, "I welcome you to my home and to my heart! Make
Giovanni as happy as I know he will make you! Now, my children, accept a
father's blessing!"

The young couple knelt at the old man's feet and he extended his hands
above their heads. When they arose he took Zuleika in his arms and
tenderly kissed her.

In the general joy Valentine was not forgotten, the aged Count renewing
to her the expression of his gratitude he had previously made to her
husband in her behalf.

It was ultimately arranged that the marriage contract should be signed
within a week, and this formality was complied with in the presence of
many of the young Viscount's relatives, of Monte-Cristo, Mercédès, M.
and Mme. Albert de Morcerf, Espérance and M. and Mme. Morrel, Mercédès
and the Morcerfs having come post-haste to Rome to take part in the
auspicious event. Monte-Cristo gave his daughter the dowry of a Princess
and his liberality was fully matched by that of the Count Massetti who
settled upon Giovanni a fortune equal to that of some oriental
potentate.

The marriage took place in Rome and was a grand affair, the wedding
festivities lasting all day and far into the night. The happy occasion
had the character of a public rejoicing, for the populace grateful to
the Count of Monte-Cristo and Maximilian Morrel for the suppression of
Luigi Vampa and his dangerous outlaws, who for years had been the terror
of rich and poor alike, paraded the streets in vast bodies in honor of
Zuleika's nuptials with the man whom the notorious brigand chief had so
nearly succeeded in overwhelming with irretrievable ruin and disgrace.

From a very early hour in the morning the Palazzo Massetti was
surrounded by cheering and enthusiastic throngs, and by eight o'clock
the vast gardens of the Massettis' were thrown open freely to all who
chose to enter. The preparations there were on a gigantic and princely
scale. Huge tables had been placed in various broad alleys and literally
groaned beneath the weight of the abundant and inviting refreshments,
while vast casks of excellent wines were on tap. An army of servants
waited upon the people, liberally supplying them with the appetizing
edibles and the exhilarating product of the vintage. The Papal and
French flags were everywhere displayed in company, and the beauty of the
decorations of the gardens was such as to excite universal wonder and
admiration. The health of the Viscount Massetti and his charming bride
was drunk thousands of times amid acclamations of delight, but
throughout the whole colossal assemblage perfect order was preserved,
the military police on duty finding their occupation a sinecure.

Immediately in front of the Palazzo Massetti a triumphal arch had been
erected. It was covered with the intertwined ensigns of Rome and France
and at its apex bore an appropriate motto formed of creamy white orange
blossoms and scarlet roses.

The interior of the palazzo rivaled in dazzling splendor the most superb
and gorgeous vision that ever entranced a devotee of hatchis while
dreaming under the potent influence of his favorite drug.

In the principal salon were gathered many personages with whom the
reader is familiar, all in festal attire--the Count of Monte-Cristo and
his beloved wife Mercédès, their friends Maximilian and Valentine
Morrel, Espérance, Mlle. Louise d' Armilly and M. and Madame Albert de
Morcerf. Many noble relatives of the groom were also present, to say
nothing of hosts of acquaintances. Old Count Massetti, who seemed
rejuvenated and whose venerable countenance was wreathed in smiles of
joy, moved about among his guests the happiest of the happy.

Presently a door was thrown open, a valet announced the bride and groom
and Giovanni entered proudly with the lovely Zuleika hanging upon his
arm, her beauty heightened by her blushes and diffidence. She wore a
magnificent robe of white satin that a Queen might have envied and the
radiance of diamonds of inestimable value flashed from a tasteful
necklace that adorned her pearly throat; upon her night black hair
rested a wreath of orange blossoms and her flowing bridal veil was
fastened back by a sparkling emerald pin.. A murmur of admiration and
approval arose from the guests as they beheld Monte-Cristo's daughter
and noted her unequaled charms.

The procession to St. Peter's was witnessed by compact masses of
spectators, who loudly cheered the bride and groom and hailed with
tumultuous applause all the well-known personages as they in turn
appeared.

Within the vast cathedral the concourse was immense, but was kept at a
suitable distance by uniformed ushers.

The Pope himself united the young couple in the holy bonds of wedlock,
having consented to do so in consequence of his high esteem for the
Massetti house, the oldest and most aristocratic in his dominions, and
out of consideration for the Count of Monte-Cristo, whose wonderful
history had penetrated even the august portals of the Vatican. At the
close of the impressive ceremony His Holiness blessed the newly-made
husband and wife, and immediately afterwards the grand organ burst out
with a triumphal peal, an unseen choir chanting a jubilant marriage
hymn, whereupon the bride and groom surrounded by their bridesmaids and
groomsmen, Espérance holding the first place among the latter, received
the congratulations of their relatives and friends.

That night there was unbounded festivity at the Palazzo Massetti, the
glad celebration terminating with a grand ball and an elaborate supper.
The next morning Giovanni and Zuleika started upon an extended bridal
tour which was to embrace the most interesting portions of Europe.

Eventually they settled in Paris, as they had originally decided, where
Giovanni bought a magnificent residence, furnishing it with all the
luxury of the orient.

Their married life was as happy as it was favored, and Zuleika never had
occasion to regret that she had clung to Giovanni when all the rest of
the world seemed to have deserted him.

Espérance and the young husband at once became as fast friends as ever,
and the dark cloud that had separated them in the past was completely
forgotten.

The Count of Monte-Cristo and Mercédès continued to lead a tranquil and
charming existence in the palatial mansion on the Rue du Helder. Upon
the elevation of Louis Napoleon to power the Count, who distrusted him
and his schemes, abandoned politics and the agitation of public life
forever, contenting himself with doing all the good in his power and
aiding the needy in a quiet, unostentatious way. His daughter and her
husband spent a great deal of their time at the family mansion, and the
Count and Mercédès acquired additional delight thereby. Albert de
Morcerf, his wife and Mlle. Louise d' Armilly remained inmates of the
Monte-Cristo residence, aiding not a little in promoting the comfort and
happiness of their generous and agreeable hosts.

Maximilian Morrel and his wife returned to Marseilles, but they were
frequently in Paris and never failed to find vast enjoyment and
gratification in the society of the Monte-Cristos, the Massettis and
their friends.

Giovanni's father died a year or two after the marriage of his son,
leaving him his title, his palaces, his vineyard and all his colossal
wealth; but even this change in his condition did not induce the young
Count to return to Rome, where the sad associations of the past were too
powerful for him.

Old Solara expired in the hospital at Rome a few days subsequent to
Vampa's trial, and Annunziata lived long with Mme. de Rancogne in the
Refuge at Civita Vecchia, drawing what consolation she could from
abundant good works.

Peppino and Beppo remained in the service of the Count of Monte-Cristo,
leading honest and upright lives.

Waldmann and Siebecker were caught red-handed in the commission of a
murder and ended their iniquitous association on the scaffold, the knife
of the guillotine ridding the world of two extremely dangerous wretches.

As for Danglars, he suddenly disappeared from Paris one day and was
heard of no more.

THE END.