UNCLE WIGGILY'S TRAVELS

by

HOWARD R. GARIS

Author of _Sammie and Susie Littletail_, _Johnnie and Billy Bushytail_,
_Jackie and Peetie Bow Wow_, "Those Smith Boys," series, "The Island
Boys," series, etc.

Illustrated by LOUIS WISA

A.L. Burt Company
Publishers New York

1913


[Illustration]


THE FAMOUS BED TIME SERIES

Five groups of books, intended for reading aloud to the little folks each
night. Each volume contains 8 colored illustrations, 31 stories, one for
each day of the month. Handsomely bound in cloth. Size 6-1/2 x 8-1/4.

Price cents per volume, postpaid

       *       *       *       *       *


HOWARD R. GARIS'

Bed Time Animal Stories

No.  1. SAMMIE AND SUSIE LTTTLETAIL
No.  2. JOHNNY AND BILLY BUSHYTAIL
No.  3. LULU, ALICE & JIMMIE WIBBLEWOBBLE
No.  5. JACKIE AND PEETIE BOW-WOW
No.  7. BUDDY AND BRIGHTEYES PIGG
No.  9. JOIE, TOMMIE AND KITTIE KAT
No. 10. CHARLIE AND ARABELLA CHICK
No. 14. NEDDIE AND BECKIE STUBTAIL
No. 16. BULLY AND BAWLY NO-TAIL
No. 20. NANNIE AND BILLIE WAGTAIL
No. 28. JOLLIE AND JILLIE LONGTAIL

Uncle Wiggily Bed Time Stories

No.  4. UNCLE WIGGILY'S ADVENTURES
No.  6. UNCLE WIGGILY'S TRAVELS
No.  8. UNCLE WIGGILY'S FORTUNE
No. 11. UNCLE WIGGILY'S AUTOMOBILE
No. 19. UNCLE WIGGILY AT THE SEASHORE
No. 21. UNCLE WIGGILY'S AIRSHIP
No. 27. UNCLE WIGGILY IN THE COUNTRY

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt
of price by the publishers.

A.L. BURT CO., 114-120 East 23d St., New York

       *       *       *       *       *


UNCLE WIGGILY'S TRAVELS


The stories herein contained appeared originally in the _Evening News_,
of Newark, N.J., where (so many children and their parents were kind
enough to say) they gave pleasure to a number of little folks and
grown-ups also. Permission to issue the stories in book form was kindly
granted by the publisher and editor of the _News_, to whom the author
extends his thanks.


CONTENTS

   STORY                                         PAGE

     I. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE RED SQUIRREL         9

    II. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BROWN WREN          16

   III. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE SUNFISH             22

    IV. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE YELLOW BIRD         28

     V. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE SKY-CRACKER         34

    VI. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BUTTERCUP           40

   VII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE JULY BUG            46

  VIII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT      52

    IX. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE LOST CHIPMUNK       58

     X. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BLACK CRICKET       64

    XI. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BUSY BUG            70

   XII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE FUNNY MONKEY        76

  XIII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BIG DOG             82

   XIV. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE PEANUT MAN          88

    XV. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE CRAWLY SNAKE        94

   XVI. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE WATER-LILIES       100

  XVII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE SUNFLOWER          106

 XVIII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE LIGHTNING BUGS     112

   XIX. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE PHOEBE BIRDS       118

    XX. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE MILKMAN            124

   XXI. UNCLE WIGGILY'S SWIMMING LESSON          131

  XXII. UNCLE WIGGILY IN THE BEAR'S DEN          137

 XXIII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE TOADSTOOL          144

  XXIV. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE CHICKIE            150

   XXV. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE WASP               157

  XXVI. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BLUEBELL           163

 XXVII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE WIBBLEWOBBLES      170

XXVIII. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BERRY BUSH         176

  XXIX. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE CAMP FIRE          183

   XXX. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE COWBIRD            189

  XXXI. UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE TAILOR BIRD        195


Uncle Wiggily's Travels


STORY I

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE RED SQUIRREL


You know when Uncle Wiggily Longears, the old rabbit gentleman, started
out to look for his fortune, he had to travel many weary miles, and many
adventures happened to him. Some of those adventures I have told you in
the book just before this one, and now I am going to tell you about his
travels when he hoped to find a lot of money, so he would be rich.

One day, as I told you in the last story in the other book, Uncle Wiggily
came to a farm, and there he had quite an adventure with a little boy. And
this little boy had on red trousers, because, I guess, his blue ones were
in the washtub. Anyhow, he and the rabbit gentleman became good friends.

And now I am going to tell you what happened when Uncle Wiggily met the
red squirrel.

"Where do you think you will go to look for your fortune to-day, Uncle
Wiggily?" asked the little boy with the red trousers the next morning,
after the rabbit had stayed all night at the farm house.

"I do not know," said the rabbit gentleman. "Perhaps I had better do some
traveling at night. I couldn't find the pot of gold at the end of the
rainbow, but perhaps there may be a gold, or silver fortune, at the end of
a moon-beam. I think I'll try."

"Oh, but don't you get sleepy at night?" asked the little boy's mother as
she fried an ice cream cone for Uncle Wiggily's breakfast.

"Well, I could sleep in the day time, and then I would stay awake at
night," answered the traveling uncle, blinking his ears.

"Oh, but aren't you afraid of the bogeyman at night?" inquired the boy
with the red hair--I mean trousers.

"There are no such things as bogeymen," said Uncle Wiggily, "and if there
were any, they would not harm you. I am not a bit afraid in the dark,
except that I don't like mosquitoes to bite me. I think I'll travel
to-morrow night, and look for gold at the end of the moon-beam."

So he started off that day, and he went only a short distance, for he
wanted to find a place to sleep in order that he would be wide awake when
it got dark.

Well, he found a nice, soft place under a pile of hay, and there he
stretched out to slumber as nicely as if he were in his bed at home. He
even snored a little bit, I believe, or else it was Bully Frog croaking
one of his songs.

The day passed, and the sun went down, and it got all ready to be night,
and still Uncle Wiggily slept on soundly. But all of a sudden he heard
voices whispering:

"Now you go that way and I'll go this way, and we'll catch that rabbit and
put him in a cage and sell him!"

Well, you can just believe that Uncle Wiggily was frightened when he
awakened suddenly and saw two bad boys softly creeping up and making ready
to catch him.

"Oh, this is no place for me!" the rabbit cried, and he grabbed up his
crutch and his valise and hopped away so fast that the boys couldn't catch
him, no matter how fast they could run, even bare-footed.

"Let's throw stones at him!" they cried. And they did, but I'm glad to say
that none of them hit Uncle Wiggily. Isn't it queer how mean some boys can
be? But perhaps they were never told any better, so we'll forgive them
this time.

"Well, it is now night," said the rabbit gentleman as he hopped on through
the woods, "so I think I will sit under this tree and wait for the moon to
come up. And while I'm waiting I'll eat my supper."

So Uncle Wiggily ate his supper, which the kind farmer lady had put up for
him, and then he sat and waited for the moon to rise, and pretty soon he
heard a funny noise, calling like this:

"Who? Who? Who-tu-tu-tu."

"Oh, you know who I am all right, Mr. Owl," said the rabbit. "You can see
very well at night. You can see me."

"My goodness, if it isn't Uncle Wiggily!" cried the owl in surprise. "What
are you doing out so late, I'd like to know?"

"Waiting for a moon-beam, so I can see if there is any gold for my fortune
at the end of it," was the answer. "Is the moon coming up over the trees,
Mr. Owl?"

"Yes, here it comes," said the owl, "and now I must fly off to the dark
woods, for I don't like the light," and he fluttered away.

Then the moon came up, all silver and glorious; shining over the tree tops
like a shimmering ball, and soon the moon-beams fell to the ground in
slanting rays, but they fell so softly, like feathers, that they did not
get hurt at all.

"Well, I guess I'll follow that big one," said the old gentleman rabbit,
as he picked out a nice, broad, large, shiny moon-beam. "That must have
gold at the end, and, if I find it, my fortune is made." So off he started
to follow the moon-beam to where it came to an end.

It seemed to go quite a distance through the dark woods, and Uncle Wiggily
traveled on for several hours, and he didn't seem to be any nearer the end
by that time than he was at first.

"My land, this is a very long beam," he exclaimed. "It is almost big
enough to make a church steeple from. But I'll keep on a little longer,
for I'm not a bit sleepy yet."

Well, all of a sudden, just as he was turning the corner around a big
stone, the rabbit gentleman heard a funny noise.

It wasn't like any one crying, yet it sounded as if some one was in
trouble, for the voice said:

"Oh, dear! I'll never get it big enough, I know I can't! I've combed it
and brushed it, and done it up in curl papers to make it fluffy, but still
it isn't like theirs. What shall I do?"

"Hum, I wonder who that can be?" thought Uncle Wiggily. "Perhaps it is
some little lost child; but no children would be out in the woods at
night. I'll take a look."

So he hopped softly over, and peered around the edge of the stone, and
what do you think he saw?

Why, there was a nice, little, red squirrel-girl, and she had a comb and a
brush, and little looking-glass. And the glass was stuck up on a stump
where the moon-beam that Uncle Wiggily was following shone on it and
reflected back again. And by the light of the moon-beam the red squirrel
was combing and brushing out her tail as hard as she could comb and brush
it.

"What are you doing?" asked Uncle Wiggily in surprise.

"Oh, my! How you startled me!" exclaimed the red squirrel. "But I'm glad
it's you, Uncle Wiggily. I'm going to a surprise party soon, and I was
just trying to make my tail as big as Johnnie or Billie Bushytail's, but I
can't do it," she said sadly.

"No, and you never can," said the rabbit. "Their tails are a different
kind than yours, for they are gray squirrels and you are a red one. But
yours is very nice. Be content to have yours as it is."

"I guess I will," said the red squirrel. "But what are you doing out so
late, Uncle Wiggily?"

"Looking for the end of the moon-beam to get my fortune."

"Ha! The moon-beam ends right here," said the red squirrel-girl, pointing
to her looking-glass, and, surely enough, there the bright shaft of light
ended. "But there is no fortune here, Uncle Wiggily, I am sorry to say,"
she added.

"I see there isn't," answered the rabbit. "Well, I must travel on again
to-morrow, then. But now I will see that you get safely home, for it is
getting late."

And, just as he said that, what should happen but that a black, savage,
ugly bear stuck his nose out of the bushes and made a grab for the rabbit.
But what do you think the red squirrel did?

She just took her hair brush and with the hard back of it she whacked the
bear on the end of his tender-ender nose, and he howled, and turned around
to run away, and the squirrel girl tickled him with the comb, and he ran
faster than ever, and the bear didn't eat Uncle Wiggily that night.

Then the rabbit stayed at the red squirrel's mamma's house the rest of the
evening, and the next day the squirrel went to the surprise party with her
tail the regular size it ought to be, and not as big as the Bushytail
brothers' tails, and everybody was happy.

Now in case the granddaddy longlegs doesn't tickle the baby with his long
cow-pointing leg and make her laugh so she gets the hiccoughs, I'll tell
you in the next story about Uncle Wiggily and the brown wren.


STORY II

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BROWN WREN


Well, just as I expected, the granddaddy longlegs did tickle the baby, but
she only smiled in her sleep, and didn't awaken, so, as it's nice and
quiet I can tell you another story. And it's going to be about how Uncle
Wiggily, in his travels about the country, in search of his fortune,
helped a little brown wren.

"Well, where are you going this morning?" asked the red squirrel's mother
as Uncle Wiggily finished his breakfast, and shook out from his long ears
the oatmeal crumbs that had fallen in them.

"Oh, I suppose I will have to be traveling on," answered the rabbit. "That
fortune of mine seems to be a long distance off. I've tried rainbows and
moon-beams and I didn't find any money at their ends. I guess I'll have to
look under the water next, but I'll wait until I get back home, and then
I'll have Jimmie Wibblewobble the duck boy put his head at the bottom of
the pond and see if there is any gold down there."

So off the old gentleman rabbit started, limping on his crutch, for his
rheumatism was troubling him again, and at his side swung his valise, with
some crackers and cheese and bread and butter and jam in it--plenty of
jam, too, let me tell you, for the red squirrel's mamma could make lovely
preserves, and this was carrot jam, with turnip frosting on it.

Well, Uncle Wiggily traveled on and on, over the hills and through the
deep woods, and pretty soon he came to a place where he saw a lot of
little black ants trying to carry to their nest a nice big piece of meat
that some one had dropped.

"My, how hard those ants are working," thought the rabbit. "But that meat
is too heavy for them. I'll have to help carry it."

Now the piece of meat was only as big as a quarter of a small cocoanut,
but, of course, that's too big for an ant to carry; or even for
forty-'leven ants, so Uncle Wiggily kindly lifted it for them, and put it
in their nest.

"Thank you very much," said the biggest ant. "If ever we can do you a
favor, or any of your friends, we will."

The old gentleman rabbit said he was glad to hear that, and then, taking
up his crutch and valise again, on he went.

Pretty soon he came to a place in the woods where the sun was shining
down through the trees, and a little brook was making pretty music over
the stones. And then, all at once, the old gentleman rabbit heard a
different kind of music, and it was that of a little bird singing. And
this is the song.

Now I did not make up this song. It is much prettier than I could write,
even if I had my Sunday-go-to-meeting clothes on, and I don't know who did
write it. But it used to be in my school reader when I was a little boy,
and I liked it very much. I hope whoever did write it won't mind if you
sing it. This is it:

    "There's a little brown bird sitting up in a tree,
    He's singing to you--he's singing to me.
    And what does he say, little girl--little boy?
    Oh, the world's running over with joy!"

Then the bird sang about how there were five eggs laid away up in a nest,
and how, pretty soon, little birds would come out from them, and then, all
of a sudden, the bird sang like this:

    "But don't meddle,--don't touch,
    Little girl--little boy,
    Or the world will lose some of its joy!"

"Ha! you seem quite happy this beautiful morning," said Uncle Wiggily, as
he paused under the tree where the bird was singing. "Why, I do declare,"
he exclaimed. "If it isn't Mrs. Wren! Well, I never in all my born days! I
didn't know you were back from the South yet."

"Yes, Uncle Wiggily," said the little brown wren, "I came up some time
ago. But I'm real glad to see you. I'm going to take my little birdies out
of the shell pretty soon. They are almost hatched."

"Glad to hear it," said the rabbit, politely, and then he told about
seeking his fortune, and all of a sudden a great big ugly crow-bird flew
down out of a tall tree and made a dash for Mrs. Wren to eat her up. But
Mrs. Wren got out of the way just in time, and didn't get caught.

But alack, and alas-a-day! The crow knocked down the wren's nest, and all
the sticks and feathers of which it was made were scattered all about, and
the eggs, with the little birdies inside, would have been all broken
ker-smash, only that they happened to fall down on some soft moss.

"Oh, dear!" cried Mrs. Wren, sorrowfully. "Now see what that crow has
done! My home is broken up, and my birdies will be killed."

"Caw! Caw! Caw!" cried the crow as unkindly as he could, and it sounded
just as if he laughed "Haw! Haw! Haw!"

"Oh, whatever shall I do?" asked Mrs. Wren. "My birdies will have no nest,
and I haven't time to make another and break up the little fine sticks
that I need and gather the feathers that are scattered all over. Oh, what
shall I do? Soon my birdies will be out of the shells."

"Never fear!" said Uncle Wiggily, bravely. "I will help you. I'll gather
the sticks for you."

"Oh, but you haven't time; you must be off seeking your fortune," answered
the wren.

"Oh, I guess my fortune can wait. It has been waiting for me a long time,
and it won't hurt to wait a bit longer. I'll get you the sticks," said the
rabbit gentleman.

So while Mrs. Wren sat over the eggs to keep them warm with her fluffy
feathers, Uncle Wiggily looked for sticks with which to make a new nest.
He couldn't find any short and small enough, so what do you think he did?

Why, he took some big sticks and he jumped a jiggily dance up and down on
them with his sharp paws, and broke them up as fine as toothpicks for the
nest. Then he arranged them as well as he could in a sort of hollow, like
a tea cup.

"Oh, if we only had some feathers now, we would be all right," said Mrs.
Wren. "It's a very good nest for a rabbit to make."

"Don't say a word!" cried some small voices on the ground. "We will
gather up the feathers for you." And there came marching up a lot of the
little ants that Uncle Wiggily had been kind to, and soon they had
gathered up all the scattered feathers. And the nest was made on a mossy
stump, and lined with the feathers, and the warm eggs were put in it by
Mrs. Wren, who then hovered over them to hatch out the birdies. And she
was very thankful to Uncle Wiggily for what he had done.

Now, in case the water in the lake doesn't get inside the milk pail and
make lemonade of it, I'll tell you in the next story how the birdies were
hatched out, and also about Uncle Wiggily and the sunfish.


STORY III

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE SUNFISH


Uncle Wiggily slept that night--I mean the night after he had helped Mrs.
Wren build her nest--he slept in an old under-ground house that another
rabbit must have made some time before. It was nicely lined with leaves,
and the fortune-hunting bunny slept very nice and warm there.

When the sun was up, shining very brightly, and most beautifully, Uncle
Wiggily arose, shook his ears to get the dust out of them, and threw the
dried-leaf blankets off him.

"Ah, ha! I must be up and doing," he cried. "Perhaps I shall find my
fortune to-day."

Well, no sooner had he crawled out of the burrow than he heard a most
beautiful song. It was one Mrs. Wren was singing, and it went "tra-la-la
tra-la-la! tum-tee-tee-tum-tum-tee-tee!" too pretty for anything. And
then, afterward, there was a sort of an echo like "cheep-cheep
cheep-cheep!"

"Why, you must be very happy this morning, Mrs. Wren!" called Uncle
Wiggily to her as she sat in her new nest which the rabbit had made for
her on the mossy stump.

"I am," she answered, "very happy. What do you think happened in the
night?"

"I can't guess," he answered. "A burglar crow didn't come and steal your
eggs, I hope!"

"Oh, nothing sad or bad like that," she answered. "But something very
nice. Just hop up here and look."

So Uncle Wiggily hopped up on the stump, and Mrs. Wren got off her nest,
and there, on the bottom, in among some egg-shells, were a lot of tiny,
weeny little birdies, about as big as a spool of silk thread or even
smaller.

"Why, where in the world did they come from?" asked the old gentleman
rabbit, rubbing his eyes.

"Out of the eggs to be sure," answered Mrs. Wren. "And I do declare, the
last of my family is hatched now. There is little Wiggily out of the shell
at last. I think I'll name him after you, as he never could keep still
when he was being hatched. Now I must take out all the broken shells so
the birdies won't cut themselves on them." And she began to throw them out
with her bill, just as the mother hen does, and then one of the new little
birdies called out:

"Cheep-cheep-chip-chip!"

"Yes, I know you're hungry," answered their mamma, who understood their
bird talk. "Well, I'll fly away and get you something to eat just as soon
as your papa comes home to stay in the house. You know Mr. Wren went away
last night to see about getting a new position in a feather pillow
factory," said Mrs. Wren to Uncle Wiggily, "and he doesn't yet know about
the birdies. I hope he'll come back soon, as they are very hungry, and I
don't like to leave them alone to go shopping."

"Oh, I'll stay and take care of them for you while you go to the store,"
said the old gentleman rabbit, kindly.

"That will do very well," said Mrs. Wren. So she put on her bonnet and
shawl and took her market basket and off she flew to the store, while
Uncle Wiggily stayed with the new birdies, and they snuggled down under
his warm fur, and were as cozy as in their own mother's feathers.

Well, Mrs. Wren was gone some time, as the store was crowded and she
couldn't get waited on right away, and Uncle Wiggily stayed with the
birdies. And they got hungrier and hungrier, and they cried real hard.
Yes, indeed, as hard as some babies.

"Hum! I don't know what to do," said the old gentleman rabbit. "I can't
feed them. I guess I'll sing to them." So he sang this song:

    "Hush, birdies, hush,
      Please don't cry;
    Mamma'll be back
      By and by.

    "Nestle down close
      Under my fur,
    I'm not your mother, but
      I'm helping her."

But this didn't seem to satisfy the birdies and they cried "cheep-cheep"
harder than ever.

"Oh, dear! I believe I must get them something to eat," said Uncle
Wiggily. So he covered them all up warmly with the feathers that lined the
nest, and then he hopped down and went limping around on his crutch to
find them something to eat.

Pretty soon he came to a little brook, and as he looked down into it he
saw something shining, all gold and red and green and blue and yellow.

"Why, I do declare, if here isn't the end of the rainbow!" exclaimed the
old gentleman rabbit, as he saw all the pretty colors.

He rubbed his eyes with his paw, to make sure he wasn't dreaming, but the
colors were surely enough there, down under water.

"No wonder the giant couldn't find the pot of gold, it was down in the
water," spoke the rabbit. "But I'll get it, and then my fortune will be
made. Oh, how glad I am!"

Well, Uncle Wiggily reached his paw down and made a grab for the red and
green and gold and yellow thing, but to his surprise, instead of lifting
up a pot of gold, he lifted up a squirming, wiggling sunfish.

"Oh, my!" exclaimed the rabbit in surprise.

"I should say yes! Two Oh mys and another one!" gasped the fish. "Oh,
please put me back in the water again. The air out on land is too strong
for me. I can't breathe. Please, Uncle Wiggily, put me back."

"I thought you were a pot of gold," said the rabbit, sadly. "I'm always
getting fooled. But never mind. I'll put you in the water."

"What are you doing here?" asked the fish, as he slid into the water again
and sneezed three times.

"Just at present I am taking care of Mrs. Wren's new little birdies," said
the rabbit. "She has gone to the store for something for them to eat, but
they are so hungry they can't wait."

"Oh, that is easily fixed," said the sunfish. "Since you were so kind to
me I'll tell you what to do. Get them a few little worms, and some small
flower seeds, and feed them. Then the birdies will go to sleep."

So Uncle Wiggily did this, and as soon as the birds had their hungry
little mouths filled, sound to sleep they went. And in a little while Mrs.
Wren came back from the store with her basket filled, and Mr. Wren flew
home to say that he had a nice position in a feather factory, and how he
did admire his birdies! He hugged and kissed them like anything.

Then the two wrens both thanked Uncle Wiggily for taking care of their
children, and the rabbit said good-by and hopped on again to seek his
fortune. And if the trolley car conductor gives me a red, white and blue
transfer, for the pin cushion to go to sleep on, I'll tell you in the
following story about Uncle Wiggily and the yellow bird.


STORY IV

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE YELLOW BIRD


Once upon a time, when Johnnie Bushytail was going along the road to
school, he met a fox--oh, just listen to me, would you! This story isn't
about the squirrel boy at all. It's about Uncle Wiggily Longears to be
sure, and the yellow bird, so I must begin all over again.

The day after the old gentleman rabbit had helped Mrs. Wren feed her
little birdies he found himself traveling along a lonely road through a
big forest of tall trees. Oh, it was a very lonesome place, and not even
an automobile was to be seen, and there wasn't the smell of gasoline, and
no "honk-honks" to waken the baby from her sleep.

"Hum, I don't believe I'll find any fortune along here," thought Uncle
Wiggily as he tramped on. "I haven't met even so much as a red ant, or
even a black one, or a grasshopper. I wonder if I can be lost?"

So he looked all around to see if he might be lost in the woods. But you
know how it is, sometimes you're lost when you least expect it, and again
you think you are lost, but you're right near home all the while.

That's the way it was with Uncle Wiggily, he didn't know whether or not he
was lost, so he thought he'd sit down on a flat stone and eat his lunch.
The reason he sat on a flat stone instead of a round one was because he
had some hard boiled eggs for his lunch, and you know if you put an egg on
a round stone it's bound to roll off and crack right in the middle.

"And I don't like cracked eggs," said the rabbit. So he laid the eggs he
had on the flat stone, and put little sticks in front of them and behind
them, so they couldn't even roll off the flat stone if they wanted to.
Then he ate his lunch.

"I guess it doesn't much matter if I am lost," said the traveling
fortune-hunting rabbit a little later. "I'll go on and perhaps I may meet
with an adventure." So on he hopped, and pretty soon he came to a place
where the leaves and the dirt were all torn up, just as if some boys had
been playing a baseball game, or leap-frog, or something like that.

"My, I must look out that I don't tumble down any holes here," thought
Uncle Wiggily, "for maybe some bad men have been setting traps to catch us
rabbits."

Well, he turned to one side, to get out of the way of some sharp thorns,
and, my goodness! if there weren't more sharp thorns on the ground on the
other side of the path. "I guess I'll have to keep straight ahead!"
thought our Uncle Wiggily. "I never saw so many thorns before in all my
life. I'll have to look out or I'll be stuck."

So he kept straight on, and all of a sudden he felt himself going down
into a big hole.

"Oh! Oh dear! Oh me! Oh my!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "I've fallen into a
trap! That's what those thorns were for--so I would have to walk toward
the trap instead of going to one side."

But, very luckily for Uncle Wiggily, his crutch happened to catch across
the hole, and so he didn't go all the way down, but hung on. But his
valise fell to the bottom. However, he managed to pull himself up on the
ground, though his rheumatism hurt him, and soon he was safe once more.

"Oh, my valise, with all my clothes in it!" he cried, as he looked down
into the hole, which had been covered over with loose leaves and dirt so
he couldn't see it before falling in. "I wonder how I can get my things
back again?" he went on.

Then he looked up, and in a tree, not far from him, he saw something
bright and yellow, shining like gold.

"Ah, ha!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "At last I have found the pot of gold,
even if the rainbow isn't here. That is yellow, and yellow is the color of
gold. Now my fortune is made. I will get that gold and go back home."

So, not worrying any more about his valise down the trap-hole, Uncle
Wiggily hopped over to the tree to get what he thought was a big bunch of
yellow gold. But as he came closer, he saw that the gold was moving about
and fluttering, though not going very far away.

"That is queer gold," thought the old gentleman rabbit. "I never saw
moving gold before. I wonder if it is a good kind."

Then he went a little closer and he heard a voice crying.

"Why, that is crying gold, too," he said. "This is very strange."

Then he heard some one calling:

"Oh, help! Will some one please help me?"

"Why, this is most strange of all!" the rabbit cried. "It is talking gold.
Perhaps there is a fairy about."

"Oh, I only wish there was one!" cried the yellow object in the tree. "If
I saw a fairy I'd ask her to set me free."

"What's that? Who are you?" asked the rabbit.

"Oh, I'm a poor little yellow bird," was the answer, "and I'm caught in a
string-trap that some boys set in this tree. There is a string around my
legs and I can't fly home to see my little ones. I got into the trap by
mistake. Oh! can't you help me? Climb up into the tree, Uncle Wiggily, and
help me!"

"How did you know my name was Uncle Wiggily?" asked the rabbit.

"I could tell it by your ears--your wiggling ears," was the answer. "But
please climb up and help me."

"Rabbits can't climb trees," said Uncle Wiggily. "But I will tell you what
I'll do. I'll gnaw the tree down with my sharp teeth, for they are sharp,
even if I am a little old. Then, when it falls, I can reach the string,
untie it, and you will be free."

So Uncle Wiggily did this, and soon the tree fell down, but the golden
yellow bird was on a top branch and didn't get hurt. Then the old
gentleman rabbit quickly untied the string and the bird was out of the
trap.

"I cannot thank you enough!" she said to the rabbit. "Is there anything I
can do for you to pay you?"

"Well, my valise is down a hole," said Uncle Wiggily, "but I don't see how
you can get it up. I need it, though."

"I can fly down, tie the string to the satchel and you can pull it up,"
said the birdie. And she did so, and the rabbit pulled up his valise as
nicely as a bucket of water is hoisted up from the well. Then some bad
boys and a man came along to see if there was anything in the hole-trap,
or the string-trap they had made; but when they saw the bird flying away
and the rabbit hopping away through the woods they were very angry. But
Uncle Wiggily and the yellow bird were safe from harm, I'm glad to say.

And the rabbit had another adventure soon after that, and what it was I'll
tell you soon, when the story will be about Uncle Wiggily and the
skyrockets. It will be a Fourth of July story, if you please; that is if
the bean bag doesn't fall down the coal hole and catch a mosquito.


STORY V

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE SKY-CRACKER


Let me see, I think I promised to tell you a story about Uncle Wiggily and
the skyrocket, didn't I? Or was it to be about a firecracker, seeing that
it soon may be the Fourth of July? What's that--a firecracker--no? A
skyrocket? Oh, I'm all puzzled up about it, so I guess I'll make it a
sky-cracker, a sort of half-firecracker and half-skyrocket, and that will
do.

Well, after Uncle Wiggily had gotten the little yellow bird, that looked
like gold, out from the string-trap in the tree, the old gentleman rabbit
spent two nights visiting a second cousin of Grandfather Prickly
Porcupine, who lived in the woods. Then Uncle Wiggily got up one morning,
dressed himself very carefully, combed out his whiskers, and said:

"Well, I'm off again to seek my fortune."

"It's too bad you can't seem able to find it," said the second cousin to
Grandfather Prickly Porcupine, "but perhaps you will have good luck
to-day. Only you want to be very careful."

"Why?" asked the old gentleman rabbit.

"Well, because you know it will soon be the Fourth of July, and some boys
may tie a firecracker or a skyrocket to your tail," said the porcupine.

"Ha! Ha!" laughed Uncle Wiggily. "They will have a hard time doing that,
for my tail is so short that the boys would burn their fingers if they
tried to tie a firecracker to it."

"Then look out that they don't fasten a skyrocket to your long ears," said
the second cousin to Grandfather Prickly Porcupine, as he wrapped up some
lettuce and carrot sandwiches for Uncle Wiggily to take with him.

The old gentleman rabbit said he would watch out, and away he started,
going up hill and down hill with his barber-pole crutch as easily as if he
was being wheeled in a baby carriage.

"Well, I don't seem to find any fortune," he said to himself as he walked
along, and, just as he said that he saw something sparkling in the grass
beside the path in the woods. "What's that?" he cried. "Perhaps it is a
diamond. If it is I can sell it and get rich." Then he happened to think
what the second cousin of Grandfather Prickly Porcupine had told him about
Fourth of July coming, and Uncle Wiggily said:

"Ha! I had better be careful. Perhaps that sparkling thing is a spark on
a firecracker. Ah, ha!"

So he looked more carefully, and the bright object sparkled more and more,
and it didn't seem to be fire, so the old gentleman rabbit went up close,
and what do you suppose it was?

Why, it was a great big dewdrop, right in the middle of a purple violet,
that was growing underneath a shady fern. Oh, how beautiful it was in the
sunlight, and Uncle Wiggily was glad he had looked at it. And pretty soon,
as he was still looking, a big, buzzing bumble bee buzzed along and
stopped to take a sip of the dewdrop.

"Ha! That is a regular violet ice cream soda for me!" said the bee to
Uncle Wiggily. And just as he was taking another drink a big, ugly snake
made a spring and tried to eat the bee, but Uncle Wiggily hit the snake
with his crutch and the snake crawled away very much surprised.

"Thank you very much," said the bee to the rabbit. "You saved my life, and
if ever I can do you a favor I will," and with that he buzzed away.

Well, pretty soon, not so very long, in a little while, Uncle Wiggily came
to a place in the woods where there were a whole lot of packages done up
in paper lying on the ground. And there was a tent near them, and it
looked as if people lived in the white tent, only no one was there just
then.

[Illustration]

"I guess I'd better keep away," thought the old gentleman rabbit, "or they
may catch me." And just then he saw something like a long, straight stick,
standing up against a tree. "Ha, that will be a good stick to take along
to chase the bears away with," he thought. "I think no one wants it, so
I'll take it."

Well, he walked up and took hold of it in his paws, but, mind you, he
didn't notice that on one end of the stick was a piece of powder string,
like the string of a firecracker, sticking down, and this string was
burning. No, the poor old gentleman, rabbit never noticed that at all. He
started to take the stick away with him when, all of a sudden, something
dreadful happened.

With a whizz and a rush and a roar that stick shot into the air, carrying
Uncle Wiggily with it, just like a balloon, for he hadn't time to let go
of it.

Up and up he went, with a roar and a swoop, and just then he saw a whole
lot of boys rushing out of the woods toward the white tent. And one boy
cried:

"Oh, fellows, look! A rabbit has hold of our sky-cracker and it's on fire
and has gone off and taken him with it! Oh the poor rabbit! Because when
the sky-cracker gets high enough in the air the firecracker part of it
will go off with a bang, and he'll be killed. Oh, how sorry I am. The hot
sun must have set fire to the powder string."

You see those boys had come out in the woods to have their Fourth of July,
where the noise wouldn't make any one's head ache.

Well, Uncle Wiggily went on, up and up, with the sky-cracker, and he felt
very much afraid for he had heard what the boys said.

"Oh, this is the end of me!" he cried, as he held fast to the sky-cracker.
"I'll never live to find my fortune now. When this thing explodes, I'll be
dashed to the ground and killed."

The sky-cracker was whizzing and roaring, and black smoke was pouring out
of one end, and Uncle Wiggily thought of all his friends whom he feared he
would never see again, when all of a sudden along came flying the buzzing
bumble bee, high in the air. He was much surprised to see Uncle Wiggily
skimming along on the tail of a sky-cracker.

"Oh, can't you save me?" cried the rabbit.

"Indeed I will, if I can," said the bee, "because you were so kind to me.
You are too heavy, or I would fly down to earth with you myself, but I'll
do the next best thing. I'll fly off and get Dickie and Nellie Chip-Chip,
the sparrow children, and they'll come with a big basket and catch you so
you won't fall."

No sooner said than done. Off flew the bee. Quickly he found Dickie and
Nellie and told them the danger Uncle Wiggily was in.

"Quick," called Dickie to Nellie. "We must save him."

Off they flew like the wind, carrying a grocery basket between them. Right
under Uncle Wiggily they flew, and just as the sky-cracker was going to
burst with a "slam-bang!" the old gentleman rabbit let go, and into the
basket he safely fell and the sparrow children flew to earth with him.
Then the sky-cracker burst all to pieces for Fourth of July, but Uncle
Wiggily wasn't on it to be hurt, I'm glad to say.

He spent the Fourth visiting the Bumble bee's family, and had ice cream
and cake and lemonade for supper, and at night he heard the band play, and
he gave Nellie and Dickie ten cents for ice cream sodas, and that's all to
this story.

But on the next page, if the baker man brings me a pound of soap bubbles
with candy in the middle for Cora Janet's doll, I'll tell you about Uncle
Wiggily and the buttercup.


STORY VI

UNCLE WIGGILY AND BUTTERCUP


I hope none of you were burned by a sky-cracker or a Roman candle stick
when you had your Fourth of July celebration, but if you were I hope you
will soon be better, and perhaps if I tell you a story it will make you
forget the pain. So here we go, all about Uncle Wiggily and the buttercup.

The old gentleman rabbit spent a few days in an old burrow next to the
bumble bee's house, and then one morning, when the sun was shining
brightly, he started off again to seek his fortune.

"I never can thank you enough," he said to the bee, "for going after the
sparrow children and saving me from the exploding sky-cracker. If ever I
find my fortune I will give you some of it."

"Thank you very kindly," said the bee, as she looked in the pantry, "and
here are some sweet honey sandwiches for you to eat on your travels. This
is some honey that I made myself."

"Then it must be very good," said the old gentleman rabbit politely, as
he put the sandwiches in his valise and started off down the dusty road.

Well, he hopped on and on, sometimes in the woods where it was cool and
green and shady, and sometimes out in the hot sun, and every minute or so
he would stop and look around to see if he could find his fortune.

"For, who knows?" he said, "perhaps I may pick up a bag of gold, or some
diamonds at almost any minute. Then I could go back home and buy an
automobile for myself to ride around in, and my travels would be over. I
have certainly been on the go a long time, but my health is much better
than it was."

So he kept on, looking under all the big leaves and clumps of ferns for
his fortune. But he didn't find it, and pretty soon he came to a hole in
the ground. And in front of this hole was a little sign, printed on a
piece of paper, and it read:

    "COME IN! EVERYBODY WELCOME."

"Humph! I wonder if that means me?" thought the old gentleman rabbit.
"Let's see, gold grows under ground, in mines, and perhaps this is a gold
mine. I'm going down. I'm sure there is a fortune waiting for me. Yes,
I'll go down."

So he laid aside his valise and barber-pole crutch and got ready to go
down in the hole, which wasn't very big.

"But I can scratch it bigger if I need to," said Uncle Wiggily.

Well, he had no sooner gotten his front feet and part of his nose down the
hole, but his ears were still sticking out, when he heard a voice calling:

"Here! Where are you going?"

"Down this hole after gold," replied Uncle Wiggily.

"You mustn't go down there," went on the voice, and pulling out his nose
and looking about him, the old gentleman rabbit saw a white pussy cat
sitting on a stump. And the pussy cat was washing his face with his paws,
taking care not to let the claws stick out for fear of scratching his
eyes.

"Why can't I go down this hole, Pussy?" asked the rabbit. "Do you have
charge of it?"

"No, indeed," was the answer, "but there is a bad snake who lives down
there, and he puts up that sign so the animals will come down, and then he
eats them. That's the reason he says they are welcome. No, indeed, I
wouldn't want to see you go down there!"

"Ha! Hum! I wouldn't like to see myself!" spoke Uncle Wiggily, and he
crawled away from the hole just in time, for the snake stuck out his ugly
head and was about to bite the rabbit. It was the same snake that had
nearly caught the bumble bee.

"Say!" cried the snake, quite angry like, to the pussy cat, "I wish you
would get away from here! You are always spoiling my plans. I thought I
was going to have a nice rabbit dinner, and now look at what you have
done," and that snake was so angry that he hissed like a boiling
teakettle.

"I will never let you eat up Uncle Wiggily!" cried the pussy. "Now look
out for yourself, Mr. Snake!" and with that the pussy made his back round
like a hoop, and he swelled up his tail like a bologna sausage, and he
showed his teeth and claws to the snake, and that snake popped down the
hole again very quickly, I can tell you, taking his tail with him. Oh, my,
yes, and a bucket of sawdust soup besides.

"I thank you very much for telling me about that snake, little pussy cat,"
said Uncle Wiggily. "Well, I am disappointed about my fortune again. I
shall never be rich I fear. But I almost forgot that I have some fine
honey sandwiches and I will give you some, for you must be hungry. I know
I am."

"I am, too," said the pussy. So Uncle Wiggily opened his valise and took
out the honey sandwiches which the bee had given him, but when he went to
eat them he found that the bee had forgotten to butter the bread.

"Oh, that is too bad!" cried the pussy, when Uncle Wiggily spoke of it.
"Still they will do very well without butter."

"No, we must have some," said the rabbit. "I wonder how I can get butter
in the woods?" So he looked all around and the first thing he saw was a
yellow buttercup flower. You know the kind I mean. You hold them under
your chin to see if you like butter, and the shine of the flower makes
your chin yellow.

"Ha!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "Now we will have butter."

"But you are not going to eat the flower, are you?" asked the pussy.

"No, indeed!" cried the rabbit, "I'll show you."

Now there was a cow in the field a short distance away, and Uncle Wiggily
went over and got some milk from the cow in a little tin cup. "Butter is
made from milk," said the rabbit to the pussy. "So I will just pour some
milk in the buttercup flower, and shake it just as if it was a churn, and
then we'll have butter for our honey sandwiches."

So he did this. Into the buttercup he poured the milk, and it became
yellow like butter at once. But Uncle Wiggily did not have to shake the
flower, for a little wind came along just then and shook it for him.

And pretty soon, in a little while, the milk in the buttercup was churned
into lovely sweet butter, and the rabbit and pussy spread it on their
honey sandwiches, and what a fine feast they had. Just as they were eating
it the bad alligator came along, and wanted to take the honey away from
them, but the pussy scratched the end of the savage beast's tail with his
claws, and the bad alligator ran away as fast as he could.

Then Uncle Wiggily and the pussy traveled on together and the next day
they had quite an adventure. What it was I'll tell you in the next story
when, in case the steamboat stops at our house for a little girl wearing a
green sunbonnet, with horse chestnuts on it, I'll tell you about Uncle
Wiggily and the July bug.


STORY VII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE JULY BUG


"Well, what shall we do to-day?" asked the white pussy of Uncle Wiggily,
as they traveled on together, the next day after the adventure at the
snake hole. They had slept that night in a nice hollow stump.

"Hum! I hardly know what to do," replied the old gentleman rabbit. "Of
course I must be on the watch for my fortune, but, as I don't seem to be
finding it very fast, what do you say to having a picnic to-day?"

"The very thing!" cried pussy. "We will get some lunch, and go off in the
woods and eat it. Only we ought to have a lot more people. Two are hardly
enough for a picnic."

"I would like some of my friends to come to it," spoke Uncle Wiggily, "but
I am afraid they are too far off."

"Couldn't you send them word by telephone?" inquired the pussy. "I'm sure
I would like to meet them, for I have heard so much about Sammie and
Susie Littletail, and Johnnie and Billie Bushytail."

"There is no telephone in these woods," replied Uncle Wiggily, "and we
haven't time to send them postcards. I wish I could get word to them,
however, but I don't s'pose I can."

"Yes, you can!" suddenly cried a voice down in the grass. "I'll tell all
your friends to come to the picnic if you like."

"Indeed, I would like it," said the rabbit, "but who are you, if I may be
so bold as to ask? I can't see you."

"There he is--it's a big June bug!" exclaimed the pussy.

"I beg your pardon," spoke the bug quickly, as he crawled out from under a
leaf and sat on a toadstool. "But I am not a June bug, if you please."

"You look like one," said Uncle Wiggily politely.

"I am a July bug," went on the funny little creature. "I was intended for
a June bug, but there was some mistake made, and I didn't come out of my
shell until July. So you see I'm a July bug, and at first I thought it
would be jolly fun, to hear all the firecrackers and skyrockets go off."

"It isn't so much fun as you imagine," said Uncle Wiggily, as he thought
of the time he went sailing into the air on the sky-cracker. "But don't
you like being a July bug?"

"Not very much. You see I'm the only one there is, and all the others are
June bugs. The June bugs won't speak to me, nor let me play with them, so
I'm very lonesome. I heard you talking about a picnic you were going to
have, and so I offered to call all your friends to it. I thought perhaps
if I did that you would let me come to it also."

"To be sure!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "You may gladly come, but how are
you going to send word to all of my friends?"

"I will fly through the air and tell them to come," was the answer. "I am
a very swift flyer. Watch me," and then and there the July bug buzzed
around so fast that Uncle Wiggily and the pussy couldn't see his wings go
flip-flop-flap.

Well, they decided it would be a good plan to have the July bug act as a
postman, so Uncle Wiggily wrote out the invitations on little pieces of
white birch bark, and gave them to the bug. Off he flew into the air
waving one leg at Uncle Wiggily and the pussy.

"Well, now we must get ready for the picnic--get the things to eat--for
that bug flies so fast that soon all my friends will be here," said the
rabbit, so he and the pussy began to get the lunch ready.

Uncle Wiggily had some food in his valise, but they got more good things
from a kind old monkey who lived in the woods. He used to work on a hand
organ, but when he got old he bought him a nest in the woods with the
pennies he had saved up, and he lived in peace and quietness, and played a
mouth organ on Sundays.

Well, you will hardly believe me, but it's true, no sooner had Uncle
Wiggily and the pussy put up the lunch, wrapping some for each visitor in
nice, green grape leaves, than the first ones of the picnic party began to
arrive. They were Dickie and Nellie Chip-Chip, the sparrows, for they
could fly through the air very quickly, and so they came on ahead.

"We got your invitation that the July bug left us, Uncle Wiggily, and we
came at once," said Dickie.

"Where are the others?" asked the old gentleman rabbit.

"They are coming," answered Nellie, as she tied her tail ribbon over
again, for the bow knot had become undone as she was flying through the
air.

Well, in a little while along came hopping, Sammie and Susie Littletail,
the rabbit children, and Billie and Johnnie Bushytail, the squirrel
brothers, and Bully and Bawly the frogs, and Dottie and Munchie Trot, the
ponies, and Lulu and Alice and Jimmie Wibblewobble, the duck twins, and
Buddy and Brighteyes Pigg, and oh, all the boy and girl animals I have
ever told you about.

And oh! how glad they were to see Uncle Wiggily. He had to tell them all
about his travels after his fortune before they would go off in the woods
to the picnic. But at last they went, each one with a little leaf-package
of lunch. The July bug came along, too, and he had a very little package
of good things, because he was so small, you see, but it was enough.

They all sat down on the ground with flat stones for plates, and sticks
for knives and forks, and they ate their picnic lunch there. Oh, they had
the finest time, and it didn't matter if some ants did get in the sugar.
Uncle Wiggily said they could have all they wanted of the sweet stuff.

And, when the picnic was almost over, there was a sudden noise in the
bushes, and two bad foxes sprang out. One tried to grab Uncle Wiggily, and
another made a dash for Lulu Wibblewobble.

"Oh dear!" cried Dottie Trot, without looking to see if her hair ribbon
was on straight. "We shall all be eaten up!"

"No, you won't!" cried the brave July bug. "I'll fix those foxes!"

So that brave July bug just buzzed his wings as hard as he could, and
straight at those foxes he flew, bumping and banging them on their noses
and in the eyes, so that they gave two separate and distinct howls, and
ran away, taking their big tails with them.

So that is how the July bug saved everybody from being eaten up, and then
the picnic was over and every one said it was lovely.

"Well, I'll start on my travels again to-morrow," said Uncle Wiggily, as
his friends told him good-by.

Now what happened to him the next day I'll tell you very soon, for, in
case I see a chipmunk with a blue tail and a red nose climbing up the
clothes pole, the story will be about Uncle Wiggily and
Jack-in-the-pulpit.


STORY VIII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT


Uncle Wiggily was slowly hopping along through the woods, sometimes
leaning on his crutch, when his rheumatism pained him, and again skipping
along when he got out into the warm sunshine. It was the day after the
picnic, and the old gentleman rabbit felt a bit lonesome as all his
friends had gone back to their homes.

"I do declare!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily, as he walked slowly along by a
little lake, where an August rabbit was running his motor boat, "if I
don't find my fortune pretty soon I won't have any vacation this year. I
must look carefully to-day, and see if I can't find a pot full of gold."

Well, he looked as carefully as he could, but my land sakes and a pair of
white gloves! he couldn't seem to find a smitch of gold and not so much as
a crumb of diamonds.

[Illustration]

"Hum!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily, "at this rate I guess I'll have to keep on
traveling for several years before I find my fortune. But never mind,
I'm having a good time, anyhow. I'll keep on searching."

So he kept on, and all of a sudden when he was walking past a prickly
briar bush, he heard a voice calling:

"Hey, Uncle Wiggily, come on in here."

"Ha! Who are you, and why do you want me to come in there?" asked the old
gentleman rabbit.

"Oh, I am a friend of yours," was the answer, "and I will give you a lot
of money if you come in here."

"Let me see your face," asked the rabbit, "I want to know who you are."

"Oh! I have a dreadful toothache," said the creature hiding in the bushes.
"I don't want to stick my face out in the cold. But if you will take my
word for it I am a good friend of yours. I would like very much for you to
come in here."

"Well, perhaps I had better," said the old gentleman rabbit, "for I
certainly need money."

And he was just going to crawl in under the prickly briar bush when all of
a sudden he happened to look, and he saw the skillery-scallery tail of the
alligator accidentally sticking out. Yes, it was the alligator trying to
fool dear old Uncle Wiggily.

"Oh, ho!" cried the wise old rabbit. "I guess I won't go in there after
all," so he hopped to one side and the alligator kept waiting for him to
come in so he could eat him, but when the rabbit didn't come in the savage
creature with the skillery-scallery tail cried:

"Well, aren't you coming in?"

"No, thank you," said the rabbit. "I have to go on to seek my fortune,"
and away he hopped. Well, that alligator was so angry that he gnashed his
teeth and nearly broke them, and he crawled after Uncle Wiggily, but of
course, he couldn't catch him.

Uncle Wiggily was pretty careful after that, and whenever he came near a
prickly briar bush he listened with both his long ears stuck up straight
to see if he could hear any sounds like an alligator. But he didn't, and
so he kept on.

Well, it was coming on toward evening, one afternoon, and the old
gentleman rabbit was tramping along the road, wondering where he would
sleep, when all of a sudden something came bursting out of the bushes
toward the rabbit, and a voice cried out:

"Hide! Hide! Uncle Wiggily. Hide as quickly as you can!"

"Why should I hide?" asked the old gentleman rabbit. "Is there a giant
coming after me?"

"Worse than a giant," said the voice. "It is a bad wolf that jumped out of
his cage from the circus, and he is just ready to eat up anything he
sees," and the July bug, for it was he who had fluttered out of the
bushes, to tell Uncle Wiggily, made his wings go slowly to and fro like an
electric palm-leaf fan.

"A wolf, eh?" cried the old gentleman rabbit. "And do you think he will
eat me?"

"He surely will," said the July bug. "I happened to fly past his house,
and I heard him say to his wife that he was going out to see if he could
find a rabbit supper. So I know he's coming for you. You'd better hide."

"Oh! where can I hide?" asked the rabbit, as he looked around for a hollow
stump. But there wasn't any, and there were no holes in the ground, and he
didn't know what to do.

Then, all at once there was a crashing in the bushes and it sounded like
an elephant coming through, breaking all the sticks in his path.

"There's the wolf! There's the wolf!" cried the July bug. "Hide, Uncle
Wiggily," and then the bug perched on the high limb of a tree where the
wolf couldn't catch him.

Well, the poor old gentleman rabbit looked for a place to hide himself
away from the wolf but he couldn't seem to find any, and he was just going
to crawl under a stone and maybe hurt himself, when all at once he heard a
voice say:

"Jump up here, Uncle Wiggily. I'll hide you from the wolf."

So the rabbit traveler looked up, and there he saw a flower called
Jack-in-the-pulpit looking down on him. I've told you about them before,
how the frog once took his bath in one, and how, when you pick a
wood-bouquet you put them in with some ferns to make the bouquet look
pretty. They are a flower like a vase, with a top curling over, and a
thing standing up in the centre whose name is "Jack."

"Jump in here," said the Jack. "I'll fold my top down over you like an
umbrella, and the wolf can't find you."

"But you are so small that I can't get inside," said the rabbit.

"Oh, I'll make myself bigger," cried the Jack, I and he took a long
breath, and puffed himself up and swelled himself up, until he was large
enough for Uncle Wiggily to jump down inside. Then the Jack-in-the-pulpit
closed down the umbrella top over the rabbit, and he was hidden away as
nice and snug as could be wished.

Pretty soon that bad savage wolf came prancing along, and he looked all
over for the rabbit. Then he sniffed and cried:

"Ha! I smell him somewhere around here! I'll find him!" But he couldn't
see Uncle Wiggily because he was safely hidden in the Jack-in-the-pulpit.
So the wolf raged around some more and chased after his tail, and just as
he smelled the rabbit hidden in the flower, the July bug flew down out of
the tree, bang! right into the eyes of the wolf, and then the savage
creature felt so badly that he ran home and ate cold bread and water for
supper, and he didn't bother Uncle Wiggily any more that day.

So that's how the Jack-in-the-pulpit saved the rabbit and very thankful
Uncle Wiggily was. And he stayed that night in a hollow stump, and the
next day he went on to seek his fortune.

And quite a curious thing happened to him, as I shall have the pleasure of
telling you about soon, when in case our canoe boat doesn't turn upside
down and spill out the breakfast oatmeal, the next bedtime story will be
about Uncle Wiggily and the lost chipmunk.


STORY IX

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE LOST CHIPMUNK


Uncle Wiggily was walking along the road one morning, after he had slept
all night in the hollow stump. He didn't have any breakfast either, for
there was nothing left in his valise, and of course he couldn't eat his
barber-pole crutch. If the crutch had had a hole in it, like in the
elephant's trunk, then the old gentleman rabbit could have carried along
some sandwiches. But, as it was, he had nothing for breakfast, and he
hadn't had much supper either, the night before.

"Oh, how hungry I am!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "If only I had a piece of
cherry pie now, or an ice cream cone, or a bit of bread and butter and jam
I would be all right."

Well, he just happened to open his valise, and there on the very bottom,
among some papers he found a few crumbs of the honey sandwiches the bumble
bee had given him. Well, you never can imagine how good those few crumbs
tasted to the old gentleman rabbit, which shows you that it is a good
thing to be hungry once in a while, because even common things taste good.

But the crumbs weren't enough for Uncle Wiggily. As he walked along he
kept getting hungrier and hungrier and he didn't know how he was going to
stand it.

Then, all of a sudden, as he was passing by a hollow stump, he saw a whole
lot of little black creatures crawling around it. They were going up and
down, and they were very busy.

"Why, these are ants," said the rabbit. "Well, I s'pose they have plenty
to eat. I almost wish I was an ant."

"Well! Well!" exclaimed a voice all at once. "If here isn't Uncle Wiggily.
Where did you come from?" and there stood a second cousin to the ant for
whom Uncle Wiggily had once carried home a pound of beefsteak with
mushrooms on it.

"Oh, I am traveling about seeking my fortune," said the rabbit. "But I
haven't been very successful. I couldn't even find my breakfast this
morning."

"That's too bad!" exclaimed the ant who wore glasses. "We can give you
something, however. Come on! everybody, help get breakfast for Uncle
Wiggily."

So all the ants came running up, and some of them brought pieces of
boiled eggs, and others brought oatmeal and others parts of oranges and
still others parts of cups of coffee. So take it altogether, with
seventeen million, four hundred and seventeen thousand, one hundred and
eighty-five ants and a baby ant to wait on him, Uncle Wiggily managed to
make out a pretty fair sort of a breakfast.

Well, after the old gentleman rabbit had eaten all the breakfast he could,
he thanked the kind ants and said good-by to them. Then he started off
again. He hadn't gone on very far through the woods, before, all of a
sudden he saw something bright and shining under a blackberry bush.

"Well, I do declare!" cried the old gentleman rabbit. "I think that looks
like gold. I hope I'm not fooled this time. I will go up very slowly and
carefully. Perhaps I shall find my fortune now."

So up he walked very softly, and he stooped down and picked up the shining
thing. And what do you think it was? Why a bright new penny--as shiny as
gold.

"Good luck!" cried Uncle Wiggily, "I am beginning to find money. Soon I
will be rich, and then I can stop traveling," and he put the penny in his
pocket.

Well, no sooner had he done so than he heard some one crying over behind a
raspberry bush. Oh, such a sad cry as it was, and the old gentleman rabbit
knew right away that some one was in trouble.

"Who is there?" he asked, as he felt in his pocket to see if his penny was
safe, for he thought that was the beginning of his fortune.

"Oh, I'm lost!" cried the voice. "I came to the store to buy a chocolate
lollypop, and I can't find my way back," and then out from behind the
raspberry bush came a tiny, little striped chipmunk with the tears falling
down on her little paws.

"Oh, you poor little dear!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "And so you are lost?
Well, don't you know what to do? As soon as you are lost you must go to a
policeman and ask him to take you home. Policemen always know where
everybody lives."

"But there are no policemen here," said the chipmunk, who was something
like a squirrel, only smaller.

"That's so," agreed Uncle Wiggily. "Well, pretend that I am a policeman,
and I'll take you home. Where do you live?"

"If I knew," said the chipmunk, "I would go home myself. All that I know
is that I live in a hollow stump."

"Hum!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "There are so many hollow stumps here,
that I can't tell which one it is. We will go to each one, and when you
find the one that is your home, just tell me."

"But that is not the worst," said the chipmunk. "I have lost my bright,
new penny that my mamma gave me for a chocolate lollypop. Oh dear. Isn't
it terrible."

"Perhaps this is your penny," said the old gentleman rabbit a bit sadly,
taking from his pocket the one he had found.

"It is the very one!" cried the lost chipmunk, joyfully. "Oh, how good of
you to find it for me."

"Well," thought Uncle Wiggily with a sorrowful sigh as he handed over the
penny, "I thought I had found the beginning of my fortune, but I've lost
it again. Never mind. I'll try to-morrow."

So he gave the penny to the chipmunk, and she stopped crying right away,
and took hold of Uncle Wiggily's paw, and he led her around to all the
hollow stumps until she found the right one where she lived.

And he bought her an ice cream cone because he felt sorry for her. And,
just as she was eating it, along came a big, black bear and he wanted
half of it, but very luckily the July bug flew past just then, and he bit
the bear in the eyes, so that the bad bear was glad enough to run home,
taking his little stumpy tail with him. Then the chipmunk took Uncle
Wiggily back to her home, and he stayed with her papa and mamma all night.

Now, in case the rocking chair on our porch doesn't tip over in the middle
of the night, and scare the pussy cat off the railing, I'll tell you next
about Uncle Wiggily and the black cricket.


STORY X

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BLACK CRICKET


Uncle Wiggily, the nice old gentleman rabbit, was feeling quite sad one
morning as he hopped along the dusty road. It was a few days after he had
helped the lost chipmunk find her way back home, and he had given her the
lost penny which he had also picked up.

"Oh, dear me!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily, as he thought of the penny.
"That's generally the way it is in this world. Nothing seems to go right.
I naturally thought I had found the beginning of my fortune, even if it
was only a penny, and it turned out that the money belonged to somebody
else. Oh dear!"

Well, the old rabbit traveler actually felt so badly that he didn't much
care whether he found his fortune or not, and that is a very poor way to
feel in this world, for one must never give up trying, no matter what
happens.

Then Uncle Wiggily looked in his satchel to see if he had anything to eat,
but my goodness sakes alive and a ham sandwich! There wasn't a thing in
the valise! You see he was thinking so much about the penny that he forgot
to put up his lunch.

"Humph! This is a pretty state of affairs!" exclaimed the old rabbit
gentleman. "Worse and worse, and some more besides! I do declare! Hum!
Suz! Dud!"

Well, he didn't know what to do, so he sat down on a log beside a shady
bush and thought it all over. And the more he thought the sadder he
became, until he began to believe he was the most miserable rabbit in all
the world.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "I might as well go back
home and done with it."

But no sooner had he said this, than Uncle Wiggily heard the jolliest
laugh he had ever known. Oh! it was such a rippling, happy joyous laugh
that it would almost cure the toothache just to listen to it.

"Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho! He! He!" laughed the voice, and Uncle Wiggily looked up,
and he looked down, and then he looked sideways and around a corner, but
he could see no one. Still the laugh kept up, more jolly than ever.

"Humph! I wonder who that is?" said the rabbit. "I wish I could laugh like
that," and Uncle Wiggily actually smiled the least little bit, and he
didn't feel quite so sad.

Then, all at once, there was a voice singing, and this is the song, and if
you feel sad when you sing it, just get some one to tickle you, or watch
baby's face when he smiles, and you will feel jolly enough to sing this
song, even if you have been crying because you stubbed your toe.

    "Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho! I gladly sing,
    I sing about most anything.
    I sing about a pussy cat,
    Who caught a little mousie-rat.
    I sing about a doggie-dog,
    Who saw a turtle on a log.
    I sing about a little boy,
    Who cried because he broke his toy.
    And then he laughed, 'Ha! Ha! He! He!'
    Because he couldn't help it; see?"

"Well, well!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily, "I wish I knew who that was.
Perhaps it is a fairy, and if it is, I'm going to ask her for my fortune.
I'm getting tired of not finding it," and when he thought about that he
was sad again.

But a moment later a little black creature hopped out from under a leaf,
and who should it be but a cricket.

"Was that you laughing?" asked the old gentleman rabbit, as he again
looked in his valise to see if he had any sandwiches there. "Was it you?"

"It was," said the cricket. "I was just going--Oh, kindly excuse me, while
I laugh again!" the cricket said, and then he laughed more jolly than
before.

"What makes you so good-natured?" asked the rabbit.

"I just can't help it," said the cricket. "Everything is so lovely. The
sun shines, and the birds sing, and the water in the brooks babble such
jolly songs, and well--Oh, excuse me again if you please, I'm going to
laugh once more," and so he did then and there. He just laughed and
laughed and laughed, that cricket did.

"Well," said Uncle Wiggily, still speaking sadly, "of course it's nice to
be jolly, anybody can be that way when the sun shines, but what about the
rain? There! I guess you can't be jolly when it rains."

"Oh! when it rains I laugh because I know it will soon clear off, and
then, too, I can think about the days when the sun did shine," said the
cricket.

"Well," spoke Uncle Wiggily, "there is something in that, to be sure. And
as you are such a jolly chap, will you travel along with me? Perhaps with
you I could find my fortune."

"Of course I'll come," said the cricket, and he laughed again, and then he
and the old gentleman rabbit hopped on together and Uncle Wiggily kept
feeling more and more happy until he had forgotten all about the
chipmunk's penny that wasn't his.

Well, in a little while, not so very long, the rabbit and the cricket came
to a dark place in the woods. Oh! it was quite dismal, and, just as they
passed a big, black stump with a hole in it, all of a sudden out popped
the skillery-scalery-tailery alligator.

"Ah, ha!" exclaimed the unpleasant creature. "Now I have you both. I'm
going to eat you both, first you, Mr. Cricket, and then you, Uncle
Wiggily."

"Oh, please don't," begged the rabbit. "I haven't found my fortune yet."

"No matter," cried the alligator, "here we go!"

He made a grab for the cricket, but the little black insect hopped to one
side, and then, all of a sudden he began to laugh. Oh, how hard he
laughed.

"Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho! He! He!" My, it was wonderful! At first the alligator
didn't know what to make of it. Harder and harder did the black cricket
laugh, and then Uncle Wiggily began. He just couldn't help it. Harder and
harder laughed the cricket and Uncle Wiggily together, and then, all at
once, the alligator began to laugh. He couldn't help it either.

"Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho! He! He!" laughed the 'gator, and great big alligator
tears rolled down his scaly cheeks, he laughed so hard. Why, he giggled so
that he couldn't even have eaten a mosquito with mustard on.

"Come on, now!" suddenly cried the cricket to Uncle Wiggily. "Now is our
chance to get away."

And before the alligator had stopped laughing they both hopped away in the
woods together, and so the bad scalery-ailery-tailery creature didn't get
either of them.

"My! it's a good thing you made him laugh," said the rabbit when they were
safely away.

"It's a good thing to make anybody laugh," said the black cricket, and
then he and Uncle Wiggily went on to seek the old gentleman rabbit's
fortune.

And in the next story, in case the sunshine doesn't make my pussy cat
sneeze and spill his milk, on the new door mat, I'll tell you all about
Uncle Wiggily and the busy bug.


STORY XI

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BUSY BUG


Everywhere Uncle Wiggily and the black cricket went in the next few days,
every one was glad to see them. For they were both so jolly, and laughed
and joked so much along the road, that no one who heard them could be sad.

They came to one place where there was a boy sick with the toothache, and
his mamma had done everything for him that she could think of, even to
putting mustard on it, but still that boy's tooth ached.

Well, as soon as that boy saw the cricket and the old gentleman rabbit,
and heard them laugh, why the boy smiled, and then the pain, somehow,
seemed to be better, and he smiled some more, and then he laughed.

Then Uncle Wiggily told a funny story about a monkey who made faces at
himself in a looking-glass, and got so excited about it that he jumped
around behind the glass, thinking another monkey was there, and there
wasn't, and the monkey fell into the freezer full of ice cream and caught
cold because he ate so much of it.

Well, that boy opened his mouth real wide to laugh at the funny story and
his mamma all of a sudden slipped a string around the aching tooth and she
pulled it out in a moment, and it never ached again.

"Oh, how glad I am!" cried the little boy. "I wish you would always stay
with me, Uncle Wiggily--you and the jolly cricket."

"I'd like to, but I can't," said the old gentleman rabbit. "I must keep on
after my fortune."

"I'll stay with you for a little while," said the cricket, and he did,
telling some funny stories to other boys who had the toothache, and right
away after that they allowed their bad teeth to be pulled, and their pain
was over.

So Uncle Wiggily said good-by to the cricket and went on by himself. He
was feeling very good now, for he and the cricket had met a kind muskrat,
a thirty-fifth cousin to Nurse Jane Fuzzy-Wuzzy, and this muskrat gave
Uncle Wiggily a lot of sandwiches for his satchel, so he wouldn't be
hungry again for some time.

"And I don't mind so much about the cent, either," thought the rabbit, as
he remembered the one that belonged to the chipmunk. "After all a cent is
not so much, and I need more than that for my fortune. Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho!"

He just had to laugh, you see, when he thought of the jolly cricket. So he
traveled on and on, over hill and dale, until one evening, just as the sun
was going down behind the clouds, all red and golden and violet colored,
he saw a little house built of green leaves.

"Ha!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "That is a very fine house. I wish I had
one like it in which to stay to-night. But it's too small for me. I guess
I'll have to keep on and look for a haystack under which to crawl."

Well, just as he said that, all of a sudden there was a little rustling,
scratching noise, and a bug came to the door of the queer little green
leaf house. The bug had a broom and she began sweeping off the front porch
and then she knocked the dirt out of the doormat, and then she swept some
cobwebs off the shutters and then she hurried out and swept off the
sidewalk, all so quickly that you could scarcely see her move.

"My, but she is a fast worker," said Uncle Wiggily. "She is almost as
quick as Jennie Chipmunk."

"I have to be!" exclaimed the bug, for the old gentleman rabbit had spoken
out loud without thinking, and the bug had heard him. "I have to hustle
around," she said, "for I am the busy bug, and I have to keep busy. I work
from morning to night to keep my house in order. Now excuse me; I have to
go in and dust the piano," and she was just going to run in the house,
when Uncle Wiggily said:

"Do you happen to know of a place where I can stay to-night?"

"Why, yes," said the busy bug. "Next door is a house where Mr. Groundhog
used to live. But now he is away on his vacation, and I have the keys. I'm
sure he wouldn't mind you staying in there over night. I'll get it in
order for you. Come along, hurry up, no time to lose!"

And before Uncle Wiggily knew what was happening the busy bug had run in,
got the keys, opened the front door of the groundhog's house. Then she
flew in, and she began dusting it. My! what a dust she raised. Uncle
Wiggily had to sneeze, there was so much of it.

And the funny part of it was that the house was already just as neat and
clean as a piece of cocoanut or custard, or maybe even apple pie.

"Don't fuss any more with it," said Uncle Wiggily. "It will do very well
as it is."

"Oh, it must be made cleaner," said the busy bug, and she swept and dusted
until Uncle Wiggily sneezed again. Then the bug dusted a little more, and
at last she said the house was in pretty fair shape and Uncle Wiggily
could sleep there.

Then the busy bug flew back home and she kept busy up to nine o'clock,
making beds and dusting the crumbs off the mantelpiece and picking up
grains of sand off the floor. Then she went to sleep.

Well, along in the middle of the night Uncle Wiggily was awakened by
hearing some one talking under his window. He looked out, and there were
two savage old owls.

"Now, we'll fly right in through her window," said one owl, "and we'll eat
her all up, and then we'll tear her house down."

And, would you believe it, they started right toward the house of the poor
busy lady bug, who was fast asleep.

"Ha! This must never be!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "I must save her. How can I
do it?" So he looked around, and he saw a broom, which the busy bug had
left behind when she finished sweeping. "That will do!" cried the rabbit.
He took it in his paws and, leaning out of the window, he held it just as
if it was a gun, and cried:

"Now, you bad owls, fly away or I'll shoot all your feathers off! Fly away
and don't you harm my friend, the busy lady bug!"

Well, sir, those owls were so frightened, thinking that Uncle Wiggily was
going to shoot them with the broom-gun (only, of course, they didn't know
it was only a broom), and, would you believe it, they were terribly afraid
and they flew off into the dark woods, and so didn't eat up the busy bug
after all, and she slept in peace and quietness, never even waking up, she
was so tired after being busy all day.

Then Uncle Wiggily went back to bed, and the owls didn't disturb him again
that night. And in the morning the busy bug got his breakfast and thanked
him when he told her about scaring the owls away with the make-believe
broom-gun.

Uncle Wiggily traveled on, and soon he had another adventure. What it was
I'll tell you almost right away, when, in case the cake of ice doesn't
melt, and make a mud puddle for the baby to fall into, I'll tell you about
Uncle Wiggily and the funny monkey.


STORY XII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE FUNNY MONKEY


It was a bright and beautiful sunshiny day, and Uncle Wiggily was hopping
along the road, thinking many thoughts and about the busy bug and the
black cricket and all things like that and how hard it was to look and
look for your fortune and never find it, when all of a sudden, just as he
happened to put his crutch down on a round stone, it slipped, and down he
fell kerthump.

"Oh, wow! Ouch!" cried the old gentleman rabbit as he bumped his nose on a
sharp stick. "That hurt! My, I hope I haven't broken one of my ears or
paw-nails. If I did I'll have to get in the ambulance and go to the
hospital."

So he sat up very slowly and carefully and looked himself all over and he
was glad to see that he hadn't broken anything except a lettuce sandwich
that he carried in his satchel and, as it was just as good broken as it
was whole, it didn't matter much.

"Oh, are you hurt?" suddenly cried a voice, as Uncle Wiggily took some
dirt out of his left ear. "If you are I can give you something to put on
your cuts," and out from under a big leaf came a beautiful butterfly.

"What can you put on my cuts?" asked the rabbit.

"Oh, I can get some sticky gum from a tree or a flower and spread it on a
leaf and make some court plaster," spoke the butterfly. "It will cure a
cut very quickly."

"Thank you very much," said Uncle Wiggily, "but very luckily I haven't any
cuts. I'm all right, I guess, but because you are so kind to me here is
just a drop of honey that I found in the bottom of my satchel. The bee
gave it to me." So he handed to the kind butterfly a little honey he had
left. The butterfly was very glad to get it, and fluttered away, jumping
from one flower to another as easily as a boy can spin his top.

Then the old gentleman rabbit traveled on, and pretty soon, when it was
just about time for dinner, he came to a beautiful place in the woods. The
trees were nice and green and shady, and there was a little brook that was
bubbling and babbling over the mossy stones and then all at once Uncle
Wiggily heard the queerest music he had ever heard. It was like
forty-'leven bands all playing in the park at once.

"My, I must be near a big picnic!" cried the rabbit. "I shall have to look
out for myself, or some boys may chase me."

The music kept getting louder but still the old gentleman rabbit didn't
see any people, and he went on very slowly until he came to a little house
built of shingles, and there in front of it sat a monkey. And he was the
funniest monkey you ever saw.

For that monkey was playing five hand organs all at once. Yes, just as
true as I'm telling you, he was. He played one organ with his left paw and
he played another organ with his right paw, and he played still another
with his left foot and he twisted the crank of another with his right
foot. And then, to finish off with, he whirled around the crank of the
fifth organ with his long tail. Oh, he was a smart monkey, I tell you!

"My! This is almost as good as a circus!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "I'm
glad I came this way."

Well, that funny monkey played faster than ever, and on one organ he
played the tune "Please Bring Your Umbrella Inside When it Rains," and on
another he played "May I Have Some of Your Ice Cream Cone if I Give You a
Kiss?" And on the third hand organ the monkey was playing the tune "Come
Out Into the Hammock and See Who'll Fall Out First," and another tune was
"Please Don't Let that Big Black Bug Tickle Me," and on the organ that he
twisted with his tail the monkey ground out the song "Come On Inside the
Motorboat and Have a Nice, Cool Swim."

"My, how do you do it?" asked the rabbit of the monkey. "You must be very
musical."

"Oh, it comes natural to me," said the monkey, not a bit proud like.

"But where did you get so many organs?"

"Oh, I saved up my pennies for them," said the monkey. "You see, it was
this way. I used to work for a man who had a hand organ, and he used to
take me around with him to climb up on the porches, and in the
second-story windows to get the pennies from the children. Well, I always
loved music, and I wanted the man to let me play his organ, but he never
would. So I made up my mind I would save up all my pennies and some day
buy an organ for myself.

"Well, I did that, for you know often when I used to go around to collect
pennies for the man, some children would give me a few for myself. Finally
I got rich and I didn't work for the man any longer, and I had enough to
buy five hand organs, for I can play five at once. Then I came here, and
built this shingle house and every day I amuse myself by playing tunes,
and I never have to climb up the rainwater pipe to get money. Oh, it is a
happy life," and the monkey felt so funny that he hung by his tail from a
tree branch, and made faces at Uncle Wiggily--just in fun, you understand.

Uncle Wiggily was very glad he had met the monkey, and he listened to the
music, and the monkey even let the rabbit play one tune for himself, and
it was called, "When You Wiggle Your Wiggily Ears Wiggle Them Good and
Hard."

And then, all of a sudden, just as that tune was finished, there was a
terrible noise in the bushes.

"My goodness! What's that?" cried the monkey as he hopped up on top of one
of his hand organs and curled his tail around the handle.

"It sounds like a bear!" said the rabbit. "But don't worry. I'll do just
as the cricket did to the alligator and make him laugh so that he won't
hurt us."

"Good!" cried the monkey. And then the noise became louder and out from
the bushes popped a big animal. But it was an elephant instead of a bear,
and as soon as he saw the monkey and Uncle Wiggily he ran up to them and
shook his trunk at them and cried:

"Oh, I'm so glad to see you! I just got away from the circus, and I want
to have some fun!" and he was as kind and gentle as he could be and he and
Uncle Wiggily had quite an adventure the next day.

I'll tell you about it on the next page, when, in case the little boy
across the street doesn't tickle my pussy cat and make him sneeze the
rubbers off the umbrella plant, the story will be about Uncle Wiggily and
the big dog.


STORY XIII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BIG DOG


Let's see, I left off in the last story just where the elephant came out
of the woods and shook his tail--I mean his trunk--at Uncle Wiggily and
the funny monkey, didn't I? Well, now, I'm going to tell you what happened
after that.

"Why did you run away from the circus?" asked the old gentleman rabbit of
the elephant. "I should think you would like it there. I know Sammie and
Susie Littletail would love a circus."

"Yes, some folks like it," spoke the elephant slow and thoughtful-like, as
he sat down on his trunk, "but I do not care for it. You see of late the
children ate all the peanuts, instead of giving me my share, and I just
couldn't stand it any longer. Why, it got so, finally, that when a man
would give his little boy five cents to buy a bag of peanuts for me the
little boy would eat all but two or three of the nuts, and those were all
he gave to me. It wasn't enough, so I ran away."

"I don't in the least blame you," said the monkey, "and I'm going to let
you play some of my hand organs."

Well, the elephant was delighted at that, and he played one organ with his
trunk and another one with his tail, making some very nice music.

Uncle Wiggily stayed in the monkey's house that night, and the elephant
wanted to come in also, but of course he was far too big, so he had to
sleep outside under a tree. It was an apple tree, and in the middle of the
night the elephant snored so hard and heavily through his trunk that he
shook the tree and all the apples fell off, and in the morning the monkey
made an apple pie from some of them.

"I think I had better start off on my travels again," said the old
gentleman rabbit after breakfast. "There must be a fortune for me
somewhere if I can only find it. So I'll trot along."

"I'll go with you," said the kind elephant. "Perhaps you might see your
fortune in the top of a tall tree, and then you couldn't get it. But I
would pull the tree down for you."

"That would be fine!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "I'll be glad to have you
travel with me."

So they said good-by to the monkey, and off they started together, the
rabbit and the elephant. They talked of many things, about how hot it
was, and whether there would be rain soon, and about how much ice cream
cones cost, and sometimes what a little bit of ice cream the man puts in
the cones when he is in a hurry.

"Speaking of ice cream cones," said the elephant, "makes me hungry for
some. I wish I had one."

"I wish I had one also," spoke Uncle Wiggily. "You would have to have a
very large one, though, Mr. Elephant, but a small one would do for me."

"Don't say another word," cried the elephant as he waved his trunk in the
air. "I'm going right off and get us some ice cream cones. I know where
there's a store. You hop along slowly and I'll catch up to you."

So the elephant went off to the ice cream cone store, and Uncle Wiggily,
with his valise and the barber pole crutch, hopped on through the woods,
looking about to see if his fortune was up in any of the trees, but it
wasn't there yet.

Well, pretty soon, in a little while, not so very long, all of a sudden
the old gentleman rabbit heard a sniffing-sniffing noise in the woods. And
then there was a rustling in the bushes.

"Ha, hum!" exclaimed the rabbit. "Perhaps that may be a bear. I had better
look out for myself."

He started to hop softly away, so the bear, or whatever it was, wouldn't
hear him, but he was too late. In an instant out of the bushes popped
something big and black and shaggy, and the rabbit, taking one look at it,
saw that it was a big dog.

"New is the time for me to run!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "That dog will eat
me up, sure pop!"

Away hopped the old gentleman rabbit, his heart going "pitter-patter-pat,"
he was so frightened. On and on he ran down a path in the woods.

"Here, come back here! Come back!" cried the dog.

"Indeed, I will not," answered Uncle Wiggily. "I know what you want to do.
You want to eat me."

"No, I don't, honestly!" cried the dog. "But come back, for if you run any
farther on that road you'll fall into a lake and be drowned."

"Humph! I don't believe that!" cried the rabbit. "You are saying that to
scare me," and on he hopped faster than ever.

"Come back! Come back!" cried the dog again, but Uncle Wiggily wouldn't.
My! how fast he did hop, until, all of a sudden, as he returned around the
corner of a stump, he saw a lake of water right in front of him. And
before he could stop himself he had fallen plump into it; crutch, satchel
and all, and of course he couldn't swim. And he could hear the dog coming
barking down the path after him.

"Oh, this is the end of me, sure pop!" thought poor Uncle Wiggily. "I'll
never get any fortune now."

"Oh, dear!" cried the dog. "I told you how it would be. I tried to save
you from getting in the water," and then the rabbit knew the big dog had
been telling the truth. But it was too late now. Uncle Wiggily was going
down under the deep, dark, cold water when, all of a sudden, along came
the elephant with a great big ice cream cone for himself, and a little one
for Uncle Wiggily. He saw the rabbit in the water and he also saw the big
shaggy dog.

"Did you push Uncle Wiggily in the water?" asked the elephant, "because if
you did I'm going to throw you in."

"No, indeed, I didn't," answered the dog. "It was an accident," and he
told the elephant how it happened. "But I'll jump in, grab him and swim
out with him," said the dog.

"No, don't do that, you might accidentally bite him," spoke the elephant.
"I have a better plan." So he laid down the ice cream cones and then he
put the end of his hollow trunk in the lake, and he began to suck up and
drink the water, just as you suck lemonade up through a straw.

And presto chango! in a few seconds all the water was sucked out of the
lake by the elephant, and it was dry land and the rabbit could walk safely
to shore, and so he wasn't drowned after all. And how he did thank the
elephant! Uncle Wiggily ate his ice cream cone, and the elephant gave some
of his to the dog, and they were all happy.

Now, if the elephant doesn't get a sliver in his foot so he can't dance at
the hoptoads' picnic, I'll tell you in the next story about Uncle Wiggily
and the peanut man.


STORY XIV

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE PEANUT MAN


After Uncle Wiggily and the elephant and the big dog had eaten up the ice
cream cones, they sat in the woods a while and looked at the place where
the watery lake had been before the elephant drank it up to save the
rabbit from drowning.

"My, but you must be strong to take up all that water," said the dog.

"Yes, I guess I am pretty strong," said the elephant, though he was not at
all proud-like. "I will show you how I can pull up a tree," he said. So he
wound his trunk around a big tree and he gave one great, heaving pull and
up that tree came by the roots. Then, all of a sudden a voice cried:

"Oh, you're upsetting all my eggs!" and a robin, who had her nest in the
tree, fluttered around feeling very sad.

"Oh, excuse me, Mrs. Robin," said the elephant. "I would not have
disturbed you for the world had I known that your nest was in that tree.
I'll plant it right back again in the same place I pulled it up. Anyhow, I
intended to do it, as it is not a good thing to kill a tree. I'll plant it
again."

So he put the tree back in the hole, and with his big feet he stamped down
the earth around it. Then the robin's nest and eggs were safe, and she
sang a pretty song because she was thankful to the elephant.

Well, the elephant had to sleep out-of-doors again that night, because he
couldn't find a house large enough for him, but Uncle Wiggily slept in the
big dog's kennel. In the morning the rabbit said:

"It is very nice here, and I like it very much, but I must travel along, I
s'pose, and see if I can't find my fortune. Are you coming, Mr. Elephant?"

"Why, certainly. I will go along with you," said the big chap. "Perhaps
the dog will come also."

"No, thank you," said the dog. "I am going to meet a friend of mine, named
Percival, and we are going to call on Lulu and Alice and Jimmie
Wibblewobble, the duck children."

"Is that so?" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "Why, Percival and the
Wibblewobbles are friends of mine. Kindly give them my love and say that
I hope soon to get back home with my fortune."

So the dog said he would, and he started off to meet Percival, who used to
work in the same circus where the elephant came from. And the rabbit and
the elephant hurried off together down the road.

"Are you ever going back to the circus?" asked Uncle Wiggily of the
elephant as they went along.

"Not unless they catch me and make me go," he answered. "I like this sort
of life much better, and besides, no one gave me ice cream cones in the
circus."

Well, pretty soon the rabbit and the elephant came to a place where there
was a high mountain.

"Oh, we'll never get up that," said Uncle Wiggily.

"Yes, we will," said the elephant, "I'll make a hole through it with my
tusks, and we can walk under it instead of climbing over."

So with his long, sharp tusks he made a tunnel right through the mountain,
and, though it was a bit darkish, he and the rabbit went through it as
easily as a mouse can nibble a bit of cheese.

[Illustration]

Then, a little later they came to a place where there was a big river
to cross, and there was no bridge.

"Oh, we can never get over that," said Uncle Wiggily.

"Yes, we can," said the elephant.

"Are you going to drink it up as you did the lake?" asked the rabbit.

"No," said the elephant, "but I will make a bridge to go over the river."
So he found a great big tree that the wind had blown down, and, taking
this in his strong trunk, the elephant laid it across the river, and then
he laid another tree and another, and pretty soon he had as good a bridge
as one could wish, and he and Uncle Wiggily crossed over on it.

Well, they hadn't gone on very far, before, all of a sudden the elephant
fell down, and he was so heavy that he shook the ground just like when a
locomotive choo-choo engine rushes past.

"Oh, whatever is the matter?" asked Uncle Wiggily. "Did you hurt
yourself?"

"No," said the elephant, sad-like, "I am not hurt, but I am sick. I guess
I drank too much ice water, which is a bad thing to do in hot weather. Oh,
how ill I am! You had better go for a doctor."

Well, that poor elephant was so ill that he had to lie down on the ground,
and he cried and groaned, and the big tears rolled down his trunk, and
made quite a mud puddle on the earth. For when an elephant is ill he is
very ill, indeed, as there is so much of him.

"I'll cover you with leaves so you won't get sunburned," said Uncle
Wiggily, "and then I'll hop off for a doctor." Well, it takes a great
number of leaves to cover up an elephant, but finally the rabbit did it,
and then away he started.

He looked everywhere for an elephant doctor, but he couldn't seem to find
any. There were dog doctors and horse doctors and cat doctors and even
doctors for boys and girls, but none for the elephant.

"Oh, what shall I do?" thought the rabbit. "My poor, dear elephant may
die."

Just then he heard some one singing in the woods like this:

    "Peanuts, they are good to eat,
    Mine are most especially neat,
    I am going to make them hot
    So that you will eat a lot."

"Oh, are you an elephant doctor?" cried Uncle Wiggily.

"No, I am a hot-peanut-man," said the voice, and then the peanut roaster
began to whistle like a tea-kettle. "But, perhaps I can cure a sick
elephant," said the peanut man. So he and Uncle Wiggily hurried off
through the woods to where the elephant was groaning, and, would you
believe it? as soon as the big chap heard the whistle of the hot-peanut
wagon and smelled the nuts roasting he got well all of a sudden and he ate
a bushel of the nuts and Uncle Wiggily had some also. So that's how the
elephant got well, and he and the rabbit traveled on the next day.

They had quite an adventure, too, as I shall have the pleasure of telling
you in the next story which will be about Uncle Wiggily and the crawly
snake--that is if the baby doesn't drop his bread and butter down the
stovepipe and make the rice pudding laugh.


STORY XV.

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE CRAWLY SNAKE


"Do you feel all right to travel to-day?" asked Uncle Wiggily of the
elephant the next morning, after the hot-peanut-man had cured the big
chap.

"Oh, yes, I feel very fine!" said the elephant. "We will travel along
together again, and perhaps we may find your fortune this time."

"Hadn't we better take some extra peanuts with us, in case you become ill
again?" asked the rabbit, as he looked in the satchel to see if he had any
sandwiches, in case he got hungry.

"Oh, to be sure, we must have peanuts!" exclaimed the elephant. "Take as
many as we can carry, for I just love 'em!"

So they hunted up the hot-peanut-man, and bought all the rest of his
peanuts, besides paying for those the elephant had eaten to make himself
get well.

"Good luck to you!" cried the peanut man, as he wheeled away his empty
wagon, "I wish I had elephants for customers every day, then I would soon
get rich," and away he went singing:

    "I sell peanuts good and hot,
    Five cents buys you quite a lot.
    Get your money and come here,
    Buy my peanuts, children dear.

    "My peanuts are hot and brown,
    Finest ones in all the town.
    Nice and juicy--good to chew,
    I have some for all of you."

"Well, come on," said the elephant to Uncle Wiggily, "put some peanuts in
your valise, and I will carry the rest."

"How; in your trunk?" asked the rabbit.

"No, I'm going to wrap them up in a bundle, and tie them on my back. I
want my trunk to squirt water through when it gets hot, as I think the sun
is going to be very scorchy to-day."

So he tied the bundle of peanuts on his back, and then the two friends
journeyed on together. Well, it did get very hot, and it kept on getting
hotter, and there wasn't much shade.

"Oh my, I wish it would rain a little shower!" said Uncle Wiggily, as he
wiped his ears with his handkerchief. "I am as hot as an oven."

"I can soon fix that part of it," said the elephant. And pretty soon he
came to a spring of cold water, and he sucked a lot of it up in his hollow
trunk, and then he squirted a nice cool, fine spray of it over the rabbit,
just as if it came out of a hose with which papa waters the garden or
lawn.

"My! That feels fine!" said the rabbit. Then the elephant squirted some
water on himself, and they went on, feeling much better.

But still they were warm again in a short time, and then the elephant
said:

"I know what I am going to do. I am going to get some more ice cream
cones. They will cool us off better than anything else. I'll go for them
and bring back some big ones. You stay here in the shade, Uncle Wiggily,
but don't walk on ahead, or you may tumble into the water again."

"I'll not," promised the rabbit. "I'll wait right here for you."

Off the elephant started to get the ice cream cones and pretty soon he
came to the store where the man sold them.

[Illustration]

"I want two of your very coldest cones," said the elephant to the man, for
sometimes, in stories, you know, elephants can talk to people. "I want a
big strawberry cone for myself," the elephant went on, "and a smaller
one for my friend, Uncle Wiggily, the rabbit."

"Very well," said the man, "but you will have to wait until I make a large
cone for you."

So that man took seventeen thousand, six hundred and eighty-seven little
cones and made them into one big one for the elephant. Then he took
eighteen thousand, two hundred and ninety-one quarts of strawberry ice
cream, and an extra pint, and put it into the big cone. Then he made a
rabbit-sized ice cream cone for Uncle Wiggily and gave them both to the
elephant, who carried them in his trunk so they wouldn't melt.

But I must tell you what was happening to Uncle Wiggily all this while. As
he sat there in the shade of the apple tree, thinking, about his fortune
and whether he would ever find it, all of a sudden he saw something round
and squirming sticking itself toward him through the bushes.

"Ha! the elephant has come back so quietly that I didn't hear him,"
thought the rabbit. "That is his trunk he is sticking out at me. I guess
he thinks I don't see him, and he is going to tickle me. I hope he has
those ice cream cones."

Well, the crawly, squirming, round thing, which was like the small end of
an elephant's trunk, kept coming closer and closer to the rabbit.

"Now, I'll play a trick on that elephant--I'll tickle his trunk for him,
and he'll think it's a mosquito!" said Uncle Wiggily to himself.

He was just about to do this, when suddenly the crawly thing made a sort
of jump toward him, and before the rabbit could move he found himself
grasped by a big, ugly snake, who wrapped himself around the rabbit just
as ladies wrap their fur around their necks in the winter. It wasn't the
elephant's trunk at all, but a bad snake.

"Now, I have you!" hissed the snake like a steam radiator in Uncle
Wiggily's left ear. "I'm going to squeeze you to death and then eat you,"
and he began to squeeze that poor rabbit just like the wash-lady squeezes
clothes in the wringer.

"Oh, my breath! You are crushing all the breath out of me!" cried Uncle
Wiggily. "Please let go of me!"

"No!" hissed the snake, and he squeezed harder than ever.

"Oh, this is the end of me!" gasped the rabbit, when all of a sudden he
heard a great crashing in the bushes. Then a voice cried:

"Here, you bad snake, let go of Uncle Wiggily."

And bless my hat! If the elephant didn't rush up, just in time, and he
grabbed hold of that snake's tail in his trunk, and unwound the snake from
around the rabbit, and then the elephant with a long swing of his trunk
threw the snake so high up in the air that I guess he hasn't yet come
down.

"I was just in time to save you!" said the elephant to Uncle Wiggily.
"Here, eat this ice cream cone and you'll feel better."

So the rabbit did this, and his breath came back and he was all right
again, but he made up his mind never to try to tickle a crawly thing again
until he was sure it wasn't a snake.

So that's all for the present, if you please, but in case my fur hat
doesn't sleep out in the hammock all night, and catch cold in the head so
that it sneezes and wakes up the alarm clock, I'll tell you next about
Uncle Wiggily and the water lilies.


STORY XVI

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE WATER LILIES


Uncle Wiggily was hopping along through the woods one day, and pretty
soon, as he went past a cute little house, made out of corncobs, he heard
some one calling to him.

"Oh, Mr. Rabbit," a voice said, "have you seen anything of my little
girl?" And there stood a nice mamma cat, looking anxiously about.

"I don't know," answered Uncle Wiggily, as he stopped in the shade of a
tree, and set down his valise. "Was your little girl named Sarah, Mrs.
Cat?"

"Oh, indeed, my little girl is not named Sarah," said Mrs. Cat. "She is
called Snowball, and she is just as cute as she can be. She is all white,
like a ball of snow, and so we call her Snowball. But she is lost, and I'm
afraid I'll never find her again," and the kittie's mamma began to cry,
and she wiped her tears on her apron.

"Oh, don't worry. Never mind. I'll find her for you," said the kind old
gentleman rabbit.

"I can't find my fortune but I believe I can find Snowball. Now, tell me
which way she went away, and I'll go search for her."

"I didn't see her go out of the house," said Mrs. Cat, "because I was
making a cherry pie, and I was very busy. Snowball was playing on the
floor, with a ball of soft yarn, and it rolled out of doors. She raced out
after it, and I thought she would soon be back. I put the cherry pie in
the oven and then when I went to look for her she was gone. Oh, dear! I
just know some horrid dog has hurt her."

"Please don't worry," said Uncle Wiggily. "I'll find her for you. I'll
start right off, and if I can't find her I'll get a policeman, and he can,
for the police always find lost children."

So Uncle Wiggily started off, leaving his valise with Mrs. Cat, but taking
his crutch with him, for he thought he might need it to beat off any bad
dogs if they chased after Snowball.

First the old gentleman rabbit looked carefully all along the road, but he
couldn't see anything of the lost pussy cat.

"Perhaps she may be up a tree," he said to himself. "If a dog chased her
she would climb up one, and perhaps she is afraid to come down."

So he looked up into all the trees, and he even shook some of them in
order to see up them better, but he did not discover the pussy cat. Then
he called:

"Snowball! Snowball! Snowball! Where are you?"

But there was no answer.

"Oh, if there was only some bird who could call 'Snowball' I would get
them to call for the lost pussy," thought Uncle Wiggily.

Then he looked up and he saw a big black bird sitting on a tree.

"Can you call 'Snowball' for me?" asked the rabbit, politely. "She is lost
and her mamma wants her very much. Just call 'Snowball' as loudly as you
can."

"I can't," said the big black bird. "All I can cry is 'Caw! Caw! Caw!' I
am a crow, you see."

"That is too bad," said the rabbit. "Then I will have to keep on searching
by myself," so he did, and the crow flew away to look for a cornfield that
had no scarecrow in it to frighten him.

Well, Uncle Wiggily looked in all the places he could think of, but still
there was no pussy to be seen, and he was just thinking he had better go
for a policeman. But he thought he would try just one more place, so he
looked down a hollow stump, but Snowball was not there.

"I'll have to get a policeman after all," said the rabbit, so he told a
policeman cat about the lost pussy, and the policeman cat searched for
Snowball, but he couldn't find her, either.

"I guess she is gone," said the policeman. "You had better go back and
tell her mamma that she hasn't any little pussy girl any more."

"Oh, how sad it will be to do that!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "I just can't
bear to."

But he started back to the corncob house to tell Mrs. Cat that he couldn't
find her Snowball. And all the while he kept feeling more and more sad,
until he was almost ready to cry.

"But I must be brave," said the old gentleman rabbit, and just then he
came to a pond where a whole lot of beautiful, white water lilies were
growing. Oh, they are a lovely flower, with such a sweet, spicy smell. As
soon as Uncle Wiggily saw them he said:

"I'll pick some and take them home to Mrs. Cat. Perhaps they will make her
feel a little happy, even if her Snowball is gone forever."

So with his long crutch Uncle Wiggily pulled toward shore some of the
water lilies, until he could pick them on their slender stems. Some of the
flowers were wide open, and some were closed, like rosebuds.

He took both kinds home to Mrs. Cat, and when he told her he couldn't find
Snowball she was very sorrowful and she cried. But she loved the flowers
very much, and put them in a bowl of water.

"I'll stay here to-night," said the rabbit, "and in the morning I'll look
for Snowball again. I'm sure I'll find her."

"Oh, you are very kind," said Mrs. Cat, as she wiped away her tears.

Well, the next morning Uncle Wiggily got up real early, and the first
thing he saw was the bowl of water lilies on the parlor table. They had
all closed up like buds in the night, but in the sunlight they all opened
again into beautiful flowers.

And, would you believe me, right in the middle of one of the flowers
something white moved and wiggled. Then it gave a little "Mew!" and then
Uncle Wiggily cried:

"Oh, Mrs. Cat, come here quickly! Here is Snowball! She was asleep inside
of one of the water lilies!"

And, surely enough, there was the little lost kittie, just awakening in
one of the flowers, and she was exactly the color of it. And, oh, how glad
she was to see her mamma again, and how her mamma did hug her!

"How did you get in that flower?" asked Uncle Wiggily.

"Oh, when I went after my ball a big dog chased me," said Snowball, "so I
jumped into one of the lilies and I fell asleep, and the flower went shut
and I stayed there. But now I'm home, and I'm glad of it," and she just
kissed Uncle Wiggily on the tip end of his nose, that twinkled like a star
on a frosty night.

So that's how Snowball was lost and found, and I'm going to tell you about
Uncle Wiggily and the sunflower, that is if the sunfish doesn't spread the
butter too thick on the baby's bread with his tail and make her slide out
of her high chair.


STORY XVII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE SUNFLOWER


Mrs. Cat and her daughter Snowball liked Uncle Wiggily so much that they
wanted him to stay with them a long time.

"You can build yourself a nice little corncob house next to ours," said
Snowball, "and live in it; and you can tell me a story every night."

"Oh, but rabbits live underground, and not in corncob houses, though such
houses are very nice," said Uncle Wiggily. "I guess I'll have to be
traveling on."

"If you stay, I'll bake you a cherry pie every day," said Mrs. Cat. "And
you can help find Snowball when she gets lost again."

"Cherry pie is very good, and you are very kind," said the rabbit
politely, "but I have my fortune to find."

"Well, if you can't stay you can't, I s'pose," said Snowball; "but I'm
never going to get lost again," and she put her little nose down deep
inside a water lily and smelled it, and oh, how sweet and spicy it
smelled!

So Uncle Wiggily got ready to start off on his travels again, and in his
satchel he put a whole cherry pie that Mrs. Cat had baked for him.

"It will taste good when you are hungry," she said.

"Indeed it will," agreed Uncle Wiggily, and he wished he was hungry then
and there, because he just loved cherry pie.

He was walking on through the woods, when, all at once, he heard some
music playing, and the name of the song was "Never Take Your Ice Cream
Cone and Drop it in the Mud."

"Ha! I believe that is the funny monkey and one of his hand organs!"
exclaimed the rabbit. "I shall be glad to see him again."

So he looked through the trees, and there, surely enough, was the monkey,
and he was playing the organ with his tail, and in one paw he held a
cocoanut and in the other paw an orange, and first he would take a bite of
the orange, and then a bite of the cocoanut.

"I always like music when I eat," said the monkey as he threw a bit of
orange skin over his left shoulder.

"How comes it that you are away off here," asked the rabbit.

"Oh! I got tired of staying home," said the monkey. "I thought I would go
out and see if I could make a few pennies by playing music." Then he
played another tune called, "Don't Sit Down When You Stand Up."

Well, Uncle Wiggily listened to the music, which he liked very much, and
he began to feel hungry. Then he thought of the cherry pie, that the cat
lady had put in his valise.

"I guess I'll eat some of that and give the monkey a bit," he said, and he
did so.

"Oh, this is most delicious and scrumptious!" cried the monkey, as he and
Uncle Wiggily sat there eating the pie, and wiping off the juice with
green leaves, so as not to soil their clothing.

"Indeed, it is very delectable," said the rabbit, hungry-like. "Have
another piece."

Well, he was just cutting it off, when, all of a sudden, before you could
say "Boo!" to an elephant, a terrible voice cried:

"Here! Give me that pie! I must have cherry pie!" and before the monkey or
Uncle Wiggily knew what was happening, out from behind the bushes jumped
the skillery-scallery-tailery alligator, gnashing his teeth.

"Give me that pie!" he cried again, opening his mouth wide enough to
swallow a cake as big as a wash-tub.

"No, you cannot have it," said Uncle Wiggily, and, as quick as a wink, he
popped the pie into his valise and closed it up. "Now you can't get it!"
the rabbit said.

"Then I'll get you and the monkey!" cried the alligator, as he made a dash
for both of them.

"Not me! You can't catch me!" exclaimed the monkey, as he skipped up into
the top of a tall tree. Then, of course, as the alligator couldn't climb a
tree he couldn't get the monkey. The skillery-scallery creature tried to
eat the hand organ, and he tried to play it, but he could do neither. Then
he got real angry.

"I'll chase after Uncle Wiggily and eat him!" he cried out, for by this
time the rabbit was hopping along down the road. After him went the
'gator, coming nearer and nearer.

"Stop! Stop! I want you!" cried the alligator to the rabbit.

"I know you do, but you can't have me!" replied the rabbit. "I don't want
to be eaten up!"

So he ran on as fast as he could, but still the alligator came on after
him, and the savage beast was almost up to Uncle Wiggily.

"Oh, if I only had some place to hide!" panted the poor rabbit. "Then
maybe the alligator would pass me by."

So he looked around for a place in which to hide, but just then he found
himself in a field, and all that he could see were a whole lot of
sunflowers growing near a fence.

"Oh, I can't hide behind those flowers because the stems are so small
around," thought Uncle Wiggily. "And I can't climb up them, and sit on the
big flower, because I can't climb, and besides the stems are too slender
to hold me up. Oh, what shall I do?"

Well, the alligator was coming nearer and nearer, and the rabbit could
hear the gnashing of his teeth, when, all at once one of the sunflowers
called out.

"Gnaw through my stem, and cut me down, Uncle Wiggily. Then you can hold
my big blossom up in front of you and the alligator can't see you."

"But won't it hurt you to cut you down?" asked the rabbit.

"No, for I will grow up again next year," said the big sunflower. "Hurry
and cut me down, and hide behind me, and I'll shine in the eyes of the
alligator and blind him."

So Uncle Wiggily quickly gnawed through the sunflower stalk with his sharp
teeth, and down the flower came. Then the rabbit held the blossom up in
front of himself, and hid behind it, and the yellow flower, which is
round, just like the sun, shone so brightly into the alligator's face
that he couldn't look out of his eyes, and so he was partly blinded, and
he couldn't see to catch Uncle Wiggily, and he had to crawl away without
eating the rabbit.

Then Uncle Wiggily thanked the sunflower, and laid it gently down, and
hopped on his way again to seek his fortune.

And the story after this, in case the washbowl and pitcher don't do a
funny dance in the middle of the night and wake up my puppy dog, I'll tell
you about Uncle Wiggily and the lightning bugs.


STORY XVIII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE LIGHTNING BUG


It was a very warm day, and as Uncle Wiggily walked along, carrying his
satchel, and sort of leaning on his crutch, for his rheumatism hurt him a
bit, he said:

"It is very hard to have to look for your fortune on a hot day, I wish it
was nice and cool, and then I would feel better."

"I can tell you where there is a cool place," said a little yellow bird,
as she flew along in the air over the head of the old gentleman rabbit.

"Do you mean in an icehouse?" asked the traveling rabbit as he took off
his hat to see if the sun had burned it any.

"No, but of course that is a cold place," said the bird, as she sang a
funny little song about a curly-headed dog who hadn't any nose and every
time he walked along he stepped upon his toes. "But I don't mean an
icehouse," went on the bird, as she turned her head to one side. "However,
I know a nice cool place in the woods where you can lie down and have a
little sleep. By that time the hot sun will go down behind the clouds, and
then you can travel on in comfort."

"I believe that will be a good plan," spoke the rabbit. "I'll do it.
Please show me the way to the cool place."

So the bird flew on ahead, and Uncle Wiggily hopped on behind, and pretty
soon he came to a place in the woods where there was a little babbling
brook, flowing over mossy green stones, and telling them secrets about the
fishes that swam in the cool water. Then there were long, green ferns
leaning over, and nodding their heads as they dipped down to take a drink
out of the brook. There was also a nice little cave, made of stones, and
that was almost as cool as an icehouse.

"Oh, this will be just fine for me!" exclaimed the rabbit, as he hopped
inside the stone cave. "I'll go to sleep here."

So he stretched out on a pile of leaves, and the little yellow bird began
to sing a sleepy song. This is how it went, to the tune "Lum-tum-tum
tiddily-iddily-um:"

    "Sleep, Uncle Wiggily, sleep.
    Don't open your eyes to peep.
    I'll sing you a song,
    That's not very long.
    It's not sad, so please do not weep."

Well, as true as I'm telling you, before she had sung more than
forty-'leven verses the old gentleman rabbit was fast, fast asleep, and,
no matter how hot the sun shone down, Uncle Wiggily was nice and cool.

Well, pretty soon, in a little while, a savage, bad hawk-bird flew down
from high in the air, where he had seen the little yellow bird sitting on
the tree, near the cave, where the rabbit was sleeping. And the hawk made
a dash for the yellow bird, and would have eaten her up only the bird flew
quickly away and hid in a hollow stump, and that hawk was so mad that he
bit a leaf off a tree and tore it into three pieces--the leaf, I mean, not
the tree.

Well, after that the yellow bird didn't dare stay near the cave, for the
hawk was on the watch to catch her, and, of course, Uncle Wiggily had no
one to awaken him when it was cool enough for him to travel on and seek
his fortune.

He slept and he slept, and then he slept a little more, and all of a
sudden he awakened and it was nearly night. My! how he did jump up then
and rub his eyes with his paws, and he couldn't think, for a minute or so,
just where he was.

"Oh, now I remember!" he exclaimed. "I'm in the cave. Oh, dear me! but
it's coming on night. The yellow bird must have forgotten to wake me up. I
wonder what I shall do?"

So he went out of the cave to look for the bird, but he couldn't find her.
The savage hawk was there, however, but when he saw Uncle Wiggily and
noted how brave he was, even if he did have the rheumatism, that hawk just
gnashed his beak and flew away.

Then it got darker and darker, and poor Uncle Wiggily didn't know what to
do, for he didn't know whether or not it would be safe to stay in the
cave.

"A bear might come along and eat me," he thought. "This cave might be a
bear's den. I guess I will travel ahead and look for some other place
where I can spend the night. But I don't like traveling in the dark."

However, there was no help for it, so the old gentleman rabbit, after
eating a lettuce sandwich, took up his satchel, grasped his crutch firmly,
and started away.

He traveled on through the woods, and it kept getting darker and darker,
until at last Uncle Wiggily couldn't see anything in front of him but just
blackness.

"Oh, this will never do!" he cried. "I can't go on this way. If I only
had a lantern it would be all right."

Then, all at once, he heard a sort of growling noise in the bushes, and
then he heard a sniffing-snuffling noise, and pretty soon a voice cried:

"Oh, ha! Oh, hum! I smell fresh rabbit. Now, I will have a good supper!"

"That must be a savage bear or a fox!" cried the rabbit. "I guess this is
the last of me!"

Then he saw two round circles shining in the darkness, two flashing,
bright, shining things, and he was more frightened than ever.

"Oh, those are the glaring eyes of the fox or bear!" thought Uncle
Wiggily. "I'm done for, sure!"

Then something made a jump for him, out of the bushes, but the rabbit
crouched down, and the beast jumped over him. Then, would you ever believe
it? those two shining things flew nearer, and instead of being the eyes of
a fox or bear they were two, good, kind, lightning bugs, who were flitting
about.

"Oh, you'll be a lantern for me, won't you?" cried the rabbit, anxiously.
"Will you please light me out of these woods, and keep the savage beasts
away?"

"Of course, we will!" cried the two lightning bugs. And they flew closer
to the rabbit. Then the savage fox, for he it was who had made a jump for
Uncle Wiggily, was so afraid of the sparkling lights, that he ran away and
hid in the bushes, fearing he would be burned. Then the two bugs called
for all of their friends to come and make the woods light so the old
gentleman rabbit could see.

And pretty soon seventeen thousand, four hundred and eighty-three big
lightning bugs, and a little baby one besides, came flying along, and the
woods were almost as light as day, and Uncle Wiggily could see to hop on.
The bugs flew ahead, shining themselves like fairy lanterns, and pretty
soon the rabbit came to a nice hollow stump, where he remained all night.
And some of the bugs stayed with him to keep the bears and foxes away.

Then, in the morning, after thanking the bugs, the rabbit traveled on
again, and he had another adventure. What it was I'll tell you on the next
page, when, in case my pussy cat goes in swimming and doesn't get her fur
wet, the story will be about Uncle Wiggily and the Phoebe birds.


STORY XIX

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE PHOEBE BIRDS


"Well, I don't seem to be finding my fortune very fast," said Uncle
Wiggily to himself the next day, as he traveled on, after the lightning
bugs had shown him the way out of the woods. "Here I've been tramping
around the country for a considerable while, and all I've found was one
cent, and that belonged to the chipmunk.

"I wish I could find a little money. Then I would buy some peanuts and
sell them, and make more money, and pretty soon I would be rich, and I
could go back home and see Sammie and Susie Littletail."

So he walked along, looking very carefully on the ground for money. All he
found for some time were only old acorns, and, as he couldn't eat them,
they were of no use to him.

"If Johnnie or Billie Bushytail were here now I would give them some," he
said. But the squirrels were far away frisking about in the tops.

Now, as true as I'm telling you, a moment after that, just as Uncle
Wiggily was going past a big stone, he saw something bright and shining in
the leaves.

"Oh, good luck!" he cried. "I've found ten cents, and that will buy two
bags of peanuts. Now I'll get rich!"

So he picked up the shining thing, and oh! how disappointed he was, for it
was only a round piece of tin, such as they make penny whistles of.

"Oh, dear!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "Fooled again! Well, all I can do is to
keep on."

He went on a little farther, until he came to a place where there were a
whole lot of prickly briar bushes, with red berries growing on them.

"Oh, ho!" exclaimed the rabbit. "Some of those berries will do for my
dinner, as I'm getting hungry. I'll pick a few."

He was just going to pick some of the berries, when he happened to notice
a big, red thing, like a red flannel bag, standing wide open near a hole
in the bushes. And in front of the red place was a sign, which said:

"Come in, one and all. Everybody welcome."

"It looks very nice in there," thought the rabbit. "Perhaps it is the
opening of a circus tent. I'm going in, for I haven't seen a show in some
time. And, maybe, my friend, the elephant, will be in there."

Uncle Wiggily was just going to hop into the funny red opening that had
the sign on it, when a little ant came crawling along, carrying a small
loaf of bread.

"Hello, Uncle Wiggily," said the ant. "Where are you going?"

"I am going inside this red circus tent," said the rabbit. "Won't you come
in with me? I'll buy you a ticket."

"Oh, never go in there--don't you do it!" cried the ant, and she got so
excited that she nearly dropped her loaf of bread. "That is not a circus
tent; it is only the skillery-scalery-tailery alligator, and he has opened
his mouth wide hoping some one will come in, so he can have a meal. Don't
go in."

"I won't," said Uncle Wiggily, quickly as he hopped away, and then he took
up a stone and tossed it into the red mouth of the scalery-tailery-wailery
alligator. The alligator shut his jaws very quickly, thinking he had
something good to eat, but he only bit on the stone, and he was so angry
that he lashed out with his tail and nearly knocked over a hickory-nut
tree.

Then the ant crawled home, and Uncle Wiggily hopped on out of danger and
the alligator opened his mouth again, hoping some foolish animal would
walk into the trap he had all ready for them.

Well, in a little while after that, as the old gentleman rabbit was going
along under the big tree, all of a sudden he heard a voice calling, rather
sadly and sweetly:

"Phoebe! Phoebe!"

"My goodness, that must be some little lost girl named Phoebe, and her
sister is calling for her," he thought. "I wonder if I could help find
her?" For, you know, Uncle Wiggily was just as kind as he could be, and
always wanting to help some one.

Then he heard the voice again:

"Phoebe! Phoebe!"

"Where are you?" asked the rabbit. "I'll help you hunt for your sister
Phoebe. Where are you, little girl?"

But the voice only called again:

"Phoebe! Phoebe!"

"I guess she can't hear me," said the rabbit. "I'll shout more loudly."

So he cried out at the top of his voice:

"I'll help you find Phoebe. Tell me where you are, and we'll go off
together to hunt for her."

But this time the calling voice was farther off, though still the rabbit
could hear it saying:

"Phoebe! Phoebe!"

"My goodness me, sakes alive, and a bottle of stove polish! I can't make
this out," said Uncle Wiggily. "That little girl is so worried about her
lost sister that she doesn't pay any attention to me. But I'll help her
just the same."

So he hopped on toward where he heard the voice calling, and pretty soon,
believe me, he heard two voices. One cried out:

"Phoebe! Phoebe!"

And the other one called just the same, only a little more slowly, like
this:

"Phoe-be! Phoe-be!"

"Now, there are two of her sisters calling for the lost one," said the
rabbit. "They must be very much worried about Phoebe. Perhaps a bear has
eaten her. That would be dreadful! I must help them!"

So he hopped on through the woods, faster than ever, crying out:

"I'm coming! I'm coming! Old Uncle Wiggily is going to help you find
Phoebe."

And then, would you believe me, Uncle Wiggily heard seven voices, all
calling at once:

"Phoebe! Phoebe! Phoebe! Phoebe! Phoebe! Phoebe! Phoebe!"

"Oh, now the whole family is after that lost child," said the rabbit. "I
had better go for a policeman." And then he happened to look up, and he
saw a whole lot of little birds sitting on a tree, and each one was
calling:

"Phoebe!" just like that. Really I'm not fooling a bit; honestly.

"Oh my! How surprised I am!" cried the rabbit. "Was that you birds calling
for the little lost girl?"

"It was," said the largest bird, "but there isn't any lost girl. You see
we are Phoebe birds, and that is the way we always sing. We always say
'Phoebe--Phoebe' over and over again. We didn't mean to fool you. It's
only our way of calling."

"Oh, that's all right," said the rabbit. "I don't mind. It was good
exercise for me to run after you."

Well, those birds liked Uncle Wiggily so much that they sang their
prettiest for him, and asked him to stay to dinner, which he did. And he
had chocolate cake with candied carrots on top.

And that's all to this story, if you please, but in case a red bird brings
me some green flower seeds to plant in my garden so I can grow some
lollypops, I'll tell you next about Uncle Wiggily and the milkman.


STORY XX

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE MILKMAN


Well, now I guess we're all ready for the story of the chicken who tried
to roll an egg up hill, and it fell down, and was broken into forty-'leven
pieces and the monkey--Oh dear! Did you ever hear of such a thing? I guess
I must have turned over two pages in the story book instead of one, for
to-night I'm going to tell you about Uncle Wiggily and the milkman, and
not about the chicken and the egg at all. That comes in later.

Let's see then, we left the old gentleman rabbit just after he had met the
Phoebe birds, didn't we? Well, a few days after that, as Uncle Wiggily was
hopping along with the elephant, who had come back to him again, now and
then, when he was tired, taking a ride on the back of the big fellow, all
of a sudden they heard a voice crying:

"Ah, ha! Now I have you!"

"My! What's that?" asked the old gentleman rabbit.

"It must be somebody after us," answered the elephant. "But don't you be
afraid, Uncle Wiggily, I'll take care of you, and not let them hurt you.
Just get behind me."

So the rabbit got behind the big elephant, and, would you believe it? you
couldn't see Uncle Wiggily at all, not even if you were to put on the
strongest kind of spectacles, such as Grandma wears. For he was hidden
behind the elephant.

Then, in another moment a man with a long rope came bursting through the
bushes, and he ran straight toward the elephant.

"Now I have you!" cried the man again. "You must come right back to the
circus with me."

"Oh, it's you they want, and not me," remarked Uncle Wiggily, and then he
wasn't afraid any more, and felt better, for he knew that he could still
travel on and seek his fortune.

"Yes, they're after me," said the elephant sadly. "I guess I'll have to
leave you, Uncle Wiggily. Do you want me to go with you, Mr. Man?"

"Yes, we want you back in the circus show."

"Will I have all the peanuts I want?" asked the elephant.

"Oh, yes," promised the man, "you may have a bushel and a pint every day,
besides a pailful of pink lemonade."

"Then I'll come," said the elephant, "though I would like to have Uncle
Wiggily come also. But he still has his fortune to find. Come and see me
some time," he called to the rabbit.

"I will," said Uncle Wiggily. Then the man tied a rope around the
elephant's trunk and led him away, and the big fellow waved and flapped
his ears at the rabbit to say good-by.

"Now I must travel all alone once more," said Uncle Wiggily to himself, as
he hopped on through the woods. "And I do hope I find part of my fortune
to-day, even if it's only ten cents' worth."

Well, he was passing across a nice green field a little while after that
when, all of a sudden, he heard some voices talking. He looked all around,
but he couldn't see any one, and he wondered if perhaps there were fairies
about. Then he heard a voice say:

"Now, children, hop just as I do. Take a long breath and then hop, and be
very careful where you go."

Then Uncle Wiggily looked down in the grass, and he saw a mamma hoptoad
and a whole lot of her little toads hopping along. The mamma toad was
giving the little ones their morning lesson. And I just wish you could
have seen how nicely those tiny toads could hop. One little chap, named
Sylvester, hopped over a big stone, and his little sister, named
Clarabella, leaped over a stick with a nail in it and didn't get hurt a
bit.

"Ha! That is very good hopping! Very fine, indeed!" cried Uncle Wiggily,
waving his ears back and forth. "I could hardly do better myself."

"Oh, it's very kind of you to say so," said the mamma toad. "Now,
children, give a big hop for Uncle Wiggily."

Well, they all took long breaths, and they were just going to hop when the
old gentleman rabbit suddenly called:

"Look out! Hold on! Don't jump!"

They all stopped quickly, and the mamma toad wanted to know what was the
matter.

"Why, there is a big cow walking along," said the rabbit, for he could see
over the top of the grass better than could the toads, and could watch the
big cow coming. "If that cow stepped on you, why, you would never hop
again," said the rabbit, and then he led the toads out of danger.

"Oh, I'm ever so much obliged to you," said the mamma toad to the rabbit.
"You saved our lives."

Then she had all the little toads thank the old gentleman rabbit, and the
mamma toad asked him to come to her house for dinner. Uncle Wiggily went,
but the toad's house was so small that he couldn't get in, until he had
made it bigger by scratching away some of the dirt around the front door.

Then he had a very good dinner, and he stayed all night at the toad
family's house and watched the little ones hop some more, and he and the
papa toad talked about the weather.

Well, in the morning when Uncle Wiggily got up and washed his face and
paws, and combed out his whiskers, he suddenly heard all the little toads
crying.

"Hum! Suz! Dud!" he exclaimed, "some of them must have the toothache." So
he went down stairs, and there all the toad family were sitting around the
breakfast table, but they weren't eating.

"What's the matter?" asked Uncle Wiggily, sadly-like.

"Why," said the papa toad, "the milkman hasn't come, and the children have
no milk for their oatmeal, and I have none for my coffee, and I'm in a
hurry to get down to the store where I work."

"That's too bad," said the rabbit. "Can't you use condensed milk?"

"We haven't any," spoke the mamma toad.

[Illustration]

"Well, I'll hop out and see if I can see the milkman coming," said the
rabbit, "for I can see a long distance." So he went out and he hopped up
and down the street, and he looked up and down, but no milkman could he
see. And the little toads were getting hungrier and hungrier every minute
and they cried a lot, yes, indeed!

"This is too bad!" said Uncle Wiggily. "I guess that milkman must be lost.
What can I do? Ah, I have it!" and away he hopped off toward the green
fields. Pretty soon he came to where the cow, who had nearly walked on the
toads, was eating grass, and, stepping up to her, Uncle Wiggily politely
asked:

"Will you please give me some milk for the toads?"

"To be sure I will," said the cow, kindly, "and I'm sorry I nearly stepped
on them yesterday." So she gave Uncle Wiggily a canful of fresh milk, for
the rabbit had brought the milk can out with him. Then Uncle Wiggily
hopped to the toadhouse as fast as he could, and the little toads had milk
for their breakfast, and didn't cry any more.

Then, after a while, the milkman (who was a big puppy dog) came along and
said he was sorry he was late, but he couldn't help it, because he had
stepped on a thorn and had a lame foot and couldn't go fast, so they
forgave him.

"Well, I'll travel along now, I guess," said Uncle Wiggily, and once more
he started off to seek his fortune. And if you don't let your bathing suit
fall into the water and get all wet, I'll tell you next about Uncle
Wiggily's swimming lesson.


STORY XXI

UNCLE WIGGILY'S SWIMMING LESSON


Uncle Wiggily was so tired and worn out after running for milk for the
toad family that he couldn't travel very far that day to seek his fortune.
He slept that night in a doghouse, where a kind puppy named Towser lived,
and Towser covered the old gentleman rabbit up with leaves and straw and
kept watch so that no one would hurt him.

"For I have heard about you from Percival, the old circus dog," said
Towser, the next morning when the rabbit awakened, "and I feel quite like
a friend to you. Will you gnaw one of my juicy bones?"

"No, thank you," said Uncle Wiggily, "but if I had a bit of carrot I would
be very glad."

"Don't say another word!" cried Towser. "I will have it for you in less
than two shakes of a crooked stick, or a straight one, either."

So he ran out into the vegetable garden, and, very carefully he dug up a
fine yellow carrot, which Uncle Wiggily ate for his breakfast. Then the
rabbit rested all that day, and stayed another night with Towser. And
Towser invited some of his friends over to call on the rabbit, and they
had quite an evening's entertainment.

Towser sang a funny song and stood on his tail, and Uncle Wiggily jumped
over two chairs and a footstool, and a dog named Rover stood up on his
hind legs and begged, and made believe he was a soldier with a broom for a
gun, and did lots of tricks like that.

Well, the next day Uncle Wiggily felt well enough to go on with his
travels again and so he started off.

"I will go part of the way with you," said Towser, "to see that no harm
comes to you."

"Thank you, very much," said the rabbit, and so they set off together, the
puppy dog carrying Uncle Wiggily's valise for him.

Pretty soon, not so very long, they came to a pond of water, and as soon
as Towser saw it, he cried out:

"Oh, it is such a hot day I think I'll jump in and have a swim. Come on,
Uncle Wiggily, have a swim with me."

"Oh, no, I can't swim," said the old gentleman rabbit.

"What! You can't swim?" cried the dog. "Well, every one ought to swim,
for when they go on their vacation if they fall in the water they won't
drown if they know how to keep themselves up. Watch me and see how easy it
is."

So Towser set the satchel down on the bank and, taking off some of his
clothes, into the water he jumped with a big splashy dive. Right down
under the water he disappeared.

"Oh, he'll be drowned, sure!" cried Uncle Wiggily, who was much
frightened. But, no. In a second up came Towser, shaking the water from
his hair and eyes, and then he began swimming around as easily as a
chicken can pick up corn.

"Come on in, Uncle Wiggily," he called. "The water is fine."

"Oh, I'm afraid!" said the rabbit.

"Then the first thing to do is to get so you are not afraid of the water,"
said the dog. "You needn't be. Just see; it will hold you up easily if you
go at it right. Just keep your nose out, and don't splutter and splash too
much and you can swim. Come in and I will give you a lesson."

So Uncle Wiggily got in the water. At first it took his breath away, but
after a bit he got used to it, and he found that he could wade away far
out. Then he tried holding his breath and ducking his head away under, and
he found that he could do that and not be harmed in the least, and at
last he got so he wasn't afraid at all in the water.

"Now for a lesson," said the puppy dog. "You must wade out so that the
water is up to your neck, and then you face toward shore, so you won't be
frightened. Then you just lean forward, gently and easily, and you kick
out with your legs like a frog, and you wave your hands around from in
front of you to your sides, and keep on doing that and you'll swim."

"I'll try it," said the rabbit.

So he tried it, but, all of a sudden, he cried out:

"Ouch! Oh, my! Oh, dear me! Oh, hum, suz dud!"

"What's the matter," asked the dog, looking around.

"A fish bit my toe," exclaimed the rabbit.

"Oh, I guess you only hit it on a stone," said Towser. "Fish are too
frightened to bite any one. Come on, strike out and swim as I do."

Then Uncle Wiggily wasn't afraid, and soon he was swimming as nicely as
could be. For you know to swim you must first not be a bit afraid of the
water, for it can't hurt you. If ever you fall in, don't breathe--just
hold your breath as long as you can. Then, pretty soon you'll come up, and
if some one doesn't grab you, and you go under again, hold your breath
until you come up once more and then some one will surely grab you.

"You must never breathe under water--just hold your breath," said Towser
to Uncle Wiggily, and the rabbit did it that way, and soon he could even
swim under water.

"Well, I'm much obliged to you," he said to Towser, "but now I must be on
my way to seek my fortune."

So he said good-by to Towser and hopped on. And he hadn't gone very far
before a big bear saw him and chased after him.

"Oh, I'll catch you!" cried the bear to the rabbit. Well, I just wish you
could have seen Uncle Wiggily run! He ran until he came to a big river,
and the bear was right after him.

"Now I have you!" cried the bear. "You can't get across the river."

"Oh, can't I?" asked the rabbit. "Just you watch and see!"

So Uncle Wiggily threw his crutch and valise across the stream, and then
into it he jumped, and he swam just as Towser had taught him and he got
safely on the other side and so saved his life, for the bear couldn't swim
and Uncle Wiggily could. So you see it's a good thing to know how to swim,
and I hope all of you, who are big enough, know how to keep up in the
water.

Well, Uncle Wiggily got across to the other shore, and he looked back and
there that bear was raging and tearing around as mad as mad could be,
because the rabbit had gotten away from him. But I'm glad of it; aren't
you?

Now I have another story for you, and, in case my typewriter doesn't fall
in the lake and the fishes don't eat up the hair ribbon on it, I'll tell
you about Uncle Wiggily in the bear's den.


STORY XXII

UNCLE WIGGILY IN THE BEAR'S DEN


Well, here we are again, all ready for a story, I suppose, and I hope you
had a nice time at the surprise party. Let me see now, what shall I tell
you about? How would you like to hear about the old gentleman rabbit and
the toadstool?

Oh, my! I just happened to remember that I promised to write about Uncle
Wiggily getting into the bear's den, so of course I'll have to tell about
that first, and afterward I'll write the story about the toadstool. I'll
tell you this much, however, the toadstool story is very curious, if I do
say so myself.

Anyhow, Uncle Wiggily was hopping along one fine morning, following a
stormy night, and he was thinking about the swimming lesson he had had a
few days before.

"I wonder if I have forgotten how to move my legs, and go skimming through
the water?" he said to himself as he set down his valise, and leaned his
crutch against a prickly briar bush. "I must practice a little."

And the old gentleman rabbit did practice then and there, going through
all the motions of swimming, only he was on dry land, of course. Next he
twinkled his nose, like a star on a very hot night, when you drink iced
lemonade to keep cool, and then Uncle Wiggily hopped forward once more.

He hadn't gone very far before he noticed a grasshopper moving along so
swiftly that the old gentleman rabbit could hardly see the legs go
flip-flap. My, but that grasshopper did hippity-hop!

"Hold on there, if you please!" called Uncle Wiggily. "What is your hurry.
Are you late for school?"

"There is no school now," said the grasshopper, as he sat on a daisy
flower, "but I am hopping along to get out of danger."

"Danger? What danger is there around here?" asked the rabbit. "Do you see
a fox, or anything like that?"

"No, but don't you hear that dreadful noise?" asked the grasshopper.
"Listen, and you will hear it. It scared me so that I went away as fast as
I could."

So Uncle Wiggily listened, and sure enough he heard, away off in the
woods, a voice shouting:

"Help! Help! Help! Oh, won't some one please help me, or I'll be killed!"

"There, did you hear it?" asked the grasshopper, as he shivered and got
ready to flit away again, "he said he was going to kill us."

"Oh, no! Nonsense!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily. "That is some poor animal
caught in a trap, and he's afraid of being killed himself. I'm going to
see who it is. Perhaps it is a friend of mine."

"Oh, no! Don't you go!" begged the grasshopper. "For it may be the
alligator with the skillery-scalery-railery tail."

"Oh, preposterous!" cried Uncle Wiggily, who sometimes used big words when
he was excited. "I'm not afraid. I'm going to help whoever it is, and,
perhaps, in that way I may find my fortune."

So the grasshopper, who was very much frightened, flew on, and the rabbit
hopped toward where he could hear the voice still calling for help.

And whom do you s'pose it was? Why, the second cousin to Grandfather
Prickly Porcupine was caught fast in a trap, and he was calling for help
as loudly as he could call.

"Oh, I'm so glad you came along," said the porcupine to Uncle Wiggily.
"Please help me to get my leg out of this trap."

"Of course I will," said the rabbit, and with his crutch he pried open the
trap, and set free the nice little second cousin to Grandfather Prickly
Porcupine.

"Oh, how thankful I am to you," said the porcupine, as he limped away. "If
ever I can do you a favor I will." And, would you believe it? the time was
soon to come when that porcupine was to save Uncle Wiggily's life.

Well, the old gentleman rabbit hopped on, looking all over for his
fortune, but he couldn't seem to find it anywhere until, all of a sudden,
as he was walking along by some big stones, he saw something shining, and
picking it up, he found he had a silver twenty-five-cent piece.

"Oh, my goodness me, sakes alive and a piece of cherry pie!" cried the
rabbit. "I've found part of my fortune! I'll have good luck now, and
perhaps I can find more."

So the rabbit looked all about in among the stones for other money. But he
didn't find any, and pretty soon he came to a place where there was a hole
down in between the big rocks.

"Perhaps there is more money down there," said the rabbit. "I'll take a
look." He leaned over, and looked down, and then--Oh, how sorry I am that
I have to tell it, but I do, all of a sudden Uncle Wiggily fell right down
that black hole.

Right down into it he fell, and he landed at the bottom with such a bump
that he nearly broke his spectacles. At first it was so dark that he
couldn't make out anything, but in a little while he could see something
big and black and shaggy coming toward him, and a grillery-growlery voice
called out:

"Who's there? Who dares to come into my den?"

"It is only I," said the rabbit. "I'm Uncle Wiggily Longears, and I came
in here by mistake. I was looking for my fortune."

"Ah, ha!" cried the bear, for the shaggy creature with the
grillery-growlery voice was a bear. "Ah, ha! That is a different story. I
am very glad you dropped in to see me, Mr. Longears. I was just wondering
what I'd have for my dinner, and now I know--it is going to be rabbit
stew, and you are going to be stewed," and the bear opened the dining-room
shutters so he could see to eat the rabbit.

"Oh, how can you be so cruel to me?" asked Uncle Wiggily. "I only came in
here by mistake. I found twenty-five cents, and I was looking for more."

"Found twenty-five cents, did you, eh?" cried the bear, savage-like. "Give
it to me at once! I lost that, it's my money!"

And he took the twenty-five-cent piece right away from Uncle Wiggily. Then
the bear was just going to eat up the nice old gentleman rabbit, and Uncle
Wiggily didn't know how to get away, and he was feeling most dreadful,
when, all of a sudden, a voice sharply cried:

"Here, you let my friend Uncle Wiggily alone," and then some one scrambled
down through the top hole of the bear's den.

"Who are you?" asked the shaggy creature with the grillery-growlery voice,
and the bear gnashed his teeth.

"I'm the second cousin to Grandfather Prickly Porcupine," was the answer,
"and I'm going to save my rabbit friend."

And with that the porcupine took out a whole handful of his
stickery-ickery quills, like toothpicks, and he stuck them right into the
soft and tender nose of that bad bear. And the stickery-ickery quills so
tickled the bear and hurt him that he nearly sneezed his head off, and
tears came into his eyes.

"Now's our time! Come on, let's get away from here!" cried the porcupine
to the rabbit, and up out of the bear's den they scrambled, and got safely
away before the bear had finished his sneezing.

"Oh, you saved my life," said Uncle Wiggily to the prickly porcupine, "and
I thank you very much." Then they traveled on together, and they had an
adventure the next day.

What it was I'll tell you soon, when, in case the boys who go in swimming
don't duck my typewriter under water and make it catch the measles, I'll
tell you about Uncle Wiggily and the toadstool.


STORY XXIII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE TOADSTOOL


"Were you much frightened when you were in the bear's den?" asked the
prickly porcupine as he and Uncle Wiggily went along the road next day.
They had slept that night in a hole where an old fox used to live, but
just then he was away on his summer vacation at Asbury Park, and so he
wasn't home.

"Was I frightened?" repeated the old gentleman rabbit, as he looked to see
if there was any mud on his crutch, "why I was so scared that my heart
almost stopped beating. But I'm glad you happened to come along, and that
you stuck your stickery-ickery quills into the bear's nose. It was very
lucky that you chanced to come past the den."

"Oh, I did it on purpose," said the porcupine. "After you got me out of
the trap, and I scurried away, I happened to think that you might go past
the bear's house, so I hurried after you, and--well, I'm glad that I
did."

[Illustration]

"So am I," said the rabbit. "Will you have a bit of my carrot sandwich?"

"I don't mind if I do," said the porcupine, polite-like, so he and the
rabbit traveler ate the carrot sandwiches as they walked along.

"Well, I don't believe I'm ever going to find my fortune," said Uncle
Wiggily sadly. "I began to have hopes, when I picked up the
twenty-five-cent piece, but now the bear has that and I have nothing. Oh,
I certainly am very unlucky."

"Never mind," said the porcupine, "I'll help you look." But even with the
sharp eyes, and the sharp, stickery-ickery quills of the hedgehog, Uncle
Wiggily couldn't find his fortune.

But it is a good thing the old gentleman rabbit had company, for as they
were walking along under some trees, all of a sudden a big snake hissed at
them, like a coffee-pot boiling over. And then the snake uncoiled himself
and tried to grab the rabbit by the ears.

"Here! That will never do!" cried the porcupine, and then and there,
without even stopping to take off his necktie, that brave creature stuck
twenty-seven and a half stickery-stockery-stackery quills into the snake,
and then that snake was glad enough to crawl away. Oh, my, yes, and a
basketful of soap bubbles besides!

Well, it wasn't long after that before it was dinner time, and the two
friends sat down in a place where there were a lot of toadstools to eat
their lunch. They sat on the low toadstools, and the higher ones they used
for tables, each one having a toadstool table for himself, just like in a
restaurant.

"Now, this is what I call real jolly," said the porcupine, as he ate his
third piece of hickory-nut pie with carrot sauce on it.

"Yes, it is real nice," said the rabbit. "After all, it isn't so bad to go
hunting for your fortune when you have company, but it's not so much fun
all alone."

Well, the two friends were just finishing their meal, and they were
getting ready to travel on, when, all at once, there was a terrible
crashing sound in the bushes, just as if some one was breaking them all to
pieces.

"My! What's that?" asked the porcupine, preparing to pull out some more of
his stickery-ickery quills.

"It sounds like the elephant," said the rabbit, as he looked around for a
safe place in which to hide in case it should happen to be the bear coming
after him.

"Oh, if it's the elephant, we don't have to worry. He is a friend of
ours," said the porcupine.

Well, the crashing in the bushes still kept up, and then before you could
tickle your pussy cat under the chin-chopper, there burst out of the
middle of a prickly briar bush a great big alligator--the same one who
once before had tried to catch Uncle Wiggily.

"Oh, look!" cried the porcupine. "He's after us."

"Indeed, I am!" exclaimed the 'gator. "I'll have a fine meal in about a
minute. I'll pull all your quills out, and eat you with strawberry sauce
on; prickly porcupine."

"Oh, don't you let him do it!" cried Uncle Wiggily. "Stick some of your
quills in him, and make him go away, Mr. Porcupine."

"It wouldn't do any good," said the porcupine. "You see, the alligator has
such a thick skin on him that even a bullet will hardly go through, so my
quills won't hurt him. I guess we had better run away."

Well, they started to run away, but the 'gator, with his skillery-scalery
tail, chased after them, and he could go very quickly, too, let me tell
you. Right after Uncle Wiggily and the porcupine the alligator raced, and
he almost caught both of them. Then the porcupine saw a hole just big
enough for him to squeeze down, but not big enough for the alligator to
come after.

Down into this hole jumped the prickly porcupine, and he was safe, but
there was no hole for Uncle Wiggily to hide in, and the alligator was
close after him.

"Jump up on a toadstool, and maybe he can't get you!" called the
porcupine, sticking the end of his nose out of the hole.

"I will!" cried the rabbit, and up on top of the biggest toadstool he
landed with a jump.

"Oh, I can easily get you off there!" yelled the alligator, savage-like.
"I'll have you down in a minute."

He reached up with his claws to get the rabbit, and Uncle Wiggily got
right in the middle of the toadstool, as far away as he could, but it
wasn't very far. The alligator's claws almost had him, when all of a
sudden that toadstool quickly began to grow up tall. Taller and taller it
grew, for toadstools grow very fast you know. Higher and higher it went,
like an elevator, taking Uncle Wiggily up with it.

"Oh, now I'm safe!" cried the rabbit, for he was quite high in the air by
this time.

"No, you're not. I'll get you yet!" cried the alligator, as he reared up
on the end of his skillery-scalery tail. He made a grab for the rabbit,
but the kind toadstool at once grew itself up as tall as the church
steeple, with Uncle Wiggily still on top, and then, of course, the
alligator couldn't reach him.

"Oh, now I'm safe, but how ever am I going to get down?" thought the
rabbit, for the alligator was still there. But, in another minute, along
came a policeman dog, and with his club he made that alligator run away
back to the swamp where he belonged. Then the toadstool began to get
smaller and smaller, and it sank down close to the ground again and
lowered the rabbit just like on an elevator in a store, and Uncle Wiggily
was safe on earth once more. And he was very thankful to the toadstool,
which grew up so quickly just in time.

"Well, we'd better get along once more," said Uncle Wiggily to the prickly
porcupine, after he had thanked the dog-policeman. So the two friends set
off together through the woods, and the next day something else happened
to them.

I'll tell you what it was on the next page, when, in case the iceman
brings me some hot chocolate to put on my bread and butter, the bedtime
story will be about Uncle Wiggily and the chickie.


STORY XXIV

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE CHICKIE


"Well, what shall we do to-day?" asked the second cousin to Grandfather
Prickly Porcupine, as he crawled out of his bed of dried leaves, and
looked over to where Uncle Wiggily was washing his whiskers. "Are we going
to travel some more?"

"Oh, yes," answered the old gentleman rabbit, "we must still keep on, for
I have yet to find my fortune."

"What are you going to do with your fortune when you find it?" asked the
porcupine. "Will you buy a million ice cream cones with the money?"

"Oh, my goodness sakes alive, and a pot of mustard, no!" replied Uncle
Wiggily. "If I ate as many cones as that I would have indigestion, as well
as rheumatism. When I find my fortune I am going back home, and I'll buy
something for Sammie and Susie Littletail, and for Johnnie and Billie
Bushytail, and for all my other animal friends, including Grandfather
Goosey Gander. That's what I'll do when I find my fortune."

"Very good," said the porcupine, and then he got up and washed his face
and paws. And he wiped them on the towel after the old gentleman rabbit,
instead of before him, for you see when the porcupine soaked up the water
off his face he left some of his stickery-stockery quills sticking in the
towel, and if Uncle Wiggily had used it then he might have been scratched.
But, as it was, the rabbit didn't even get tickled, and very glad of it he
was, too. Oh, my, yes, and some pepper hash in addition.

Well, Uncle Wiggily and the porcupine had their breakfast and then they
started off. They hadn't gone very far before they met a locust sitting on
the low limb of a tree. And this locust was buzzing his wings like an
electric fan, and making more noise than you could shake your handkerchief
at on a Tuesday morning.

"Why do you do that?" asked the rabbit.

"To keep myself cool," said the locust. "I am fanning myself with my buzzy
wings for it is going to be a very hot day."

"Then we must keep in the shade as we travel along," said the porcupine,
and that is what he and the old gentleman rabbit did. And it is a good
thing they did so, for, as they walked along where it was cool and dark,
beneath clumps of ferns, and under big, tall trees, they passed by a place
where a bad snake lived.

"Look out! There's the snake's hole!" cried Uncle Wiggily, and he jumped
to one side.

"Ha! I'm ready for him!" called the porcupine, and he got some of his
stickery quills ready to jab into the snake. But the snake was out on a
big rock, sunning himself in the hot sun, though when he heard the rabbit
and porcupine talking he made a jump for them and tried to catch them.

But you see they were in the cool shadows, and the snake's eyes were
blinded by the sun, so he could not see very well, and thus the rabbit and
his friend escaped.

"I tell you it is a good thing we heard the locust sing, and that we kept
in the shade, or else we might have stepped right on that snake and he'd
have bitten and killed us," said the porcupine, and Uncle Wiggily said
that this was true.

Well, they kept on and on, and pretty soon they sat down in the shade of a
mulberry tree and ate their lunch. Then they rested a bit, and in the
afternoon they traveled on farther.

And, just as they were passing by a large, gray rock, that had nice, green
moss on it, all of a sudden they heard something calling like this:

"Cheep! Cheep! Chip-cheep-cheep! Oh, cheep! Peep! Peep!"

"What's that?" asked Uncle Wiggily in a whisper.

"I don't know. Maybe a burglar fox," answered the porcupine also, in a
whisper. "But I'm all ready for him."

So he got out some of his sharpest stickery quills to jab into the burglar
fox, and the noise still kept up:

"Cheep! Cheep! Yip! Yip! Yap! Yap! Cheep-chap!"

"That doesn't sound like a fox," said the rabbit, listening with his two
ears.

"No, it doesn't," admitted the porcupine, and he stuck his quills back
again like pins in a cushion. "Perhaps it is the skillery-scalery
alligator, and my quills would be of no use against him," he went on.

Then, all at once, before Uncle Wiggily could make his nose twinkle like a
star of a frosty night more than two times, there was a rustling in the
bushes, and out popped a poor, little white chickie--only she wasn't so
very white now, for her feathers were all wet and muddy.

"Cheep-chap! Yip-yap!" cried the little chickie.

"Why, what in the world are you doing away off here?" asked Uncle
Wiggily. "You poor little dear! Where is your mother?"

"Oh, me! Oh, my!" cried the little chickie. "I only wish I knew. I'm lost!
I wandered away from my mamma, and my brothers, and sisters, and I'm lost
in these woods. Oh chip! Oh chap! Oh yip! Oh yap!" Then she cried real
hard and the tears washed some of the dirt off her white feathers.

"Don't cry," said Uncle Wiggily, kindly. "We'll help you find your mamma,
won't we, Mr. Porcupine?"

"Of course we will," said the stickery-stockery creature. "You go one way,
Uncle Wiggily, and I'll go the other, and the chickie can stay on this big
rock until one of us comes back with her mamma."

"Yes, and here is a piece of cherry pie for you to eat while we are gone,"
said the rabbit, giving the lost chickie a nice piece of the pie.

So off the rabbit and the porcupine started to find the chickie's mamma.
They looked everywhere for her, but the porcupine couldn't find the old
lady hen, so he went back to the rock to wait there with the lost chickie
so she wouldn't be lonesome. But Uncle Wiggily wouldn't stop looking.
Pretty soon he heard something going "cluck-cluck" in the bushes, and he
knew that it was the mamma hen. Then he went up to her and said:

"Oh, I know where your little lost chickie is."

Well, at first, that mamma hen didn't know who the rabbit was, and she
ruffled up her feathers, and puffed them out, and let down her wings, and
she was going to fly right at Uncle Wiggily, but she happened to see who
he was just in time and she said:

"Oh, thank you ever so much, Uncle Wiggily. I was so worried that I was
just going down to the police station to see if a policeman had found her.
Now I won't have to go. Come along, children, little lost Clarabella is
found. Uncle Wiggily found her."

So she clucked to all the other children, and the rabbit led them toward
where Clarabella was sitting on the rock with the porcupine.

And on the way a big, ugly fox leaped out of the bushes and tried to eat
up all the chickens, and Uncle Wiggily also. But the old mother hen just
ruffled up her feathers and puffed herself all out big again, and she flew
at that fox and picked him in the eyes, and he was glad enough to slink
away through the bushes, taking his fuzzy tail with him.

Then the rabbit hopped on and took the mamma hen to her little lost
chickie on the rock, and the rabbit and the porcupine had supper that
night with the chicken family and slept in a big basket full of straw next
door to the chicken coop.

Then they traveled on the next day and something else happened. What it
was I'll tell you right soon, when, in case a little boy named Willie
doesn't crawl up in my lap when I'm writing and pull my ears, as the
conductor does the trolley car bell-rope, the story will be about Uncle
Wiggily and the wasp.


STORY XXV

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE WASP


"What would you like for breakfast this morning?" asked Mrs. Hen, as Uncle
Wiggily and the porcupine got up out of their bed in the clean straw by
the chickens' coop. This was the day after the rabbit found the little
white chickie.

"Ha, hum! Let me see," exclaimed the rabbit, as he waved his whiskers
around in the air to get all the straw seeds out of them: "what would I
like? Why, I think some fried oranges with carrot gravy on them would be
nice, don't you, Mr. Porcupine?"

"No," said the stickery-stockery creature. "I think I would like to have
some bread with banana butter on and a glass of milk with vanilla
flavoring."

"You may both have what you like, because you were so kind to my little
lost Clarabella," said Mrs. Hen. Then she spoke to her children.

"Scurry around now, little ones, and get Uncle Wiggily and his friend the
nice things for breakfast. Hurry now, for they will be wanting to travel
on before the sun gets too hot," the mamma hen said.

So one little chickie got the oranges, and another chickie got the
bananas, and still another chickery-chicken, with a spotted tail, got the
carrots, and then Clarabella went to where Mrs. Cow lived, and got the
milk for the prickly porcupine. Then Mrs. Hen cooked the breakfast, and
very good it was, too, if I may be allowed to say so.

"Well, I guess we'll be getting along now," said Uncle Wiggily. "Are you
still going to travel with me, Mr. Porcupine?"

"Oh, yes, I'll come with you for a couple days more, and then if you don't
find your fortune I'll start out by myself, and perhaps I can find it for
you."

So the two friends went on together. They traveled over hills and down
dales, and once they met a lame rabbit, who had the epizootic very bad.
Uncle Wiggily showed him how to make a crutch out of a cornstalk, just as
Nurse Jane Fuzzy-Wuzzy, the muskrat, had done, and the lame rabbit made
himself one and was much obliged.

Then, a little later they met a duck with only one good leg, and the
other one was made of wood, and this duck wanted to get over a fence but
she couldn't, on account of her wooden leg.

"Pray, how did you lose your leg?" asked Uncle Wiggily, as he and the
porcupine kindly helped her over the rails.

"Oh, a bad rat bit it off," said the duck. "I was asleep in the pond one
morning and before I knew it a rat swam up under water, and nipped off my
leg."

"Oh, I'm so sorry," said the rabbit. "I'll tell Alice and Lulu and Jimmie
Wibblewobble, my duck friends, to be careful of bad rats in their pond."

"That's a good idea," spoke the duck with the wooden leg, and then she
said good-by and waddled away.

After that Uncle Wiggily and the porcupine traveled on some more, and, as
it got to be very warm they thought they would lie down in a shady place
and take a little sleep.

Well, they picked out a nice place under a clump of ferns, that leaned
over a little babbling brook, and touched the tips of their green leaves
into the cool water. And, before he knew it, dear old Uncle Wiggily was
fast, fast asleep, and he snored the least little bit, but please don't
tell any one about it.

Then pretty soon the porcupine was asleep too, only he didn't snore any,
though I'm not allowed to tell you why just now. I may later, however.

Well, in a little while, something is going to happen. In fact, it's now
time for it to begin. Yes, here comes the stingery wasp. Listen, and you
can hear him buzz.

"Buzz! Buzz! Bizzy-buzzy-buzzy!" went the stingery wasp, as he flew over
the place where the rabbit and porcupine were sleeping. And the wasp
flitted and flapped his bluish wings and lifted up the sharp end of his
body where be carries his stingery-sting.

"Ah, ha! I see something to sting!" thought the wasp. "Now, I wonder which
one I shall sting first? I think I will try the porcupine, and then I will
sting the rabbit." Oh, but he was a bad wasp, though; wasn't he, eh?

Well, he was all ready to sting the porcupine, when suddenly the wasp
heard a voice calling to him from the bushes.

"Don't sting the porcupine, Mr. Wasp, sting the rabbit," said the rasping
voice.

"Why should I do that?" asked the wasp, as he looked to see if his sting
needed sharpening.

"Oh, because if you sting the porcupine you might get stuck with his
stickery-stockery quills," said the voice. "But the rabbit can't hurt you.
Besides, if you sting him for me I will give you a popcorn ball."

[Illustration]

"Why are you so anxious for me to sting the rabbit?" asked the wasp, as he
flittered his steely-blue wings.

"Oh, if you do that it will scare him so that he won't know which way to
run, and then, when he is all puzzled up, I can jump out on him and eat
him up!" said the voice. "I have been wanting a rabbit dinner this long
time," and with that out from the bushes crawled the bad fox.

"Very well," said the wasp, "I'll sting the rabbit on the end of his
twinkling nose for you, and then you must give me a popcorn ball," for you
know wasps like sweet things.

So the wasp got ready to sting poor Uncle Wiggily, and all this while the
rabbit and the porcupine were peacefully sleeping there under the ferns,
and they didn't know what was going to happen.

"Buzz! Buzz! Buzz!" went the wasp, as he flew closer to Uncle Wiggily. He
was all ready to sting him, when a piece of bark happened to fall off a
tree and hit the porcupine on his left ear, waking him up. He opened his
eyes very quickly, thinking that a fairy was throwing snowballs at him,
and then the porcupine heard the wasp buzzing, and he saw the wasp flying
straight toward Uncle Wiggily to sting him, and next the porcupine saw
the bad fox.

"Ha! So that is how things are, eh?" cried the porcupine, as he jumped up.
"Well, I'll soon put a stop to that!"

So, before you could fan yourself with a feather, the porcupine took out
one of his stickers, and he stuck the wasp with it so hard that the bad
wasp was glad enough to fly away, taking his stinger with him.

"Now, it's your turn!" cried the porcupine to the fox, and with that he
threw a whole lot of his sharp quills at the fox, and that bad creature
ran away howling. And then Uncle Wiggily woke up and wanted to know what
it was all about, and what made the buzzing and howling noises.

"You had a narrow escape," said the porcupine as he told the rabbit about
the wasp and the fox.

"I guess I did," admitted Uncle Wiggily. "I'm much obliged to you. Now
let's have supper."

So they ate their supper, and that's all I can tell you for the present,
if you please. But, in case I see a little pig with a pink ribbon tied in
his curly tail, I'll make the next bedtime story, about Uncle Wiggily and
the bluebell.


STORY XXVI

UNCLE WIGGLY AND THE BLUEBELL


Well, I didn't see any little pig with a pink ribbon tied in his kinky,
curly tail, but I'll tell you a story just the same if you'd like to hear
it.

Once upon a time, a good many years ago, when--Oh, there I go again! I'm
always making mistakes like that, of late. That's a story about a giant
that I was thinking of, whereas I meant to tell you one about Uncle
Wiggily, and what happened to him.

It was the day after the wasp had nearly stung him, and the old gentleman
rabbit was traveling on alone, for the second cousin to Grandfather
Prickly Porcupine had to go home, and so he couldn't help Uncle Wiggily
hunt for his fortune any longer.

"Now take care of yourself," the porcupine had said to the rabbit, as they
bade each other good-by, "and don't let any wasps sting you."

"What should I do, in case I happened to be stung?" asked Uncle Wiggily.

"Put some mud on the place," said the porcupine. "Mud is good for stings."

"I will," said the rabbit, and then he hopped on with his valise and his
red-white-and-blue-striped-barber-pole crutch. Uncle Wiggily hoped he
would soon find his fortune, for he wanted to get back home and see Sammie
and Susie Littletail, and all the other animal friends. So he looked
around very carefully for any signs of gold. He also asked all the animals
and flowers whom he met if they could tell him where his fortune was.

"No," said a warty-spotted toad, "I can't tell you, but I should think you
would dig in the ground for gold."

So Uncle Wiggily dug in the dirt in many places, but no gold did he find.

"Perhaps you can tell me where my fortune is?" he said to a tailor-bird
who was sewing some leaves together to make a nest.

"It might be up in the air," said the tailor-bird. "If I were you I should
hop up into the air and look for it."

Well, Uncle Wiggily hopped up, but you know how it is with rabbits.
They're not made to fly, and he couldn't stay up in the air long enough to
do any good, so he couldn't find any gold that way.

"Oh, dear! I guess I'll never find my fortune," said the rabbit
sadly-like. Then he saw a little blue flower, shaped just like a bell,
hanging on a stem over a small babbling brook of water.

"Ah, there is a bluebell!" said the rabbit. "Perhaps she knows where my
fortune is. I'll ask her, for flowers are very wise."

"No, I can't tell you where there is any gold," said the bluebell when
Uncle Wiggily had asked her most politely. "All I do is to swing backward
and forward here all day long, and I ring my bell and I am happy. I do not
need gold."

"I wish I didn't have to have it, but I do. I need it to make my fortune,
and then I can go home," said the rabbit.

"Very well," spoke the blue flower, as she rang her bell, oh so sweetly!
so that it seemed to the rabbit as if she played a song about the blue
skies, and birds singing and fountains spouting upward in the sun while
pretty blossoms grew all around. "Go on, Uncle Wiggily, but if you don't
find your fortune come back here, and I will sing you to sleep," she
added.

"I will," spoke the rabbit, as he hopped away.

Well, pretty soon, not so very long, as he was walking on a path through
the woods, Uncle Wiggily heard a voice speaking.

"I can tell you where to find your fortune," said the voice. "I know where
there is a big pile of yellow stones, and I think they are gold. Follow me
and I will show you."

"But who are you?" asked the rabbit, for he could see no one. "You may be
the alligator for all I know."

"Oh, I'm not the alligator," was the answer. "I am a friend of yours, and
I like you very much," and the unseen one smacked his lips. "But I can't
come out and let you see me, for I dare not go out in the sun as I am
afraid of getting too hot," the voice answered, "so I will just creep
along through the bushes and I will wiggle my tail, and you can see it
moving in the grass, and you can follow that without seeing me, and I will
lead you to the pile of yellow stones."

"Very well," answered the rabbit, "though I would much rather see you. But
go ahead and I'll follow, for I must find my fortune."

So the old gentleman rabbit saw the grass wiggling and he followed that,
and he kept thinking of how rich he would soon be, and how many nice
things he would buy for Sammie and Susie Littletail.

But if the rabbit had only known who it was he was following he wouldn't
have been so happy, for it was a crawly snake, and that snake was only
fooling Uncle Wiggily, and trying to get him off to his den so he could
eat him. And that's why he didn't show himself. On and on the snake
wiggled through the grass, shaking his tail, and the poor rabbit followed
after him.

"Are we nearly to the gold?" asked Uncle Wiggily after a bit.

"Almost," answered the snake, making his voice soft and gentle.

The snake was nearly at his den now, and he was just going to turn around
and squeeze the rabbit to death, when all at once a yellow bumblebee that
was flying overhead looked down and saw the crawly creature, and the bee
knew what the snake was going to do.

"Run away, Uncle Wiggily! Run!" called the bee, "the snake is fooling
you!"

Well, Uncle Wiggily didn't wait a second. He jumped right over a briar
bush and away he hopped as fast as he could hop, and the snake didn't get
him, and, oh, how mad that snake was!

Uncle Wiggily hopped around and around in the woods and the first thing he
knew he couldn't find the path, he was so excited. And the more he tried
to find it the more he couldn't, until he sat down on a stump and said:

"I'm lost. I know I am! Lost in the dark, deep, dismal woods, and night
coming on! Oh, what shall I do?"

Well, he was feeling very badly, and was quite frightened, and he didn't
know what to do when, all at once he heard a bell ringing. Oh, such a
sweet-toned silvery bell. "Ding-dong! Ding-dong!" it went, sounding very
clearly through the woods. Then the bell seemed to say:

"Come this way, Uncle Wiggily, come this way. Ding-dong!"

"Oh, that's the bluebell flower!" cried the rabbit. "How glad I am. Now I
can follow the ringing sound and get to a nice place to stay for the
night."

So he listened carefully, and the blue flower rang her tinkling bell
louder than ever, and the rabbit could tell by the sound of it just which
way to go, and pretty soon he was out of the woods and right beside the
flower that was swinging to and fro in the wind, just like a bell in a
church steeple.

"Oh, I'm go glad I could ring and tell you the way back here," said the
bluebell. "Now lie down and sleep, and if there is any danger I will
tinkle my bell and awaken you."

So Uncle Wiggily stretched out on some soft moss, and went to sleep. And
there was some danger for him, as I shall tell you very soon, when, in
case the rocking chair on the front porch doesn't go swimming in the
molasses barrel, the next story will be about Uncle Wiggily and the
Wibblewobble children.


STORY XXVII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE WIBBLEWOBBLES


Uncle Wiggily, the nice old gentleman rabbit, was sleeping on the soft
moss under a clump of ferns, and over his head the bluebell flower was
nodding in the night breeze, keeping watch for danger. For you remember, I
dare say, that the flower had promised to awaken Uncle Wiggily in case any
harm happened to come near him.

Hour after hour crept along, like a little mouse after a bit of cheese,
and still the rabbit slumbered, and still the bluebell nodded her drowsy
head, for she would not go to sleep while she was keeping watch.

"I think I will just take one little nap," said the flower to herself,
after a bit, "just shut my eyes for a little while." So she did so, and
then, all of a sudden, as quietly as a clock when it isn't ticking, there
came creeping and crawling through the woods, the bad scalery-tailery
alligator.

He was looking around sniffing, and snooping, and scuffing for something
to eat, and pretty soon he sniffed and snuffed until he came to where
Uncle Wiggily was fast asleep, dreaming that he had found his fortune. And
the worst part of it was that the bluebell flower also was sleeping, and
she couldn't tell the rabbit what was going to happen.

"Oh, I'll have a fine meal in about a minute," said the scalery-tailery
alligator as he smacked his big jaws. Then he shuffled up closer to Uncle
Wiggily, and was about to bite him when all of a sudden the nutmeg grater
tail of the scalery alligator accidentally hit against the bluebell
flower, and she awoke quickly.

"Tinkle! Tinkle! Tinkle! Ding-dong! Ding-dong!" rang out the bluebell,
just like an alarm clock in the morning. "Ding-dong-dong! Tinkle! Tinkle!"

Up jumped Uncle Wiggily, rubbing the sleep out of his eyes. He looked
through the woods, and by the light of the silvery moon he saw the
grinning alligator, with his open mouth, close to him.

"Run, Uncle Wiggily! Run!" cried the bluebell, and then she made such a
jingling-jangling noise that all the birds in the woods awakened, and by
the moonlight, they flew down at that alligator, and stuck him with their
sharp bills, so that he was glad to crawl away, and he didn't forget to
take his scalery tail with him, either.

"My, that was a narrow escape!" said the rabbit. "I am glad he didn't eat
me."

"So am I," said the bluebell, "and I'll not go to sleep again, either, I
promise you."

So the flower stayed wide awake the rest of the night, and the rabbit
slept on the soft moss, and in the morning he awakened and ate his
breakfast out of his valise, and then, saying good-by to the flower and
thanking her, he set off once more to seek his fortune.

Uncle Wiggily traveled on and on, looking in all the places he could think
of for some gold, but he couldn't seem to find any. And then, just when he
got on top of a little hill, and started down the other side he heard some
one crying--no, I'm just a bit wrong, he heard three some ones
crying--three separate and distinct cries.

"Oh, dear, I've got a sliver in my foot!" blubbered one voice.

"And I've stepped on a stone and there's a big bruise on my foot!"
sniffled another voice.

"Oh! none of you is as badly off as I am," quivered a third voice, "for
I've cut my two feet on a piece of glass! Oh, whatever shall we do?"

"My, I wonder who they can be?" thought the rabbit, for he could see no
one as yet. "Maybe those are the little children of the burglar fox, and
if they are, then the burglar fox must be somewhere around here, and I had
better be careful of myself."

Well, the rabbit was about to turn, and run back down the hill, up which
he had just come, when he saw something white fluttering like a piece of
paper.

"A fox isn't white," Uncle Wiggily said to himself, "at least not the
foxes around here. That must be something else." So he took another
careful look, and he saw three nice little duck children--I guess you
remember their names--Lulu and Alice and Jimmie Wibblewobble. And as soon
as they saw the old gentleman rabbit, those three duck children exclaimed:

"Oh, joy! Oh, happiness!" and they didn't think about the slivers and the
bruises and the cuts in their feet any more.

"My goodness me sakes alive and a potato pancake!" cried Uncle Wiggily.
"What are you children doing so far away from home? You must be lost."

"We are lost," said Jimmie Wibblewobble, "all three of us."

"Yes," went on Lulu, "we are certainly lost, and it's Jimmie's fault, for
he asked us to come."

"Oh! it's not all Jimmie's fault," said Alice gently, as she looked at her
brother. "You see, Uncle Wiggily, we are visiting our Aunt Lettie, the old
lady goat, who lives in the country near here. We are at her house for our
vacation, and to-day we started to go to the woods to have a good time,
but we took the wrong path and we are lost, and I have a big sliver in my
foot."

"Yes, and I stepped on a stone, and have a big bruise," whimpered Jimmie.

"And I've cut both feet on a piece of glass," cried Lulu Wibblewobble,
"and Oh, we are all so miserable!"

"Well, well!" exclaimed the rabbit in a jolly voice, "this is too bad. I
must see what I can do for you. First we will take the sliver out of
Alice's foot," and he did so with a sharp needle. It hurt a little, but
Alice never cried.

"Now for Jimmie's bruise," said the rabbit, and he took some soft green
leaves, and made a plaster of them, and with some ribbon-grass for a
string he tied the plaster on Jimmie's foot, and that was almost well.
Then Uncle Wiggily made a little salve, from some gum out of a cherry
tree, and bound up the glass cuts on Lulu's feet.

"Now, I will lead you to your Aunt Lettie's house," said the rabbit, "and
you won't be lost any more." So the three Wibblewobble children felt much
better and happier, and when they were almost at their aunt's house, a big
hawk swooped down out of the sky and tried to bite Lulu. But Uncle Wiggily
hit the bad bird with his barber-pole crutch, and the hawk flew away,
flopping his wings and tail.

"Oh, how good, and brave, and strong you are!" cried Lulu to Uncle
Wiggily, and then all three duck children kissed him. Soon they were at
the goat-lady's home, and Aunt Lettie was very glad to see the rabbit
gentleman, and also glad to have the children back. So she invited Uncle
Wiggily to stay to supper, and very glad he was to do so.

He also stayed all night at Aunt Lettie's house, and he had quite an
adventure, too, which I shall tell you about directly, when, in case the
fire shovel doesn't slide down hill on a cake of ice and break its roller
skates the next bedtime story will be about Uncle Wiggily and the berry
bush.


STORY XXVIII

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE BERRY BUSH


"Well, children, I think I will soon have to be leaving you," said Uncle
Wiggily Longears one morning to the three Wibblewobbles, when he had
stayed all night at their Aunt Lettie's house. That was after the old
gentleman rabbit had found the three ducks lost in the woods, you
remember, and had taken them to where they were visiting the old lady
goat. "I must pack my valise and travel on," said Uncle Wiggily.

"Oh, can't you stay a little longer?" asked Alice Wibblewobble, as she
tied her sky-blue-pink hair ribbon in a flopsy-dub kind of a bow knot.

"Yes, do stay!" urged Jimmie as he tossed up his ball, which Lulu, his
sister, caught. "We'll have some fun together and you can play on my ball
team, Uncle Wiggily."

"Oh! I am much too old for that," said the rabbit, "though I like to watch
you play. Besides, I have the rheumatism, and I have to keep on looking
for my fortune. So I will travel forward once more."

"Well, if you must go, I suppose you must," said Aunt Lettie, the old lady
goat. "But at least let me put you up a little lunch. Let me see, what
shall it be? I think a tomato can sandwich, and some brown paper cake with
paste frosting on would be nice. And then, too, I can give you some fine
wooden pie."

"Oh, excuse me!" exclaimed the rabbit, "but while it is very kind of you,
I cannot eat such things. I never could chew a tomato can, nor yet a
wooden, or even a sawdust pie."

"No more you could," cried Aunt Lettie in confusion. "I was thinking of
what I liked to eat. Very well, I will give you some carrots and cabbage
and a piece of cherry pie. I know you will like those."

So she made Uncle Wiggily that kind of a lunch, and he put it in his
valise, and after saying good-by to the old lady goat, and the three
Wibblewobbles, off he started to seek his fortune once more.

On and on he traveled up some hills, and down others and through the
woods, and pretty soon he came to a place where there was a big hole in
the ground.

"Ah, ha!" exclaimed the rabbit, "perhaps this is a gold mine. I will get
some gold dollars out of it and then I will be rich." So he went close to
the hole and looked down it, but all of a sudden out popped a great big
rat, and she gnashed her teeth at Uncle Wiggily and tried to bite him.

"What are you doing at my house?" she cried, real savagely. "Get away at
once before I eat you."

"Indeed I will," said the rabbit, politely. "I thought your hole was a
gold mine. Excuse me, I'll get right along," so he hopped away as fast as
he could hop, very thankful that he had not gone down the hole.

Well, the next place he came to was where a great big stone was sticking
out of the side of a hill. And the stone glittered in the sunshine just
like diamonds or dewdrops.

"Oh, how delightful!" cried the rabbit. "This surely is a gold stone. I
will break off some pieces of it and take them home, and then I will have
my fortune."

So, taking his crutch, Uncle Wiggily tried to break off pieces of the
glittering stone. But, my goodness me, sakes alive and a chocolate ice
cream cone! that stone was very hard, and try as he did, Uncle Wiggily
couldn't break off a piece even as big as baby's tiny pink toe.

"I'll just sing a little song, and then, perhaps, I can get some of the
gold," he said. So he sang this song, which goes to the tune
"Tiddily-um-tum-tum:"

    "My fortune I've found,
    On top of the ground,
    I'm lucky as lucky can be.
    But really this stone,
    Is hard as a bone,
    I wish that some one would help me."

After singing, Uncle Wiggily hammered away at the stone with his crutch
again, but the song did no good. And then, all at once, before you could
shake your finger at a pink pussy cat, out from behind the glittering
stone there jumped the savage wushky-woshky, which is a very curious beast
with two tails and three heads and only one crinkly leg, so that it has to
go hippity-hop, or else fall down ker thump!

"What are you doing to my stone?" cried the wushky-woshky.

"Oh, excuse me," said Uncle Wiggily politely. "I didn't know it was your
stone. I was only trying to break off a small piece for my fortune."

"Wow! Oh, wow!" cried the wushky-woshky, as savage as savage could be, and
he gnashed the teeth in all three of his mouths, and he lashed his two
tails on the ground. "I'm going to catch you!" he called to the rabbit.

"Not if I know it you won't catch me," said Uncle Wiggily bravely, and off
he hopped down the hill.

"Yes, I will catch you!" cried the wushky-woshky, and off he hopped on his
one crinkly leg after the rabbit. Faster and faster hopped Uncle Wiggily,
but still faster and faster hopped the wushky-woshky.

"Oh, he'll surely catch me!" thought the rabbit. "I wonder what I can do?
I know. I'll open my valise, and I'll scatter on the ground my nice lunch
that Aunt Lettie put up for me, and the wushky-woshky will stop to eat the
good things, and then I can get away."

So the rabbit did this. Out on the ground from the valise tumbled all the
nice carrot and lettuce sandwiches. But the savage wushky-woshky gobbled
them up with three mouthfuls, and didn't stop hopping after Uncle Wiggily
on his one crinkly leg.

"Oh, he'll surely catch me now!" cried the rabbit.

"No, he won't! Jump up in the air, and come down inside of me!" cried a
voice, and Uncle Wiggily saw a nice blackberry bush waving its long arms
at him. "Jump down inside of me, where there are no thorns to scratch
you," said the berry bush, "but if the wushky-woshky tries to come after
you I'll scratch his six eyes out. I'll save you. Jump down inside me!"

"Thank you, I will," said the rabbit, and he gave a big spring and a hop,
over the outer edge of the bush, and down he landed safely inside of it,
not scratched a bit. Up came the three-headed, two-tailed and one
crinkly-legged wushky-woshky, but when he saw the prickly briar berry bush
he stopped short, for he did not want his six eyes scratched out.

"Come out of there!" cried the wushky-woshky to the rabbit.

"Indeed, I will not," said Uncle Wiggily, politely.

"Then I'll stay here forever and you can't ever come out," said the savage
creature. "For if you come out I'll eat you!"

"Don't let him scare you," said the briar berry bush to Uncle Wiggily,
"I'll fix him," so the berry bush reached out a long arm all covered with
stickers, and she stickered and prickered the wushky-woshky on his three
heads and two tails and one leg, so that the savage creature ran away
howling, and Uncle Wiggily was safe, and not hurt a bit, I'm glad to say.

So he stayed in the briar bush that night and had berries for breakfast,
and the next day he had another adventure. What it was I will tell you on
the page after this one, when the bedtime story will be about Uncle
Wiggily and the camp fire--that is, if the cat across the street doesn't
untie the pink ribbon off our pussy's neck and put it on his ice cream
cone.


STORY XXIX

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE CAMP FIRE


"Well, how do you find yourself this morning?" asked the berry bush of
Uncle Wiggily as the old gentleman rabbit peeped out to see if the bad
three-headed wushky-woshky had come back. "Are you all right?"

"Oh, yes, thank you kindly," spoke the rabbit, "but I was just wondering
how I could get out of here to go on and seek my fortune without being
scratched all to pieces."

"Can't you jump out just as you jumped in?" asked the bush, waving her
prickly arms, but taking care not to so much as even tickle Uncle Wiggily.

"No, there isn't room enough for me to get started to jump out," replied
the rabbit. "I'm afraid I'll have to stay here a long time, and I really
ought to be going on."

"Oh, I have a plan!" suddenly cried the bush. "You are a very good digger,
so why can't you dig a tunnel right under me? Start it inside here and
curve it up so that it comes outside of my prickly branches, and then you
won't be scratched."

"I'll do it!" cried Uncle Wiggily, so with his strong front feet he dug a
tunnel, just as you sometimes make in the sand, and soon he was safely
outside the berry bush.

"Take some of my berries with you," said the bush, "so you won't get
hungry."

"I will," answered the rabbit, and he filled his valise with nice, big
blackberries. He felt a little sad about the nice lunch the wushky-woshky
had eaten, but there was no help for it--that lunch was gone completely.

So Uncle Wiggily said good-by to the kind berry bush, and traveled on once
more to seek his fortune.

"Watch out for the wushky-woshky," called the bush to the rabbit, as she
waved her friendly stickery branches at him.

"I will," he said, and then he passed up over the hill and out of sight.

The first place he came to was an old hollow stump, where an old owl had
once lived. The rabbit looked down inside the stump, but there was no
fortune there.

The second place he came to was a curious little house built of bark,
where an old dog, who was a friend to Peetie and Jackie Bow Wow, used to
live, but the old dog was away on his vacation at Ocean Grove, so he
wasn't at home.

"Perhaps there is a fortune in here," thought the rabbit, but there wasn't
any and he went on.

Now the third place he came to was a little house, made out of
clothespins, where a pussy cat lived, and the pussy wasn't home, for she
had just gone to the store to get some milk.

But the rabbit didn't know this, so he went inside the house to see if
there was any fortune there. And the first thing he saw on the mantelpiece
was a tin bank, and when he shook it something inside of it rattled, and
when he peeped in Uncle Wiggily saw a whole lot of pennies in the tin
bank.

"Oh fine!" he cried, "now I have my fortune at last. Some one has gone
away and left all this money, so I might as well take it."

Well, he was just putting the bank full of pennies into his valise, when
the pussy came back with the bottle of milk.

"Oh! are you going to take my bank away from me?" she cried, very sadly.
"I have been saving up my pennies for a long time, and now you have them."

"Oh, I wouldn't take them for the world!" cried the rabbit. "I didn't know
they were yours, it's all a mistake," and he placed the bank right back
on the mantel. "But perhaps you could tell me where to find my fortune,"
said Uncle Wiggily, and he told the pussy all about his travels.

"First we will have a drink of milk," said the pussy, and she poured out
some for the rabbit. "Then I will go into the woods a little way with you
and help you look for your fortune."

"Perhaps we had better take some lunch with us," said the rabbit, so he
went to the store and got a nice lunch, which he put up in his valise, and
then he and the pussy started off together to the woods.

They looked here and there and everywhere and even around corners, but no
fortune could they find, and pretty soon it began to get a little dark.
And then suddenly it got all dark.

"Oh, I can never find my way back home!" cried the pussy. "And I am afraid
in these lonesome woods."

"Oh! don't be frightened," said Uncle Wiggily, who was very brave. "I will
build a camp fire and we can stay here all night. I will cook some supper
and in the morning I will take you home."

Then the pussy wasn't afraid any more. She helped the rabbit to gather up
some dry leaves and little sticks, and also some big sticks, and soon
Uncle Wiggily had a fine fire merrily blazing away in the woods, and it
was nice and light. Then he took some leafy branches and made a little
house for himself and the pussy and then they cooked supper, making some
coffee in an old empty tomato can they found near a wrinkly-crinkly stump.

"Oh, this is real jolly!" cried the pussy, as she warmed her paws and her
nose at the blaze. "It is much better than drinking milk out of a bottle."

"I think so myself," said the rabbit. "Now, if I could only find my
fortune I would be happy. But, perhaps, I shall to-morrow."

Well, pretty soon Uncle Wiggily and the pussy became sleepy so they
thought they would go to bed. They made their beds in the little green
bower-house on some soft, dried leaves.

"And I must have plenty of wood to put on the camp fire," said the rabbit,
"for in the night some bad animal might try to eat us, but when they see
the blaze they will be afraid and run away."

So he gathered a big pile of wood, and then he and the pussy went to
sleep. And in the middle of the night, as true as I'm telling you, yes,
indeed, along came sneaking the wushky-woshky with his three heads and
two tails and his one crinkly leg.

"Now, I'll have a fine meal," thought the wushky-woshky as he saw the
rabbit and the pussy sleeping. "Which one shall I take first?"

But all of a sudden his foot slipped on a stone and he made a noise, and
Uncle Wiggily awakened in an instant and cried out:

"Some one is after us!" Then the brave rabbit threw some wood on the camp
fire, and it blazed up so quickly that it burned the whiskers of the
wushky-woshky and he gave three howls, one with each of his mouths, and
away he hopped on his one leg, taking his two tails with him.

"My!" cried the pussy, "it's a good thing we had the camp fire, or we
would have been eaten up."

"Indeed it is," said the rabbit. "I'll keep it blazing all night." So he
did this, and no more wushky-woshkys came to bother them. And in the
morning the pussy and the rabbit traveled on together and they had quite
an adventure.

What it was I'll relate to you almost immediately, when, in case a little
girl named Elizabeth learns how to swim by standing on one toe and holding
a red balloon under water, I'll tell you about Uncle Wiggily and the
cowbird.


STORY XXX

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE COWBIRD


"Do you think you can help me find my way back home again?" asked the
pussy of Uncle Wiggily as they awakened the next morning, after having
spent the night in the woods by the camp fire.

"Oh, I'm sure I can," answered the rabbit. "As soon as we have our
breakfast we'll start off to look for your clothespin house."

Then Uncle Wiggily made up the camp fire again, putting on some more wood,
and he boiled the coffee, in a tomato can, and fried some pieces of bacon
he had in his valise. The way he cooked them was to take a sharp stick and
put a piece of bacon on the end of it, and then he held the bacon up in
front of the blaze, where it sizzled away, and got nice and curly and
brown, and oh! how good it did smell, and so did the coffee! Oh! it's
great to cook over a camp fire when the smoke doesn't get in your eyes and
when it doesn't rain.

"Now we must put out the fire," said the rabbit, as he and the pussy were
ready to go look for the clothespin house.

"Why must we do that, Uncle Wiggily?"

"Oh, so that it will not set fire to the woods, and burn down the nice
trees after we are gone. Always put out your camp fire when you leave it,"
said the rabbit, as he threw water on the blaze, making clouds of steam.

Well, he and the pussy traveled on for some time longer together, but
somehow or other they couldn't seem to find the place where the pussy
lived, and the little cat was beginning to be sorry that she had gone
camping in the woods.

"Oh, I know I'll never find my home again!" she cried.

"Oh, yes, we will," said the rabbit kindly. "Don't worry."

And just then they heard some one else crying, a little, tiny, sobbing
voice.

"What's that?" exclaimed the pussy. "Perhaps it is one of the
skillery-scalery alligator's children."

"No, I do not think so," said the rabbit. "It sounds to me as if some one
else were lost in the woods, and I may have to find their home, too. We'll
take a look."

So they looked all around, but they couldn't seem to find any one, though
the crying was still to be heard.

"That's queer," said the rabbit, "I'll call to them."

So he called as loudly as he could like this:

"Is any one lost? Do you want me to help you find your home?"

"Oh, I'd be very glad to have you help me," said the crying voice, "but I
am not lost."

"Then who are you, and what is the matter?" asked the rabbit.

"Oh, I am a robin bird," was the answer, "and I am in this bush over your
heads."

"Ha, no wonder we couldn't see you," said the rabbit, as he and the pussy
looked up, and there, sure enough, was the nice mamma robin bird, and she
was crying, as she sat in the bush.

"What is the matter?" asked the rabbit.

"I will tell you," said the robin. "You know there is a bird called the
cowbird or cuckoo, and that bird is too lazy to build a nest for itself.
So what do you think it does?"

"What?" asked the pussy.

"Why it goes around, laying its eggs in the nests of other birds," said
the robin. "Then we birds have to hatch out the cowbird's eggs, and when
her children come out they are so unpleasant that they shove our little
birdies right out of the nest, and eat all the things we mamma birds
bring home to our little ones."

"Ha! That is very unpleasant, to say the least," spoke the rabbit. "And
are there any cowbirds in your nest now, Mrs. Robin?"

"Not yet, but there are three of the cowbird's eggs here, and they will
soon hatch out."

"Why don't you toss out the cowbird's eggs?" asked the pussy. "Then you
won't have to hatch them."

"I would," said the robin, "only I am not strong enough, for I have been
ill, and my husband is out of work and he is looking for some. So I don't
know what to do about it. Oh, dear!" and she cried again.

"Ha! We must see what we can do," said Uncle Wiggily, who always liked to
help people who were in trouble. "I think I have a plan."

"What is it?" asked the robin.

"Well, I can't climb up that bush, for my paws are not built for that sort
of thing, but the pussy can climb very nicely, as she has sharp claws."

"Indeed I can," said the pussy, "and I will, and I'll throw out the
cowbird's eggs for you, so those bad birds won't bother your little
birds."

So Uncle Wiggily gave the pussy a boost up the bush, in which the robin's
nest was built, and then the pussy, with her sharp claws climbed up the
rest of the distance all alone very nicely.

"Now show me which are the eggs of the cowbird?" said the kittie-cat to
the robin when the nest was reached. So the robin mamma pointed out the
eggs with her claw, and then with her foot the pussy clawed those cowbird
eggs out on the ground where they wouldn't hatch.

"Now, that will be the last of those bad birds," said the pussy as she
started to climb down to where Uncle Wiggily was waiting for her.

"Yes, indeed, and thank you very much," spoke the robin. "Now, my little
ones will have a chance to grow and live."

And just then there was a fluttering and a rustling in the bushes, and the
bad cowbird came flying past. And when she saw what had been done, and how
her eggs had been tossed out of the robin's nest where they didn't belong,
that cowbird flew at the pussy and was going to pick her eyes out.

But Uncle Wiggily took his crutch, and tickled the cowbird so that she
sneezed, and had to fly away without doing any harm. And Uncle Wiggily
called after her that she ought to be ashamed of herself not to build her
own nests. And I guess that cowbird was ashamed, but I'm not sure. Anyhow
she came back a little later and gathered up her eggs off the ground, and
flew away with them, and what she did with them I'll tell you; oh, just as
soon as you like.

The bedtime story then will be about Uncle Wiggily and the tailor
bird--that is, if the needle and thread don't dance up and down on the pin
cushion, and make it full of holes so the sawdust stuffing comes out and
tickles the baby's pink toes.


STORY XXXI

UNCLE WIGGILY AND THE TAILOR BIRD


After Uncle Wiggily and the pussy had helped the robin get the cowbird's
eggs out of her nest, as I told you in the story before this, the rabbit
and the kittie stayed in the woods a little while talking to the mamma
bird.

"I should like to see the little robins hatch out of the eggs," said the
pussy, as she frisked her tail about and smoothed out her fur.

"So should I," added Uncle Wiggily.

"I will gladly let you see my little birdies hatch," spoke the robin, "but
it will take nearly a week yet, and you will have to wait."

"Oh, I can't wait as long as that," went on the rabbit. "I must be off to
seek my fortune."

"Yes, and I must go and find my clothespin house," said the pussy.

So they said good-by to the mamma robin, and away the pussy and Uncle
Wiggily went, over the hills and down the dales through the woods and over
little brooks.

Pretty soon they came to a place in the woods where there were a whole
lot of flowers nodding their heads in the wind, and it was such a pretty
place that Uncle Wiggily and the pussy stayed there a little while. And in
about a minute they heard something flying through the bushes and out flew
that same cowbird, and she laughed just as hard as she could laugh, as she
passed along.

"Somebody is going to be surprised!" cried the cowbird and she fluttered
her wings at the rabbit and the kittie, and then she hid herself off in
the woods.

"I wonder what she means?" asked the pussy.

"I'm sure I don't know," replied the rabbit. "But did you notice that she
didn't have her eggs with her?"

"Sure enough!" exclaimed the pussy. "She must have left them in some other
bird's nest."

"Well, we had better keep on, for it is getting late," spoke Uncle
Wiggily, "and I want to find your clothespin house for you."

On they hurried through the trees, and pretty soon--Oh, I guess about as
long as it takes you to eat a stick of peppermint candy--they suddenly
came to the pussy's clothespin house.

"Oh, here's where I live!" she cried. "How glad I am to get back home!"
She hurried in through the front door and no sooner was she inside than
she cried out:

"Come here! Come here, quickly, Uncle Wiggily! Did you ever see such a
sight in all your born days?"

"What is it?" asked the rabbit, as he hopped in, and he was half afraid
that there might be a burglar fox hiding in the pussy's house.

But it wasn't anything like that. Instead the rabbit saw the pussy
pointing to her bed, and there, right in the middle of the feather
pillows, were some eggs.

"The cowbird's eggs!" cried the kittie. "That's what she meant when she
said some one was going to be surprised. Indeed, I am the one who is
surprised. She brought her eggs here, thinking I would hatch them out for
her, but I'll not do it!"

So the pussy threw the eggs out of the window, on some soft straw, where
they wouldn't be broken, and pretty soon that cowbird came back, as angry
as a lion without any tail. And she grabbed up her eggs, and this time she
took them to the monkey, who played five hand-organs at once. And the
monkey was a good-natured sort of a chap, so he hatched out the cowbird's
eggs for her, and soon he had a lot of little calfbirds, and when they
grew up they gave him no end of trouble.

"Well, now you are safe home," said Uncle Wiggily to the pussy, "I will
travel on."

"First, let me fill your valise with something to eat," said the kittie
cat, and she did so, and then the rabbit hopped on. He looked all over for
his fortune, but he couldn't find it, and pretty soon it got dark night
and he went to sleep in a hollow stump.

"Surely, I will find my fortune to-day," thought Uncle Wiggily, as he
arose the next morning, and combed out his whiskers. It was a bright,
beautiful sunshiny morning, and everything was cheerful, and the birds
were singing. But, in spite of all that, something happened to the rabbit.

He was just going past a berry bush, and he was reaching up to pick off
some of the red raspberries, when all at once a sharp claw was thrust out
from the bush and a grab was made for the rabbit.

"Now, I've got you!" cried a savage voice.

"No, you haven't!" exclaimed Uncle Wiggily, and he jumped back just as a
savage wolf sprang out at him.

"Oh, don't worry, I'll get you yet!" went on the wolf and he made another
spring. But the rabbit was ready for him and ran down the hill and the
wolf ran after him, howling at the top of his grillery-growlery voice,
for he was very hungry.

My! how Uncle Wiggily did run. And the wolf ran also, and he was catching
up to the rabbit, and probably would have eaten him all up, but just then
a kind bumble bee who knew Uncle Wiggily flew off a tree branch and stung
that wolf on the end of his nose.

That wolf gave a howl, and made one more grab for Uncle Wiggily, but he
only managed to catch hold of his coat tails in his teeth, and there the
wolf held on.

"Let go of Uncle Wiggily!" buzzed the bee.

"No I won't!" cried the wolf, most impolite-like.

"Then I'll sting you again!" cried the bee, and she did so, and the rabbit
gave a great pull, and he managed to pull himself away from the wolf. But,
alas! Uncle Wiggily's nice red coat was all tattered and torn.

"Oh, whatever shall I do?" cried Uncle Wiggily as the wolf ran away down
the hill and the rabbit looked at the torn and ripped coat. "I never can
go on seeking my fortune with a torn coat."

"I am sorry," said the bee, "but I can not help you. But if you see the
tailor bird she may mend your coat for you."

So the bee buzzed away and Uncle Wiggily went on looking for the tailor
bird. This is a bird that makes a nest by sewing leaves together with
grass for thread. And would you believe me, in a little while Uncle
Wiggily saw the very bird he wanted.

She was making a nest with her bill for a needle and some dried grass for
thread, and she was sewing the leaves together.

"Will you kindly mend my coat for me where the wolf tore it?" asked the
rabbit politely.

"Indeed I will," said the tailor bird. So she took some long, strong
pieces of grass for thread. Then she made her sharp bill go back and forth
in the cloth of Uncle Wiggily's coat and soon it was all mended again as
good as new. Then the rabbit thanked the bird and started off again to
seek his fortune and you could hardly see where his coat was torn.

Then Uncle Wiggily was very thankful to the tailor bird, and he stayed at
her house for some time, helping her sweep the sidewalk mornings, and
bringing up coal, and all things like that. And the old gentleman had some
more adventures.

But as I have already made this book quite long, I think I will have to
save the rest of the stories for another one. I'll get it ready as soon
as I can for you, and the name of it is going to be "Uncle Wiggily's
Fortune."

Just think of that! He really does find his fortune in that book, though
he has quite some trouble, let me tell you. But bless your hearts! Trouble
is only another kind of fun!

So now we will say good-by to Uncle Wiggily for a time, and soon you may
hear more about him. Good-by and good luck to all of you.


THE END


       *       *       *       *       *


Uncle Wiggily Picture Books


Three stories in
each book
By
Howard R. Garis

[Illustration:
UNCLE WIGGILY'S
SNOW PUDDING]

Also twenty-seven
color pictures
By
Lang Campbell

In these funny little books you can see in bright colored pictures the
adventures of myself and my woodland friends. Also the pictures of some
bad fellows, whose names you know.

So if the spoon holder doesn't go down cellar and take the coal shovel
away from the gas stove, you may read

No. 1. UNCLE WIGGILY'S AUTO SLED


If the rocking chair doesn't tickle the rag carpet and make the brass bed
fall upstairs, you may read

No. 2. UNCLE WIGGILY'S SNOW MAN


If the umbrella doesn't go out in the rain and splash water all over the
rubber boots on the gold fish, you may read

No. 3. UNCLE WIGGILY'S HOLIDAYS


If the electric light doesn't cry for some molasses, when the match leaves
it all alone in the china closet, you may read

No. 4. UNCLE WIGGILY'S APPLE ROAST


If the egg beater doesn't try to jump over the coffee pot and fall in the
sink when the potato is learning to swim, you may read

No. 5. UNCLE WIGGILY'S PICNIC


If the sugar cookie doesn't go out walking with the fountain pen, and get
all black so it looks like a chocolate cake, you may read

No. 6. UNCLE WIGGILY GOES FISHING


Hurry up and get these nice little books from the bookstore man, or send
direct to the publishers, 50 cents per copy, postpaid.

CHARLES E. GRAHAM & CO.
NEW YORK

[Illustration: Uncle Wiggily]

Burt's Series of One Syllable Books

14 Titles. Handsome Illuminated Cloth Binding

A series of Classics, selected specially for young people's reading, and
told in simple language for youngest readers. Printed from large type,
with many illustrations.


       *       *       *       *       *

Price 75 Cents per Volume

       *       *       *       *       *


AESOP'S FABLES
  Retold in words of one syllable for young people. By MARY GODOLPHIN.
  With 41 illustrations.

ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND
  Retold in words of one syllable for young people. By MRS. J.C. GORHAM.
  With many illustrations.

ANDERSEN'S FAIRY TALES
  (Selections.) Retold in words of one syllable for young people. By
  HARRIET T. COMSTOCK. With many illustrations.

BIBLE HEROES
  Told in words of one syllable for young people. By HARRIET T. COMSTOCK.
  With many illustrations.

BLACK BEAUTY
  Retold in words of one syllable for young people. By MRS. J.C. GORHAM.
  With many illustrations.

GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES
  (Selections.) Retold in words of one syllable. By JEAN S. REMY.
  With many illustrations.

GULLIVER'S TRAVELS
  Into several remote regions of the world. Retold in words of one
  syllable for young people. By J.C.G. With 32 illustrations.

LIFE OF CHRIST
  Told in words of one syllable for young people. By JEAN S. REMY.
  With many illustrations.

LIVES OF THE PRESIDENTS
  Told in words of one syllable for young people. By JEAN S. REMY.
  With 24 large portraits.

PILGRIM'S PROGRESS
  Retold in words of one syllable for young people. By SAMUEL PHILLIPS
  DAY. With 33 illustrations.

REYNARD THE FOX
  The Crafty Courtier. Retold in words of one syllable for young people.
  By SAMUEL PHILLIPS DAY. With 23 illustrations.

ROBINSON CRUSOE
  His life and surprising adventures retold in words of one syllable for
  young people. By MARY A. SCHWACOFER. With 32 illustrations.

SANFORD AND MERTON
  Retold in words of one syllable for young people. By MARY GODOLPHIN.
  With 20 illustrations.

SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON
  Retold in words of one syllable for young people. Adapted from the
  original. With 31 illustrations.


       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers, A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 East 23rd Street, New York.

THE MOTHER GOOSE SERIES

24 TITLES HANDSOME CLOTH BINDING, ILLUMINATED COVERS

A series of popular books for young people. Each book is well printed from
large type on good paper, frontispiece in colors, profusely illustrated,
and bound in cloth, with ornamental covers in three colors, making a
series of most interesting books for children at a reasonable price.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 75 cents per copy

       *       *       *       *       *

Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp, and Other Stories. Profusely
Illustrated.

Animal Stories for Little People. Profusely Illustrated.

Beauty and the Beast, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Bird Stories for Little People. Profusely Illustrated.

Bluebeard, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Cinderella; or, The Little Glass Slipper, and Other Stories. Profusely
Illustrated.

Foolish Fox, The, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Goody Two Shoes, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Hansel and Grethel, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

House That Jack Built, The, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Jack and the Beanstalk, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Jack the Giant Killer, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Little Red Riding Hood, and Other Stories. Profusely illustrated.

Little Snow White, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Mother Goose Rhymes. Profusely Illustrated.

Mother Hubbard's Melodies. Profusely Illustrated.

Night Before Christmas, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Patty and Her Pitcher; or, Kindness of Heart, and Other Stories.
Profusely Illustrated.

Peter and His Goose; or, The Folly of Discontent, and Other Stories.
Profusely Illustrated.

Puss in Boots, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Sleeping Beauty, The, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Tom Thumb, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Ugly Duckling, The, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

Who Killed Cock Robin, and Other Stories. Profusely Illustrated.

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers, A.L. BURT CO., 114-120 East 23rd Street, New York City.


       *       *       *       *       *


Aunt Amy's Animal Stories

By AMY PRENTICE


A Series of Stories, told by animals, to AUNT AMY PRENTICE.

Each illustrated with many pictures in black, and four illustrations in
colors, by J. WATSON DAVIS.

12 titles, in handsome cloth binding.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 75 cents. Net----

       *       *       *       *       *

Bunny Rabbit's Story,      30 Illustrations
Billy Goat's Story,        32 Illustrations
Brown Owl's Story,         31 Illustrations
Croaky Frog's Story,       28 Illustrations
Frisky Squirrel's Story,   30 Illustrations
Gray Goose's Story,        32 Illustrations
Mickie Monkey's Story,     35 Illustrations
Mouser Cat's Story,        35 Illustrations
Plodding Turtle's Story,   30 Illustrations
Quacky Duck's Story,       34 Illustrations
Speckled Hen's Story,      28 Illustrations
Towser Dog's Story,        32 Illustrations

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers, A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 East 23rd Street, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *


Our Young Aeroplane Scout Series

(Registered in the United States Patent Office)

By HORACE PORTER

       *       *       *       *       *

Handsome Cloth Binding, PRICE, 75 per Volume

A series of stories of two American boy aviators in the great European war
zone. The fascinating life in mid-air is thrillingly described. The boys
have many exciting adventures, and the narratives of their numerous
escapes make up a series of wonderfully interesting stories.

       *       *       *       *       *


OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN FRANCE AND BELGIUM;
  or, Saving the Fortunes of the Trouvilles.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN GERMANY.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN RUSSIA;
  or, Lost on the Frozen Steppes.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN TURKEY;
  or, Bringing the Light to Yusef.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN ENGLAND;
  or, Twin Stars in the London Sky Patrol.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN ITALY;
  or, Flying with the War Eagles of the Alps.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS AT VERDUN; or, Driving
  Armored Meteors Over Flaming Battle Fronts.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN THE BALKANS;
  or, Wearing the Red Badge of Courage.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN THE WAR ZONE;
  or, Serving Uncle Sam In the Cause of the Allies.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS FIGHTING TO THE FINISH;
  or, Striking Hard Over the Sea for the Stars and Stripes.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS AT THE MARNE;
  or, Harrying the Huns From Allied Battleplanes.
OUR YOUNG AEROPLANE SCOUTS IN AT THE VICTORY;
  or, Speedy High Flyers Smashing the Hindenburg Line.

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers

A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 East 23rd St., New York

       *       *       *       *       *


The Boy Scouts Series

By HERBERT CARTER

       *       *       *       *       *

Handsome Cloth Binding, PRICE, 75 per Volume

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BOY SCOUTS' FIRST CAMP FIRE; or, Scouting with
     the Silver Fox Patrol.

THE BOY SCOUTS IN THE BLUE RIDGE; or, Marooned
     Among the Moonshiners.

THE BOY SCOUTS ON THE TRAIL; or, Scouting through
     the Big Game Country.

THE BOY SCOUTS IN THE MAIN WOODS; or, The New
     Test for the Silver Fox Patrol.

THE BOY SCOUTS THROUGH THE BIG TIMBER; or, The
     Search for the Lost Tenderfoot.

THE BOY SCOUTS IN THE ROCKIES; or, The Secret of
     the Hidden Silver Mine.

THE BOY SCOUTS ON STURGEON ISLAND; or, Marooned
     Among the Game Fish Poachers.

BOY SCOUTS DOWN IN DIXIE; or, The Strange
     Secret of Alligator Swamp.

THE BOY SCOUTS AT THE BATTLE OF SARATOGA; A
     story of Burgoyne's defeat in 1777.

THE BOY SCOUTS ALONG THE SUSQUEHANNA; or, The
     Silver Fox Patrol Caught in a Flood.

THE BOY SCOUTS ON WAR TRAILS IN BELGIUM; or,
     Caught Between the Hostile Armies.

THE BOY SCOUTS AFOOT IN FRANCE; or, With the Red
     Cross Corps at the Marne.


       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers

A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 East 23rd St., New York


       *       *       *       *       *

The Navy Boys Series

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

A series of excellent stories of adventure on sea and land, selected from
the works of popular writers; each volume designed for boys' reading.

HANDSOME CLOTH BINDINGS

       *       *       *       *       *

PRICE, 75 PER VOLUME

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NAVY BOYS IN DEFENCE OF LIBERTY.
    A story of the burning of the British schooner Gasnee in 1772
    By William P. Chipman.

THE NAVY BOYS ON LONG ISLAND SOUND.
     A story of the Whale Boat Navy of 1776.
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS AT THE SIEGE OF HAVANA.
     Being the experience of three boys serving under Israel Putnam in
      1772.
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS WITH GRANT AT VICKSBURG.
     A boy's story of the siege of Vicksburg.
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS' CRUISE WITH PAUL JONES.
     A boy's story of a cruise with the Great Commodore in 1776.
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS ON LAKE ONTARIO.
     The story of two boys and their adventures in the War of 1812,
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS' CRUISE ON THE PICKERING.
     A boy's story of privateering in 1780.
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS IN NEW YORK BAY.
     A story of three boys who took command of the schooner "The Laughing
Mary," the first vessel of the American Navy,
     By James Otis.

THE NAVY BOYS IN THE TRACK OF THE ENEMY.
     The story of a remarkable cruise with the Sloop of War "Providence"
and the Frigate "Alfred."
     By William P. Chipman.

THE NAVY BOYS' DARING CAPTURE.
     The story of how the navy boys helped to capture the British Cutter
"Margaretta," in 1775.
     By William P. Chipman.

THE NAVY BOYS' CRUISE TO THE BAHAMAS.
     The adventures of two Yankee Middies with the first cruise of a:
American Squadron in 1775.
     By William P. Chipman.

THE NAVY BOYS' CRUISE WITH COLUMBUS.
     The adventures of two boys who sailed with the great Admiral in his
discovery of America.
     By Frederick A. Ober.

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers. A.L. BURT COMPANY, 114-120 East 23d Street. New York

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boy Spies Series

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

These stories are based on important historical events, scenes wherein
boys are prominent characters being selected. They are the romance of
history, vigorously told, with careful fidelity to picturing the home
life, and accurate in every particular.

HANDSOME CLOTH BINDINGS

       *       *       *       *       *

PRICE, 75 PER VOLUME

       *       *       *       *       *


THE BOY SPIES AT THE BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS.
     A story of the part they took in its defence.
     By William P. Chipman.

THE BOY SPIES AT THE DEFENCE OF FORT HENRY.
     A boy's story of Wheeling Creek in 1777.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES AT THE BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL.
     A story of two boys at the siege of Boston.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES AT THE SIEGE OF DETROIT.
     A story of two Ohio boys in the War of 1812.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES WITH LAFAYETTE.
     The story of how two boys joined the Continental Army.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES ON CHESAPEAKE BAY.
     The story of two young spies under Commodore Barney.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES WITH THE REGULATORS.
     The story of how the boys assisted the Carolina Patriots to drive the
British from that State.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES WITH THE SWAMP FOX.
     The story of General Marion and his young spies.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES AT YORKTOWN.
     The story of how the spies helped General Lafayette in the Siege of
Yorktown.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES OF PHILADELPHIA.
     The story of how the young spies helped the Continental Army at
Valley Forge.
     By James Otis.

THE BOY SPIES OF FORT GRISWOLD.
     The story of the part they took in its brave defence.
     By William P. Chipman.

THE BOY SPIES OF OLD NEW YORK.
     The story of how the young spies prevented the capture of General
Washington.
     By James Otis.


       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by
the publishers. A.L. BURT COMPANY. 114-120 East 23d Street. New York.