'My name is Henry Aylwin,' said I; 'and I must ask you to withdraw
your words about the virtues of soap, as my sister objects to them.'

'What?' cried he, losing for the first time his matchless
_sang-froid_. 'Henry Aylwin?' Then he looked at me in silent
amazement, while an expression of the deepest humorous enjoyment
overspread his features, making them positively shine as though
oiled. Finally, he burst into a loud laugh, that was all the more
irritating from the manifest effort he made to restrain it.

'Did I hear His Majesty of Gypsydom aright?' he said, as soon as his
hilarity allowed him to speak. 'Is the humble bed of a mere painter
to be made for him by the representative of the proud Aylwins, the
genteel Aylwins, the heir-presumptive Aylwins--the most respectable
branch of a most respectable family, which, alas! has its ungenteel,
its bohemian, its vulgar offshoots? Did I hear His Majesty of
Gypsydom aright?'

He leant against a tree, and gave utterance to peal after peal of
laughter.

I advanced with rapidly rising anger, but his hilarity had so
overmastered him that he did not heed it.

'Wilderspin,' cried he, 'come here! Pray come here. Have I not often
told you the reason why I threw up my engagement with my theatrical
manager, and missed my high vocation in ungenteel comedy? Have I not
often told you that it sprang from no disrespect to my friends, the
comic actors, but from the feeling that no comedian can hope to be
comic enough to compete with the real thing--the true harlequinade of
everyday life, roaring and screaming around me wherever I go?'

Then, without waiting for his companion's reply, he turned to me, and
giving an added volume to his sonorous voice, said:

'And you, Sir King, do you know whose bed Your Majesty was going to
make at the bidding of--well, of a duke's chavi?'

I advanced with still growing anger. 'Stay, King Bamfylde, stay,'
said he; 'shall the beds of the mere ungenteel Aylwins, "the outside
Aylwins," be made by the high Gypsy-gentility of Raxton?'

A light began to break in upon me. 'Surely,' I said, 'surely you are
not Cyril Aylwin, the------?'

'Pray finish your sentence, sir, and say the low bohemian painter,
the representative of the great ungenteel--the successor to the
Aylwin peerage.'

The other painter, looking in blank amazement at my newly-found
kinsman's extraordinary merriment, exclaimed, 'Bless me! Then you
really can laugh aloud, Mr. Cyril. What has happened? What can have
happened to make my dear friend laugh aloud?'

'Well he may ask,' said Cyril, turning to me. 'He knows that ever
since I was a boy in jackets I have despised the man who, in a world
where all is so comic, could select any particular point of the farce
for his empty guffaw. But I am conquered at last. Let me introduce
you, Wilderspin, to my kinsman, Henry Aylwin of Raxton Hall, alias
Lord Henry Lovell of Little Egypt--one of Duke Panuel's interesting
twinses.'

But Wilderspin's astonishment, apparently, was not at the
_rencontre_: it was at the spectacle of his companion's hilarity.
'Wonderful!' he murmured, with his eyes still fastened upon Cyril.
'My dear friend can laugh aloud. Most wonderful! What can have
happened?'

This is what had happened. By one of those strange coincidences which
make the drama of real life far more wonderful than the drama of any
stage, I, in my character of wandering Gypsy, had been thrown across
the path of the _bête noire_ of my mother and aunt, Cyril Aylwin, a
painter of bohemian proclivities, who (under the name of 'Cyril') had
obtained some considerable reputation. This kinsman of mine had been
held up to me as a warning from my very childhood, though wherein lay
his delinquencies I never did clearly understand, save that he had
once been an actor--before acting had become genteel. Often as I had
heard of this eccentric painter as the representative of the branch
of the family which preceded mine in the succession to the coveted
earldom, I had never seen him before.

He stood and looked at me in a state of intense amusement, but did
not speak.

'So you are Cyril Aylwin?' I said. 'Still you must withdraw what you
said to my sister about the soap.'

'Delicious!' said he, grasping my hand. 'I had no idea that high
gentility numbered chivalry among its virtues. Lady Sinfi,' he
continued, turning to her, 'they say this brother of yours is a
character, and, by Jove! he is. And as to you, dear lady, I am proud
of the family connection. The man who has two Romany Rye kinsmen may
be excused for showing a little pride. I withdraw every word about
the virtues of soap, and am convinced that it can do nothing with the
true Romany-Aylwin brown.'

On that we shook hands all round. 'But, Sinfi,' said I, 'why did you
not tell me that this was my kinsman?'

''Cause I didn't know,' said she. 'I han't never seed him since I've
know'd you. I always heerd his friends call him Cyril, and so I used
to call him Mr. Cyril.'

'But, Lady Sinfi, my Helen of Little Egypt,' said Cyril, 'suppose
that in my encounter with my patrician cousin--an encounter which
would have been entirely got up in honour of you--suppose it had
happened that I had made your brother's bed for him?'

'You  make _his_  bed!' exclaimed Sinfi, laughing.

'Dordi! how you would ha' went down afore the Swimmin' Rei!'
[Footnote]

[Footnote: By the Welsh Gypsies, but few of whom can swim, I was
called 'the Swimmin' Rei,' a name which would have been far more
appropriately given to Percy Aylwin (Rhona Boswell's lover), one of
the strongest swimmers in England; but he was simply called the
Tarno Rye (the young gentleman).]

'But suppose that, on the contrary, he had gone down before me,' said
Cyril; 'suppose I had been the death of your Swimming Rei, I should
have been tried for the wilful murder of a prince of Little Egypt,
the son of a Romany duke. Why, Helen of Troy was not half so
mischievous a beauty as you.'

'You was safe enough, no fear,' said Sinfi. 'It 'ud take six o' you
to settle the Swimmin' Rei.'

I found that Cyril and his strange companion were staying at 'The
Royal Oak,' at Bettws y Coed. They asked me to join them, but when I
told them I 'could not leave my people, who were encamped about two
miles off,' Cyril again looked at me with an expression of deepest
enjoyment, and exclaimed 'delightful creature.'

Turning to Sinfi, he said: 'Then we'll go with you and call upon the
noble father of the twins, my old friend King Panuel.'

'He ain't a king,' said Sinfi modestly; 'he's only a duke.'

'You'll give us some tea, Lady Sinfi?' said Cyril.

'No tea equal to Gypsy tea.'

'Romany tea, Mr. Cyril,' replied Sinfi, with perfect dignity and
grace. 'My daddy, the duke, will be pleased to welcome you.'

We all strolled towards the tents. I offered to carry an umbrella and
a camp-stool. Cyril walked briskly away with Sinfi, leaving me to get
on with Wilderspin as best I could. Before the other two were out of
earshot, however, I heard Cyril say,

'You shouldn't have taken so seriously my chaff about the soap,
Sinfi. You ought to know me better by this time than to think that I
would really insult you.'

'How you would ha' went down afore the Swimmin' Rei!' replied Sinfi
regretfully.


III

Between my new companion, Wilderspin, and myself there was an awkward
silence for some time. He was evidently in a brown study. I had ample
opportunity for examining his face. Deeply impressed upon his forehead
there was, as I now perceived, an ancient scar of a peculiar shape. At
last, a lovely bit of scenery broke the spell, and conversation began
to flow freely.

We had nearly got within sight of the encampment when he said,

