In the two preceding lectures I have endeavoured to reach some
conception of what the All-originating Spirit is in itself, and
of the relation of the individual to it. So far as we can form
any conception of these things at all we see that they are
universal principles applicable to all nature, and, at the human
level, applicable to all men: they are general laws the
recognition of which is an essential preliminary to any further
advance, because progress is made, not by setting aside the
inherent law of things, which is impossible, but by specializing
it through presenting conditions which will enable the same
principle to act in a less limited manner. Having therefore got a
general idea of these two ultimates, the universal and the
individual, and of their relation to one another, let us now
consider the process of specialization. In what does the
specialization of a natural law consist? It consists in making
that law or principle produce an effect which it could not
produce under the simply generic conditions spontaneously
provided by nature. This selection of suitable conditions is the
work of Intelligence, it is a process of consciously arranging
things in a new order, so as to produce a new result. The
principle is never new, for principles are eternal and universal;
but the knowledge that the same principle will produce new
results when working under new conditions is the key to the
unfoldment of infinite possibilities. What we have therefore to
consider is the working of Intelligence in providing specific
conditions for the operation of universal principles, so as to
bring about new results which will transcend our past
experiences. The process does not consist in the introduction of
new elements, but in making new combinations of elements which
are always present; just as our ancestors had no conception of
carriages that could go without horses, and yet by a suitable
combination of elements which were always in existence, such
vehicles are common objects in our streets today. How, then, is
the power of Intelligence to be brought to bear upon the generic
law of the relation between the Individual and the Universal so
as to specialize it into the production of greater results than
those which we have hitherto obtained?

All the practical attainments of science, which place the
civilized world of to-day in advance of the times of King Alfred
or Charlemagne, have been gained by a uniform method, and that a
very simple one. It is by always enquiring what is the
affirmative factor in any existing combination, and asking
ourselves why, in that particular combination, it does not act
beyond certain limits. What makes the thing a success, so far as
it goes, and what prevents it going further? Then, by carefully
considering the nature of the affirmative factor, we see what
sort of conditions to provide to enable it to express itself more
fully. This is the scientific method; it has proved itself true
in respect of material things, and there is no reason why it
should not be equally reliable in respect of spiritual things
also.

Taking this as our method, we ask, What is the affirmative factor
in the whole creation, and in ourselves as included in the
creation, and, as we found in the first lecture, this factor is
Spirit--that invisible power which concentrates-the primordial
ether into forms, and endows those forms with various modes of
motion, from the simply mechanical motion of the planet up to the
volitional motion in man. And, since this is so, the primary
affirmative factor can only be the Feeling and the Thought of the
Universal Spirit.* Now, by the hypothesis of the case, the
Universal Spirit must be the Pure Essence of Life, and therefore
its feeling and  thought can only be towards the continually
increasing expression of the livingness which it is; and
accordingly the specialization, of which we are in search, must
be along the line of affording it a centre from which it may more
perfectly realize this feeling and express this thought: in other
words the way to specialize the generic principle of Spirit is by
providing new mental conditions in consonance with its own
original nature.

* See my "Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science."


The scientific method of enquiry therefore brings us to the
conclusion that the required conditions for translating the
racial or generic operation of the Spirit into a specialized
individual operation is a new way of THINKING mode of thought
concurring with, and not in opposition to, the essential forward
movement of the Creative Spirit itself. This implies an entire
reversal of our old conceptions. Hitherto we have taken forms and
conditions as the starting point of our thought and inferred that
they are the causes of mental states; now we have learnt that the
true order of the creative process is exactly the reverse, and
that thought and feeling are the causes, and forms and conditions
the effects. When we have learnt this lesson we have grasped the
foundation principle on which individual specialization of the
generic law of the creative process becomes a practical
possibility.

New Thought, then, is not the name of a particular sect, but is
the essential factor by which our own future development is to be
carried on; and its essence consists in seeing the relation of
things in a New Order. Hitherto we have inverted the true order
of cause and effect; now, by carefully considering the real
nature of the Principle of Causation in itself--causa causans as
distinguished from cause causata--we return to the true order and
adopt a new method of thinking in accordance with it.

In themselves this order and this method of thinking are not new.
They are older than the foundation of the world, for they are
those of the Creative Spirit itself; and all through the ages
this teaching has been handed down under various forms, the true
meaning of which has been perceived only by a few in each
generation. But as the light breaks in upon any individual it is
a new light to him, and so to each one in succession it becomes
the New Thought. And when anyone reaches it, he finds himself in
a New Order. He continues indeed to be included in the universal
order of the cosmos, but in a perfectly different way to what he
had previously supposed; for, from his new standpoint, he finds
that he is included, not so much as a part of the general effect,
but as a part of the general cause; and when he perceives this he
then sees that the method of his further advance must be by
letting the General Cause flow more and more freely into his own
specific centre, and he therefore seeks to provide thought
conditions which will enable him to do so.

Then, still employing the scientific method of following up the
affirmative factor, he realizes that this universal causative
power, by whatever name he may call it, manifests as Supreme
Intelligence in the adaptation of means to ends. It does so in
the mechanism of the planet, in the production of supply for the
support of physical life, and in the maintenance of the race as a
whole. True, the investigator is met at every turn with
individual failure; but his answer to this is that there is no
cosmic failure, and that the apparent individual failure is
itself a part of the cosmic process, and will diminish in
proportion as the individual attains to the recognition of the
Moving Principle of that process, and provides the necessary
conditions to enable it to take a new starting point in his own
individuality. Now, one of these conditions is to recognize it as
Intelligence, and to remember that when working through our own
mentality it in no way changes its essential nature, just as
electricity loses none of its essential qualities in passing
through the special apparatus which enables it to manifest as
light.

When we see this, our line of thought will run something as
follows:--"My mind is a centre of Divine operation. The Divine
operation is always for expansion and fuller expression, and this
means the production of something beyond what has gone before,
something entirely new, not included in past experience, though
proceeding out of it by an orderly sequence of growth. Therefore,
since the Divine cannot change its inherent nature, it must
operate in the same manner in me; consequently in my own special
world, of which I am the centre, it will move forward to produce
new conditions, always in advance of any that have gone before."
This is a legitimate line of argument, from the premises
established in the recognition of the relation between the
individual and the Universal Mind; and it results in our looking
to the Divine Mind, not only as creative, but also as directive--
that is as determining the actual forms which the conditions for
its manifestation will take in our own particular world, as well
as supplying the energy for their production. We miss the point
of the relation between the individual and the universal, if we
do not see that the Originating Spirit is a FORMING power. It is
the forming power throughout nature, and if we would specialize
it we must learn to trust its formative quality when operating
from its new starting point in ourselves.

But the question naturally arises, If this is so, what part is
taken by the individual? Our part is to provide a concrete centre
round which the Divine energies can play. In the generic order of
being we exercise upon it a force of attraction in accordance
with the innate pattern of our particular individuality; and as
we begin to realize the Law of this relation, we, in our turn,
are attracted towards the Divine along the lines of least
resistance, that is on those lines which are most natural to our
special bent of mind. In this way we throw out certain
aspirations with the result that we intensify our attraction of
the Divine forces in a certain specific manner, and they then
begin to act both through us and around us in accordance with our
aspirations. This is the rationale of the reciprocal action be
tween the Universal Mind and the individual mind, and this shows
us that our desires should not be directed so much to the
acquisition of particular THINGS as to the reproduction in
ourselves of particular phases of the Spirit's activity; and
this, being in its very nature creative, is bound to externalize
as corresponding things and circumstances. Then, when these
external facts appear in the circle of our objective life, we
must work upon them from the objective stand-point. This is where
many fall short of completed work. They realize the subjective or
creative process, but do not see that it must be followed by an
objective or constructive process, and consequently they are
unpractical dreamers and never reach the stage of completed work.
The creative process brings the materials and conditions for the
work to our hands; then we must make use of them with diligence
and common-sense--God will provide the food, but He will not cook
the dinner.

This, then, is the part taken by the individual, and it is thus
that he becomes a distributing centre of the Divine energy,
neither on the one hand trying to lead it like a blind force, nor
on the other being himself under a blind unreasoning impulsion
from it. He receives guidance because he seeks guidance; and he
both seeks and receives according to a Law which he is able to
recognize; so that he no more sacrifices his liberty or dwarfs
his powers, than does an engineer who submits to the generic laws
of electricity, in order to apply them to some specific purpose.
The more intimate his knowledge of this Law of Reciprocity
becomes, the more he finds that it leads on to Liberty, on the
same principle by which we find in physical science that nature
obeys us precisely in the same degree to which we first obey
nature. As the esoteric maxim has it "What is a truth on one
plane is a truth on all." But the key to this enfranchisement of
body, mind, and circumstances is in that new thought which
becomes creative of new conditions, because it realizes the true
order of the creative process. Therefore it is that, if we would
bring a new order of Life, Light, and Liberty into our lives we
must commence by bringing a new order into our thought, and find
in ourselves the starting point of a new creative series, not by
the force of personal will, but by union with the Divine Spirit,
which in the expression of its inherent Love and Beauty, makes
all things new.


THE LIFE OF THE SPIRIT.

The three preceding lectures have touched upon certain
fundamental truths in a definite order--first the nature of the
Originating Spirit itself, next the generic relation of the
individual to this All-embracing Spirit, and lastly the way to
specialize this relation so as to obtain greater results from it
than spontaneously arise by its merely generic action, and we
have found that this can only be done through a new order of
thought. This sequence is logical because it implies a Power, an
Individual who understands the Power, and a Method of applying
the power deduced from understanding its nature. These are
general principles without realizing which it is impossible to
proceed further, but assuming that the reader has grasped their
significance, we may now go on to consider their application in
greater detail.

Now this application must be a personal one, for it is only
through the individual that the higher specialization of the
power can take place, but at the same time this must not lead us
to suppose that the individual, himself, brings the creative
force into being. To suppose this is inversion; and we cannot
impress upon ourselves too deeply that the relation of the
individual to the Divine Spirit is that of a distributor, and not
that of the original creator. If this is steadily borne in mind
the way will become clear, otherwise we shall be led into
confusion.

What, then, is the Power which we are to distribute? It is the
Originating Spirit itself. We are sure that it is this because
the new order of thought always begins at the beginning of any
series which it contemplates bringing into manifestation, and it
is based upon the fact that the origin of everything is Spirit.
It is in this that its creative power resides; hence the person
who is in the true new order of thought assumes as an axiomatic
fact that what he has to distribute, or differentiate into
manifestation is nothing else than the Originating Spirit. This
being the case, it is evident that the PURPOSE of the
distribution must be the more perfect expression of the
Originating Spirit as that which it is in itself, and what it is
in itself is emphatically Life. What is seeking for expression,
then, is the perfect Livingness of the Spirit; and this
expression is to be found, through ourselves, by means of our
renewed mode of thought. Let us see, then, how our new order of
thought, with regard to the Principle of Life, is likely to
operate In our old order of thought we have always associated
Life with the physical body--life has been for us the supreme
physical fact. Now, however, we know that Life is much more than
this; but, as the greater includes the less, it includes physical
life as one mode of its manifestation. The true order does not
require us to deny the reality of physical life or to call it an
illusion; on the contrary it sees in physical life the completion
of a great creative series, but it assigns it the proper place in
that series, which is what the old mode of thought did not.

When we realize the truth about the Creative Process, we see that
the originating life is not physical: its livingness consists in
thought and feeling. By this inner movement it throws out
vehicles through which to function, and these become living forms
because of the inner-principle which is sustaining them; so that
the Life with which we are primarily concerned in the new order
is the life of thought and feeling in ourselves as the vehicle,
or distributing medium, of the Life of the Spirit.

Then, if we have grasped the idea of the Spirit as the great
FORMING Power, as stated in the last lecture, we shall seek in it
the fountain-head of Form as well as of Power: and as a logical
deduction from this we shall look to it to give form to our
thoughts and feelings. If the principle is once recognised the
sequence is obvious. The form taken by our outward conditions,
whether of body or circumstance, depends on the form taken by our
thoughts and feelings, and our thoughts and feelings will take
form from that source from which we allow them to receive
suggestion. Accordingly if we allow them to accept their
fundamental suggestions from the relative and limited, they will
assume a corresponding form and transmit them to our external
environment, thus repeating the old order of limitation in a
ceaselessly recurring round. Now our object is to get out of this
circle of limitation, and the only way to do so is to get our
thoughts and feelings moulded into new forms continually
advancing to greater and greater perfection. To meet this
requirement, therefore, there must be a forming power greater
than that of our own unaided conceptions, and this is to be found
in our realization of the Spirit as the Supreme Beauty, or
Wisdom, moulding our thoughts and feelings into shapes
harmoniously adjusted to the fullest expression, in and through
us, of the Livingness which Spirit is in itself.

Now this is nothing more than transferring to the innermost plane
of origination, a principle with which all readers who are "in
the thought" may be presumed to be quite familiar--the principle
of Receptiveness. We all know what is meant by a receptive mental
attitude when applied to healing or telepathy; and does it not
logically follow that the same principle may be applied to the
receiving of life itself from the Supreme Source? What is wanted,
therefore, is to place ourselves in a receptive mental attitude
towards the Universal Spirit with the intention of receiving its
forming influence into our mental substance. It is always the
presence of a definite intention that distinguishes the
intelligent receptive attitude of mind from a merely sponge-like
absorbency, which sucks in any and every influence that may
happen to be floating round: for we must not shut our eyes to the
fact that there are various influences in the mental atmosphere
by which we are surrounded, and some of them of the most
undesirable kind. Clear and definite intention is therefore as
necessary in our receptive attitude as in our active and creative
one; and if our intention is to have our own thoughts and
feelings moulded into such forms as to express those of the
Spirit, then we establish that relation to the Spirit which, by
the conditions of the case, must necessarily lead us to the
conception of new ideals vitalised by a power which will enable
us to bring them into concrete manifestation. It is in this way
that we become differentiating centres of the Divine Thought
giving it expression in form in the world of space and time, and
thus is solved the great problem of enabling the Universal to act
upon the plane of the particular without being hampered by those
limitations which the merely generic law of manifestation imposes
upon it. It is just here that subconscious mind performs the
function of a "bridge" between the finite and the infinite as
noted in my "Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science" (page 31), and
it is for this reason that a recognition of its susceptibility to
impression is so important.

By establishing, then, a personal relation to the life of the
Spirit, the sphere of the individual becomes enlarged. The reason
is that he allows a greater intelligence than his own to take the
initiative; and since he knows that this Intelligence is also the
very Principle of Life itself, he cannot have any fear that it
will act in any way to the diminution of his individual life, for
that would be to stultify its own operation--it would be
self-destructive action which is a contradiction in terms to the
conception of Creative Spirit. Knowing, then, that by its
inherent nature this Intelligence can only work to the expansion
of the individual life, we can rest upon it with the utmost
confidence and trust it to take an initiative which will lead to
far greater results than any we could forecast from the
stand-point of our own knowledge. So long as we insist on
dictating the particular form which the action of the Spirit is
to take, we limit it, and so close against ourselves avenues of
expansion which might otherwise have been open to us; and if we
ask ourselves why we do this we shall find that in the last
resort it is because we do not believe in the Spirit as a FORMING
power. We have, indeed, advanced to the conception of it as
executive power, which will work to a prescribed pattern, but we
have yet to grasp the conception of it as versed in the art of
design, and capable of elaborating schemes of construction, which
will not only be complete in themselves, but also in perfect
harmony with one another. When we advance to the conception of
the Spirit as containing in itself the ideal of Form as well as
of Power, we shall cease from the effort of trying to force
things into a particular shape, whether on the inner or the outer
plane, and shall be content to trust the inherent harmoniousness
or Beauty of the Spirit to produce combinations far in advance of
anything that we could have conceived ourselves. This does not
mean that we shall reduce ourselves to a condition of apathy, in
which all desire, expectation and enthusiasm have been quenched,
for these are the mainspring of our mental machinery; but on the
contrary their action will be quickened by the knowledge that
there is working at the back of them a Formative Principle so
infallible that it cannot miss its mark; so that however good and
beautiful the existing forms may be, we may always rest in the
happy expectation of something still better to come. And it will
come by a natural law of growth, because the Spirit is in itself
the Principle of Increase. They will grow out of present
conditions for the simple reason that if you are to reach some
further point it can only be by starting from where you are now.
Therefore it is written, "Despise not the day of small things."
There is only one proviso attached to this forward movement of
the Spirit in the world of our own surroundings, and that is that
we shall co-operate with it; and this co-operation consists in
making the best use of existing conditions in cheerful reliance
on the Spirit of Increase to express itself through us, and for
us, because we are in harmony with it. This mental attitude will
be found of immense value in setting us free from worry and
anxiety, and as a consequence our work will be done in a much
more efficient manner. We shall do the present work FOR ITS OWN
sake, knowing that herein is the principle of unfoldment; and
doing it simply for its own sake we shall bring to bear upon it a
power of concentration which cannot fail of good results--and
this quite naturally and without any toilsome effort. We shall
then find that the secret of co-operation is to have faith in
ourselves because we first have faith in God; and we shall
discover that this Divine self-confidence is something very
different from a boastful egotism which assumes a personal
superiority over others. It is simply the assurance of a man who
knows that he is working in accordance with a law of nature. He
does not claim as a personal achievement what the Law does FOR
him: but on the other hand he does not trouble himself about
outcries against his presumptuous audacity raised by persons who
are ignorant of the Law which he is employing. He is therefore
neither boastful nor timorous, but simply works on in cheerful
expectancy because he knows that his reliance is upon a Law which
cannot be broken.

In this way, then, we must realize the Life of the Spirit as
being also the Law of the Spirit. The two are identical, and
cannot deny themselves. Our recognition of them gives them a new
starting point through our own mentality, but they still continue
to be the same in their nature, and unless limited or inverted by
our mental affirmation of limited or inverted conditions, they
are bound to work out into fuller and continually fuller
expression of the Life, Love, and Beauty which the Spirit is in
itself. Our path, therefore, is plain; it is simply to
contemplate the Life, Love, and Beauty of the Originating Spirit
and affirm that we are already giving expression to it in our
thoughts and in our actions however insignificant they may at
present appear. This path may be very narrow and humble in its
beginning, but it ever grows wider and mounts higher, for it is
the continually expanding expression of the Life of the Spirit
which is infinite and knows no limits. 


ALPHA AND OMEGA.

Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. What does this mean? It
means the entire series of causation from the first originating
movement to the final and completed result. We may take this on
any scale from the creation of a cosmos to the creation of a
lady's robe. Everything has its origin in an idea, a thought; and
it has its completion in the manifestation of that thought in
form. Many intermediate stages are necessary, but the Alpha and
Omega of the series are the thought and the thing. This shows us
that in essence the thing already existed in the thought. Omega
is already potential in Alpha, just as in the Pythagorean system
all numbers are said to proceed from unity and to be resolvable
back again into it. Now it is this general principle of the
already existence of the thing in the thought that we have to lay
hold of, and as we find it true in an architect's design of the
house that is to be, so we find it true in the great work of the
Architect of the Universe. When we see this we have realized a
general principle, which we find at work everywhere. That is the
meaning of a general principle: it can be applied to any sort of
subject; and the use of studying general principles is to give
them particular application to anything we may have to deal with.
Now what we have to deal with most of all is ourselves, and so we
come to the consideration of Alpha and Omega in the human being.
In the vision of St. John, the speaker of the words, "I am Alpha
and Omega, the First and the Last," is described as "Like unto a
son of man"--that is, however transcendent the appearance in the
vision, it is essentially human, and thus suggests to us the
presence of the universal principle at the human level. But the
figure in the apocalyptic vision is not that of man as we
ordinarily know him. It is that of Omega as it subsists enshrined
in Alpha: it is the ideal of humanity as it subsists in the
Divine Mind which was manifested in objective form to the eyes of
the seer, and therefore presented the Alpha and Omega of that
idea in all the majesty of Divine glory.

But if we grasp the truth that the thing is already existent in
the thought, do we not see that this transcendent Omega must be
already existent in the Divine ideal of every one of us? If on
the plane of the absolute time is not, then does it not follow
that this glorified humanity is a present fact in the Divine
Mind? And if this is so, then this fact is eternally true
regarding every human being. But if it is true that the thing
exists in the thought, it is equally true that the thought finds
form in the thing; and since things exist under the relative
conditions of time and space, they are necessarily subject to a
law of Growth, so that while the subsistence of the thing in the
thought is perfect ab initio, the expression of the thought in
the thing is a matter of gradual development. This is a point
which we must never lose sight of in our studies; and we must
never lose sight of the perfection of the thing in the thought
because we do not yet see the perfection of the thought in the
thing. Therefore we must remember that man, as we know him now,
has by no means reached the ultimate of his evolution. We are
only yet in the making, but we have now reached a point where we
can facilitate the evolutionary process by conscious co-operation
with the Creative Spirit. Our share in this work commences with
the recognition of the Divine ideal of man, and thus finding the
pattern by which we are to be guided. For since the person to be
created after this pattern is ourself, it follows that, by
whatever processes the Divine ideal transforms itself into
concrete reality, the place where those processes are to work
must be within ourselves; in other words, the creative action of
the Spirit takes place through the laws of our own mentality. If
it is a true maxim that the thing must take form in the thought
before the thought can take form in the thing, then it is plain
that the Divine Ideal can only be externalized in our objective
life in proportion as it is first formed in our thought; and it
takes form in our thought only to the extent to which we
apprehend its existence in the Divine Mind. By the nature of the
relation between the individual mind and the Universal Mind it is
strictly a case of reflection; and in proportion as the mirror of
our own mind blurs or clearly reflects the image of the Divine
ideal, so will it give rise to a correspondingly feeble or
vigorous reproduction of it in our external life.

This being the rationale of the matter, why should we limit our
conception of the Divine ideal of ourselves? Why should we say,
"I am too mean a creature ever to reflect so glorious an image"--
or "God never intended such a limitless ideal to be reproduced in
human beings." In saying such things we expose our ignorance of
the whole Law of the Creative Process. We shut our eyes to the
fact that the Omega of completion already subsists in the Alpha
of conception, and that the Alpha of conception would be nothing
but a lying illusion if it was not capable of expression in the
Omega of completion. The creative process in us is that we become
the individual reflection of what we realize God to be relatively
to ourselves, and therefore if we realize the Divine Spirit as
the INFINITE potential of all that can constitute a perfected
human being, this conception must, by the Law of the Creative
Process, gradually build up a corresponding image in our mind,
which in turn will act upon our external conditions.

This, by the laws of mind, is the nature of the process and it
shows us what St. Paul means when he speaks of Christ being
formed in us (Gal. iv. 19) and what in another place he calls
being renewed in knowledge after the image of Him that created us
(Col. iii. 10). It is a thoroughly logical sequence of cause and
effect, and what we require is to see more clearly the Law of
this sequence and use it intelligently--that is why St. Paul says
it is being "renewed in knowledge": it is a New Knowledge, the
recognition of principles which we had not previously
apprehended. Now the fact which, in our past experience, we have
not grasped is that the human mind forms a new point of departure
for the work of the Creative Spirit; and in proportion as we see
this more and more clearly, the more we shall find ourselves
entering into a new order of life in which we become less and
less subject to the old limitations. This is not a reward
arbitrarily bestowed upon us for holding dogmatically to certain
mere verbal statements, but it is the natural result of
understanding the supreme law of our own being. On its own plane
it is as purely scientific as the law of chemical reaction; only
here we are not dealing with the interaction of secondary causes
but with the Self-originating action of Spirit. Hence a new force
has to be taken into account which does not occur in physical
science, the power of Feeling. Thought creates form, but it is
feeling that gives vitality to thought. Thought without feeling
may be constructive as in some great engineering work, but it can
never be creative as in the work of the artist or musician; and
that which originates within itself a new order of causation is,
so far as all pre-existing forms are concerned, a creation ex
nihilo, and is therefore Thought expressive of Feeling. It is
this indissoluble union of Thought and Feeling that distinguishes
creative thought from merely analytical thought and places it in
a different category; and therefore if we are to afford a new
starting-point for carrying on the work of creation it must be by
assimilating the feeling of the Originating Spirit as part and
parcel of its thought--it is that entering into the Mind of the
Spirit of which I spoke in the first address.

Now the images in the Mind of the Spirit must necessarily be
GENERIC. The reason for this is that by its very nature the
Principle of Life must be prolific, that is, tending to
Multiplicity, and therefore the original Thought-image must be
fundamental to whole races, and not exclusive to particular
individuals. Consequently the images in the Mind of the Spirit
must be absolute types of the true essentials of the perfect
development of the race, just what Plato meant by architypal
ideas. This is the perfect subsistence of the thing in the
thought. Therefore it is that our evolution as centres of
CREATIVE activity, the exponents of new laws, and through them of
new conditions, depends on our realizing in the Divine Mind the
architype of mental perfection, at once as thought and feeling.
But when we find all this in the Divine Mind, do we not meet with
an infinite and glorious Personality? There is nothing lacking of
all that we can understand by Personality, excepting outward
form; and since the very essence of telepathy is that it
dispenses with the physical presence, we find ourselves in a
position of interior communion with a Personality at once Divine
and Human. This is that Personality of the Spirit which St. John
saw in the apocalyptic vision, and which by the very conditions
of the case is the Alpha and Omega of Humanity.

But, as I have said, it is simply GENERIC in itself, and it
becomes active and specific only by a purely personal relation to
the individual. But once more we must realize that nothing can
take place except according to Law, and therefore this specific
relation is nothing arbitrary, but arises out of the generic Law
applied under specific conditions. And since what makes a law
generic is precisely the fact that it does not supply the
specific conditions, it follows that the conditions for the
specializing of the Law must be provided by the individual. Then
it is that his recognition of the originating creative movement,
as arising from combined Thought and Feeling, becomes a practical
working asset. He realizes that there is a Heart and Mind of the
Spirit reciprocal to his own heart and mind, that he is not
dealing with a filmy abstraction, nor yet with a mere
mathematical sequence, but with something that is pulsating with
a Life as warm and vivid and full of interest as his own--nay,
more so, for it is the Infinite of all that he himself is. And
his recognition goes even further than this, for since this
specialization can only take place through the individual
himself, it logically follows that the Life, which he thus
specializes, become HIS OWN life. Quoad the individual it does
not know itself apart from him. But this self-recognition through
the individual cannot in any way change the inherent nature of
the Creative Spirit, and therefore to the extent to which the
individual perceives its identification with himself, he places
himself under its guidance, and so he becomes one of those who
are "led by the Spirit." Thus he begins to find the Alpha and
Omega of the Divine ideal reproduced in himself--in a very small
degree at present, but containing the principle of perpetual
growth into an infinite expansion of which we can as yet form no
conception.

St. John sums up the whole of this position in his memorable
words:--"Beloved now are we the Sons of God, and it doth not yet
appear what we SHALL be; but we know that when He shall appear
(i.e., become clear to us) we shall be like Him; for (i.e., the
reason of all this) we shall see Him as He is" (I. John iii. 2). 


THE CREATIVE POWER OF THOUGHT.

One of the great axioms in the new order of ideas, of which I
have spoken, is that our Thought possesses creative power, and
since the whole superstructure depends on this foundation, it is
well to examine it carefully. Now the starting point is to see
that Thought, or purely mental action, is the only possible
source from which the existing creation could ever have come into
manifestation at all, and it is on this account that in the
preceding addresses I have laid stress on the origin of the
cosmos. It is therefore not necessary to go over this ground
again, and we will start this morning's enquiry on the assumption
that every manifestation is in essence the expression of a Divine
Thought. This being so, our own mind is the expression of a
Divine Thought. The Divine Thought has produced something which
itself is capable of thinking; but the question is whether its
thinking has the same creative quality as that of the Parent
Mind.

Now by the very hypothesis of the case the whole Creative Process
consists in the continual pressing so forward of the Universal
Spirit for expression through the individual and particular, and
Spirit in its different modes is therefore the Life and Substance
of the universe. Hence it follows that if there is to be an
expression of thinking power it can only be by expressing the
same thinking power which subsists latent in the Originating
Spirit. If it were less than this it would only be some sort of
mechanism and would not be thinking power, so that to be thinking
power at all it must be identical in kind with that of the
Originating Spirit. It is for this reason that man is said to be
created in the image and likeness of God; and if we realize that
it is impossible for him to be otherwise, we shall find a firm
foundation from which to draw many important deductions.

