The central portions of the cities underneath the explosions suffered
almost complete destruction.  The only surviving objects were the
frames of a small number of strong reinforced concrete buildings which
were not collapsed by the blast; most of these buildings suffered
extensive damage from interior fires, had their windows, doors, and
partitions knocked out, and all other fixtures which were not integral
parts of the reinforced concrete frames burned or blown away; the
casualties in such buildings near the center of explosion were almost
100%.  In Hiroshima fires sprang up simultaneously all over the wide
flat central area of the city; these fires soon combined in an immense
"fire storm" (high winds blowing inwards toward the center of a large
conflagration) similar to those caused by ordinary mass incendiary
raids; the resulting terrific conflagration burned out almost
everything which had not already been destroyed by the blast in a
roughly circular area of 4.4 square miles around the point directly
under the explosion (this point will hereafter in this report be
referred to as X).  Similar fires broke out in Nagasaki, but no
devastating fire storm resulted as in Hiroshima because of the
irregular shape of the city.

In both cities the blast totally destroyed everything within a radius
of 1 mile from the center of explosion, except for certain reinforced
concrete frames as noted above.  The atomic explosion almost completely
destroyed Hiroshima's identity as a city.  Over a fourth of the
population was killed in one stroke and an additional fourth seriously
injured, so that even if there had been no damage to structures and
installations the normal city life would still have been completely
shattered.  Nearly everything was heavily damaged up to a radius of 3
miles from the blast, and beyond this distance damage, although
comparatively light, extended for several more miles.  Glass was broken
up to 12 miles.

In Nagasaki, a smaller area of the city was actually destroyed than in
Hiroshima, because the hills which enclosed the target area restricted
the spread of the great blast; but careful examination of the effects
of the explosion gave evidence of even greater blast effects than in
Hiroshima.  Total destruction spread over an area of about 3 square
miles.  Over a third of the 50,000 buildings in the target area of
Nagasaki were destroyed or seriously damaged.  The complete destruction
of the huge steel works and the torpedo plant was especially
impressive.  The steel frames of all buildings within a mile of the
explosion were pushed away, as by a giant hand, from the point of
detonation.  The badly burned area extended for 3 miles in length.  The
hillsides up to a radius of 8,000 feet were scorched, giving them an
autumnal appearance.


MAIN CONCLUSIONS

The following are the main conclusions which were reached after
thorough examination of the effects of the bombs dropped on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki:

1.  No harmful amounts of persistent radioactivity were present after
the explosions as determined by:

A.  Measurements of the intensity of radioactivity at the time of the
investigation; and

B.  Failure to find any clinical evidence of persons harmed by
persistent radioactivity.

The effects of the atomic bombs on human beings were of three main
types:

A.  Burns, remarkable for (1) the great ground area over which they
were inflicted and (2) the prevalence of "flash" burns caused by the
instantaneous heat radiation.

B.  Mechanical injuries, also remarkable for the wide area in which
suffered.

C.  Effects resulting from penetrating gamma radiation.  The effects
from radiation were due to instantaneous discharge of radiation at the
moment of explosion and not to persistent radioactivity (of either
fission products or other substances whose radioactivity might have
been induced by proximity to the explosions).

The effects of the atomic bombs on structures and installations were of
two types:

A.  Destruction caused by the great pressure from the blast; and

B.  Destruction caused by the fires, either started directly by the
great heat radiation, or indirectly through the collapse of buildings,
wiring, etc.

4.  The actual tonnage of T.N.T. which would have caused the same blast
damage was approximately of the order of 20,000 tons.

5.  In respect to their height of burst, the bombs performed exactly
according to design.

6.  The bombs were placed in such positions that they could not have
done more damage from any alternative bursting point in either city.

7.  The heights of burst were correctly chosen having regard to the
type of destruction it was desired to cause.

8.  The information collected would enable a reasonably accurate
prediction to be made of the blast damage likely to be caused in any
city where an atomic explosion could be effected.


THE SELECTION OF THE TARGET

Some of the most frequent queries concerning the atomic bombs are those
dealing with the selection of the targets and the decision as to when
the bombs would be used.

The approximate date for the first use of the bomb was set in the fall
of 1942 after the Army had taken over the direction of and
responsibility for the atomic bomb project.  At that time, under the
scientific assumptions which turned out to be correct, the summer of
1945 was named as the most likely date when sufficient production would
have been achieved to make it possible actually to construct and
utilize an atomic bomb.  It was essential before this time to develop
the technique of constructing and detonating the bomb and to make an
almost infinite number of scientific and engineering developments and
tests.  Between the fall of 1942 and June 1945, the estimated
probabilities of success had risen from about 60% to above 90%;
however, not until July 16, 1945, when the first full-scale test took
place in New Mexico, was it conclusively proven that the theories,
calculations, and engineering were correct and that the bomb would be
successful.


The test in New Mexico was held 6 days after sufficient material had
become available for the first bomb.  The Hiroshima bomb was ready
awaiting suitable weather on July 31st, and the Nagasaki bomb was used
as soon after the Hiroshima bomb as it was practicable to operate the
second mission.

The work on the actual selection of targets for the atomic bomb was
begun in the spring of 1945.  This was done in close cooperation with
the Commanding General, Army Air Forces, and his Headquarters.  A
number of experts in various fields assisted in the study.  These
included mathematicians, theoretical physicists, experts on the blast
effects of bombs, weather consultants, and various other specialists.
Some of the important considerations were:

A.  The range of the aircraft which would carry the bomb.

B.  The desirability of visual bombing in order to insure the most
effective use of the bomb.

C.  Probable weather conditions in the target areas.

D.  Importance of having one primary and two secondary targets for each
mission, so that if weather conditions prohibited bombing the target
there would be at least two alternates.

E.  Selection of targets to produce the greatest military effect on the
Japanese people and thereby most effectively shorten the war.

F.  The morale effect upon the enemy.

These led in turn to the following:

A.  Since the atomic bomb was expected to produce its greatest amount
of damage by primary blast effect, and next greatest by fires, the
targets should contain a large percentage of closely-built frame
buildings and other construction that would be most susceptible to
damage by blast and fire.

