"Yes, sir," said Ishmael calmly, "circumstances into which it is not
necessary that we should now enter, render it absolutely necessary
that we should be in England as soon as possible. It is equally
necessary that we should take the negroes with us, not only as
witnesses against their first abductor as to the fact of the
abduction, but also as to other transactions of which they were
cognizant previous to that event. We must therefore avoid lawsuits
which would be likely to detain us here. We cannot delay our
departure either to prosecute the smugglers for kidnaping, or to sue
the purchasers for the recovery of the negroes. We must leave the
smugglers to the retribution of Providence, and we must pay the
purchasers for the negroes we wish to carry away with us. What,
therefore, we would ask of your kindness is this--that you will go
with us to the purchasers of these negroes and identify us, so as to
smooth the way for a negotiation of our difficulties."

"Certainly, certainly. Let me see. I have an appointment here at two
o'clock, but at three I will join you at any place you may name."

"Would our hotel be a convenient rendezvous for you?"

"Perfectly."

"Then we will detain you no longer," said Ishmael, rising.

The judge followed his example.

And both gentlemen shook hands with the consul and departed.

"I think," said Ishmael, as they took their seats in the carriage,
"that we should take Katie immediately back to her owner. I
understand from her that he is a man in the humbler walks of life,
and therefore I think that he might be willing to close with us for
a liberal advance upon the price paid the smuggler."

"Do so, if you please, Ishmael; I trust entirely to your
discretion," answered the judge.

"Katie," said Ishmael to the old woman, who had never left the
carriage, "can you direct us the way to find the man who bought
you?"

"Not to save my precious life, couldn't I, honey. Because you see, I
nebber can t'ink o' de barbareous names dey has to de streets in dis
outlan'ish place. But I knows where I is well 'nough. An' I knows
where it is--de shop, I mean. And so if you'll put me up alongside
ob de driver I can point him which way to go an' where to stop,"
said Katie.

This proposition was agreed to. The carriage was stopped and Katie
was let out and enthroned upon the seat beside the coachman, a
Spaniard, whom she proceeded to direct more by signs and gestures
than by words.

After a very circuitous route through the city they turned into a
narrow street and stopped before a house partly confectionery and
partly tobacco shop.

They alighted and went in, and found the proprietor doing duty
behind his counter.

The study of the Spanish language had been one of the few
recreations Ishmael had allowed himself in his self-denying youth.
He had afterwards improved his opportunities by speaking the
language with such Spaniards as he met in society in Washington. He
therefore now addressed the tobacconist in that tongue, and
proceeded to explain the business that brought himself and his
friend to the shop.

The tobacconist, who was the ordinary, small, lean, yellow specimen
of the middle class of Cubans, courteously invited the "senors" into
the back parlor, where they all seated themselves and entered more
fully into the subject, Ishmael acting as interpreter between the
judge and the tobacconist, whose name they discovered to be
Marinello.

Marinello expressed himself very much shocked to find that his
purchase of the woman was illegal, if not positively felonious; and
that an appeal to the law would probably deprive him of his bargain,
and possibly criminate him as the accomplice of the slave stealer.

He said that he had given eight hundred dollars for the woman Katie,
who had been extolled by the trader as a most extraordinary cook.
And a "most extraordinary" one, he declared, he found her to be, for
she did not appear to know beef from mutton or rice from coffee. And
in fact she was good for nothing; for even if he sent her on an
errand, as on this occasion, she would stay forever and one day
after, and charge her sloth upon her infirmities. She had been a
bitter bargain to him.

Judge Merlin smiled; he knew Katie to be one of the best cooks in
this world and to be in the enjoyment of perfect health, and so he
supposed that the cunning old woman had taken a lesson from the
sailor's monkey, who could talk, but wouldn't, for fear he should be
made to work. And that she had feigned her ignorance and ill health
to escape hard labor for one who she knew could have no just claim
to her services.

Ishmael, speaking for Judge Merlin, now explained to the tobacconist
that this woman Katie had been a great favorite with the mistress
from whom she was stolen; that they were on their way to see that
lady, that they wished to take the woman with them; that they would
rather repurchase her than lose time by suing to recover her; and
finally, that they were willing to give him back the money that he
had paid for Katie, provided that he would deliver her up to them at
once.

Marinello immediately came to terms and agreed to all they proposed.
He accompanied them back to the hotel, where he received eight
hundred dollars and left Katie.

"That is a 'feat accomplished,'" said Ishmael gayly, as he returned
to Judge Merlin's room, after seeing Marinello out; "and now we may
expect Mr. Tourneysee every moment."

And in fact while he spoke the door was opened and Mr. Tourneysee
was announced.

"I am up to time," he said, smiling, as he entered.

"With dramatic punctuality," said Ishmael, pointing to the clock on
the mantel-piece, which was upon the stroke of three.

"Yes," said the consul, smiling.

"We have done a good stroke of business since we left you. We have
bought Katie back from her new master at the same price he gave for
her, and he was very glad to get out of the affair so happily," said
Ishmael.

"Ah! that was prompt indeed. I wish you equal good speed with the
other purchasers of stolen slaves. By the way, where do we go
first?"

"I think we had best call on the lady who bought the girl Sally;
from her--Sally, I mean--we might learn the name and residence of
the gentleman who bought Jim, and of which we are at present in
ignorance."

"Who is the lady, and where does she live?"

"We do not know her name either; Katie could not tell us; but she
lives in the city, and Katie can direct the coachman where to drive.
And now as the carriage is at the door, I think we had better start
at once."

"I think so, too," said the judge.

And accordingly the whole party went downstairs and re-entered the
carriage, with the exception of Katie, who again mounted the box
beside the driver for the purpose of directing him.

Katie, who could not, if it were to save her life, remember the name
of any place or person in that "barbareous" land, as she called it,
yet possessed the canine memory of localities; so she directed the
coachman through the shortest cut of the city towards the beautiful
suburb Guadaloupe, and then to an elegant mansion of white granite,
standing within its own luxuriant grounds.

On seeing the carriage draw up and stop before the gate of this
aristocratic residence, the young consul suddenly changed color and
said:

"This is the palace of the Senora Donna Eleanora Pacheco, Countess
de la Santa Cruz."

"You know this lady?" inquired the judge.

Mr. Tourneysee bowed.

The porter threw open the great gate, and the carriage rolled along
a lovely shaded avenue, up before the white marble facade of the
palace, where it stopped.

"If you please, I will send your cards in with my own. As I am known
to the senora, it may insure you a speedier audience."

"We thank you very much," said Ishmael, placing his own and the
judge's cards in the hands of the consul, who alighted, went up the
marble steps to the front door, and rang.

A footman opened the door, took in the cards, and after a few
moments returned.

"The countess will see the senors," was the message that the consul
smilingly brought back to his friends in the carriage.

Then all alighted and went into the house.

The same footman, a jet black young negro, in gorgeous livery of
purple and gold, led them into a small, elegantly furnished
reception room, where, seated on a sofa, and toying with a fan, was
one of the loveliest little dark-eyed Creoles that ever was seen.

She did not rise, but extended her hand with a graceful gesture and
gracious smile to welcome her visitors.

Tourneysee advanced, with a deep and reverential bow, that would
have done honor to the gravest and most courteous hidalgo of that
grave and courteous people.

"Senora," he said, with great formality, "I have the honor to
present to your ladyship Chief Justice Merlin, of the United States
Supreme Court. Judge Merlin, the Countess de la Santa Cruz."

The judge made a profound bow, which the lady acknowledged by a
gracious bend of the head.

With the same serious and stately formality, which was certainly not
natural to the young Marylander, but which was assumed, in deference
to the grave character of Spanish etiquette, Mr. Tourneysee next
presented:

"Mr. Worth, of the Washington bar."

The low obeisance of this visitor was received with even a more
gracious smile than had been vouchsafed to that of the judge.

When they were seated, in accordance with the lady's invitation, the
conversation turned upon the ordinary topics of the day: the
weather; the opera; the last drawing room at the Government Palace;
the new Captain General and his beautiful bride, etc., etc., etc.

The judge fidgeted; Ishmael was impatient; the consul perplexed. It
was necessary to speak of the affair that brought them there. Yet
how was it possible without offense to introduce any topic of
business in that bower of beauty, to that indolent Venus, whose only
occupation was to toy with her fan; whose only conversation was of
sunshine, flowers, music, balls, and brides?

Clearly neither the judge nor the consul had the courage to obtrude
any serious subject upon her. The disagreeable task was at length
assumed by Ishmael, who never permitted himself to shrink from a
duty merely because it was an unpleasant one.

Taking advantage, therefore, of a break in the conversation, he
turned to the lady and, speaking with grave courtesy, said:

"Will the senora pardon me for beseeching her attention to an affair
of great moment which has brought us to her presence?"

The "senora" lifted her long, curled lashes until they touched her
brows, and opened wide her large, soft, dark eyes in childish
wonder. "An affair of great moment!" What could it be? A masked
ball? a parlor concert? private theatricals? a--what? She could not
imagine. Dropping her eyelids demurely, she answered softly:

"Proceed, senor."

Ishmael then briefly explained to her the business upon which they
had come.

The senora was as sensible as she was beautiful, and as benevolent
as she was sensible. She listened to the story of the negroes'
abduction with as much sympathy as curiosity, and at the end of the
narrative she exclaimed:

"What villains there are in this world!"

Ishmael then delicately referred to their wish to purchase the girl
Sally.

The senora promptly assented to the implied desire.

"It was my steward, Miguel Manello, who bought her for me. I did not
particularly want her. And I find her of very little use to me. She
cannot understand one word that is said to her. And she does nothing
from morning until night but weep, weep, weep tears enough to float
away the house."

"Poor girl!" muttered Ishmael.

"So if the senor wishes to recover her he can take her now, or at
any time."

Ishmael delicately hinted at the purchase money.

"Oh, I know nothing about such matters. I will send my steward to
wait on the senor at his hotel this evening. The senor can then
arrange the matter with him."

Ishmael expressed his thanks, arose, and bowed as if to take leave.
But the lady waved her hand, and said in a sweet but peremptory
manner:

"Be seated, senor."

With another inclination of the head, Ishmael resumed his seat. The
lady rang a silver bell that stood on a stand at his right hand and
brought to her presence the gorgeous, sable footman.

"Serve the senors with refreshments," was the order given and
promptly obeyed.

An elegant little repast was set before them, consisting of
delicious coffee, chocolate, fresh fruits, cakes, and sweetmeats.
And only when they had done full justice to these delicacies would
their hostess permit them to retire.

Again Ishmael bowed with profound deference, expressed his thanks on
the part of himself and his friends, and finally took leave.

On going from the room they noticed a person, who, from the extreme
quietness of her manner, had escaped their observation until this
moment. She was a woman of about sixty years of age, clad in the
habit of a lay-sister of the Benedictine Order, and seated within a
curtained recess, and engaged in reading her "office." She was
probably doing duty as duenna to the beautiful widow.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

STILL ON THE TRACK.

  One sole desire, one passion now remains,
  To keep life's fever still within his veins,--
  Vengeance! Dire vengeance on the wretch who cast
  On him and all he loved that ruinous blast.
                                          --_Moore_.


Our party drove back to the hotel to await the coming of the steward
with Sally. Mr. Brudenell had not yet returned.

Ishmael sent for the clerk of the house and bespoke proper
accommodations for the servants.

But Katie rebelled, and protested that she would not leave her old
master until bedtime, when she should insist upon his locking her in
her bedroom and taking charge of the key, for fear she should be
bewitched and stolen again.

At about six o'clock Miguel Manello arrived, having Sally in charge.
According to instructions left with the waiters they were
immediately shown up to the apartments of Judge Merlin.

Miguel Manello, a little, dried-up, mahogany-colored old man with
blue-gray hair, came in, bowing profoundly.

Sally followed him, but suddenly stopped, opened her mouth and eyes
as wide as they could be extended, and stood dumb with astonishment.

As she could not speak a word of Spanish, nor the steward of
English, she could not be made to understand where he was bringing
her. So she had not the remotest suspicion that she was approaching
her master until she actually stood in his presence. Astonishment
makes people break into exclamations; but Sally it always struck
speechless. So it had been with her when the viscount and his
accomplices entered her room that night of the abduction. So it was
with her now that she was brought unexpectedly to the presence of
the beloved old master whom she had never hoped to see again on this
side of the grave.

How long she might have remained standing there, dumfounded, had she
not been interrupted, is not known; for old Katie made a dash
forward, caught her in an embrace, kissed her, burst into tears, and
said:

"Oh, Sally, it is all come right! Ole marster done come here and he
gwine to buy us all back and take us to my ladyship, and we gwine be
witness ag'in my lordship and de shamvally--which I hopes dey'll be
hung, and likewise de whited saltpeter as is de wuss ob de t'ree!"

The tears began to steal down poor Sally's cheeks and she looked
appealingly from old Katie to Judge Merlin and Ishmael, as if to
entreat confirmation of the good news.

"It is all quite true, Sally. You are to return to England with us,
and then, I hope, we shall all come back to old Maryland, never to
leave it again," said Ishmael.

"Oh, Marse Ishmael, dat would be like coming out'n purgatory into
heaben! Thank de Lord!" fervently exclaimed the girl, while tears--
tears of joy--now streamed down her cheeks.

"There, now, Sally; go with your aunty into the next room, and have
a glorious old talk, while we settle some business with the
steward," said Ishmael, pointing to the door of the anteroom.

When they had retired he beckoned the steward to approach. Miguel
Manello advanced with a series of genuflexions, and laid upon the
table a document which proved to be a bill of sale for the girl,
Sally.

"The senor will perceive," he said, "that I paid the trader twelve
hundred dollars for the negress. My mistress, the Senora Donna
Eleanora Pacheco, has instructed me to deliver the girl up to the
senor at his own price. But the senor will not, perhaps, object to
paying the same sum I paid for the girl."

"Certainly not," answered Ishmael.

Judge Merlin produced the money, and the sale was immediately
effected. The steward took up his hat to depart, but Ishmael made a
sign for him to stop.

"You were present at the sale of this girl?"

"Assuredly, senor; since I purchased her."

"There was an old woman sold at the same time?"

"Yes, senor; the one that I found in here."

"Exactly. There was also a young man?"

"Yes, senor."

"Can you tell me who became his purchaser?"

"Certainly, senor. He was bought by the Senor Don Filipo Martinez,
who lives in the Suburb Regla."

"Can you give me directions how to find the place?"

"Certainly, senor. I will write it down, if the senor will permit me
the use of his writing-case."

Ishmael placed a chair at the table, and signed for the steward to
take it. Miguel Manello sat down, wrote out the directions, handed
them to Ishmael, and then with a deep bow took his leave.

When they were alone Ishmael said:

"The Suburb Regla is on the other side of the harbor. We cannot with
propriety visit it this evening. In the morning we will set out
early. We must either make a long circuit by land, or else take the
shorter cut across the harbor. I think the last mentioned the best
plan."

"I agree with you," said the judge; "but I fear we are greatly
trespassing on the time and the official duties of our friend," he
added, turning with a smile to the consul.

"Oh, not at all! I am sufficiently attentive to my business to
afford to take a day now and then, when necessity demands it,"
replied Mr. Tourneysee pleasantly, as he arose and bid his friends
good-evening.

He had scarcely left the scene when the door opened and the truant,
Herman Brudenell, entered.

"You are a pretty fellow to back your friends. Here we have been
overwhelmed with business and beset with adventures, and you gone!"
exclaimed the judge, whose spirits were much elated with the
successes of the day. "Give an account of yourself, sir!" he added.

"Well," said Mr. Brudenell, throwing himself into a chair and
setting his hat upon the table with a wearied, but cheerful air, "I
have been walking around the city to see all that was interesting in
it. I visited the cathedral, where the ashes of Columbus repose; saw
the Government Palace; the Admiralty; the Royal Tobacco Factory;
several interesting old churches, and so forth. Last of all, I ran
up against a very dear friend of mine, whose acquaintance I made at
the court of Queen Isabella when I was at Madrid, some years ago.
And Don Filipo insisted on my returning home with him to the Suburb
Regla, where he has a beautiful house standing in the midst of
equally beautiful grounds. Well, I dined there; and I got away as
soon after dinner as I decently could."

"'Don Filipo? Suburb Regla?'" repeated Judge Merlin, as his thoughts
ran upon the purchaser of the negro boy Jim.

"Yes. Do you know him? Senor Don Filipo Martinez--"

"No, not personally; we have heard of him, though. Sit still,
Brudenell, I have got something to tell you. We have met some old
acquaintances also since you left us," said the judge.

"Ah, who are they? The Tourneysees, I presume."

"We have met the Tourneysees of course; but we have met others."

"Then you will have to tell me, judge, for I should never be able to
guess among your thousands of friends and acquaintances who were the
individuals encountered here."

"What would you say to me if I should tell you that Ishmael met our
old Katie in the street and brought her hither?"

"I should say that you or I were mad or dreaming," said Mr.
Brudenell, staring at the judge.

"And yet I tell you the sober truth. That infamous villain, Malcolm,
Lord Vincent, taking advantage of the opportunities afforded by his
residence on a remote part of the sea coast, and his connection with
a crew of smugglers, actually succeeded in kidnaping Lady Vincent's
three servants and selling them to the trader, who brought them to
this island and sold them again."

"Am I awake?" exclaimed Mr. Brudenell, in amazement.

"As much as any of us, I suppose. There are times when I fancy
myself in a strange dream."

"What could have been the man's motive for such a crime?"

"Partly, no doubt, cupidity; for he is as mean as marsh mud! partly
revenge; for he hates these negroes for their devotion to their
mistress; but mostly caution; for one of these negroes became
possessed of a secret compromising the reputation, and even the
personal liberty of the viscount."

"Good Heavens! I never heard of such a transaction in all my life.
Do give me the particulars of this affair."

"By and by. Just now I must tell you that, with the aid of our
consul, who has just left us, we have ferreted out the purchasers of
the negroes, and we have just repurchased two of them--old Katie and
Sally; who are at this present moment in the next room, enjoying
their reunion."

"But--why the deuce did you repurchase these negroes, when, by
appealing to the law, and proving their felonious abduction and
illegal sale, you might have recovered possession of them without
paying a dollar?"

"Yes, I might; but then again I mightn't, as the children say. In
the first impetuosity of my anger, at discovering these crimes, I
would have instantly sued for the recovery of the negroes, and
sought out and prosecuted the traders, had it not been for Ishmael.
God bless that young man, how much I owe him! He interposed his
warning voice and wise counsels. He indicated several questionable
features in the case, that would make the issue of any lawsuit that
I might bring for the recovery of the negroes very uncertain. He
reminded me that if I involved myself in any lawsuit, either civil
or criminal, it would detain me on the island for weeks or months,
while it is of the utmost importance that I should be at the side of
my injured child. I could but acknowledge the truth and justice of
his argument, and therefore I have, at some sacrifice of money and
temper, repurchased the negroes."

"And looking at the affair from Ishmael's point of view, I think you
have done quite right, sir," said Mr. Brudenell.

"And there is another consideration," put in Ishmael. "Judge Merlin
mentioned to you, as one of the motives that instigated Vincent to
the perpetration of the crime, the fear of the negroes, who had
become possessed of a secret involving the liberty of the viscount.
This secret was neither more nor less than the knowledge of a
conspiracy formed by the viscount and two of his accomplices against
the honor of Lady Vincent. Thus, you see, it is absolutely necessary
that these negroes should be taken to England without delay as
witnesses--"

"In the divorce trial, certainly."

"No; not in the divorce trial; though their testimony in such a
trial would be conclusive for the lady. But we wish, if possible, to
prevent the divorce trial. We will not have the daughter of Randolph
Merlin assailed in such unseemly manner. No woman, however innocent
she may be, comes out unscarred from such a struggle; for the simple
reason that the bare fact of such a suit having brought against her
attaches a life-long reproach to her."

"There is truth in what you say, Ishmael, but I do not see how the
trial is to be avoided, since Lord Vincent is determined to sue for
a dissolution of his marriage."

"In this way, sir. By placing Lord Vincent hors-du-combat at the
very onset. When we reach Edinboro' our first visit will be to a
magistrate's office, where we will lodge information and cause
warrants to be issued for the arrest of Lord Vincent and his
accomplices upon the charge of conspiracy and kidnaping. Do you
suppose that Lord Vincent, lodged in jail and awaiting his trial for
abduction and conspiracy, will be in a condition to prosecute his
suit for divorce?"

"Certainly not. I see that you are right, Ishmael. But poor Claudia!
In any case, how she must suffer."

"Heaven comfort her! Yes. But we chose the least of two evils for
her. Delivered from the fiend who has tormented her for so long a
time, and restored to her native country and to the bosom of her
family, we will hope that Lady Vincent's youth will enable her to
rally from the depressing influences of these early troubles, and
that she will yet regain her peace and cheerfulness."

"Heaven grant it, Heaven grant it!" said the judge fervently. "Oh,
Ishmael," he continued, "when I think that I shall have my child
back again, I almost feel reconciled to the storm of sorrow that
must drive her for shelter into my arms. Is that selfish? I do not
know. But I do know that I shall love her more, indulge her more
than I ever did before. She must, she shall be, satisfied and happy
with me."

Ishmael pressed his hand in silent sympathy, and then to divert his
thoughts from a subject fraught with so much emotion he said:

"It occurs to me, judge, to say that Mr. Brudenell will probably be
able very much to facilitate our negotiations with his friend, Don
Filipo."

"Yes, I should think he would," replied the judge, with difficulty
tearing his thoughts from the image of his daughter restored to his
home, sitting by his fireside, or at the head of the table; "yes, I
should think Brudenell would be able to smooth our way in that
quarter."

"What is that, Ishmael? What are you both talking of in connection
with myself and friend?" demanded Mr. Brudenell.

"Why, sir, your friend, Senor Don Filipo Martinez, is just precisely
the same gentleman who became the purchaser of the boy Jim. We
intend to pay him a visit to-morrow, for the purpose of trying to
repurchase the boy. It is rather a delicate matter to propose to a
Spanish hidalgo; and therefore we feel very much pleased to find
that he is a friend of yours, and we hope that your introduction
will recommend us to a favorable hearing."

"Certainly, I will go with you and introduce you. But I do not think
your cause needs my advocacy; and I am very much mistaken in my
estimation of Don Filipo's character, if when he has heard all the
facts he does not at once deliver the negro boy into your hands and
decline to accept any payment."

"But to that I would never consent," said the judge.

"I do not see how you can help it, if you cannot get your witness on
any other terms. Don Filipo is a Spanish nobleman; he has high ideas
of honor. The manner in which he will look upon this affair will be
probably this--he will see that he has been deceived into the
purchase of stolen property, and into a sort of unconscious
complicity with the thieves. He will drop the property 'like a hot
potato,' as the Irish say. In other words, he would consider his
honor ineffaceably stained by either keeping the boy on the one hand
or receiving any payment on the other. Don Filipo would lose ten
times the amount of the purchase money rather than suffer the shadow
of a shade of reproach to rest for one instant on his 'scutcheon."

"I think if it is as Mr. Brudenell says, judge, that you had better
not make any difficulty about this 'point of honor' with the Senor
Don Filipo. Get the negro back on his own terms. Afterwards, when
you reach England you can easily and delicately remunerate him by
sending him a complimentary present of equal or greater value than
the purchase money he refuses, supposing that he does refuse it,"
said Ishmael.

"He will refuse it," persisted Mr. Brudenell.

"That will do, Ishmael. You have shown me a way out of this
difficulty. And now suppose we ring for supper? We have had nothing
since breakfast except the light repast set before us by the Senora
Donna--et cetera."

Ishmael touched the bell, which brought up a waiter. Judge Merlin
ordered supper to be served immediately. When it was ready he called
in Katie and Sally to wait on the table--to remind him of old times,
he said.

After supper he sent for the housekeeper and gave his two female
servants into her charge, requesting her to see that their wants
were supplied. And Katie, now that she had Sally with her, went away
willing enough without insisting on being locked in her bedchamber
for safe-keeping. And soon after this our wearied party separated
and retired to rest.

The next morning, directly after an early breakfast, they set off
for the Suburb Regla, calling on their way at the office of the
consul, to discharge that gentleman from the duty of accompanying
them; a measure now rendered unnecessary by the presence of Mr.
Brudenell, and the fact of the latter being an intimate friend of
Don Filipo, and therefore quite competent to indorse these
strangers.

Mr. Tourneysee was excessively busy, and was very glad to be
released from his promise to attend his friends. He gave them,
however, his best wishes for their success, bid them adieu, and
suffered them to depart.

It was about eleven o'clock in the forenoon when they reached the
residence of Don Filipo. It was an imposing edifice, built of white
granite, and standing within its own spacious grounds. A broad
avenue, paved with granite, and shaded with tropical trees, led up
to the front of the house.

Arrived here, Mr. Brudenell alighted from his carriage, rang the
doorbell, and sent in the cards of his party with his own. In a few
minutes they were admitted by a mulatto footman, in rich though
plain livery, who conducted them to a handsome library, where Don
Filipo stood ready to receive them.

The Senor Don Filipo Martinez, Marquis de la Santo Espirito, was not
a creole. That any spectator might know at a glance. He was, as has
been said, a Spanish hidalgo, of the glorious old Castilian order.
He had been born and brought up near the Court of Madrid; he had
graced an enviable position about the person of his sovereign; and
lately, he had been sent out to fill a responsible office in the
government of the island. He was even now talked of as the next
Captain General.

He was a very distinguished-looking man, somewhat past middle age,
with a tall, finely proportioned though very spare form; a long,
thin face, Roman nose, piercing black eyes, heavy black eyebrows,
olive complexion, and iron-gray hair and beard.

He advanced with grave and stately courtesy to welcome his visitors,
whom Mr. Brudenell presented in due order.

When they were all seated, Mr. Brudenell undertook at once to
introduce the subject of the business upon which they had come.

Don Filipo gave the speaker his most serious attention, and heard
the narrative with surprise and mortification, somewhat modified by
his habitual and dignified self-restraint.

At its conclusion, he turned to Judge Merlin, and said:

"I am deeply grieved, senor, in having done you, however
unconsciously, so great a wrong. I must pray you to accept my
apologies, and the only atonement I can make you--the restitution of
your slave."

"Sir, I am pained that you should accuse yourself so unjustly; I
cannot feel that you have done me any wrong, or owe me any apology,
or restitution. I shall be very glad to get the boy back; and I
thank you heartily for your willingness to give him up. But I am
quite willing and ready to refund to you the purchase money paid for
him," said Judge Merlin.

"Senor, it is impossible for me to receive it," answered Don Filipo
gravely.

"But, sir, I cannot think of permitting you to be the loser by this
transaction. I really must insist upon you accepting the purchase
money."

"Senor, it is impossible for me to do so," very gravely replied Don
Filipo.

"But, my dear sir, pray reflect. You have actually disbursed a large
sum of money in the purchase of this boy. I do but offer you your
own. I pray you accept it."

"It is impossible, senor," very, very gravely replied the Spaniard.

And at that moment Judge Merlin caught the eye of Ishmael fixed upon
him with an anxious gaze. This gaze caused Judge Merlin to glance up
at the face of his interlocutor.

The countenance of Don Filipo had assumed a severe and haughty
aspect, although his words and tones were still courteous and
gentle, as he repeated:

"It is impossible, senor."

And then Judge Merlin seemed to understand that to continue to press
money upon this proud old Castilian nobleman would be simply to
insult him.

With a deep bow, he said:

"I yield the point to you, Senor Don Filipo. And must remain your
debtor for this great favor."

The stern face of the old Castilian melted into a fascinating smile,
as he offered his hand to the judge, and said courteously:

"I esteem myself happy in being able to restore to the senor his
slave. The boy is absent now exercising my favorite saddle horse;
but as soon as he returns he shall be sent to the senor."

Our party then arose to depart; but Don Filipo would not allow them
to go before they had partaken of a tempting repast of cakes,
fruits, sweetmeats, and wine.

Then, with a real regret at parting with this "fine old Spanish
gentleman," they took leave and returned to their hotel.

In the course of the afternoon Jim arrived in the custody of Don
Filipo's steward, and was regularly delivered over to the safe-
keeping of Judge Merlin.

The meeting of poor Jim with his old master and friends, and with
his mother and his sweetheart, was at once so touching and so
absurd, that it inclined the spectator at the same time to tears and
laughter.

"Now," said Judge Merlin, as they sat together in his rooms that
evening, "our work is over. And this is Tuesday evening, and we
cannot sail until Saturday morning! What the deuce shall we do with
the three intervening days?"

"To-morrow," answered Ishmael, "we had better see to providing
ourselves with an outfit for the voyage. Remember that since our
wardrobe was lost on the 'Oceana,' we have had nothing but the
single change provided us by the captain of the 'Santiago.'"

"True, we must have an outfit. The purchase of that will occupy one
day; but there will be still two left to dispose of."

"On Thursday we can spend the morning in seeing whatever is
interesting in the city and its suburbs, and in the evening you know
we are engaged to dine with Mr. Tourneysee."

"Exactly! But what shall we do on Friday?"

"Continue our sight-seeing through the city in the morning, and have
Mr. Tourneysee and the Senor Don----"

"Et cetera, to dine with us in the evening. Is that what you mean,
Ishmael?"

"Yes, sir."

"That will do then. Now we will go to bed," said the judge, rising
and taking his bedroom candle.

And that was the signal for the party to disperse and go to rest.

The remainder of the week was passed in the manner sketched out by
Ishmael. Nevertheless the three days of waiting seemed to the
anxious father of Claudia three years in length. On Saturday morning
our whole party, consisting now of three gentlemen and four
servants, embarked on the "Cadiz" for Europe.

Mr. Tourneysee and Don Filipo "Et cetera," as the judge called him,
accompanied them to the steamer, and remained with them to the
latest possible moment. Then with many fervent wishes for their
prosperity in the voyage, the two gentlemen took leave of our party
and went on shore. The steamer sailed at nine o'clock. When it was
well under way Ishmael looked around among his fellow-passengers,
and was pleased to recognize many of the companions of his
disastrous voyage on the "Oceana." Among the others was the family
of Dr. Kerr. Later in the day, as Ishmael and his shadow, the
professor, were standing leaning over the bulwarks of the ship and
watching the setting sun sink into the water, leaving a trail of
light upon the surface of the sea, he heard a familiar voice
exclaim:

"Fader Abraham! Tere ish tat yunk shentleman ant hish olt man
again!"

And Ishmael turned and saw the German Jew standing near him. Ishmael
smiled and held out his hand; and Isaacs came and grasped it,
expressing his pleasure in having "von drue shentleman" for his
fellow-passenger once more. And from this day quite a friendship
grew up between the young Christian and the old Jew. Without making
the least effort to do so, Ishmael won his entire confidence.

Isaacs, reserved and uncommunicative with everyone else, seemed to
find pleasure in talking to Ishmael.

Among other voluntary revelations, Isaacs informed Ishmael that he
was going to England to see his niece, who was "von gread laty." She
was the daughter, he said, of his only sister, who had been the wife
of a rich English Jew. She had married an Englishman of high rank;
but her husband, as well as her father and mother, was dead; all
were dead; and she was living in widowhood and loneliness; and, ah!
a great wrong had been done her! And here the Jew would sigh
dismally and shake his head.

Now Ishmael, in the delicacy of his nature, would receive all the
Jew's voluntary communications and sympathize with all his
complaints, without ever asking him a question. And thus, as the Jew
never happened to mention the name of his niece, and Ishmael never
inquired it, he remained in ignorance of it.

The voyage of the "Cadiz," considering the season of the year, might
be said to have been very prosperous. The weather continued clear,
with a light wind from the northwest, alternating with calms. Our
party having served out their time at seasickness on the "Oceana,"
were not called to suffer any more from that malady on this voyage.

On the fourteenth day out they arrived at Cadiz, whence they took a
steamer bound for Liverpool, where they landed on the first of
February, late in the night.

They went to a hotel to spend the remaining hours in sleep. And the
next morning, after a hurried breakfast, eaten by candlelight, they
took the express train for Edinboro'.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

CLAUDIA AT CAMERON COURT.

  Sweet are the paths--oh, passing sweet,
    By Esk's fair streams that run
  O'er airy steep, thro' copsewood deep,
    Impervious to the sun.

  There the rapt poet's step may rove,
    And yield the muse the day;
  There beauty led by timid love
    May shun the tell-tale ray.
                       --_Scott_.


Cameron Court, the favorite seat of Berenice, Countess of
Hurstmonceux, was situated about seven miles south of Edinboro', on
the north banks of the Esk. It was an elegant modern edifice, raised
upon the ruins of an ancient castle, overhanging a perpendicular
precipice, with a sheer descent of several hundred feet to the
river. It looked down upon the course of the Esk, winding between
rocks of lofty height, whose sides were fringed with a tangled mass
of shrubs, ferns, and thistles, and whose summits were crowned with
thickets of hazel, pine, and birch. On still higher ground, behind
the house, and sheltering it from the northern blast, stood a thick
wood of cedar, beech, and fir trees. Many winding footpaths led
through this wood, and down the rocks and along the edge of the
river. A wilder, more picturesque and romantic spot could scarcely
have been found for a dwelling-place.

In summer, green with foliage, bright with blooming flowers, and
musical with singing birds and purling brooks, it was beautiful! But
in winter, bound in ice, mantled with snow, and gemmed with frost,
it was sublime!

Such was the aspect of the place without; while within were
collected all the comforts, luxuries, and elegances that wealth,
taste, and intellect could command.

Within a short distance of this charming residence stood Craigmillar
Castle, an old ruin, memorable from having been the first residence
of Mary Queen of Scots after her return from France; and also her
favorite retreat when driven to seek repose from the clashing
antagonisms of her court at Holyrood.

Nearer still, on the banks of the Esk, stood Roslyn Castle and
Chapel, famous in song and story for "the lordly line of high St.
Clair"; and Hawthornden, remarkable for its enormous artificial
caves, hewn out of the solid foundation rocks, and used as a place
of refuge during the barbarous wars of by-gone ages; and many other
interesting monuments of history and tradition.

To this attractive home Lady Hurstmonceux had brought Claudia late
one winter afternoon.

At that hour, between the thickness of the Scotch mist and the low,
gathering shadows of the night, but little could be seen or surmised
of the scenery surrounding the house.

But Claudia keenly appreciated the comfort and elegance of the well-
warmed and brightly lighted rooms within.

Not that they were more luxurious or more splendid than those she
had left forever behind at Castle Cragg, but they were--oh, so
different!

There all the magnificence was tainted with the presence of guilt;
here all was pure with innocence. There she had been "under the
curse"; here she was "under the benediction." There she had been
tormented by a devil; here she was comforted by an angel. And this
is scarcely putting the comparison, as it existed in her experience,
too strongly.

Even when she had been alone and unprotected at the hotel, she had
experienced a rebound of spirits from long depression, a joyous
sense of freedom--only from the single cause of getting away from
Castle Cragg and its sinful inmates. But now, added to that were the
pleasure of friendship, the comfort of sympathy, and security of
protection. Relief, repose, satisfaction--these were the sensations
of Claudia in taking up her temporary abode at Cameron Court. The
very first evening seemed a festive one to her, who had been so
lonely, so wretched, and so persecuted at Castle Cragg.

The countess took her to a bright, cheerful suite of apartments on
the second floor, whose French windows opened upon a balcony
overlooking the wild and picturesque scenery of the Esk.

And when she had laid off her bonnet and wrappings her hostess took
her down to a handsome dining room, where an elegant little dinner
for two was served.

Ah! very different was this from the horrible meals at Castle Cragg,
or even from the lonely ones at Magruder's Hotel.

Berenice possessed the rare gift of fascination in a higher degree
than any woman Claudia had ever chanced to meet. And she exerted
herself to please her guest with such success that Claudia was
completely charmed and won.

After dinner they adjourned to a sumptuous apartment, called in the
house "my lady's little drawing room." Here everything was collected
that could help to make a winter evening pass comfortably and
pleasantly.

The Turkey carpet that covered the floor was a perfect parterre of
brilliant flowers wrought in their natural colors; and its texture
was so fine and thick that it yielded like moss to the footstep.
Crimson velvet curtains, lined with white satin and fringed with
gold, draped the windows and excluded every breath of the wintry
blast. Many costly pictures, rare works of art, covered the walls. A
grand piano-forte, a fine harp, a guitar, and a lute were at hand.
Rich inlaid tables were covered with the best new books, magazines,
and journals. Indian cabinets were filled with antique shells,
minerals, ossifications, and other curiosities, Marble stands
supported vases, statuettes, and other articles of vertu. Lastly,
two soft, deep, easy-chairs were drawn up before the glowing fire;
while over the mantelpiece a large cheval glass reflected and
duplicated all this wealth of comfort.

With almost motherly tenderness the beautiful countess placed her
guest in one of these luxurious chairs and put a comfortable foot
cushion under her feet. Then Berenice took the other chair. Between
them, on a marble stand, stood a vase of flowers and the countess'
work-box. But she did not open it. She engaged her guest in
conversation, and such was the charm of her manners that the evening
passed like a pleasant dream.

And when Claudia received the kiss of Berenice and retired for the
night, it was with the sweet feeling of safety added to her sense of
freedom. And when she awoke in the morning, it was to greet with joy
her new life of sympathy, security, and repose.

As soon as she rang her bell she was attended by a pretty Scotch
girl, who informed her that her ladyship's luggage had arrived, and
had been placed in the hall outside her apartments to await her
ladyship's orders.

Claudia, when she was dressed, went to look after it and found, to
her surprise, not only her large trunk from Magruder's, but also her
numerous boxes from Castle Cragg.

Upon inquiry she discovered that the boxes had been forwarded from
the castle to the hotel, and sent on with the trunk.

She did not stop to inspect any part of her luggage, but went
downstairs into the breakfast parlor, where she found Lady
Hurstmonceux presiding over the table, and waiting for her.

Berenice arose and met her guest with an affectionate embrace, and
put her into the easiest chair nearest the fire; for it was a bitter
cold morning, and the snow lay thick upon the ground and upon the
tops of the fir trees that stood before the windows, like footmen
with powdered heads.

On turning up her plate Claudia found a letter.

"It is from Jean Murdock, dear. Read it; it refers no doubt to the
boxes she has forwarded," said Lady Hurstmonceux.

Claudia smiled, bowed, broke the seal, and read as follows:

                    "Castle Cragg, Thursday Morning.
"Me Leddy: I hae the honor to forward your leddyship's boxes fra the
castle. I hope your leddyship will find a' richt. There hae been
unco ill doings here sin your leddyship left. Me laird hae gane his
ways up to Lunnun; but hae left the player bodie, Guid forgie him,
biding her lane here. And she has guided us a' a sair gate sin' she
hae held the reins. Auld Cuthbert wouldna bide here longer gin it
wer' na for the luve o' the house; na mare would I. I must tell your
leddyship about the visit of the poleece, whilk I understand were
sent by your leddyship's ain sel'. They cam' the same day your
leddyship left. Me laird was going away; and me laird's carriage
stood at the door; and just as he was stepping into the carriage
they cam' up and spake till him. And then his lairdship laughed, and
invited them to enter the house, and walk into the library. And he
sent Auld Cuthbert to fetch me. And when I went into the library,
his lairdship said till me:

"'Murdock, these people have come about some gorillas that are said
to be missing. What about them?'

"'If your lairdship means the puir negro bodies, I dinna ken; I hae
nae seen ane of them the day,' I answered. An noo, me leddy, ye maun
e'en just forgie' an auld cummer like mesel' gin she writes you a'
that followed, e'en though it should cut you to the heart; for ye
ought to ken weel the ways o' your bitter ill-wishers. Aweel, then,
and when I had answered me laird, he turned to the poleecemen and
said:

"'The truth is, Mr. Murray, that you have been deceived by a vera
artful party. I may just as well tell you now what in a few days
will be the talk of every taproom in the United Kingdom. When I was
in America I was regularly taken in by a beautiful adventuress, whom
I found--worse luck--in the best circles there. I married the
creature and brought her to this castle, which she has dishonored.'
And here, me leddy, he gave the poleeceman an exaggerated account of
the finding of Frisbie in your leddyship's room. And then he rang
the bell, and sent for the player bodie and her friend, who cam' in
and confeermed a' that he tauld the poleeceman. And then me laird
spake up and said that the negroes had run off wi' a large quantity
of jewelry and plate; that he had nae doubt but your leddyship had
gi'e them commission to purloin it; that your leddyship's visit and
compleent to the poleece was naught but a blind to deceive them; and
finally that he demanded to have a warrant issued for the arrest of
the negroes on the charge of theft.

"Aweel, me leddy, ye ken that your leddyship and your puir serving
bodies are strangers here, and me laird and a' his family are well
kenned folk, and, mare than that, they are o' the auld nobility--
mare the shame for me laird, na better to do honor till his race.
And sae the lang and short o' it is, he talked over the poleecemen,
sae that instead of pursuing their investigations in the castle,
they went off with me laird to have warrants out for the
apprehension of the puir negro folk, whilk I believe to be as
innocent of theft as I mysel' or auld Cuthbert. And noo, me leddy, I
hae telled ye a', thinking till mesel' that ye ought to ken it. And
sae maun e'en just commit your ways to the Lord, and put your trust
intil him. Auld Cuthbert and mesel' pray for your leddyship ilka
day, that ye may be deleevered fra the spoilers, and fra a' those
wha gang about to wark you wae. Me laird hae gane his ways up to
Lunnun, as I tauld your leddyship. And the player quean and her
cummer hae possession o' the house, and guide a' things their ain
gait, wae's me! Gin I suld hear onything anent your leddyship's puir
negro folk, I will mak' haste to let your leddyship ken. Auld
Cuthbert begs permission to send his duty and his prayers for your
leddyship's happiness. And I mysel' hae the honor to be your
honorable leddyship's
                "Obedient humble servant to command,
                                          "Jean Murdock."

When Claudia had finished reading this letter she passed it with a
sad smile to Lady Hurstmonceux, who, as soon as she had in her turn
perused it, tossed it upon the table, saying, scornfully:

"'Whom the gods wish to destroy they first make mad!' Lord Vincent
appears to me to have lost his reason. He thinks that he is weaving
a net of circumstantial evidence around you for your ruin, when he
is, in fact, only involving himself in intricacies of crime which
must inevitably prove his destruction."

"I cannot, oh, I cannot, see it in the same light that you do! It
seems to me that he has succeeded in making me appear guilty," said
Claudia, with a shudder.

"Ah, let us not talk of it, since talking will do no good; at least
not now. When your father comes, then we will talk and act," said
the countess soothingly, as she set a cup of fragrant coffee before
her guest.

Now I do not know whether you care to be informed how Claudia passed
her time during the five weeks of her sojourn at Cameron Court, so I
shall make the description of her visit a short one.

In the first place, you may be sure, from what you have already seen
of Lady Hurstmonceux, that she would not allow her guest to mope.

As soon as the snow ceased to fall and the sky cleared, with a sharp
northwest wind that froze the river hard, the countess took her
guest out to learn the exhilarating art of skating, and in this way
they employed an hour or two of each morning. The remainder of the
day would be passed in needlework, reading, music, and conversation.

When the weather moderated and the ice was unsafe for skating, they
substituted riding and driving excursions, and visited all the
remarkable places in the neighborhood.

They visited Roslyn Castle and went down into those fearful vaults,
three tiers under ground, and listened to the guide who told them
traditions of the princely state kept up by the ancient lords of
Roslyn, who had noblemen of high degree for their carvers and
cupbearers; and of those ladies of Roslyn, who never moved from home
without a train of two hundred waiting gentlewomen and two hundred
mounted knights.

They visited Roslyn Chapel and admired the unequaled beauty of its
architecture, and gazed at the wondrous chef d'oeuvre--the
"apprentice's pillar"--and heard the story how a poor but gifted
boy, hoping to please, had designed and executed the work during the
absence of his master, who, on returning and seeing the beautiful
pillar, fell into a frenzy of envious rage and slew his apprentice.

They visited the ruins of Craigmillar Castle and stood in the little
stone den, seven feet by four, which is known as "Queen Mary's
bedroom." They saw those deep, dark dungeons where in the olden
times captives pined away their lives forgotten of all above ground;
they saw the "execution room," with its condemned cell, its chains
and staples, its instruments of torture, its altar and its block.

It was indeed a

  --"Dire dungeon, place of doom,
  Of execution, too, and tomb!"

where, in those savage times, great criminals and innocent victims
were alike condemned unheard, and secretly shrived, beheaded, and
buried.

They passed on to a still more terrible dungeon among those dread
vaults--a circular stone crypt surrounded by tall, deep, narrow
niches, in which human beings had been built up alive.

With a shudder Claudia turned from all these horrors to the
countess:

"It is said that our country has no past, no history, no monuments.
I am glad of it. Better her past should be a blank page than be
written over with such bloody hieroglyphics as these. When I
consider these records and reflect upon the deeds of this crime-
stained old land, I look upon our own young nation as an innocent
child. Let us leave this place. It kills me, Berenice."

On Sunday morning at the breakfast table Lady Hurstmonceux proposed,
as the day was fine, that they should drive into Edinboro' and
attend divine services at St. Giles' Cathedral, interesting from
being the most ancient place of worship in the city; a richly
endowed abbey and ecclesiastical school in the Middle Ages; and at a
later period, after the Reformation, the church, from which. John
Knox delivered his fierce denunciation of the sins and sinners of
his day.

All this Berenice told Claudia at the breakfast table, seeking to
draw her thoughts away from the subject of her own position.

But at the invitation from Lady Hurstmonceux to attend a Christian
place of worship Claudia looked up in surprise and exclaimed
impulsively:

"But I thought--"

And there she stopped and blushed.

Lady Hurstmonceux understood her, smiled, and answered:

"You thought that I was a Jewess. Well, I was born and brought up in
the Jewish faith. But it is now many years, Lady Vincent, since I
embraced the Christian religion."

"I am very glad! I am very, very glad! Ah! I am but a poor, unworthy
Christian myself, yet I do rejoice in every soul converted to
Christ," said Claudia warmly, clasping the hand of her hostess; and,
while holding it, she continued to say: "I do love to live in an
atmosphere of Christianity, and I hate to live out of it. That was
one reason, among others, why I was so unutterably wretched at
Castle Cragg. They were such irredeemable atheists. There was never
a visit to church, never a prayer, never a grace, never a chapter
from the Bible, never any sort of acknowledgment of their Creator,
never the slightest regard to his laws. Lord Vincent and Mrs. Dugald
would sit down and play cards through a whole Sabbath evening, as
upon any other. Oh, it was dreadful. Looking back upon my life among
them, I wonder--yes, wonder--how I ever could have lived through it!
Coming from that place to this, Lady Hurstmonceux, is like coming
from something very like hell to something very like heaven."

"You were tortured in many ways, my poor Claudia. You are now off
the rack, that is all. And now, I suppose, we are to go to St.
Giles'?"

"If you please, yes; I should like to do so."

Lady Hurstmonceux rang the bell and ordered the carriage. And then
the friends arose from the breakfast table and retired to prepare
for church.

They enjoyed a beautiful drive of seven miles through a wildly
picturesque country, and entered the town and reached the church in
time for the opening of the services.

The preacher of the day was a very worthy successor of John Knox,
having all the faith and hope, and a good deal more of charity than
that grand old prophet of wrath had ever displayed.

This was the first divine worship that Claudia had engaged in for
many months. It revived, comforted, and strengthened her.

She left the church in a better mood of mind than she had perhaps
ever experienced in the whole course of her life. Her inmost thought
was this:

"God enriched my life with the most bountiful blessings. But by sins
turned them all into curses and brought my sorrows upon me. I will
repent of my sins, I will accept my sorrows. God from his own mercy
and not from my deserts has brought me thus far alive through my
troubles; he has raised up a friend to succor me. I will bow down in
penitence, in humility, in gratitude before him, and I will try to
serve him truly in the future, and I will trust all that future to
him."

They reached home to a late dinner, and spent the evening in such
serious reading and conversation and sacred music as befitted the
day. Not one dull hour had Claudia experienced during her residence
at Cameron Court.

On Monday, which was another fine winter day, the countess said to
her guest:

"This is the day of each week that I always devote to my poor. Would
you like to drive around with me in the pony chaise and make
acquaintance with the peasantry of Scotland? You will find them a
very intelligent, well-educated class."

"Thank you, I should enjoy the drive quite as much as any that we
have yet taken," said Claudia.

And accordingly after breakfast the ladies set out upon their
rounds. Berenice did not go empty-handed. Hampers of food and
bundles of clothing filled up every available space in the carriage.
It was a very pleasant drive. To every cottage that the countess
entered she brought relief, comfort, and cheerfulness.

The children greeted her with glad smiles; the middle-aged with warm
thanks; and the old with fervent blessings. Not from one humble
homestead did she turn without leaving some token of her passage;
with one family she would leave the needed supply of food; with
another the necessary winter clothing; with another, wine, medicine,
or books. With others, very poor, she would leave a portion of all
these requisites.

Finally, when the sun was sinking to his setting behind the Pentland
Hills, she returned home with her guest.

"I must thank you for a very pleasant day, Lady Hurstmonceux. One of
the pleasantest I have ever passed in my life. For I have witnessed
and I have felt more real pleasure to-day than I ever remember to
have experienced before. You have conferred much happiness to-day.
If you dispense as much on every Monday, as I suppose you do, the
aggregate must be very great," said Claudia, with enthusiasm, as
they sat together at tea that evening in "my lady's little drawing
room."

For some minutes Berenice did not reply, and when she did, she spoke
very seriously.

"If there is one thing more than another for which I thank God, it
is for making me one of his stewards. Do you suppose, Claudia, that
I hold all the wealth that he has entrusted to me, as my own, to be
used for my own exclusive benefit? Oh, no! I feel that I am but his
almoner, and I am often ashamed of taking as I do, the lion's share
of the good things," she added, glancing around upon the luxuries
that encompassed her.

The next day Lady Hurstmonceux proposed another excursion.

"I will not take you to visit any romantic old ruin this morning;
but to vary the programme I will take you to see an interesting
living reality."

And accordingly the carriage was ordered and they drove out to New
Haven, a fishing village within three miles of Edinboro', and yet as
isolated and as primitive in its manners and customs as the most
remote hamlet in the country.

There Claudia was amused and interested in watching the coming in of
the fishing boats, and observing the picturesque attire of the fish-
wives, and listening to the deafening clatter of their tongues as
they chaffered with the fishermen, while lading their baskets.

This was another pleasant day for Claudia.

But it would stretch this chapter to too great a length to describe
each day of her sojourn at Cameron Court.

Let it suffice to say in general terms that the countess kept her
guest usefully employed or agreeably entertained during the whole of
her visit. There was neither a tedious nor a fatiguing hour in the
five weeks of her sojourn.

Every Sunday they attended divine worship at "St. Giles' Cathedral,"
commonly called "John Knox's church." Every Monday they went their
rounds among the poor. Other days in the week they visited
interesting and remarkable places in and around Edinboro'. And thus
cheerfully passed the days.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

SUSPENSE.

  Wait, for the day is breaking,
    Tho' the dull night be long,
  Wait, Heav'n is not forsaking
    Thy heart--be strong! be strong!
                      --_Anon_.


As the time approached when Claudia might reasonably expect a reply
to the letter she had written to her father, she naturally became
very anxious.

Would he answer that last urgent appeal by letter or in person? that
was the question she was forever asking of herself.

And the response of her heart was always the same; he would lose no
time in writing, he would hasten at once to her relief.

Ah! but if he should be ill, or--even dead? What then? Claudia's
anxiety grew daily more acute.

She had heard nothing of the fate of her negroes. She learned by a
second letter from Jean Murdock that Mrs. Dugald still remained at
Castle Cragg, "lording it o'er a'," as the housekeeper expressed it.
And she saw by the "Times" that Malcolm, Viscount Vincent, had filed
a petition for divorce from his viscountess. That was all.

The fourth week had nearly gone by when one morning, on coming to
the breakfast table, Claudia found lying beside her plate a foreign
letter.

At the very first glance at its superscription she recognized her
father's firm handwriting, and with an irrepressible cry of joy she
snatched it up.

It was the short letter Judge Merlin had hastily penned on the eve
of his journey to Washington. It merely stated that he had just that
instant taken her letters from the post office; and that, in order
to save the immediately outgoing mail, he answered them without
leaving the office, to announce to her that he should sail for
England on the "Oceana," that would leave Boston on the following
Wednesday. And then, with strong expressions of indignation against
Lord Vincent, sorrow for Claudia's troubles, and affection for
herself, the letter closed.

"Oh, Berenice, Berenice! I am so happy; so very happy!" exclaimed
Claudia wildly. "My father has written to me! he is well! he is
coming! he is coming! he will be here in a few days! in a very few
days! for this letter was written in the post office, to save the
very last mail that came by the steamer immediately preceding the
'Oceana'! Oh, Berenice, I could cry with joy!"

"I congratulate you with all my heart, dear Claudia. Yes, I should
think your father would now be here in two or three days, at
farthest," said Lady Hurstmonceux.

"And oh, how shall I get ovor the interval? Ah, Berenice, indulge
me! Let us go down, to Liverpool to meet my father!"

"My dear, I would do so in a moment, only I think it the worst plan
you could pursue. In your circumstances, dearest Claudia, we must
not go journeying through the country. We must live very quietly.
And besides, though the 'Oceana' may reasonably be expected in two
or three days, there is no reason in the world why she might not
arrive to-day, or to-night. In which case, by going down to
Liverpool, we shall be most likely to miss your father, who would be
steaming up here."

"Certainly, certainly! I see the reasonableness of your views; but
how, then, shall I get over the intervening time?"

"I might propose for you excursions to many interesting places in
the vicinity of Edinboro' which you have not seen; but that we must
not go far from home, while expecting Judge Merlin. We must not
happen to be absent when your father arrives."

"Oh, no! we must not risk such a thing, I know. Well, I will wait as
patiently as I can."

"And I will tell you what you may do, meantime. To-day you shall
superintend in person the preparation of a suite of rooms for your
father. You shall let my housekeeper into the secret of all his
little tastes, and they shall be considered in the arrangements.
That will occupy one day. To-morrow, you know, is Sunday, and we
must go to church. That will occupy the second. The next day,
Monday, we will make our weekly round among the poor. That will
occupy the third day, to the exclusion of everything else. For if
there is one employment more than another that will make us forget
our personal anxieties, it is ministering to the wants of others.
And, in all human probability, before Monday evening Judge Merlin
will be here."

"Yes, yes! Oh, my dear father! I can scarcely realize that I shall
see him so soon," said Claudia, with emotion.

The countess' programme was carried out. Claudia spent that day in
superintending the arrangements of a handsome suite of rooms for her
father.

On Sunday they went to church. But the text was an unfortunate one
for Claudia's spirits. It was taken from James iv. 13: "Ye know not
what shall be on the morrow." And the subject of the discourse was
on the vanity of human expectations and the uncertainty of human
destiny. Claudia returned home greatly depressed; but that
depression soon yielded to the cheerfulness of Lady Hurstmonceux's
manner.

On Monday they made their rounds among the poor; and Claudia forgot
her anxieties and felt happy in the happiness she saw dispensed
around her.

Yes, the programme of the countess was carried out, but her
previsions were not realized. Judge Merlin did not come that
evening, nor on the next morning, nor on the next evening.

On Wednesday morning Claudia, as usual, seized the "Times" as soon
as it was brought in, and turned eagerly to the telegraphic column.
But there was no arrival from America. Glancing farther down the
column, she suddenly grew pale and exclaimed:

"Oh, Berenice!"

"What is it, dear?" inquired the countess.

Claudia read aloud the paragraph that had alarmed her:

"The 'Oceana' is now several days overdue. Serious apprehensions are
entertained for her safety."

"Do not be alarmed, my dear. At this season of the year the steamers
are frequently delayed beyond their usual time of arrival," said the
countess, with a cheerfulness that she was very far from really
feeling.

"But if there should have been an accident!"

"My dear, that line of steamers has never had an accident. And their
good fortune is not the effect of luck, but of the great care
bestowed by the company and its officers upon the safety of those
who trust to them their lives and goods. Reassure yourself,
Claudia."

But that was easier said than done. Three or four more of anxious
days and nights passed, during which Claudia watched the papers for
the arrival of the ocean steamers; but all in vain, until the
Saturday morning of that week, when, as usual, she opened the
"Times" and turned to the telegraphic column.

She could scarcely repress the cry of anguish that arose to her lips
on reading the following:

"Arrival of the ocean steamers. The screw propeller 'Superior,' with
New York mails of the 15th, has reached Queenstown. On the Banks of
Newfoundland she passed the wreck of a large steamer, supposed to be
the 'Oceana.'"

"Oh, Berenice! Oh, Berenice! Can this be true? Oh! Speak a word of
hope or comfort to me!" cried Claudia, wringing her hands in the
extremity of mental agony.

"My dear, let us still hope for the best. There is no certainty that
it is the wreck of the 'Oceana.' There is no certainty that the
'Oceana' is wrecked at all. She is delayed; that is all which is
known. And that is often the case with the ocean steamers at this
season of the year, as I told you before," said the countess, trying
to inspire Claudia with a hope that she herself scarcely dared to
indulge.

But Claudia's face was drawn with anguish.

"Oh, the suspense, the terrible agony of suspense! It is worse than
death!" she cried.

The countess essayed to comfort her, but in vain.

All that day, and for many succeeding ones, Claudia was like a
victim stretched upon the rack. The torture of uncertainty was
harder to endure than any certainty; it was, as she said, "worse
than death," worse than despair! Some two weeks passed away, during
which her very breath of life seemed almost suspended in the agony
of hope that could not die.

At length one morning, on descending to the breakfast parlor, she
found Lady Hurstmonceux reading the "Times."

"Any news?" inquired Claudia, in a faint voice.

The countess looked up. Claudia read the expression of her face,
which seemed to say, prepare for good news.

"Oh, yes, there is! there is!" exclaimed Claudia, suddenly snatching
the paper, and turning to the telegraphic column, and then, with a
cry of joy, sinking into her seat.

"Let me read it to you, my dear, you are incapable of doing so,"
said Berenice, gently taking the paper from her hand and reading
aloud the following paragraph:

"News of the 'Oceana.'--The Oriental and Peninsular Steam Packet
Company's ship 'Albatross' has arrived at Liverpool, bringing all
the passengers and crew of the 'Oceana,' wrecked on the banks of
Newfoundland. They were picked up by the 'Santiago,' bound for
Havana, and taken to that port, whence they sailed by the 'Cadiz'
for the port of Cadiz, whence lastly they were brought by the
'Albatross' to Liverpool. Among the passengers saved were Chief
Justice Merlin of the United States Supreme Court, Ishmael Worth,
Esquire, a distinguished member of the Washington bar, and Professor
Erasmus Kerr, of the Glasgow University. The shipwrecked passengers
have all arrived in good health and spirits, and have already
dispersed to their various destinations."

"This is too much joy! Oh, Berenice, it is too much joy!" cried
Claudia, bursting into tears and throwing herself into the arms of
Lady Hurstmonceux, and weeping freely on the sympathetic bosom of
that faithful friend.

"Claudia, dear," whispered that gentle lady, "go to your room and
shut yourself in, and kneel and return thanks to God for this his
great mercy. And so shall your spirits be calmed and strengthened."

Claudia ceased weeping, kissed her kind monitress, and went and
complied with her counsel. And very fervent was the thanksgiving
that went up to Heaven from her relieved and grateful heart. She had
finished her prayers and had arisen from her knees and was sitting
by her writing-table indulging in a reverie of anticipation, when a
bustle below stairs attracted her attention.

She listened.

Yes, it was the noise of an arrival!

With a joyous presentiment of what had come to the house, Claudia
rushed out of the room and down the stairs to the lower entrance
hall, and the next moment found herself clasped to the bosom of her
father.

For a few moments neither spoke. The embrace was a fervent, earnest,
but silent one.

The judge was the first to break the spell.

"Oh, my child! my child! Thank God that I find you alive and well!"
he exclaimed, in a broken voice.

"Oh, my father, my dear, dear father!" began Claudia; but she broke
down, burst into tears, and wept upon his bosom.

He held her there, soothing her with loving words and tender
caresses, as he had been accustomed to do when she was but a child
coming to him with her childish troubles. When Claudia had exhausted
her passion of tears, she looked up and said:

"But, papa, you have not been in the drawing room yet? You hare not
seen Lady Hurstmonceux?"

"No, my dear, I have but just arrived. Claudia, immediately upon my
landing I took the first train north, and reached Edinboro' this
morning. I sent my party on to Magruder's Hotel and took a fly and
drove immediately out here. I have but just been admitted to the
house and sent my card in to the hostess. And, ah, I see that my
messenger has returned."

A servant in livery came up, bowed, and said:

"My lady directs me to say to you, sir, that she will see you
immediately in the drawing room, unless you would prefer to go first
to the apartments which are prepared for you, sir."

The judge hesitated, and then turned to his daughter and whispered
the inquiry:

"How do I look, Claudia? Presentable?"

Lady Vincent ran her eyes over the traveler and answered:

"Not at all presentable, papa. You look just as one might expect you
to do--black with smoke and dust and cinders, as if you had traveled
in the train all night."

"Which of course I did."

"And I think you would be all the better for a visit to your rooms,
papa. Come, I will show you the way, for I am as much at home here
as ever I was at dear old Tanglewood. James," she said, turning to
the footman who had brought the message, "you need not wait. I will
show my papa his rooms; but you may order breakfast for him, for I
dare say he has had none. Come, papa!"

And so saying Claudia marshaled her father upstairs to the handsome
suite of apartments that had been made ready for him. When he had
renovated his toilet, he declared himself ready to go below and be
presented to his hostess. Claudia conducted him downstairs and into
"my lady's little drawing room."


CHAPTER XL.

FATHER AND DAUGHTER.

  How deep, how thorough felt the glow
  Of rapture, kindling out of woe;
  How exquisite one single drop
  Of bliss, that sparkling to the top
  Of misery's cup, is keenly quaffed
  Though death must follow soon the draught.
                               --_Moore_.


The countess was sitting on one of the armchairs near the fire when
Claudia led the judge up before her, saying only:

"Lady Hurstmonceux, my father."

The countess arose and held out her hand with a smile of welcome,
saying:

"It gives me much joy to see you safe, after all your dangers, Judge
Merlin. Pray sit near the fire."

The judge retained her hand in his own for a moment, while he bowed
over it and answered:

"I thank you for your kind expressions, dear Lady Hurstmonceux. But,
oh! what terms shall I find strong enough to thank you for the noble
support you have given my daughter in her great need?"

"Believe me, I was very happy to be serviceable to Lady Vincent,"
replied the countess gently. Then, turning to Claudia, she said:

"Your father has probably not had breakfast."

"No; but I assumed the privilege of ordering it for him," replied
the latter.

"The 'privilege' was yours without assumption, my dear. You did
exactly right," said the countess.

"I see that my daughter is quite at home with you, madam," observed
the judge.

"Oh, I adopted her. I told her that I should be her mother until the
arrival of her father," replied Lady Hurstmonceux, smiling.

At this moment the footman put his head in at the door to say that
the judge's breakfast was served. Lady Hurstmonceux led the way to
the breakfast parlor, and then saying:

"You will make your father comfortable here, Claudia, I hope," she
bowed and left them alone together.

Claudia sat down to the table and began to pour out the coffee.
James, the footman, was in attendance.

"Dismiss the servant, my dear," said the judge, as he took his seat
as near to his daughter as the conveniences of the table would
allow.

"You may retire, James. I will ring if you are wanted."

The man bowed and went out. The father and daughter looked up; their
eyes met and filled with tears.

"Oh, my child, how much we have to say to each other!" sighed the
judge.

"Yes, but, dear papa, drink your coffee first. You really look as
though you needed it very much," replied Claudia affectionately.

The judge complied with her advice; though, if the truth must be
told, he ate and drank indiscreetly fast in order to get through
soon and be at liberty to talk to his daughter. When he arose from
the table Claudia rang the bell for the service to be removed, and
then led the way again to my lady's little drawing room.

It was deserted. Lady Hurstmonceux had evidently left it that the
father and daughter might converse with each other unembarrassed by
the presence of a third person.

"My dear," said the judge, as he seated himself on the sofa beside
his daughter, wound his arm around her shoulders, and looked
wistfully into her face, "do you know that I am surprised to see you
looking so well? You must possess a great deal of fortitude,
Claudia, to have passed through so much trouble as you have and show
so few signs of suffering as you do."

"Ah, papa! if you had arrived a few days ago and seen me then, you
would have had good cause to say I looked well. But, for the last
week, the intense anxiety I have felt on your account has worn me
considerably."

"My poor girl! Yes, I know how that must have been. The news of the
shipwreck arrived long before we reached England, and everyone must
have given us up for lost."

"I did not. Oh, no! I could not! I still hoped; but, oh, with what
an agony of hope!"

"Such hope, my child, is worse than despair."

"Oh, no! I thought so then. I do not think so now; now that I have
you beside me."

"Now that it is ended. But, oh, my dear child, how hard it was for
you to have anxiety for my fate added to all your other troubles!"

"Papa, anxiety for your fate was my only trouble," said Claudia
gravely.

"How! what! your only trouble, Claudia? I do not understand you in
the least."

"All my other troubles had passed away. And now that anxiety is at
an end, that trouble is also passed away and I have none."

"None, Claudia? How you perplex me, my dear."

"None, papa! I left them all behind at Castle Cragg."

"I do not--cannot comprehend you, my dear."

"No, papa, you cannot comprehend me; no one could possibly
comprehend me who had not been placed in something like my own
position. But--can you not imagine that when a victim has been
stretched upon the rack and tortured by executioners, it is comfort
enough simply to be taken off it? Or when a sinner has been in
purgatory tormented by fiends, it is heaven enough only to be out of
it? Oh, papa, that is not exaggeration! That is something like what
I suffered at Castle Cragg; something like what I enjoy in being
away from it. Think of it, papa," said Claudia, gulping down the
hysterical sob that arose to her throat; "think of it! me, an
honorable woman, the daughter of Christian parents, to find myself
living in the house, sitting at the table in daily communication
with creatures that no honest man or pure woman would ever willingly
approach! Think of me being not only in the company, but in the
power, and at the mercy of such wretches!"

"'Think,' Claudia! I have thought until my brain has nearly burst.
Oh, I shall--no matter what I shall do! I will threaten no longer,
but, by all my hopes of salvation, I will act. The remorseless
monster! the infamous villain! I do not know how you lived through
it all, Claudia!"

"I do not know myself, papa. Oh, sir, I never fully realized my life
at Castle Cragg until I got away from it and could look back on it
from a distance. For the trouble then grew around me gradually;
slowly astonishing me, if you can conceive of such a thing;
benumbing my heart; stupefying my brain; deadening my sensibilities;
else I could not have endured it so quietly. Ah, it would have ended
in death, though--death of the body, perhaps death of the soul! But
still I knew enough, felt enough, to experience and appreciate the
infinite relief. of being delivered from it. Oh, papa, looking back
upon that home of horror, that den of infamy, I understand in what
hell consists--not in consuming fire, but in the company of devils!
Oh, sir, if you could once place yourself in my position and feel
what it was for me to leave that polluted atmosphere of sensuality,
treachery, and hatred, and to come into this pure air of refinement,
truth, and love, you would understand how it is that I can feel no
trouble now!"

"I do; but still I wonder to see you so well."

"Oh, sir, you know, severe as my tortures were, they were only
superficial, only skin-deep; they did not reach the springs of my
spirits. That is the reason why, in being relieved, I am so
perfectly at ease."

"Then you never loved that scoundrel, Claudia?"

"No, father, I never loved him. Therefore, the memory of his
villainy does not haunt me, as otherwise it might. Not loving him, I
ought never to have married him. If I had not, I should have escaped
all the suffering."

"Ah, Claudia, would to Heaven you never had married him," sighed the
judge, without intending to cast the least reproach on his daughter.

She felt the reproach, however, and exclaimed, with passionate
earnestness:

"Oh, father, do not blame me--do not! I could not help it! Oh, often
I have examined my conscience on that score and asked myself if I
could! And the answer has always come--no, with my nature, my
passions, my pride, my ambition, I could not help doing as I have
done!"

"Could not help marrying a man you could not love, Claudia?"

"No, papa, no! There were passions in my nature stronger than love.
These spurred me on to my fate. I was born with a great deal of
pride, inherited from--no one knows how many ancestors. This should
have been curbed, trained, directed into worthy channels. But it was
not. I was left to develop naturally, with the aid only of
intellectual education. I did develop, from a proud, frank, high-
spirited girl into a vain, scheming, ambitious woman. I married for
a title. And this is the end. How true is it that 'pride goeth
before a fall and a haughty temper before destruction!'"

"Oh, Claudia, Claudia, every word you speak wounds me like a sword-
thrust! It was my 'theory' that did it all, I said I would let my
trees and my daughter grow up as nature intended them to do. And
what is the result? Tanglewood has grown into an inextricable
wilderness that nothing but a fire could clear, and my daughter's
life has run to waste!" groaned the judge, covering his face with
his hands.

"Papa, dear, dearest papa, do not grieve so! I did not mean to give
you pain. I did not mean to breathe the slightest reflection upon so
kind a father as you have always been to me. I meant only to explain
myself a little. But I wish I had not spoken so. Forget what I have
said, papa," said Claudia, tenderly caressing her father.

"Let it all pass, my dear child," said the judge, embracing her.

"And, papa, my life has not run to waste; do not think it. I told
you that my troubles had not touched the springs of my soul; they
have not. Is not my mind as strong and my heart as warm and my
spirit as sweet as ever? Papa, this day I am a better woman for all
the troubles I have passed through. I have never before been much
comfort to you, my poor papa; but I will go with you to Tanglewood
and make your home happier than it has ever been since mamma died.
And you will find that my life shall be redeemed from waste."

"Claudia, are you sure that you do not love that rascal--not even a
little?"

"Papa, I do not even hate him; now judge if I ever could have loved
him."

But the judge was no metaphysician, and he looked puzzled.

"Papa, if I ever had loved that man, do you not suppose that his
unfaithfulness, neglect, and insults, to say nothing of his last
foul wrong against me, would have turned all my love into hatred?
But I never loved him, therefore all that he could do would not
provoke my hatred. Papa, he is as much below my hatred as my love."

"Oh, Claudia, Claudia, that you should be compelled to speak so of
one whom you made your husband!"

"Papa, dear, you asked me a question and I have replied to it
truthfully."

"My dear, I had a motive for putting that question. I wished to know
whether a spark of love for that man survived in your heart to make
his punishment a matter of painful interest to you. For to vindicate
you, Claudia, it may become necessary to prosecute him with the
utmost rigor of the law; necessary, in fact, to disgrace and ruin
him," said the judge solemnly.

"Papa, dear, what are you talking about? Prosecute him to the utmost
extent of the law? Disgrace and ruin him? Why, it appears to me that
you do not know the circumstances, as of course you cannot. He has
schemed so successfully, papa, that he has everything his own way.
All the evidence, the false but damning evidence, is in his favor
and against me. It seems to me, reflecting coolly upon the
circumstances, to be quite impossible that he should be punished or
I should be vindicated--in this world at least."

"Claudia, I know more of these circumstances than you think I do. I
know more of them than you do; and I repeat that, in order to
vindicate your honor fully, it may be necessary to prosecute
Malcolm, Lord Vincent, with the utmost rigor of the law; to bring
him to the felon's dock; to send him to the hulks. Now, are you
willing that this should be done?"

Claudia turned very pale and answered:

"Let the man have justice, papa, if it places him on the scaffold."

"There are two courses open to us, Claudia. The first is--simply to
let him alone until he brings his suit for divorce, and then to meet
him on that ground with such testimony as shall utterly defeat him
and destroy his plea. In that case you will be vindicated from the
charge that he has brought against you, but not from the reproach
that, however undeserved, will attach to a woman who has been the
defendant in a divorce trial, and he will go unpunished. The second
course is to prosecute him at once in the criminal court for certain
of his crimes that have come to my knowledge, and so put him out of
the possibility of suing for a divorce. And in that case your honor
would go unquestioned, and he would be condemned to a felon's fate--
penal servitude for years. Now, Claudia, I place the man's destiny
in your hands. Shall we defend ourselves against him in a divorce
court, or shall we prosecute him in a criminal court?"

"Papa," said Claudia, hesitating, and then speaking low, "what does
Ishmael advise?"

"Ishmael? How did you know that he was with me, my dear?"

"I saw his name in the list of passengers, and I knew that he had
come on with you as your private counselor."

"Yes, he did, at a vast sacrifice of his business; but then I never
knew Worth to shrink from any self-sacrifice."

"What is his advice?" asked Claudia, in a low voice.

"He does more than advise; in this matter he dictates--I had almost
said he commands; at least he insists that the divorce suit shall
not be permitted to come on; that it shall be stopped by the arrest
of Lord Vincent upon criminal charges that we shall be able to prove
upon him. And that after the conviction of the viscount you shall
bring suit for a divorce from him; for that it would not be well
that your fate should remain linked to that of a felon."

"Then, papa, let it be as Mr. Worth says; and if the prosecution
should place the viscount on the scaffold--let it place him there."

"It will not go so far as that, my dear--not in this century. If he
had lived in the last century, and amused himself as he has done in
this, he would have swung for it, that is certain."

"Papa, what is it that you have found out about him? Was he
implicated in the death of poor Ailsie Dunbar? And, if so, how did
you find it out? Tell me."

"My dearest, we have both much to tell each other. But I wish to
hear your story first. Remember, Claudia, those alarming letters you
sent me were very meager in their details. Tell me everything, my
child; everything from the time you left me until the time you met
me again."

"Papa, dear, it is a long, grievous, terrible story. I do not know
how you will bear it. You are sensitive, excitable, impetuous. I
scarcely dare to tell you. I fear to see how you will bear it. I
dread its effects upon you."

"Claudia, my dearest, conceal nothing; tell me all; and I promise to
restrain my emotions and listen to you calmly."

Upon this Claudia commenced the narrative of her sufferings from the
moment of parting with her father at Boston to the moment of meeting
with him at Cameron Court. The reader is already acquainted with the
story, and does not need to hear Claudia's narration. Judge Merlin
also knew much of it; as much as old Katie had been able to impart
to him; but he wished to hear a more intelligent version of it from
his daughter. It was, as she had said, a long, sorrowful, terrible
story; such as it was not in the nature of woman to recite calmly.
Some parts of it were told with pale cheeks, faltering tones, and
falling tears; other parts were told with fiery blushes, flashing
eyes, and clenched hands.

At its conclusion Claudia said:

"There, papa, I have hidden nothing. I have told you everything. Now
at last you will believe me when I tell you how perfectly relieved I
feel only to be out of that purgatory--only to be away from those
fiends! Now at last you will see how it is that I can say without
ruth, 'Let Malcolm, Lord Vincent, have justice, though that justice
consign him to penal servitude, or to the gallows!' But, papa, when
I said I had no trouble left, I spoke in momentary forgetfulness of
my poor servants; Heaven forgive me for it! Though, really,
uncertainty about their fate is the only care I have."

"My dear," said the judge, who had comported himself with wonderful
calmness through the trying hour of Claudia's narration; "my dear,
cast that care to the winds. Your servants are safe and well and
near at hand."

"'Safe and well, and near at hand!' Oh, papa, are you certain--quite
certain?" exclaimed Claudia, in joy modified by doubt.

"Quite certain, my dearest, since I myself lodged them at Magruder's
Hotel this morning," said the judge.

"Oh, thank Heaven!" exclaimed Claudia fervently. "But, papa, tell me
all about it. When, where, and how were they found?"

"About three weeks ago, in Havana, by Ishmael," answered the judge,
speaking directly to the point.

His daughter looked so amazed that he hastened to say:

"It is easily understood, Claudia. You mentioned in the course of
your narrative that you suspected the viscount of having spirited
away the negroes. Your suspicion was correct. Through the agency of
chloroform he abducted the negroes and got them on board a West
Indian smuggler, that took them to Havana and sold them into
slavery. When we went there on the 'Santiago,' we found, recognized,
and recovered them."

"And what was his motive--the viscount's motive, I mean--for selling
my poor negroes into slavery, and thereby committing a felony that
would endanger his reputation and liberty? It could not have been
want of money. The highest price they would bring could scarcely be
an object to the Viscount Vincent. What, then, could have been his
motive?"

"What you mentioned that you suspected it to be, Claudia: to get rid
of dangerous witnesses against himself. But I had better tell you
the whole story," said the judge; and with that he began and related
the history of the conspiracy entered into by the viscount, the
valet, and the ex-opera singer, and overheard by Katie; the
discovery and seizure of the eavesdropper; and the abduction and
sale of the negroes.

At the conclusion of this narrative he said

"So you see, Claudia, that we have got this man completely in our
power. Look at his crimes. First, complicity in the murder of Ailsie
Dunbar; secondly, conspiracy against your honor; thirdly, kidnaping
and slave-trading. The man is already ruined; and you, my dear, are
saved."

"Oh, thank Heaven, thank Heaven, that at least my name will be
rescued from reproach!" cried Claudia earnestly, clasping her hands
and bursting into tears of joy, and weeping on her father's bosom.

"Yes, Claudia," he whispered, as he gently soothed her; "yes, my
child--thank Heaven first of all! for there was something strangely
providential in the seemingly dire misfortune that was the cause of
our being taken to Havana. For if we had not gone thither, we should
never have found the negroes; and if we had not found them, it would
have been difficult, or impossible, to have vindicated you."

"Oh, I know it. And I do thank Heaven."

"And, after Heaven, there is one on earth to whom your thanks are
due--Ishmael Worth. Not because he was the first to find the
negroes, for that was an accident, but because he sacrificed so much
in order to attend me on this voyage; and because he has been of
such inestimable value to me in this business. Claudia, but that I
had him with me in Havana, I should not now be by your side. But
that I had him with me, I should have plunged myself headlong into
two law cases that would have detained me in Havana for an
indefinite time. But that I had him with me to restrain, to warn,
and to counsel I should have prosecuted the smugglers for their
share in the abduction of the negroes, and I should have sued the
owners for the recovery of them. But I yielded to Ishmael's earnest
advice, and by the sacrifice of a sum of money and a desire of
vengeance, I got easy possession of the negroes and brought them on
here. You owe much to Ishmael Worth, Claudia."

"I know it, oh, I know it! May Heaven reward him!"

"And now our witnesses are at hand; and before night, Claudia,
warrants shall be issued for the arrest of the Viscount Vincent,
Alick Frisbie, and Faustina Dugald."

"They can have no suspicion of what is coming upon them, and
therefore will have no chance to escape."

"Not a bit. We shall come upon them unawares."

"How astonished they will be."

"Yes--and how confounded when confronted with my witnesses."

"Papa, I am not malicious, but I think I should like to see their
faces then."

"My dearest Claudia, you will have to imagine them. You will not be
an eye-witness of their confusion. You will not be required either
at the preliminary examination or at the trial, and it would not be
seemly that you should appear at either."

"Oh, I know that, papa. And I am very glad that I shall not be
wanted. But will the testimony of those three negroes be sufficient
to convict the criminals?"

"Amply. But that testimony will not be unsupported. We shall summon
the steward and housekeeper of Castle Cragg. And now, my dear, I
must leave you, if the warrants are to be issued to-day," said the
judge, rising.

"So soon, papa?"

"It is necessary, my dear."

"But, at any rate, you will be back very shortly?"

"I do not know, my child."

"The countess expects you to make Cameron Court your home while you
remain in the neighborhood."

"Lady Hurstmonceux has not said so to me, Claudia."

"She has had no fit opportunity. Wait till you start to go."

"By the way, I must take leave of my kind hostess," said the judge,
looking around the room as if in search of something or somebody.

Claudia touched the bell. A footman entered.

"Let the countess know that the judge is going."

The servant bowed and withdrew, and Lady Hurstmonceux entered.

"Going so soon, Judge Merlin?" she said.

"Just what my daughter has this moment asked. Yes, madam; and you
will acknowledge the urgency of my business, when I tell you it is
to lodge information against Lord Vincent and his accomplices, and
procure their immediate arrest, upon the charge of certain grave
crimes that have come to my knowledge, and that I am prepared to
prove upon them."

"You astonish me, sir. I certainly had reason to suspect Lord
Vincent and his disreputable companions, but I am amazed that in so
short a time you should have ferreted out so much."

"It was accident, madam; or rather," said the judge, gravely bending
his head, "it was Providence. My daughter will explain the
circumstances to you, madam. And now, will you permit me once more
to thank you for your great goodness to me and mine, and to bid you
good-morning?"

"I hope it will be only good-morning, then, judge, and not good-by.
I beg that you will return and take up your residence with us while
you remain in Scotland," said the countess, with her sweetest smile.

"I should be delighted as well as honored, madam, in being your
guest, but I am off to Banff by the midday train."

"Off to Banff?" repeated Berenice and Claudia, in a breath.

"Certainly."

"What is that for?" inquired Claudia.

"Why, my dear, there is where I must lodge information against the
viscount and his accomplices. There is where the crimes were
committed, and where the warrants must be issued."

"Oh, I see."

"I had forgotten. I was thinking; or rather without thinking at all,
I was taking it for granted that it could be all done in Edinboro',"
smiled the countess.

"Madam, I must still leave my daughter a pensioner on your kindness
for a few days," said the judge, with a bow.

"You say that as if you supposed it possible for me to permit you to
do anything else with her," laughed the countess, holding out her
hand to the judge. He raised it to his lips, bowed over it, and
resigned it, all in the stately old-time way. Then he turned to his
daughter, embraced her, and departed.

"Now, Claudia, tell me what the judge has found out about Vincent.
Was he implicated in that murder? I shouldn't wonder if he was,"
said the countess impatiently.

"That is just what I thought; but that is not the case. Oh,
Berenice, what a revelation it is; but I will tell you all about
it," said Claudia,

And when they were cozily seated together beside the drawing-room
fire Claudia related the story her father had told her of the
conspiracy against her own honor, the abduction and sale of the
negroes, and the recognition and recovery of them.

"I am not surprised at anything in that story but the providential
manner in which the servants were recovered. I believe the viscount
capable of any crime, or restrained only by his cowardice. If he
should hesitate at assassination, I believe that it would not be
from the horror of blood-guiltiness, but from the fear of the
gallows. I hope that no weak relenting, Claudia, will cause either
you or your father to spare such a ruthless monster."

"No, Berenice, no. I have said to my father, 'Let Lord Vincent have
justice, though that justice place him in the felon's dock, in the
hulks, or on the scaffold.' No, I do not believe it would be fair to
the community to turn such a man loose upon them."

While Lady Hurstmonceux and Lady Vincent conversed in this manner,
Judge Merlin drove to Edinboro'.

He reached Magruder's Hotel, where he had left Ishmael Worth, the
professor, and the three negroes.

Ishmael had lost no time; he had seen that the whole party had
breakfast; and then he had gone himself and engaged a first-class
carriage in the express train that started for Aberdeen at twelve,
noon.

They were now therefore only waiting for Judge Merlin. And as soon
as the judge arrived the whole party started for the station, which
they reached in time to catch the train. Three hours' steaming
northward and they ran into the station at Aberdeen. The stage was
just about starting for Banff. They got into it at once, and in
three more hours of riding they reached that picturesque old town.

Merely waiting long enough to engage rooms at the best hotel and
deposit their luggage there, they took a carriage and drove to the
house of Sir Alexander McKetchum, who was one of the most respected
magistrates of Banff.

Judge Merlin introduced himself and his party, produced his
credentials, laid his charge, and presented his witnesses.

To say that the worthy Scotch justice was astonished, amazed, would
scarcely be to describe the state of panic and consternation into
which he was thrown.

Long he demurred and hesitated over the affair; again and again he
questioned the accusers; over and over again he required to hear the
statement; and slowly and reluctantly at last be consented to issue
the warrants for the apprehension of Lord Vincent, Alick Frisbie,
and Faustina Dugald.

Ishmael took care to see that these warrants were placed in the
hands of an efficient policeman, with orders that he should proceed
at once to the arrest of the parties named within them.

And then our party returned to their hotel to await results.


CHAPTER XLI.

ARREST OF LORD VINCENT AND FAUSTINA.

  Our plots fall short like darts that rash hands throw
  With an ill aim that have so far to go,
  Nor can we long discovery prevent,
  We deal too much among the innocent.
                      --_Howard_.


Lord Vincent was at Castle Cragg. Unable to absent himself long from
the siren who was the evil genius of his life, he had come down on a
quiet visit to her. A very quiet visit it was, for he affected
jealously to guard the honor of one who in truth had no honor to
lose. The guilty who have much to conceal are often more discreet
than the innocent who have nothing to fear.

Mrs. MacDonald was still at the castle, playing propriety to the
beauty. A very complacent person was Mrs. MacDonald.

This precaution deceived no one. The neighboring gentry rightly
estimated the domestic life at Castle Cragg and the character of its
inmates, and refrained from calling there.

This avoidance of her society by the county families galled
Faustina.

"What do they mean by it?" she said to herself. "I am the Honorable
Mrs. Dugald. Ah, they think I have lost myself. But they shall know
better when they see me the Viscountess Vincent, and afterwards, no
one knows how soon, Countess of Hurstmonceux and Marchioness of
Banff! Ah, what a difference that will make!"

And Faustina consoled herself with anticipations of a brilliant
future, in which she would reign as a queen over these scornful
prudes. But Faustina reckoned without Nemesis, her creditor. And
Nemesis was at the door.

It was a wild night. The snowstorm that had been threatening all day
long came down like avalanches whirled before the northern blast. It
was a night in which no one would willingly go abroad; when everyone
keenly appreciated the comfort of shelter.

Very comfortable on this evening was Mrs. Dugald's boudoir. The
crimson carpet and crimson curtains glowed ruddy red in the
lamplight and firelight. The thundering dash of the sea upon the
castle rock below came, softened into a soothing lullaby, to this
bower of beauty.

Lord Vincent and Mrs. Dugald were seated at an elegant and luxurious
little supper that would have satisfied the most fastidious and
dainty epicure. Three courses had been removed. The fourth--the
dessert--was upon the table. Rare flowers bloomed in costly vases;
ripe fruits blushed in gilded baskets; rich wines sparkled in
antique flasks.

On one side of the table Faustina reclined gracefully in a crimson
velvet easy-chair. The siren was beautifully dressed in the pure
white that her sin-smutted soul, in its falsehood, affected. Her
robe was of shining white satin, trimmed with soft white swan's-
down; fine white lace delicately veiled her snowy neck and arms;
white lilies of the valley wreathed her raven hair and rested on her
rounded bosom.

She looked "divine," as her fool of a lover assured her. Yes, she
looked "divine"--as the devil did when he appeared in the image of
an angel of light.

How did she dare, that guilty and audacious woman, to assume a dress
that symbolized purity and humility?

Lord Vincent lolled in the other armchair on the opposite side of
the table, and from under his languid and half-tipsy eyelids cast
passionate glances upon her.

Mrs. Macdonald had withdrawn her chair from the table and nearer the
fire, and had fallen asleep, or complacently affected to do so; for
Mrs. MacDonald was the soul of complacency. Mrs. Dugald declared
that she was a love of an old lady.

"What a night it is outside! It is good to be here," said Faustina,
taking a bunch of ripe grapes and turning towards the fire.

"Yes, my angel," answered the viscount drowsily, regarding her from
under his eyelids. "What a bore it is!"

"What is a bore?" inquired Faustina, putting a ripe grape between
her plump lips.

"That we are not married, my sweet."

"Eh bien! we soon shall be."

"Then why do you keep me at such a distance, my angel?"

"Ah, bah! think of something else!"

The viscount poured out a bumper of rich port and raised it to his
lips.

"Put that wine down, Malcolm, you have had too much already."

He obeyed her and set the glass untasted on the board.

"That's a duck; now you shall have some grapes," she said, and, with
pretty, childish grace, she began to pick the ripest grapes from her
bunch and to put them one by one into the noble noodle's mouth.

"It is nice to be here, is it not, mon ami?" she smilingly asked.

"Yes, sweet angel!" he sighed languishingly.

"And when one thinks of the black dark and sharp cold and deep snow
outside, and of travelers losing their way, and getting buried in
the drifts and freezing to death, one feels so happy and comfortable
in this warm, light room, eating fruit and drinking wine."

"Yes, sweet angel! but you won't let me have any more wine," said
the viscount drowsily.

"You have had more than enough," she smiled, putting a ripe grape
between his gaping lips.

"Just as you say, sweet love! You know I am your slave. You do with
me as you like," he answered stupidly.

"Now," said Faustina, her thoughts still running on the contrast
between the storm without and the comfort within, "what in this
world would tempt one to leave the house on such a night as this?

"Nothing in the world, sweet love!"

"Malcolm, I do not think I would go out to-night, even in a close
carriage, for a thousand pounds."

"No, my angel, nor for ten thousand pounds should you go."

"I like to think of the people that are out in the cold, though. It
doubles my enjoyment," she said, as she put another fine grape in
his mouth.

"Yes, sweet love!" he answered drowsily, closing his fingers on her
hand and drawing her forcibly towards him.

"Ah! stop!" she exclaimed, under her breath, and directing his
attention to Mrs. MacDonald, who sat with her eyes closed in the
easy-chair by the chimney corner.

"She is asleep," said the viscount, in a hoarse whisper.

"No, no! you are not certain!" whispered Faustina.

"Come, come! sit close to me!" exclaimed the viscount, with fierce
vehemence, drawing her towards him.

"You forget yourself! You are drunk, Malcolm!" cried Faustina,
resisting his efforts.

At that moment there came a rap at the door; it was a soft, low tap,
yet it startled the viscount like a thunderclap. He dropped the hand
of Faustina and demanded angrily:

"Who the fiend is there?"

There was no answer, but the rap was gently repeated.

"Speak, then, can't you? Who the demon are you?" he cried.

"Why don't you tell them to come in?" said Faustina, in a displeased
tone.

"Come in, then, set fire to you, whoever you are!" exclaimed Lord
Vincent.

The door was opened and old Cuthbert softly entered.

"What the fiend do you want, sir?" haughtily demanded the viscount;
for he had lately taken a great dislike to old Cuthbert, as well as
to every respectable servant in the house, whose humble integrity
was a tacit rebuke to his own dishonor; and least of all would he
endure the intrusion of one of them upon his interviews with
Faustina.

"What brings you here, I say?" he repeated,

"An'it please your lairdship, there are twa poleecemen downstairs,
wi' a posse at their tails," answered the old man, bowing humbly.

"What is their business here?"

"I dinna ken, me laird."

"Something about that stupid murder, I suppose."

Faustina started; she was probably thinking of Katie.

"I dinna think it is onything connected wi' Ailsie's death, me
laird."

"What then? What mare's nest have they found now, the stupid
Dogberries?"

"I canna tak' upon mesel' to say, me laird. But they are asking for
yer lairdship and Mistress Dugald."

"Me!"

This exclamation came from Faustina, who turned deadly pale, and
stared wildly at the speaker. Indeed her eyes and her face could be
compared to nothing else but two great black set in a marble mask.

"Me!"

"Aye, mem, e'en just for yer ain sel', and na ither, forbye it be
his lairdship's sel'," replied the old man, bowing with outward
humility and secret satisfaction, for Cuthbert cordially disapproved
and disliked Faustina.

"Horror! I see how it is! The dead body of the black woman has been
cast up by the sea, as I knew it would be, and we shall be
guillotined--no!--hanged, hanged by the neck till we are dead!" she
cried, wringing and twisting her hands in deadly terror.

"I wish to Heaven you may be, for an incorrigible fool!" muttered
the viscount, in irrepressible anger; for, you see, his passion for
this woman was not of a nature to preclude the possibility of his
falling into a furious passion with her upon occasions like this.
"What madness has seized you now?" he continued. "There is no
danger; you have no cause to be alarmed. They have probably come
about the murder of Ailsie Dunbar, Satan burn them! Cuthbert, what
are you lingering here for? Go, see what it is!"

The old man bowed lowly, and left the room.

"Faustina!" exclaimed the viscount, as soon as Cuthbert had gone,
"your folly will be the ruin of us both some day--will lead to
discovery! Can you not let the black woman, as you call her, rest?
Why will you be so indiscreet?"

"Oh, it is you who are indiscreet now," exclaimed Faustina, clasping
her hands and glancing towards Mrs. MacDonald, whose sleep seemed
too deep to be real.

"Try to govern yourself, then!" said the viscount.

"Ah, how can I, when I am quaking like a jelly with my terror?"

"You should not undertake dangerous crimes unless you possess heroic
courage," said the viscount.

"Mon Dieu! it is you who will ruin us!" cried Faustina, stamping her
small feet and pointing to Mrs. MacDonald.

The viscount laughed.

And at this moment old Cuthbert re-entered the room.

"Well?" asked Lord Vincent.

"If you please, me laird, they say they maun see yer lairdship's
sel' and the leddy," said the old man.

"What the blazes do they want with us? Was ever anything so
insolently persistent? Go and tell the fellows that I cannot and
will not see them to-night! And if they are disappointed it will
serve them right for coming out on such a night as this, They must
have been mad!"

"Verra weel, me laird. I'll tell them," said the old man, departing.

"Compose yourself, Faustina, this business has no reference to you,
I assure you. When they asked for us, they merely wished to see us
to put some questions about the case of Ailsie Dunbar," said the
viscount, who had not the slightest suspicion that there was, or
could be, a warrant out for his arrest. He fancied himself entirely
secure in his crimes. He believed the negroes to be safe beyond the
sea; sold into slavery in a land of which they did not even
understand the language, and from which they never would be allowed
to return. He believed Claudia to be crushed under the conspiracy he
had formed against her. He believed her father to be far away. And
so he considered himself safe from all interruptions of his
iniquities. What was there, in fact, to arouse his fears? What had
he to dread?

Nothing, he thought.

And he was still laughing at Faustina's weakness as he stood with
his back to the fire, when once more the door opened and old
Cuthbert reappeared, wearing a frightened countenance and followed
by two policemen.

Faustina shrieked with terror, covered her face with her hands, and
shrunk back in her chair. Mrs. MacDonald, aroused by the shriek from
her real or feigned sleep, opened her eyes and stared.

But Lord Vincent, astonished and indignant, strode towards the door
and demanded of his old servant:

"What means this intrusion, sir? Did I not order you to say to these
persons that I would not see them to-night? How dare you bring them
to this room?"

"'Deed, me laird, I could na help it! When I gi'e them yer
lairdship's message they e'en just bid me gang before, and sae they
followed me up, pushing me to the right and left at their ain will,"
said Cuthbert sullenly.

Lord Vincent turned to the intruders and haughtily demanded:

"What is the meaning of this conduct, fellows? Were you not told
that I would not see you to-night? How dare you push yourselves up
into the private apartment of these ladies? Leave the room and the
house instantly."

"We will leave the room and the house, my lord; but, when we do so,
you and that lady must go with us," said the taller of the two
policemen, advancing into the room.

"What?" demanded the viscount.

"Mon Dieu!" shrieked Faustina.

"Gracious, goodness, me, alive!" exclaimed Mrs. MacDonald.

"You are wanted," answered the policeman, whose name by the way was
McRae.

"What do you mean, fellow? Leave the room, I say, before I order my
servant to kick you out!" fiercely cried the viscount.

The policeman immediately stepped up to the side of his lordship and
laid his hand upon his shoulder, saying:

"Malcolm Dugald, Lord Vincent, you are my prisoner."

"Your prisoner, you scoundrel! hands off, I say!" cried the
viscount.

"I arrest you in the Queen's name, for the abduction and selling
into slavery of the three negroes, Catherine Mortimer, James
Mortimer, and Sarah Sims," said McRae, taking a firmer hold of his
captive.

"Let go my collar, you infernal villain, and show me your warrant!"
thundered Lord Vincent, wrenching himself from the grasp of the
policeman.

McRae calmly produced his warrant and placed it in the hands of the
viscount.

Lord Vincent, astonished, terrified, but defiant, held the document
up before his dazed eyes and tried to read it. But though he held it
up with both hands close to his blanched face, it trembled so in his
grasp that he could not trace the characters written upon it.

While he held it thus, McRae slyly drew something from his own
pocket, approached the viscount and--click! click--the handcuffs
were fastened upon the wrists of his lordship!

Down fluttered the warrant from the relaxed fingers of the viscount,
while his face, exposed to view, seemed set in a deadly panic as he
gazed upon his captor.

"Look to him, Ross," said McRae, addressing his comrade and pointing
to the viscount.

Then he stepped up to the cowering form of Mrs. Dugald, who had
shrunk to the very back of her deep velvet chair. Laying his hand
upon her shoulder he said:

"Faustina Dugald, you are my prisoner. I arrest you, in the Queen's
name, upon the charge of having aided and abetted Lord Vincent in
the abduction of--"

"Oh, horror! let me go, you horrid brute!" cried Faustina, suddenly
finding her voice, interrupting the officer with her shrieks and
springing from under his hand.

She rushed towards the passage door with the blind impulse of flight
and tore it open, only to find herself stopped by a posse of
constables drawn up without. They had come in force strong enough to
overcome resistance, if necessary.

"Give yourself up, Faustina. It is the best thing you can do," said
the viscount.

She stared wildly like a hunted hare, and then turned and made a
dash towards her bedroom door, but only to be caught in the arms of
McRae, who stepped suddenly thither to intercept her mad flight.

He held her firmly with one hand, while with the other he drew
something from his pocket and suddenly snapped the handcuffs upon
her wrists.

She burst into passionate tears.

"I am sorry to do this, madam, but you forced me to it," said McRae
gravely and kindly.

She was a pitiable object as she stood there, guilty, degraded, and
powerless. Her wreath of lilies had been knocked off and trampled
under foot in the scuffle. The bouquet of lilies that rested on her
bosom was crushed. Her lace and swan's-down trimmings were torn. Her
hair was disheveled, her face pale, and her eyes streaming with
tears.

"Why do they make me a prisoner?" she sobbed.

"I told you, madam, it was for your share in the abduction of--"

"Abduction! abduction! I don't know what you mean by abduction! I
did not kill the black negro person! I did not put her into the sea!
It was Lord Vincent! I never helped him! No, not at all! He would
not let me! And if he would, I should not have done it! He did it
all himself! And it is cruel to make a poor, small, little woman
suffer for what a big man does!" she cried, amid piteous tears and
sobs.

"Faustina! Faustina! what are you saying?" exclaimed the viscount,
in consternation.

"The truth, my lord viscount; you know it! The truth, messieurs, I
assure you! Lord Vincent killed the black negro woman and threw her
into the sea! And I had nothing to do with, it! I did not even know
it until all was over! And I will tell you all about it, messieurs,
if you will only take these dreadful things off my poor, little,
small wrists and let me go! It is cruel, messieurs, to fetter and
imprison a poor, small little woman, for a big man's crime! Let me
go free, messieurs, and I will tell you all about him," pleaded this
weeping creature, who for the sake of her own liberty was willing to
give her lover up to death.

But you need not be surprised at this; for I told you long ago that
there can be no honor, faith, or love among thieves, let the
biographers of the Jack Shepherds and Nancy Sykeses say what they
please to the contrary. "Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles?" The criminal is the most solitary creature upon earth; he
has no ties--for the ties of guilt are nothing; they snap at the
lightest breath of self-interest.

Faustina's plea dismayed her accomplice and disgusted her captor.

"Madam," said the latter, "you had better hold your peace. Your
words criminate yourself as well as Lord Vincent."

"How do they criminate myself? Oh, mon Dieu! what shall I do, since
even my denials are made to tell against me!" she whimpered,
wringing her hands.

"Faustina, be silent!" said the viscount sternly.

"My lord, we are ready to remove you," said McRae, advancing toward
the viscount.

"Where do you intend to take us then?" demanded the viscount, with a
blush of shame, though with a tone of defiance.

"To the police station house, for the night. In the morning you will
be brought before the magistrate for examination."

"To your beast of a station house?" said the viscount.

The policeman bowed.

"Ah, mon Dieu! will he take us out into the snow to-night? I cannot
go! I should freeze to death! I should perish in the storm! It would
be murder!" cried Faustina, wringing her hands.

"You see it would be barbarous to drag a lady out in this horrible
weather. Can you not leave her here for the night? and if you
consider yourself responsible for her safe-keeping, can you not
remain and guard her?" inquired his lordship, speaking, however,
quite as much, or even more, for himself than for Faustina; for he
was well aware that, if she were left, he would be also left.

"My lord, it is impossible. I could not be answerable for my
prisoner's safety if she were permitted to remain here all night, no
matter how well guarded she might be. It was only a few weeks ago
that a prisoner--a young girl she was, charged with poisoning--
persuaded me to hold her in custody through the night in her own
chamber. I did so, placing a policeman on guard on the outside of
each door. And yet, during the night she succeeded in making her
escape down a secret staircase and through a subterranean passage,
and got clear off. It was in just such an ancient place as this, my
lord. I came near losing my office by it; and I made a resolution
then never to trust a prisoner of mine out of my sight until I got
him or her, as the case might be, safe under lock and key in my
station house."

"But, mon Dieu! mon Dieu! what will become of me?" wailed Faustina.

"It will kill her. She is very tender," urged Lord Vincent.

"Your lordship may order your own close carriage for her use. She
may wrap up in all her furs. And though she may still suffer a good
deal from the long, cold ride, she will not freeze, I assure you,"
said McRae.

"Ah, but what do you take me for at all? I say that I did not kill
the black negro woman; Lord Vincent did it."

"Madam, neither you nor my lord are accused of murder," said McRae.

"Ah! what, then, do you accuse us of?"

"You will hear at the magistrate's office, madam," said the
policeman, losing patience.

"I say, what--whatever it was, Lord Vincent did it!"

"Faustina, be silent! If no remnant of good faith leads you to spare
me, spare yourself at least," said the viscount.

"Will you order your carriage?" said McRae.

"Cuthbert, go down and have the close carriage brought around. Put
the leopard skins inside and bottles of hot water," ordered the
viscount.

"Madam, you had better summon your maid and have your wrappings
brought to you, and anything else you may wish to take with you,"
advised McRae.

"Oh, mon Dieu! mon Dieu! must I leave this beautiful place to go to
a horrid prison. Oh, mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" wept Faustina, wringing
her hands.

"Shall I ring for your maid?" inquired McRae.

"No, you monster!" shrieked Faustina. "Do you think I want Desiree,
whose ears I boxed this morning, to come here to see me marched off
to prison? She would be glad, the beast! she would laugh in her
sleeve, the wretch! Madame MacDonald, will you get my bonnet and
sables?" she said, turning to her companion.

"Yes, my dear, suffering angel, I will do all that you wish me to
do. Ah! you remind me of your countrywoman, Queen Marie Antoinette,
when she was dragged from the luxurious Tuileries to the dreary
temple," whined sympathizing Complacency.

"Good Heaven! woman, do not speak of her. She was guillotined!"
cried Faustina, with a shiver of terror.

"But you shall not be, my dear; you shall come out clear; and they
who have accused you shall be made ashamed," said Mrs. MacDonald, as
she passed into Faustina's dressing room.

Presently she came forth, bearing a quilted silk bonnet, a velvet
sack, a sable cloak, a muff and cuffs, and warm gloves and fur-lined
boots, and what not; all of which she helped Faustina to put on.
While she was kneeling on the floor and putting on the beauty's
boots she said:

"I think some of these men might have the modesty to turn their
backs, if they canna leave the room. Ah, my poor dear! now you
remind me of my own countrywoman, poor Queen Mary Stuart, when she
complained on the scaffold of having to undress before so many men!
Now you have to dress before so many."

"Oh, God, you will be the death of me, with your guillotined women!
You turn my flesh to jelly, and my bones to gristle, and my heart to
water!" cried Faustina, with a dreadful shudder, as she rose to her
feet, quite ready, as far as dress was concerned, for her journey.

"Will my poor, dear, suffering angel have anything else?" said Mrs.
MacDonald.

"Yes. Oh, dear, that I should have to leave this sweet place for a
nasty prison! Yes, you may get together all that fruit and nuts and
cake and wine, and don't forget the bonbons, and have them put in
the carriage, for I don't believe I could get such things in the
horrid prison! And, stay--put me a white wrapper and a lace cap in
my little night-bag; and stop---put that last novel of Paul de Kock
in also. I will be as comfortable as I can make myself in that beast
of a place."

"Blessed angel! what a mind you have; what philosophy; what
fortitude! You now remind me of your illustrious compatriot, Madame
Roland, who, when dragged from her elegant home to the dreadful
prison of the Conciergerie, and knowing that in a few days she must
be dragged from that to the scaffold, yet sent for her books, her
music, her birds, and her flowers, that she might make the most of
the time left," said Mrs. MacDonald, as she zealously gathered up
the desired articles.

"Silence! I shall dash my brains out if you speak to me of another
headless woman!" shrieked Faustina, stopping both her ears.

Old Cuthbert put his head in to say that the carriage was ready.
Lord Vincent ordered him to load himself with the luxuries that had
been provided for Faustina and put them into the carriage, and then
in returning to fetch him his overshoes, cloak, and hat. All of
these orders were duly obeyed.

When all was ready Lord Vincent shook hands with Mrs. MacDonald was
saying:

"We must all bow to the law, madam; but this is only a passing
cloud. We shall be liberated soon. And I hope we shall find you here
when we return."

"Ye may be sure of that, my lord. And may Heaven grant you a speedy
deliverance," she answered.

Faustina next came up to bid her good-by.

"Good-by! Good-by! my sweet, suffering angel. Bear up under your
afflictions; fortify your mind by thinking of the martyred queens
and heroines who have preceded you," said Mrs. MacDonald, weeping as
she embraced Faustina.

"Good Heaven, I shall think of none of them! I shall think only of
myself and my deliverance!" said Faustina, breaking from her.

They went downstairs, marshaled by the policemen. They entered the
carriage, two policemen riding inside with them, and one on the box
beside the coachman. And thus they commenced their stormy night
journey.


CHAPTER XLII.

A BITTER NIGHT.

  St. Agnes' Eve--ah, bitter chill it was!
    The owl, for all his feathers, was acold,
  The hare limped trembling thro' the frozen grass;
    And silent was the flock in woolly fold!
                               --_Keats_.


A freezing night. Faustina shook as with an ague-fit, and her teeth
chattered like a pair of castanets, as she crouched down in one
corner of the back seat and huddled all her wrappings close about
her. But the cold still seemed to penetrate through all her furs and
velvets and woolens and enter the very marrow of her bones.

Beside her sat the viscount, silent, grim, and still, as though he
were congealed to ice. Before her sat the two policemen, well
wrapped up in their greatcoats and thick shawls.

All were silent except Faustina. She shook and moaned and chattered
incessantly. Such a mere animal was this wretched woman that she was
quite absorbed in her present sufferings. While enduring this
intense cold she could not look forward to the terrors of the
future.

"It's insufferable!" she exclaimed, fiercely stamping her feet; "can
you not make this beast of a carriage closer, then? My flesh is
stone and my blood is ice, I tell you."

One window had been left open a little way, to let a breath of air
into the carriage, which, crowded with four persons, was otherwise
stifling. But the viscount now raised both his fettered hands and
closed up the window. The arrangement did not prove satisfactory. It
deprived the sufferers of air without making them any warmer.
Faustina shook and moaned and chattered all the same.

"Oh, wretches!" she exclaimed, in furious disgust; "open the window
again! I am suffocated! I am poisoned! They have all been eating
garlic and drinking whisky!"

The window was opened at her desire, but as they were then crossing
the narrow isthmus of rock that connected the castle steep with the
land, the wind, from that exposed position, was cutting sharp, and
drove into the aperture the stinging snow, which entered the skin
like needle points.

"Ah, shut it! shut it! It kills me! It is infamous to treat a poor
little lady so!" she cried, bursting into tears.

Again the window was closed; but not for any length of time.
Apparently she could neither bear it open nor shut. So, shaking,
moaning, and complaining, the poor creature was taken through that
long and bitter night journey which ended at last only at the
station house of Banff.

Half dead with cold, she was lifted out of the carriage by the two
policemen who stood upon the sidewalk, where she remained, shaking,
chattering, and weeping tears that froze upon her cheeks as they
fell.

She could see nothing in that dark street but the gloomy building
before her, dimly lighted by its iron lamp above the doorway.

There she remained till the viscount was handed out.

"Cuthbert," said his lordship to the old man, who had exposed
himself to the severe weather of this night and driven the carriage
for the sake of being near his master as long as possible,
"Cuthbert, take the carriage around to the 'Highlander' and put up
there for the night. We shall want it to take us back to the castle
to-morrow, after this ridiculous farce is over."

"Verra weel, me laird," replied old Cuthbert, touching his hat with
all the more deference because his master was suffering degradation.

"Ah! is it so? Will we really get back to the castle to-morrow?"
whimpered Faustina, shaking, chattering, and wringing her hands.

"Of course we will," replied his lordship.

"Ah, but how shall I get through the night? I must have a good fire
and a comfortable bed, and something warm to drink. Will you see to
it, Malcolm?" she whiningly inquired.

"Don't be a fool!" was the gentlemanly reply; for the viscount
burned with half-suppressed rage against the woman. whose fatal
beauty had led him into all this disgrace.

She burst into a passion of tears.

"That is the reward I get for all my love!" she exclaimed.

"Faustina, for your own sake, if not for any other's, exercise some
discretion!" exclaimed the viscount angrily.

"Villain!" she screamed, in fury, "I had no discretion when I
listened to you!"

"I wish to Heaven you had had then! I should not have been in this
mess," he replied.

"Ah!" she hissed. "If my hands were not fettered I would tear your
eyes!"

"Sweet angel!" sneered the viscount, in mockery and self-mockery.

"Thsche!" she hissed, "let me at him!"

The viscount laughed, a hard, bitter, scornful laugh.

And at it they went, criminating and recriminating, until the empty
carriage was driven away, and the policemen took them by the
shoulders and pushed them into the station house.

They found themselves in a large stone hall, with iron-grated
windows. It was partially warmed with a large, rusty stove, around
which many men of the roughest cast were gathered, smoking, talking,
and laughing. The walls were furnished with rude benches, upon which
some men sat, some reclined, and some lay at full length. The stone
floor was wet with the slop of the snow that had been brought in by
so many feet and had melted. In one of these slops lay a woman, dead
drunk.

"Ah! Good God! I cannot stay here!" cried Faustina, gathering up her
skirts, as well as she could with her fettered hands, and looking
around in strong disgust.

The viscount laughed in derision; he was angry, desperate, and he
rejoiced in her discomfiture.

"Eh, Saunders! take these two women in the women's room," said
McRae, beckoning a tall, broad-shouldered, red-headed Scot to his
assistance.

"Hech! it will take twa o' the strongest men here to lift yon
lassie," replied the man, lumbering slowly along towards the
prostrate woman, and trying to raise her. If he failed in lifting
her, he succeeded in waking her, and he was saluted for his pains
with a volley of curses, to which he replied with a shake or two.

"Oh, horror! I will not stay here!" cried Faustina, stamping with
rage.

"Attend to her, Christie. Dunlap, help Saunders to remove that
woman," said McRae.

Two of the policemen succeeded in raising the fallen woman, and
leading her between them into an adjoining room. The man addressed
as "Christie" would have taken Faustina by the arm, and led her
after them, but that she fiercely shook herself from his grasp.

"Follow then and ye like, lass; but gae some gait ye maun, ye ken,"
said the man good-naturedly.

She glanced around the dreary room, upon the grated windows, the
sloppy floor, the rusty stove, and the wretched men, and finally
seemed to think that she could not do better than to leave such a
repulsive scene.

"Go along, then, and I will follow, only keep your vile hands off
me," said Faustina, gathering up her dainty raiment and stepping
carefully after her leader. As she did so she turned a last look
upon Lord Vincent. The viscount had thrown himself upon a corner of
one of the benches, where he sat, with his fettered hands folded
together, and his head bent down upon his breast, as if he were in
deep despair.

"Imbecile!" was the complimentary good-night thrown by his angel, as
she passed out of the hall into the adjoining room. This--the
women's room--was in all respects similar to the men's hall, being
furnished with the like grated windows, rusty iron stove, and rude
benches. Along, on these benches, or on the floor, were scattered
wretched women in every attitude of self-abandonment; some in the
stupor of intoxication; some in the depths of sorrow; some in stony
despair; some in reckless defiance.

The men who had come in with the drunken woman deposited her on one
of the benches, from which she quickly rolled to the floor, where
she lay dead to all that was passing around her. Her misfortune was
greeted with a shout of laughter from the reckless denizens of this
room; but that shout was turned into a deafening yell when their
eyes fell upon Faustina's array.

"Eh, sirs! wha the deil hae we here fra the ball?" they cried,
gathering around her with curiosity.

"Off, you wretches!" screamed Faustina, stamping at them.

"Hech! but she hae a temper o' her ain, the quean," said one.

"Ou, aye, just! It will be for sticking her lad under the ribs she
is here," surmised another.

"Eh, sirs, how are the mighty fa'en!" exclaimed a third, as they
closed around her, and began to closely examine her rich dress.

"Rabble! how dare you?" screamed Faustina, fiercely twitching
herself away from them.

"Eh! the braw furs and silks! the town doesna often see the loike o'
them," said the first speaker, lifting up the corner of the rich
sable cloak.

"Wretch, let alone!" shrieked Faustina, stamping frantically.

The uproar brought Policeman Christie to the scene.

"Take me away from this place directly, you beast! How dare you
bring me among such wretches?" screamed the poor creature.

"My lass, I hae na commission to remove you. I dinna ken what ye hae
done to bring yoursel' here; but here ye maun bide till the morn,"
said Christie kindly and composedly.

"I will not, I say! What have I done to be placed among these vile
wretches?" she persisted, stamping.

"I dinna ken, lassie, as I telled ye before; but joodging by your
manners, I suld say ye hae guided yoursel' an unco' ill gait. But
howe'er that will be, here ye maun bide till the morn. And gin ye
will heed guid counsel, ye'll haud your tongue," said Christie, at
the same time good-naturedly setting down the hamper that contained
Faustina's luxuries. She did not want it. She threw herself down
upon one of the benches and burst into a passion of tears.

The women gathered around the hamper, and quickly tore off the lid
and made themselves acquainted with its contents.

But Faustina did not mind. She was too deeply distressed to care
what they did. The contents of the hamper were now of no use to her.
The "good fire, the comfortable bed, the warm beverage" that she had
vehemently demanded were unattainable, she knew, and she cared for
nothing else now.

While Faustina, regardless that her famished fellow-prisoners were
devouring her cakes, fruits, and wine, gave herself up to passionate
lamentations, another scene was going on in the men's hall.

Lord Vincent sat gnawing his nails and "glowering" upon the floor in
his corner. From time to time the door opened, letting in a gust of
wind, sleet, and snow, and a new party of prisoners; but the
viscount never lifted his eyes to observe them.

At length, however, he looked up and beckoned Constable McRae to his
side.

"Here, you, fellow! I would like to see your warrant again. I wish
to know who is my accuser."

"Judge Randolph Merlin, my lord, of the United States Supreme
Court," answered McRae, once more taking out his warrant and
submitting it to the inspection of his prisoner.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed the viscount affectedly. "Randolph Merlin! He
has come to the country, I suppose, to look after his daughter; and
finding that these negroes are among the missing, has pretended to
get up this charge against me! It will not answer his purpose,
however. And I only wonder that any magistrate in his senses should
have issued a warrant for the apprehension of a nobleman upon his
unsupported charge."

"Pray excuse me, my lord, but the charge was not unsupported," said
McRae respectfully.

"How--not unsupported?"

"No, my lord. The judge had for witnesses the three negroes, and--"

"The three negroes!" exclaimed the viscount, recoiling in amazement;
but quickly recovering his presence of mind, he added: "Oh! aye! of
course! they ran off with my plate, and I suppose they have
succeeded in effectually secreting it and eluding discovery. And now
I suspect they have been looked up by their old master and persuaded
to appear as false witnesses against me. Ha, ha, ha! what a weak
device! I am amazed that any magistrate should have ventured upon
such testimony to have issued a warrant for my apprehension."

"I beg your pardon, my lord; but theirs was not the only testimony.
There were several gentlemen present, fellow-voyagers of Judge
Merlin, who testified to the finding of the negroes in a state of
slavery in Cuba; their testimony corroborates that of the negroes,"
said McRae.

Lord Vincent went pale as death.

"What does that mean? Oh, I see! it is all a conspiracy," he said,
with an ineffectual effort at derision.

But at that moment there was a bustle outside; the door was thrown
open, and another prisoner was brought in by two policemen.

"What is the matter? Who is it now?" inquired McRae, going forward.

"We have got him, sir," said a constable.

"Who?" demanded McRae.

"The murderer, sir!" answered the policeman, at the same moment
dragging into view the assassin of Ailsie Dunbar, the ex-valet of
Lord Vincent, Alick Frisbie.

Heavily fettered, his knees knocking together, pale and trembling,
the wretch stood in the middle of the floor.

"Where did you take him?" inquired McRae.

"At the 'Bagpipes,' Peterhead," replied the successful captor.

"Pray, upon what charge is he arrested?" inquired the viscount, in a
shaking voice, that he tried in vain to make steady.

"A trifle of murder, among other fancy performances," said McRae.

At this moment Frisbie caught sight of his master and set up a howl,
through which his words were barely audible:

"Oh, my lord, you will never betray me! You will never be a witness
against me! You will never hang me! You promised that you would
not!"

"Hold your tongue, you abominable fool! What the fiend are you
talking about? Do you forget yourself, sir?" roared the viscount,
furious at the fatal folly of his weak accomplice.

"Oh, no, my lord, I do not forget myself! I do not forget anything.
I beg your lordship's pardon for speaking, and I will swear to be as
silent as the grave, if your lordship will only promise not to--"

"Will you stop short where you are, and not open your mouth again,
you insufferable idiot!" thundered the viscount.

Frisbie gulped his last words, whined and crouched like a whipped
hound, and subsided into silence.

And soon after this McRae and the other officers who were off duty
for the remainder of the night went home and the doors were closed.

A miserable night it was to all within the station house, and
especially to that guilty man and woman who had been torn from their
luxurious home and confined in this dreary prison. All that could
revolt, disgust, and utterly depress human nature seemed gathered
within its walls. Here were drunkenness, deadly sickness, and
reckless and shameless profanity, all of the most loathsome
character. And all this was excruciating torture to a man like Lord
Vincent, who, if he was not refined, was at least excessively
fastidious. There was no rest; every few minutes the door was opened
to receive some new prisoner, some inebriate, or some night-brawler
picked up by the watch, and brought in, and then would ensue another
scene of confusion.

An endless night it seemed, yet it came to an end at last, The
morning slowly dawned. The pale, cold, gray light of the winter day
looked sadly through the falling snow into the closely-grated, dusty
windows. And upon what a scene it looked. Men were there, scattered
over the floor and upon the benches in every stage of intoxication;
some stupid, some reckless, some despairing; some sound asleep; some
waking up and yawning, and some walking about impatiently.

As the day broadened and the hour arrived for the sitting of the
police magistrate, the policemen came in and marched off the crowd
of culprits to a hall in another part of the building, where they
were to be examined. Even the women were marched out from the inner
room after the men. It seemed that all the lighter offenders were to
be disposed of first.

Lord Vincent and Frisbie were left alone in charge of one officer.

"When are we to be examined?" demanded the viscount haughtily of
this man.

"I dinna ken," he answered, composedly lighting his pipe and smoking
away.

Lord Vincent paced up and down the wet and dirty stone floor, until
at length the door opened and McRae, the officer who arrested him,
entered.

"Ah, you have come at last. I wish to be informed why we have been
left here all this time? Everyone else has been removed," exclaimed
the viscount.

"My lord, those poor creatures who were brought here during the
night were not arrested for any grave offense. Some were brought in
only to keep them from perishing in the snowstorm, and others for
drunkenness or disorder. The sitting police magistrate disposes of
them. They will mostly be discharged. But you, my lord, are here
upon a heavy charge, and you are to go before Sir Alexander
McKetchum."

"Why, then, do you not conduct me there? Do you mean to keep me in
this beastly place all day?"

"My lord, your examination is fixed for ten o'clock; it is only nine
now," said McRae, passing on to the inner room, from which he
presently appeared with Faustina.

Wretched did the poor creature look with her pale and tear-stained
face, her reddened eyes and disheveled hair; and her rich and
elegant white evening dress with its ample skirts and lace flounces
bedraggled and bedabbled with all the filth of the station house.

"I have had a horrid night! I have been in worse than purgatory. I
have not closed my eyes. I wish I was dead. See what you have
brought me to, Malcolm! And--only look at my dress!" sobbed the
woman.

"Your dress! That is just exactly what I am looking at. A pretty
dress that to be seen in. What the demon do you think people will
take you for?" sneered his lordship.

"I do not know! I do not care! poor trampled lily that I am!"

"Poor trampled fool! Why didn't you change that Merry Andrew costume
for something plainer and decenter before you left the castle?"

"Why didn't you tell me to do it, then? I never thought of it.
Besides, I didn't know what this beast of a station house was like.
No carpets, no beds, no servants. And I'm dying for want of them
all. And now I must have my breakfast. Why don't you order it,
Malcolm?" she whimpered.

"I am afraid they do not provide breakfasts any more than they do
other luxuries for the guests of this establishment," replied the
viscount, with a malignant laugh.

"But I shall starve, then," said the poor little animal, bursting
into tears.

"I cannot help it," replied the viscount, very much in the same tone
as if he had said: "I do not care."

But here McRae spoke:

"My lord, there is nearly an hour left before we shall go before the
magistrate. If you wish, therefore, you can send out to some hotel
and order your breakfast brought to you here."

"Thank you; I will avail myself of your suggestion. Whom can I
send?" inquired the viscount.

"Christie, you can go for his lordship," said McRae to his
subordinate, who had just entered the hall.

Christie came forward to take the order.

"What will you have?" inquired Lord Vincent, curtly addressing his
"sweet angel."

"Oh, some strong coffee with cream, hot rolls with fresh butter, and
broiled moor hen with currant jelly," replied Faustina.

Lord Vincent wrote his order down with a pencil on a leaf of his
tablets, tore it out and gave it to Christie, saying:

"Take this to the 'Highlander' and tell them to send the breakfast
immediately. Also inquire for my servant, Cuthbert Allan, who is
stopping there, and order him to put my horses to the carriage and
bring them around here for my use."

The man bowed civilly and went out to do this errand.

In about half an hour he returned, accompanied by a waiter from the
"Highlander," bringing the breakfast piled up on a large tray,
unfolded the cloth and spread it upon one of the benches and
arranged the breakfast upon it.

"Did you see my servant?" inquired Lord Vincent of his messenger.

"Yes, me laird, and gi'e him your order. The carriage will be
round," replied the man.

As the viscount and his companion drew their bench up to the other
bench upon which their morning meal was laid, Mr. Frisbie, who had
been sitting in a remote corner of the hall with his head buried on
his knees, got up and humbly stood before them, as if silently
offering his services to wait at table.

"He here!" exclaimed Faustina, in amazement.

"Yes, he is in the same boat with us. Go sit down, Frisbie; we don't
need you," said Lord Vincent. And the ex-valet retired and crouched
in his corner like a repulsed dog.

Trouble did not take away the appetite of Mrs. Dugald. It does not
ever have that effect upon constitutions in which the animal nature
largely preponderates. She ate, drank, and wept, and so got through
a very hearty repast. Lord Vincent, having swallowed a single cup of
coffee, which constituted the whole of his breakfast, sat and
watched her performances with unconcealed scorn.

Before Faustina got through Officer McRae began impatiently to
consult his large silver turnip.

"It is time to go," he said at length.

But Faustina continued to suck the bones of the moor hen, between
her trickling tears.

"We must not keep the magistrate waiting," said McRae.

But Faustina continued to suck and cry.

"I am sorry to hurry you, madam; but we must go," said McRae
decisively.

"Ah, bah! what a beastly place! where a poor little lady is not
permitted to eat her breakfast in peace!" she exclaimed, throwing
down the delicate bone at which she had been nibbling, and fiercely
starting up.

As she had not removed her bonnet and cloak during the whole night
she was quite ready.

As they were going out Lord Vincent pointed to Frisbie and inquired:

"Is not that fellow to go?"

"No; he is in upon a heavier charge, you know, my lord. Your
examination precedes his," said McRae, as he conducted his prisoners
into the street, leaving Mr. Frisbie to solace himself with the
remnants of Faustina's breakfast, guarded by Christie.

The viscount's carriage was drawn up before the door.

"Is it hame, me laird I" inquired old Cuthbert, touching his hat,
from the coachman's box.

"No. You are to take your directions from this person," replied his
lordship sullenly, as he hurried into the carriage to conceal
himself and his fettered wrists from the passers-by.

McRae put Mrs. Dugald into the carriage, and then jumped up and
seated himself on the box beside the coachman, and directed him
where to drive.

The snow was still falling fast, and the streets were nearly blocked
up.


CHAPTER XLIII.

FRUITS OF CRIME.

    Ay, think upon the cause--
  Forget it not: when you lie down to rest,
  Let it be black among your dreams; and when
  The morn returns, so let it stand between
  The sun and you, as an ill-omened cloud,
    Upon a summer's day of festival.
                                  --_Byron_.


After a drive of about twenty minutes through the narrow streets the
carriage stopped before the town hall. McRae jumped down from the
box and assisted his prisoners to alight.

"Will I wait, me laird?" inquired old Cuthbert, in a desponding
tone.

"Certainly, you old blockhead!" was the courteous reply of the
viscount, as he followed his conductor into the building.

McRae, who had Mrs. Dugald on his arm, led the way through a broad
stone passage, blocked up with the usual motley crowd of such a
place, into an anteroom, half filled with prisoners, guarded by
policemen, and waiting their turn for examination, and thence into
an inner room, where, in a railed-off compartment at the upper end,
and behind a long table, sat the magistrate, Sir Alexander
McKetchum, and his clerk, attended by several law officers.

"Here are the prisoners, your worship," said McRae, advancing with
his charge to the front of the table.

Sir Alexander looked up. He was a tall, raw-boned, sinewy old Gael,
with high features, a lively, red face, blue eyes, white hair and
side whiskers, and an accent as broad as Cuthbert's own. He was
apparently a man of the people.

"Malcolm, lad, I am verra sorry to see your father's son here on
such a charge," he said.

"I am here by your warrant, sir! it is altogether a very
extraordinary proceeding!" said the viscount haughtily.

"Not mare extraordinary than painful, lad," said the magistrate.

"Who are my accusers, sir?" demanded the viscount, as if he was in
ignorance of them.

"Ye sall sune see, me laird. Johnstone, have the witnesses in this
case arrived?" he inquired, turning to one of his officers.

"Yes, your worship."

"Then bring them in."

Johnstone departed upon his errand; and the magistrate turned his
eyes upon the prisoners before him.

"Eh, it is a bonnie lassie, to be here on such a charge," he
muttered to himself, as he looked at Faustina, standing, trembling
and weeping, before him. Then beckoning the officer who had the
prisoners in charge:

"McRae, mon, accommodate the lady with a chair. Why did ye put
fetters on her? Surely there was no need of them."

"There was need, your worship. The 'lady' resisted the warrant, and
fought like a Bess o' Bedlam," said McRae, as he set a chair for
Faustina.

"Puir bairn! puir, ill-guided bairn!" muttered the old man between
his teeth. But before he could utter another word Johnstone re-
entered the room, ushering in Judge Merlin, Ishmael Worth, and the
three negroes.

"Good Heaven!" exclaimed Faustina, in horror, as her eyes met those
of Katie; "it is the ghost of the black negro woman raised from the
dead!"

Katie heard this low exclamation, and replied to it by such
grotesque and awful grimaces as only the face of the African negro
is capable of executing.

"No, it is herself. There are no such things as ghosts. It is
herself, and I have been deceived," muttered Faustina to herself.
And then she fell into silence.

Perhaps Lord Vincent had not altogether credited McRae's statement,
made to him at the station house, for certainly his eyes opened with
consternation on seeing this party enter the room.

Johnstone marshaled them to their appointed places on the right hand
of the magistrate.

On turning around Ishmael met full the eyes of the viscount. Ishmael
gravely bowed and averted his head. He could not be otherwise than
courteous under any circumstances; and he could not bear to look
upon a fellowman in his degradation, no matter how well that
degradation was deserved.

Judge Merlin also bowed, as he looked upon his worthless son-in-law;
but the judge's bow was full of irony as his face was full of scorn.

The magistrate looked up from the document he was reading and
acknowledged the presence of the new arrivals with a bow. Then
turning to the prisoner he said:

"Malcolm, lad, this is an unco ill-looking accusation they hae
brought against you; kidnaping and slave-trading, na less--a sort of
piracy, ye ken, lad! What hae ye to say till it?"

"What have I to say to it, sir? Why, simply that it has taken me so
by surprise that I can find nothing to say but that I am astounded
at the effrontery of any man who could bring such a charge against
me, and at the fatuity, if you will excuse my terming it so, of any
magistrate who could issue a warrant against me upon such a charge,"
said the viscount haughtily.

"Nay, nay, lad! nay, nay! I had guid grounds for what I did, as ye
shall hear presently, and noo, gen ye hae na objection, we will
proceed wi' the investigation----"

"But I have an objection, sir! I tell you this has taken me utterly
by surprise. I am totally unprepared for it. I must have time, I
must have counsel," said the viscount with much heat.

"Then I maun remand ye for another examination," replied Sir
Alexander McKetchum coolly.

"But I object to that, also. I object to be kept in confinement
while there is nothing proved against me, and I demand my liberty,"
said the viscount insolently.

"Why dinna ye demaund the moon and stars, laddie? I could gi'e them
to ye just as sune," replied Sir Alexander.

"You have no right to detain me in custody!" fiercely broke forth
Lord Vincent.

"Whisht, lad, I hae no richt to set you at leeberty."

Here old Katie, whose eyes had been snapping whole volleys of
vindictive fire upon the prisoners, broke out into words before
Judge Merlin or Ishmael could possibly prevent her.

"Don't you let him go, ole marse! he's one nasty, 'ceitful, lyin',
white nigger as ebber libbed! He did do it, and he needn't 'ny it,
not while I'm standin' here! Don't you let him go, ole marse! he's
cunnin' as de debbil, and he'd run away, sure as ebber you's born!
You take my 'vice and don't you let him go! he artful as ole Sam!"

"Katie, Katie, Katie!" remonstrated Ishmael, in a low voice.

"So he is, den! and he knows it himse'f, too! Yes, you is, you grand
vilyun! Ah, ha! 'member how you stood dere cussin' and swearin' and
callin' names, and sassin' at me, hard as ebber you could! Oh, ho! I
telled you den how it was goin' to be! You didn't beliebe me, didn't
you? Berry well, den! Now you see! now it's my turn!"

"Katie, be silent!" ordered Judge Merlin in a low tone.

"Yes, marse, yes, chile, I gwine be silent arter I done ease my mind
speaking. Umph, humph!" she said, turning again to the unhappy
prisoner. "Umph, humph! thought you and dat whited salt-peter was
gwine gobern de world all your own way, didn't you? Heave me down in
de wault to sleep long o' de rats, didn't you? Ah, ha! where you
sleep las' night--and where you gwine to sleep to-night? Not in your
feathery bed, dat's sartain! Send me 'cross de seas, to lib long ob
de barbariums in de Stingy Islands, didn't you? Oh, ho! where you
gwine be sent 'cross de seas? Not on a party ob pleasure, dat
sartain, too! Ebber hear tell ob Bottommy Bay, eh? Dere where you
gwine. Tell you good."

Here Sir Alexander, who had been gazing in speechless astonishment
upon what seemed to him to be an incomprehensible phenomenon,
recovered himself, found his voice, and said to Judge Merlin, very
much as if he were speaking of some half-tamed wild animal:

"Keep that creature quiet or she must be removed."

"Katie," said Ishmael gently, "you would not like to be taken from
the courtroom, would you?"

"No! 'cause I don't want to be parted from my lordship. I lubs him
so well!" replied Katie, with a vindictive snap of her eyes.

"Then you must be silent," said Ishmael, "or you will be sent away."

"Look here, ole marse!" said Katie, addressing the bench, "he had
his sassagefaction sassin' at me dere at Scraggy! now it's my turn!
And I gwine gib it to him good, too. Say, my lordship! sold me to a
low life 'fectioner to work in de kitchen--didn't you! Umph-humph!
What you gwine to work at? not crickets, dat's sartain! Ebber try to
take your recreation in de quarries wid a big ball and chain to your
leg, eh? And an oberseer wid a long whip, ha?" she grinned.

"Sir, if you have been sufficiently well entertained with this
exhibition of gorilla intelligence and malignity, will you have the
goodness to put a stop to the performance and proceed with the
business of the day?" asked Lord Vincent arrogantly.

"Aye, lad! though, as ye ask for a short delay of proceeding, in
order to get your counsel, which is but reasonable, there is no
business on hand but just to remand you and your companion--puir
lassie!--back to prison, for future examination," said the
magistrate. Then turning to a policeman, he said: "If that strange
creature becomes disorderly again, remove her from the room."

"Nebber mind, ole marse! he no call for to take de trouble. I done
said all I gwine to say and now I gwine to shut up my mouf tight.
I'd scorn to hit a man arter he's down," said Katie, bridling with a
lofty assumption of magnanimity. And as she really did shut her
mouth fast, the point of expulsion was not pressed.

"And noo, lad, naething remains but to send you back," said Sir
Alexander.

"I remarked to you before, sir, that I object to be remanded to
prison, since nothing is proved against me. I totally object!" said
the viscount stubbornly.

"Aye, lad, it appears too that ye object to maist things in legal
procedure; the whilk is but natural, ye ken, for what saith the
poet?

  "'Nae thief e'er felt the halter draw
    Wi' guid opinion o' the law,'"

replied the magistrate, with a touch of caustic humor.

"But, sir, I am ready to give bail to any amount."

"It will na do, lad. The accusation is too grave a one. Nae doubt ye
would gi'e me bail, and leg bail to the boot o' that. Na, Malcolm,
ye hae had your fling, lad, and noo yee'll just hae to abide the
consequences," replied the magistrate, taking up a pen to sign a
document that his clerk laid before him.

"Then I hope, sir, that since we are to be kept in restraint, we
shall be placed in something like human quarters; and not in that
den of wild beasts, your filthy police station," said the viscount.

"Ou, aye, surely, lad. Ye shall be made as comfortable as is
consistent wi' your safe-keeping. Christie, take the prisoners to
the jail, and ask the governor to put them in the best cells at his
disposal, as a special favor to mysel'. And ask him also in my name
to be kind and considerate to the female prisoner--puir lassie!"
said the magistrate, handing the document to the policeman in
question.

"Ole marse--" began Katie, breaking her word, and addressing the
bench.

"The court is adjourned," said the magistrate, rising.

"But, ole marse--" repeated Katie.

"Remove the prisoners," he said, coming down from his seat.

"Yes, but, ole marse--" she persisted.

"Dismiss the witnesses!" he ordered, passing on.

"Laws bless my soul alive, can't a body speak to you?" exclaimed
Katie, catching hold of his coat and detaining him.

"What is it that you want, creature?" demanded Sir Alexander, in
astonishment.

"Only one parting word to 'lighten your mind, ole marse! Which it is
dis: Just now you called dat whited salt-peter here a pure lassie,
which, beggin' your pardon, is 'fernally false, dough you don't know
it! 'cause if she's pure, all de wus ob de poor mis'able gals ye
might pick up out'n de streets is hebbenly angels, cherrybims, and
serryfims. Dere now, dat's de trufe! Don't go and say I didn't tell
you!" And Katie let go his coat.

And with a bow to Judge Merlin and his party as he passed them, Sir
Alexander left the room.

The prisoners were removed--Faustina weeping, and the viscount
affecting to sneer.

Judge Merlin and Ishmael went forth arm-in-arm. Of late the old man
needed the support of the young one in walking. Sorrow and anxiety,
more than age and infirmity, had bowed and weakened him. As the
friends walked on, their conversation turned on the case in hand.

"The magistrate seems disposed to be very lenient," said the judge,
in a discontented tone of voice.

"Not too lenient, I think, sir. He is evidently very kindly disposed
towards the prisoner, with whose family he seems to be personally
acquainted; but, notwithstanding all that, you observe, he is
conscientiously rigid in the discharge of his magisterial duties in
this case. He would not accept bail for the prisoner, although by
stretching a point he might have done so," replied Ishmael.

"I wonder if he knew that? I wonder if he really knew the extent and
limit of his power as a magistrate? I doubt it. I fancy he refused
bail in order to keep on the safe side of an uncertainty. For, do
you know, he impressed me as being a very illiterate man. Why, he
speaks as broadly as the rudest Scotch laborer I have met with yet!
He must be an illiterate man."

"Oh, no, sir; you are quite mistaken in him. Sir Alexander McKetchum
is a ripe scholar, an accomplished mathematician, an extensive
linguist, and last of all, a profound lawyer. He graduated at the
celebrated law school of Glasgow University; at least so I'm assured
by good authority," replied Ishmael.

"And speaks in a lingo as barbarous as that of our own negroes!"
exclaimed the judge.

Ishmael smiled and said:

"I have also been informed that his early life was passed in poverty
and obscurity, until the death of a distant relation suddenly
enriched him and afforded him the means of paying his expenses at
the University. Perhaps he clings to his rustic style of speech from
the force of early habit, or from affection for the accent of his
childhood, or from the spirit of independence, or from all three of
these motives, or from no motive at all. However, with the style of
his pronunciation we have nothing whatever to do. All that we are
concerned about is his honesty and ability as a magistrate; and that
appears to me to be beyond question."

"Oh, yes, yes, I dare say, he will do his duty. I am pleased that he
refused bail and remanded the prisoners."

"Yes, he did his duty in that matter, though it must have been a
very disagreeable one. And now, sir, as the prisoners are remanded
and we have nothing more to detain us in Banff, had we not better
return immediately to Edinboro'?" suggested Ishmael; for you see,
ever since the news of his daughter's misfortunes had shaken the old
man's strength, it was Ishmael who had to watch over him, to think
for him and to shape his course.

"Y--yes; perhaps we had. But when I return to Edinboro', I go to
Cameron Court," said the judge hesitatingly.

"The best place for you, sir, beyond all question."

"Yes; and by the way, Ishmael, I am charged with an invitation from
the Countess of Hurstmonceux to yourself, inviting you to accompany
me on my visit to her ladyship. Do you think you would like to
accept it?"

"Very much indeed. I have a very pleasant remembrance of Lady
Hurstmonceux, though I doubt whether her ladyship will be able to
recollect me," said Ishmael with a smile.

The judge was somewhat surprised at this ready acquiescence. After a
short hesitation, he said:

"Do you know that Claudia is staying at Cameron Court?"

"Why, certainly. It was for that reason I favored your going there.
It is, besides, under the circumstances, the most desirable
residence for Lady Vincent."

This reply was made in so calm a manner that any latent doubt or
fear entertained by the judge that there might be something
embarrassing or unpleasant to Ishmael in his prospective meeting
with Claudia was set at rest forever.

But how would Claudia bear this meeting? How would she greet the
abandoned lover of her youth? That was the question that now
troubled the judge.

It did not trouble Ishmael, however. He had no doubts or misgivings
on the subject. True, he also remembered that there had been a long
and deep attachment between himself and Claudia Merlin; but it had
remained unspoken, unrevealed. And Claudia in her towering pride had
turned from him in his struggling poverty, and had married for rank
and title another, whom she despised; and he had conquered his ill-
placed passion and fixed his affections upon a lovelier maiden. But
that all belonged to the past. And now, safe in his pure integrity
and happy love, he felt no sort of hesitation in meeting Lady
Vincent, especially as he knew that, in order to save her ladyship
effectually, it was necessary that he should see her personally.

But Ishmael never lost sight of the business immediately in hand.
Their walk from the town hall towards their hotel took them
immediately past the Aberdeen stage-coach office. Here Ishmael
stopped a moment, to secure places for himself and company in the
coach that started at eleven o'clock.

"We shall only have time to reach the hotel and pack our
portmanteaus before the coach will call for us. It is a hasty
journey; but then it will enable us to catch the afternoon train at
Aberdeen, and reach Edinboro' early in the evening," said Ishmael.

And the judge acquiesced.

When they entered the inn, they found that the professor and the
three negroes were there before them.

Ishmael gave the requisite orders, and they were so promptly
executed that when, a few minutes later, the coach called, the whole
party was ready to start. The judge and Ishmael rode inside, and the
professor and the three negroes on the outside; and thus they
journeyed to Aberdeen, where they arrived in time to jump on board
the express train that left at two o'clock for Edinboro'. They
reached Edinboro' at five o'clock in the afternoon, and drove
immediately to Magruder's Hotel. Here they stopped only long enough
to change their traveling dresses and dine. And then, leaving the
three negroes in charge of the professor, they set out in a cab for
Cameron Court. It was eight o'clock in the evening when they arrived
and sent in their cards.

The countess and Claudia were at tea in the little drawing room when
the cards were brought in.

"Show the gentlemen into this room," said Lady Hurstmonceux to the
servant who had brought them.

And in a few minutes the door was thrown open and--"Judge Merlin and
Mr. Worth" were announced.

The countess arose to welcome her guests.

But Claudia felt all her senses reel as the room seemed to turn
around with her.

Judge Merlin shook hands with his hostess and presented Ishmael to
her, and then, leaving them speaking together, he advanced to
embrace his daughter.

"My dearest Claudia, all is well. We have settled the whole party,
the viscount, the valet, and the woman. They are lodged in jail, and
are safe to meet the punishment of their crimes," he said, as he
folded her to his bosom.

But oh! why did her heart beat so wildly, throbbing almost audibly
against her father's breast?

He held her there for a few seconds; it was as long as he decently
could, and then, gently releasing her, he turned towards Ishmael,
and beckoning him to approach, said:

"My daughter, here is an old friend come to see you. Welcome him."

Ishmael advanced and bowed gravely.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Worth," said Claudia in a low voice, as
she held out her hand.

He took it, bowed over it, and said:

"I hope I find you well, Lady Vincent."

And then as he raised his head their eyes met; his eyes--those
sweet, truthful, earnest, dark eyes, inherited from his mother--were
full of the most respectful sympathy. But hers--oh, hers!

She did not mean to look at him so; but sometimes the soul in a
crisis of agony will burst all bounds and reveal itself, though such
revelation were fraught with fate. Grief, shame, remorse, and
passionate regret for the lost love and squandered happiness that
might have been hers, were all revealed in the thrilling, pathetic,
deprecating gaze with which she once more met the eyes of her
girlhood's young worshiper, her worshiper no longer.

  "Of all sad words of tongue or pen
  The saddest are these: 'It might have been.'"

Only for an instant did she forget herself; and then Claudia Merlin
was repressed and Lady Vincent reinstated. Her voice was calm as she
replied:

"It is very kind in you, Mr. Worth, to some so long a distance, at
so great a cost to your professional interests, for the sake of
obliging my father and serving me."

"I would have come ten times the distance, at ten times the cost, to
have obliged or served either," replied Ishmael earnestly, as he
resigned her hand, which until then he had held.

"I believe you would. I know you would. I thank you more than I can
say," she answered.

"Have you been to tea, Judge Merlin?" inquired the countess
hospitably.

"No, madam; but will be very glad of a cup," answered the judge,
pleased with any divertisement.

Lady Hurstmonceux rang, and ordered fresh tea and toast and more
cups and saucers. And the party seated themselves. And thus the
embarrassment of that dreaded meeting was overgot.

While they sipped their tea the judge exerted himself to be
interesting. He gave a graphic account of the scene in the
magistrate's office; the assumption of haughty dignity and defiance
on the part of the viscount; the pitiable terrors of the ex-opera
singer; the vindictive triumph of Katie; and the broad accent,
caustic humor, and official obstinacy of the magistrate. Ishmael,
when appealed to, assisted his memory. Claudia was gravely
interested. But Lady Hurstmonceux was excessively amused.

They were surprised to hear that further proceedings were deferred;
but they at last admitted that they would be obliged to be patient
under "the law's delays."

After tea, fearing that her guests were in danger of "moping," Lady
Hurstmonceux proposed a game of whist, saying playfully that it was
very seldom she was so fortunate as to have the right number of
evening visitors to form a rubber.

And as no one gainsaid their hostess, the tea service was taken
away, the table cleared, and the cards brought. They seated
themselves and cut for partners; and Claudia and her father were
pitted against Lady Hurstmonceux and Ishmael.

Do you wonder at this? Do you wonder that people who had just passed
through scenes of great trouble, and were on the eve, yes, in the
very midst of a fatal crisis, people whose minds were filled with
sorrow, humiliation, and intense anxiety, should gather around a
table for a quiet game of whist; yes, and enjoy it, too?

Why, if you will take time to reflect, you will remember that such
things are done in our parlors and drawing rooms every day and night
in our lives. Our thoughts, our passions, our troubles, are put
down, covered over, ignored, and we--play whist, get interested in
honors and odd tricks, and win or lose the rub; or do something
equally at variance with the inner life, that lives on all the same.

Our party spent a pleasant week at Cameron Court.

Ishmael occupied himself with making notes for the approaching
trials, or with visiting the historical monuments of the
neighborhood.

Judge Merlin devoted himself to his daughter.

Lady Hurstmonceux studied the comfort of her guests, and succeeded
in securing it.

And thus the days passed until they received an official summons to
appear before Sir Alexander McKetchum at the examination of Lord
Vincent and Mrs. Dugald.


CHAPTER XLIV.

NEMESIS.

  With pallid cheeks and haggard eyes,
  And loud laments and heartfelt sighs,
  Unpitied, hopeless of relief,
  She drinks the cup of bitter grief.

  In vain the sigh, in rain the tear,
  Compassion never enters here;
  But justice clanks the iron chain
  And calls forth shame, remorse, and pain.
                         --_Anon_


The same carriage that brought Lord Vincent and Mrs. Dugald to the
town hall conveyed them from that place to the county jail.

There Lord Vincent finally dismissed it, sending it home to the
castle, and instructing Cuthbert to pack up some changes of clothing
and his dressing-case and a few books and to bring them to him at
the prison.

Mrs. Dugald at the same time stopped crying long enough to order the
old man to ask Mrs. MacDonald to put up all that might be necessary
to her comfort for a week, and dispatch it by the same messenger
that should bring Lord Vincent's effects.

These arrangements concluded, the carriage drove away and Policeman
McRae conducted his prisoners into the jail. He took them first into
the warden's room, where he produced the warrant for their commital
and delivered them up.

The warden, "Auld Saundie Gra'ame," as he was familiarly styled, was
a tall, gaunt, hard-favored old Scot, who had been too many years in
his present position to be astonished at any description of prisoner
that might be confined to his custody. In his public service of more
than a quarter of a century he had had turned over to his tender
mercies more than one elegantly dressed female, and many more than
one titled scamp. So, without evincing the least surprise, he simply
took the female prisoner, named in the warrant "Faustina Dugald," to
be--just what she was--a fallen angel who had dropped into the
clutches of the law; and the male prisoner, named in the warrant
"Malcolm Dugald, Viscount Vincent," to be--what he was--a noble
rogue, guilty of being found out.

While he was reading the warrants, entering their names in his
books, and writing out a receipt for their "bodies," Lord Vincent
stood with his fettered hands clasped, his head bowed upon his
chest, and his countenance set in grim endurance; and Faustina stood
wringing her hands, weeping, and moaning, and altogether making a
good deal of noise.

"Whisht, whisht, bairnie! dinna greet sae loud! Hech! but ye mak'
din eneugh to deave a miller!" expostulated the warden, as he handed
the receipt to McRae and turned his regards to the female prisoner.

But the only effect of his words upon Faustina was to open the
sluices of her tears and make them flow in greater abundance.

"Eh, lassie, 'tis pity of you too! But hae ye ne'er been tauld that
the way o' the transgreesor is haird? and the wages o' sin is
deeth?" said the "kindly" Scot.

"But I do not deserve death! I never did kill anybody myself!"
whimpered Faustina.

"Wha the de'il said ye did? I was quoting the Book whilk I greatly
fear ye dinna aften look into, or ye would na be here noo."

"But I have no right to be here. I never did anything, I, myself, to
deserve such treatment. It was Lord Vincent's fault. It was he who
brought me to this!" whined Faustina.

"Nae doobt! nae doobt at a'! He's ane o' the natural enemies o' your
sex, ye ken. And ye suld o' thocht o' that before ye trusted him sae
far."

"I did not trust him at all. And I do not know what you mean by your
insinuations, you horrid old red-headed beast!" cried Faustina.

"Whisht! whisht! haud your tongue, woman! Dinna be sae abusive! Fou'
words du nae guid, as I aften hae occasion to impress upon the
malefactors that are brocht here for safe-keeping," said the jailer,
as he turned and looked around upon the underlings in attendance.
Then beckoning one of the turnkeys to him, he said:

"Here, Cuddie, tak' this lass into the north corridor o' the women's
ward; and when ye hae her safe in the cell, ye maun knock off the
irons fra her wrists. Gang wi' Cuddie, lass; an dinna be fashed;
he's nae a bad chiel."

Cuddie, a big, honest, good-natured looking brute, took a bunch of
great keys from their hook on the wall and signing for his prisoner
to follow him, turned to depart.

But Faustina showed no disposition to obey the order. And McRae, who
had lingered in the room, now turned to the warden and said:

"If you please, sir, Sir Alexander McKetchum desired me to request
you to put these prisoners into as comfortable quarters as you could
command, consistent with their safe custody."

"Sir Alexander would do weel to mind his ain business. Wha the de'il
gi'e him commission to dictate to me?" demanded the old Scot
wrathfully.

"Nay, sir, he only makes the request as a personal favor," said
McRae deprecatingly.

"Ou, aye, aweel, that's anither thing. Though there's nae muckle of
choice amang the cells, for that matter; forbye it's the four points
o' the compass, nor', sou', east, and wast. The jail is square and
fronts nor', and the cells range accordingly. There's nae better
than the nor' corridor o' the women's ward. Tak' the lass awa,
Cuddie."

Cuddie laid his hand not unkindly on the shoulder of his prisoner,
and Faustina, seeing at last that resistance was quite in vain,
followed him out.

"Noo, Donald, mon," said the jailer, beckoning another turnkey,
"convey his lairdship to the sou-wast corner cell in the men's ward.
It has the advantage of twa windows and mare sunshine than fa's to
the lot o' prison cells in general. And when ye get him there
relieve him o' his manacles."

The officer addressed took down his bunch of keys, and turned to his
prisoner. But Lord Vincent did not wait for the desecrating hand of
the turnkey to be laid upon his shoulder. With a haughty gesture and
tone he said:

"Lead the way, fellow; I follow you."

And Donald bowed and preceded his prisoner as if he had been a head-
waiter of a fashionable hotel, showing an honored guest to his
apartments.

When they were gone the old warden turned to the policeman:

"Will it gae hard wi' them, do ye think, McRae?"

"I think it will send them to penal servitude for twenty years or
for life."

Meanwhile Cuddie conducted his prisoner through long lines of close,
musty, fetid passages, and up high flights of cold, damp stone
stairs, to the very top of the building, where the women's wards
were situated.

Here he found a stout old woman, in a linen cap, plaid shawl, and
linsey gown, seated at an end window, with her feet upon a foot-
stove, and her hands engaged in knitting a stocking.

She was Mrs. Ferguson, the female turnkey.

"Here, mither, I hae brocht you anither prisoner," said Cuddie,
coming up with his charge.

The old woman settled her spectacles on her nose, and looked up,
taking a deliberate survey of the newcomer, as she said:

"Hech! the quean is unco foine; they be braw claes to come to prison
in. Eh, Cuddie, I wad suner hae any ither than ane o' these hizzies
brocht in."

"But, mither, the word is that she maun be made comfortable," said
Cuddie.

"Ou, aye--nae doobt! she will be some callant's light o' luve, wha
hae a plenty o' siller!" replied the old woman scornfully, as she
rose from her place and led the way to the door of a cell about
halfway down the same corridor.

"Ye'll pit her in here. It will be as guid as anither," she said.

Cuddie detached a certain key from his bunch and handed it to her.
She opened the door, and they entered. The cell was a small stone
chamber, six feet by eight, with one small grated window, facing the
door. On the right of the window was a narrow bed, filling up that
side of the cell; on the left was a rusty stove; that was all; there
was no chair, no table, no strip of carpet on the cold stone floor;
all was comfortless, desolate.

Faustina burst into a fresh flood of tears as she threw herself upon
the wretched bed.

"Let me tak' aff the fetters," said Cuddie gently.

Faustina arose to a sitting position, and held up her hands.

Cuddie, with some trouble, got them off, but so awkwardly that he
bruised and grazed her wrists in doing so, while Faustina wept
piteously and railed freely.  Cuddie was too good-natured to mind
the railing, but the dame fired up:

"Haud your growlin', ye ne'er-do well! Gin ye had your deserts, for
a fou'-mouthed jaud, ye'd be in a dark cell on bread and water!"

"Whisht! whisht, mither! Let her hae the length o' her tongue, puir
lass! It does her guid, and it does me na hurt. There, lass--the
airns are aff, and if you'll o'ny put your kershief aroun' your
bonnie wrists they'll sune be weel eneugh."

"Take me away! take me away from that horrid ol woman!" cried
Faustina, turning her wrath upon the dame and appealing to Cuddie.

"Whisht! dinna ye mind her. She's a puir dolted auld carline," said
Cuddie, in a voice happily too low to reach the ear of said
"carline."

"Ye maunna guid her siccan a sair gait, mither," said Cuddie, as
they left the cell.

"I doobt she has guided hersel' an uco' ill ane," retorted the dame.

Faustina was left sitting on the side of the hard bed, weeping
bitterly. She did not throw off her bonnet or cloak. She could not
make herself at home in this wretched den. Besides, it was bitterly
cold; there was no fire in the rusty stove and she wrapped her
sables more closely around her.

She remained there in the same position, cowering, shivering and
weeping, for two or three miserable hours, when she was at length
broken in upon by the old dame, who brought in her prison dinner--
coarse beef broth, in a tin can, with an iron spoon, and a thick
hunk or oatmeal bread on a tin plate.

"What is that!" ask Faustina.

"Your dinner. Is it na guid o' the authorities to feed the like o'
you for naething?"

"My dinner! ugh! Do you think I am going to swallow that swill--fit
only for pigs?" exclaimed Faustina, in disgust.

"Hech, sirs! what's the warld comming to? It is guid broose, verra
guid broose, that many an honest woman would be unco glad to hae for
hersel' and her puir bairns, forbye _you!_" said the dame
wrathfully.

"Take it away! the sight of it makes me ill!"

"Verra weel; just as you please. I'll set it here, till ye come to
your stomach," said the dame, setting the can and plate down upon
the stone floor, for there was no other place to put them.

"I want a fire--I am frozen!" cried Faustina.

"Why did na ye say sae before?" growled the dame, going out.

In a few minutes she came back, bringing coals and kindlings and
lighted the fire, and then retreated as sullenly as she had entered.
Faustina drew near the stove, and sat down upon the floor to hover
over it.

When she grew warm her eyes began to glitter dangerously. She turned
herself around and surveyed the place. Like the frozen viper thawed
to life, her first instinct was to bite.

"I would like to set fire to the prison !" she said.

But a moment's reflection proved to her the folly of this impulse.
If she should use the fire in her stove for such incendiary
purposes, herself would be the only thing burned up; the cell of
stone and its furniture of iron would escape with a smoking.

She put off her bonnet and her sables--the first time since the
night before, and she threw herself upon the bed, and lay there in a
torment until six o'clock in the evening, when the door was once
more unlocked by the dame, who brought her the prison supper--a tin
can of oatmeal porridge.

"Here's your parritch; ye may eat it or leave it, just as ye
please," said the woman, setting the can on the floor.

"I want some tea! I will have none of your filthy messes! Bring me
some tea!" cried Faustina.

"I wish ye may get it, lassie, that's a'," answered the dame, as she
went out and locked the door behind her.

That was the last visit Faustina had that night. She lay on her hard
bed, weeping, moaning, and lamenting her fate, until the last light
of day died out of the narrow window, and left the cell in darkness,
but for the dim red ray in the corner, that showed where the fire in
the rusty stove burned. And still she lay there, until the pangs of
hunger began to assail her. These she bore some time before she
could overcome her repugnance to the prison fare. At length,
however, she arose and groped her way about the stone floor until
she found the can of beef broth, which, upon trying, she discovered
to taste better than it looked. She ate it all; then she ate the
hunk of bread; and finally she finished with the oatmeal porridge.
And, then, without undressing, she threw herself on the outside of
her bed; and, overcome with fatigue, distress, and vigilance, she
fell into a deep sleep that lasted until the morning.

It might have lasted much longer, but she was aroused about seven
o'clock, by the entrance of her keeper, bringing her breakfast.

"Eh!" said the dame, glancing at the empty cans, "but I thocht ye
would come to your stomach. Here's your breakfast."

Faustina raised herself up and gazed around in a bewildered way, but
she soon recollected herself, and looked inquiringly at her keeper.

"It's your breakfast," said the latter; "it's guid rye coffee,
sweeted wi' treacle, and a braw bit o' bannock."

"I want water and soap and towels," said Faustina, in an angry,
peremptory manner.

"Ou, aye, nae doobt; and ye would like a lady's maid, and perfumery
'till your toilet. Aweel, there is a stone jug and bowl of water,
and a hempen clout ahint the stove, gin that will serve your
purpose," said the dame, setting down the breakfast, and gathering
the empty cans from the floor as she left the cell.

Faustina, poor wretch, made such a toilet as her rude providings
enabled her to do, and then, with what appetite she might, made her
morning meal. And then she sat on the edge of her bed and cried and
wished herself dead.

At about eleven o'clock she heard footsteps and voices approaching
the cell. And the door was opened by the turnkey, who ushered in
Mrs. MacDonald, followed by a servant from the castle, bringing a
large box and a basket.

The servant set down his burdens and retired with the turnkey, who
immediately locked the door.

And not until then, when they were left alone, did this precious
pair of female friends rush into each other's arms, Faustina
bursting into tears and sobbing violently on the bosom of Mrs.
MacDonald, and Mrs. MacDonald wheedling, caressing, and soothing
Faustina.

"Mine pet, mine darling, mine bonny bairn," were some of the
epithets of endearment bestowed by the lady upon her favorite.

"Oh, madame, what a purgatory of a place, and what demons of
people!" Faustina cried.

"Yes, my sweet child, yes, I know it! but bear up!"

"Nothing fit to eat, or drink, or sleep on, or sit down, or even to
wash with; and no one to speak a civil word to me!" wailed Faustina,
still dwelling upon present inconveniences rather than, thinking of
the future perils.

"Yes, my dear, yes, I know; but now, sit you down and see what I
have brought you," said Mrs. MacDonald, gently forcing Faustina to
seat herself upon the side of the bed.

"Look at my poor dress," said Faustina, pointing down to the
delicate white evening dress in which she had been arrested, and
which was now crumpled, torn, and stained.

"Eh, but that's a woeful sight! But I thought of it, my bairn, and I
have brought you a plain black silk and white linen collars and
sleeves. Let me help you to change your dress, and I will take that
white one home with me."

Faustina agreed to this, and when the change was effected she
certainly presented a more respectable appearance.

Mrs. MacDonald next unpacked the large basket, taking from it a
dressing-case, furnished with every requisite for the toilet; a
work-box, with every convenience for a lady's busy-idleness; and a
writing-desk, with every necessary article for epistolary
correspondence.

"Now where shall I put them?" she inquired, looking around upon the
bare cell.

"Ah, the beastly place!" exclaimed Faustina; "there is no table, no
stand; you will have to leave them on the floor or set them on the
window sill."

Mrs. MacDonald ranged them on the floor, against the wall, under the
window.

And then she rolled up the spoiled evening dress and crowded it into
the empty basket. Next she took the trunk and pushed it under the
bed, saying:

"In that trunk, my dear, you will find every requisite change of
clothing. The basket I will take back."

"Ah, but I want many more things beside clothing. I want tea and
coffee. I want bed linen and china; and--many more things," said
Faustina impatiently,

"And you shall have everything you want, my dear. Your purse is in
your writing desk. There are a hundred and forty guineas in it.
Money will buy you all you want. And I will see it brought," said
Mrs. Dugald, going to the cell door and rapping.

Dame Ferguson came and unlocked it.

"I wish to come out," said Mrs. MacDonald.

"Aye, me leddy," said the dame, courtesying and making way for the
visitor to pass; for the carriage, with the Hurstmonceux arms
emblazoned upon its panels, the servant in the livery of the Earl of
Hurstmonceux, and the haughty air of the lady visitor, all impressed
the female turnkey with a feeling of awe.

"I wish to speak with you, dame," said Mrs. MacDonald.

"Aye, me leddy, and muckle honor till me!" replied the woman, with
another low courtesy, as she led the way to her seat at the window
at the extreme end of the corridor.

"I wish to bespeak your attention to the lady I have just left,"
said Mrs. MacDonald.

"Aye, me leddy! Ye will be ane o' the beneevolent leddies wha gang
about, seeking for the lost sheep o' the house o' Israel, meaning
sic puir misguided lasses as yon! Ye'll be aiblins, ane o' the leddy
directors o' the Magdalen Hospital?" said Mrs. Ferguson.

"The--what? I don't know what you mean, woman. I am speaking to you
of a lady-the Honorable Mrs. Dugald."

"A leddy? The Honorable Mistress Dugald? Ou! aye! forgi'e me, your
leddyship. I'm e'en but a puir, auld, doitted bodie. I e'en thocht
ye were talking o' yon misguided quean in the cell. The Honorable
Mistress Dugald. She'll be like yoursel', intereested in yon lassie;
and aiblins ain o' the leddy direectors o' the Magdalen."

"I think you are a fool. The misguided lassie, as you have the
impudence to call her, is no misguided lassie at all. She is the
Honorable Mrs. Dugald, of Castle Cragg," said Mrs. MacDonald
impatiently.

"Wha--she--the lass in yon cell, the Honorable--Mistress--Dugald?"

"Herself!"

"Hech, that's awfu'l"

"So I wished to give you a hint to treat her with the consideration
due to her rank."

"Eh, sirs! but that's awfu'!" repeated the dame, unable to overget
her astonishment.

"She has money enough to pay for all that she requires and to reward
those who are kind to her besides," continued Mrs. MacDonald.

"Nae doobt! nae doobt! bags o' gowd and siller! bags o' gowd and
siller! What a puir, auld, doitted, fule bodie I was, to be sure,"
said the dame, in a tone of regret.

"Now, I want to know whether she cannot have a few comforts in her
cell, if she is able and willing to pay for them, and to reward her
attendants for bringing them?"

"And what for no? The bonny leddy sail hae a' that she craves, whilk
is consistent wi' her safe-keeping."

"And certainly her friends would ask no more."

"What would her leddyship like to begin wi'?"

"She is to remain here for a week; therefore she would like to have
her cell fitted up comfortably. She will want a piece of carpeting
to cover the floor; some nice fine bedding and bed linen; a toilet
service of china; a single dinner and tea service of china; and a
silver fork and spoon. Can you recollect all these articles?"

"What for no?"

"But stay, I forgot; she will want a small table and an easy-chair
and footstool. Can you remember them all?"

"Ilk a ane!"

"Twenty pounds, I should think, would cover the whole expense. Here
is the money; take it and send out and get the things as soon as you
can," said Mrs. MacDonald, putting two ten-pound notes in the hand
of the dame.

"I'll has them all in by twal' o' the clock," answered the dame
zealously. "Be guid till us! The Honorable Mrs. Dugald! Yon quean!
Who'd hae thocht it? But what will be the reason they pit the bonny
leddy in prison? It's wonderfu'! It canna be for ony misdeed?"

"No, dame, it is for no misdeed. Ah! you have not read history, or
you would know that ladies of the highest rank, even queens and
princesses, have been sometimes put in prison."

"Guid be guid till us! For what crime, gin your leddyship pleases?"

"For no crime at all. They have been accused of treason, or
conspiracy, or something."

"And sic will be the case wi' this puir leddy?"

"Yes," said Mrs. MacDonald, whose regard for the truth was not of
the strictest description.

"And what did they do wi' the puir queens?"

"Cut off their heads."

"Hech! that was awfu'! And what will they do wi' this puir leddy?"

"Release her after a while, because they can prove nothing against
her, and because she has powerful friends."

"Eh, but that's guid."

"And those friends will well reward such of the officers of the
prison as shall be kind to her during her incarceration," said Mrs.
MacDonald meaningly. "And now I will trouble you to unlock the door
and admit me for a few minutes to see Mrs. Dugald."

"Surely, me leddy," said the dame, with alacrity.

When Mrs. MacDonald found herself once more alone with her friend
she said:

"You will have everything you may require for your comfort in the
course of a few hours; and you will have no more trouble from the
insolence of your attendant. I have arranged all that. And now, my
dear, I am going to see the viscount. What message have you for
him?"

"None at all. I hate him; he has brought me to this! And he deceived
me about the black woman's death and nearly frightened me into
illness. Ah! the beast!" exclaimed Faustina, with a vehemence of
spite that quite astounded her visitor.

"My dear," she said, after she had in some degree recovered her
composure and collected her faculties, "that there is something very
dreadful in this arrest no one can doubt; some charge of kidnaping
in which you are both said to be implicated. But let us hope that
the charge will be disproved; let us say that it will; in which
case, will it be well for you to quarrel with the viscount? Think of
it, and send him some kind message."

"I cannot think, and I will not send him any message," persisted
Faustina.

"Then I must think for you. Good-by for a little while, my pet. I
will be with you again before I leave town," said Mrs. MacDonald, as
she left the cell.

She proceeded immediately to the warden's office, and requested
permission to visit the Viscount Vincent in his cell.

"Auld Saundie Gra'am," as he was called, beckoned the turnkey of the
ward in which the viscount was confined, and ordered him to conduct
the lady to Lord Vincent's cell. The man took down his bunch of keys
and, with a bow, turned and preceded Mrs. MacDonald upstairs to a
corridor on the second floor, flanked each side with grated doors.

The visitor followed her conductor up the whole length of this
corridor to a corner door, which he unlocked to admit the visitor.
As soon as she passed in he locked the door on her and remained
waiting on the outside.

Mrs. MacDonald found herself in the presence of Lord Vincent. As the
cell occupied by the viscount was in the angle of the building it
possessed the advantage of two small windows, one with a southern
and one with a western outlook. And the sun shone in all day long,
giving it a more cheerful aspect than usually belongs to such dreary
places. It was furnished with the usual hard narrow bed and rusty
iron stove. Besides this, it had the unusual convenience of a chair,
upon which the viscount sat, and a table at which he wrote.

In one corner of the cell was old Cuthbert, kneeling down over an
open trunk from which he was unpacking his master's effects. As Mrs.
MacDonald entered the viscount arose, bowed, and handed her to the
solitary chair with as much courtly grace as though he had been
doing the honors of his own drawing-room.

"I find you more comfortable, or rather, as I should say, less
uncomfortable, than I found Mrs. Dugald, poor child," said the
visitor, after she sank into a seat.

"Yes, thanks to the chance that left my pocketbook in my pocket,"
answered the prisoner, with a defiant smile, as he seated himself on
the side of the cot.

"I found her with scarcely the decent necessities of life; but I
have sent out to purchase for her what is needful, poor angel."

The smile died out of the viscount's face, which became pale, cold,
and hard as marble. He made no reply.

"She sent you many kind messages," began Mrs. MacDonald; but the
viscount interrupted her.

"Madam," he said, "I wish never to hear that woman's name mentioned
in my hearing again."

"Eh, but that is strange! You will have had a misunderstanding."

"A misunderstanding! I tell you, madam, that her base cowardice, her
shameful treachery, and her utter selfishness have disgusted me
beyond measure."

"Eh, me! friends should na quarrel that length either. You have both
had your tempers severely tried. When you get out of this trouble
you will be reconciled to each other."

"Never! I loathe that woman! And if I were free to-day, my first act
should be to hurry to Castle Cragg and bar the doors against her re-
entrance there. And my second should be to send all her traps after
her."

Finding at length that it was worse than useless to speak one word
in favor of Faustina while the viscount was in his present mood of
mind, Mrs. MacDonald turned the conversation by:

"Well, my lord, I hope you have taken proper precautions for your
defense at the preliminary examination."

"I have engaged counsel, who is even now at work upon my case."

"And I trust, my lord, that you have summoned the earl. His presence
here would be a tower of strength to you."

"I am aware of that. I do not, however, know exactly where to put my
hand down upon my father. I telegraphed to his London bankers to-day
to know his address. The answer came that he was at St. Petersburg
at the last advices. I shall cause a telegram to be sent to him
there, in the care of our minister. It may or may not find him."

"And now, my lord, what can I do for you?" said Mrs. MacDonald,
rising.

"Nothing, whatever, my dear madam, except to return to the castle
and remain there and keep it warm for me against I get back," said
the viscount courteously, rising to see his visitor to the door of
the cell--a distance of eight feet from the spot where they stood.

Mrs. MacDonald went back to the cell of Faustina, where she remained
until the comforts she had sent her were brought in. Then she
superintended their arrangement, and even assisted with her own
hands in the laying down of the strip of carpet, the making of the
bed, and the adjusting of the table.

"There, my dear," she said, when all was done; "I think you are now
as tidy and as comfortable as it is possible to be in such a place
as this."

"Thank you," said Faustina; "but since you have been in here this
last time you have not once mentioned Lord Vincent's name. I suppose
you have a reason for your reticence. I suppose he has been speaking
ill of me. It would be like him, to bring me into this trouble and
then malign me."

"No, my darling, he has not breathed a syllable of reproach against
you. He has spoken of you most considerately. He has charged me with
many affectionate messages to you," said this disinterested
peacemaker, whose personal interests were all at stake in the
quarrel between the viscount and his fellow-prisoner.

"I don't want to hear his messages. I hate the sound of his name,
and I wish I had never seen the sight of his face. But, Mrs.
MacDonald, I thank you for the kindness you have shown me," said
Faustina.

Mrs. MacDonald kissed her by way of answer. And then she sent out
and ordered a luxurious little dinner, which was promptly brought
and served in the cell. And after dinner they had a dessert of
fruit, and after that coffee, just as they bad been accustomed to
have these things at Castle Cragg.

Coffee cup in hand, Mrs. MacDonald remained chatting with her friend
until the hour arrived for locking up the prison for the night.
Then, with a promise to return the next day, and to come every day,
she took leave and departed, returning to Castle Cragg in the family
carriage, driven by old Cuthbert.

This day was a fair sample of all the days passed in prison by the
Viscount Vincent and Mrs. Dugald up to the time of the preliminary
examination before the magistrate.

The viscount occupied himself with writing, making notes for his
defense, or holding consultation with his counsel. As he had plenty
of ready money, he did not want any comfort, convenience, or luxury
that money could provide. The earl, his father, however, did not
arrive, and had not even been heard from.

Faustina passed her days in prison in eating, drinking, sleeping,
and repining. Mrs. MacDonald came in every day to see her, and
always stayed and dined with her. Mrs. MacDonald rather liked the
daily airing she got in her ride to and fro between the castle and
the prison. She liked also the epicurean dinners that Faustina would
buy and pay for, and thus she was a miracle of constancy and
fidelity.

Old dame Ferguson was their attendant. She also was bought with
money. And from having been the arrogant mistress of her prisoner,
she was now the humble slave of her "leddyship,"--that being the
title to which she had advanced Mrs. Dugald.

Thus the days passed, bringing at length the important morning upon
which the preliminary examination was to be held, in which it was to
be decided whether these prisoners should be honorably discharged or
whether they should be committed to jail to stand their trial upon
the charge of kidnaping and conspiracy.

The Earl of Hurstmonceux had not yet been heard from; but the
Viscount Vincent had prepared himself with the best defense possible
to be got up in his case.

Judge Merlin and his witnesses had been duly notified to appear; and
they were now in town, lodging at the very house from which the
prisoners obtained their recherche meals.


CHAPTER XLV.

THE VISCOUNT'S FALL.

  They that on glorious ancestors enlarge
  Produce their debt instead of their discharge.
                           --_Young_.


The viscount ordered his carriage to be in readiness to convey him
to the magistrate's office. Old Cuthbert was punctual. And
accordingly on the morning in question Lord Vincent, and Faustina,
attended by Mrs. MacDonald, and the policemen that had them in
custody, entered the carriage and were driven to the town hall.

Here again, as on a former occasion, the viscount, in alighting,
ordered the coachman to keep the carriage waiting for him. Then he
and his party passed through the same halls and ante-chambers,
guarded by policemen, and entered the magistrate's office.

Sir Alexander McKetchum was already in his seat on the little raised
platform. His clerk sat at a table below him. On his right hand
stood several officers of the law. On his left hand stood Judge
Merlin, Ishmael Worth, and the witnesses that had been summoned for
the prosecution.

The Policeman McRae led his charge up in front of the magistrate,
and taking off his hat, said:

"Here are the prisoners, your worship."

Lord Vincent, as with the purpose of proving himself a gentleman at
least in external manners, even under the most trying circumstances,
advanced and bowed to the magistrate.

Sir Alexander acknowledged his salute by a nod, and then said:

"Noo, then, as ye are here, me laird, we may as weel proceed wi' the
investigation."

"I beg your pardon, sir; I am expecting my counsel," said the
viscount.

"Aweel! I suppose we maun wait a bit," said the magistrate.

But at this moment the counsel for the prisoner hurried into the
office.

"We have waited for you, Mr. Bruce," said the viscount
reproachfully.

"I am very sorry that you should have been obliged to do so, my
lord! But the truth is, I have been to the telegraph office, to send
a message of inquiry at the last moment to your lordship's London
bankers, to ask if the Earl of Hurstmonceux had yet been heard from.
I waited for the answer, which has but just arrived, and which has
proved unsatisfactory."

"The earl has not written to his London bankers, then?"

"No, my lord."

"Are you ready for the examination?"

"Quite, my lord."

"Aweel, then, I suppose we may proceed," said Sir Alexander.

"At your worship's convenience," replied Mr. Bruce, with a bow.

And thereupon the proceedings commenced. The magistrate took up the
warrant that had been issued for the arrest of the prisoners, and
read it to them aloud. Then addressing them both, he said:

"Malcolm, Laird Vincent, and you, Faustina Dugald, are herein
charged wi' having felonious conspired against the guid character o'
Claudia, Viscountess Vincent, and to farther said conspiracy, wi'
having abducted and sold into slavery the bodies of three negroes,
named herein--Catherine Mortimer, James Mortimer, and Sarah Sims;
whilk are felony against the peace and dignity o' the Queen's
majesty, and punishable by penal servitude, according to the statute
in sich cases made and provided. What hae ye to say for yoursel's in
answer to this charge?"

"I deny it _in toto_. And I think it infamous that I should be
called to answer such an insulting charge," said the viscount with a
fine assumption of virtuous indignation.

"And sae do I think it infamous; I agree wi' ye there, lad! But as
to whilk pairty the infamy attaches to, there we may differ," said
the magistrate, nodding.

The viscount drew himself up in haughty silence, as though he
disdained farther reply.

"And noo, Faustina Dugald, what hae ye to say for yoursel'?"

"I did not conspire! I did not abduct! I did not sell into slavery
any negro bodies! I did not do anything wrong! Not I myself!" cried
Faustina vehemently,

"There, there, that will do. We will hear the testimony on this
case. Let Ishmael Worth, of Washington, come forward," said the
magistrate.

Ishmael advanced, bowed to the magistrate, and stood waiting.

"Ross, administer the oath," said the magistrate.

The clerk took a copy of the Holy Scriptures and held them towards
Ishmael, at the same time dictating the oath, according to the
custom of such officials.

But Ishmael, at the very onset, courteously interrupted him by
saying gently:

"I am conscientiously opposed to taking an oath; but I will make a
solemn affirmation of the truth of what I am about to state."

There was some objection made by the counsel for the prisoners, some
hesitation upon the part of the clerk, some consultation with the
magistrate; and finally it was decided that Mr. Worth's solemn
affirmation should be accepted in lieu of an oath.

"I am sorry," said Ishmael courteously, "to have made this
difficulty about a seemingly small matter; but in truth, no point of
conscience is really a small matter."

"Certainly no," responded the magistrate.

Ishmael then made his formal affirmation, and gave in his testimony.
First of all he identified the negroes--Catherine Mortimer, James
Mortimer, and Sarah Sims--as the servants, first of Judge Randolph
Merlin, of Maryland, and of his daughter Claudia, Lady Vincent. Then
he testified to the fact of the finding of the negroes, each in a
state of slavery, in the island of Cuba; their recovery by Judge
Merlin; and their return, in his company, to Scotland.

At the conclusion of this evidence the counsel for the prisoners
made some sarcastic remarks about the reliability of the testimony
of a witness who refused to make his statement upon oath; but he was
sharply rebuked for his pains by the magistrate.

"Judge Randolph Merlin will please to come forward," was the next
order of the clerk.

"I have no conscientious scruples about taking an oath, though I
certainly honor the scruples of others. And I am ready to
corroborate upon oath the testimony of the last witness," said Judge
Merlin, advancing and standing before the magistrate. The oath was
duly administered to him, and he began his statement.

He also identified the three negroes as his own family servants, who
were transferred to his daughter's service on the occasion of her
marriage with Lord Vincent, and who were taken by her to Scotland.
He likewise testified to the facts of finding the three negroes in
the city of Havana in a condition of slavery, and the repurchasing
and transporting them to Scotland.

The counsel for the accused took various exceptions to the evidence
given in by this witness; but his exceptions were set aside by the
magistrate as vexatious and immaterial.

Then he cross-examined the witness as severely as if the case,
instead of being in a magistrate's office, were before the Lords
Commissioners of the Assizes. But this cross-examination only had
the effect of emphasizing the testimony of the witness, and
impressing the facts more firmly upon the mind of the magistrate.
And then, as the counsel could make nothing by perseverance in this
course, he permitted the witness to sit down.

"Catherine Mortimer will come forward," said the clerk.

"That's me! I's got leabe to talk at last!" said old Katie, with a
malignant nod at the accused. And she stepped up, folded her arms
upon her bosom, threw back her head, and stood with an air of
conscious importance most wonderful to behold.

"Your name is Catherine Mortimer?" said the clerk.

"Yes, young marse--yes, honey, dat my name--Catherine Mortimer.
Which Catherine were the name giben me by my sponsibles in baptism;
and Mortimer were de name 'ferred upon me in holy matrimony by my
late demented 'panion; which he was de coachman to ole Comedy
Burghe, as fought de Britishers in the war of eighteen hundred and
twelve."

"What the de'il is the woman talking about?" here put in the
magistrate.

"She is giving testimony in this case," sarcastically answered the
counsel for the accused.

"My good woman, we don't want to hear any of your private history
previous to the time of your first landing on these shores. We want
to know what happened since. Your name, you say, is Catherine
Mortimer--"

"Hi, young marse, what I tell you? Sure it is; Catherine Mortimer,
'spectable widder 'oman, 'cause Mortimer, poor man, died of
'sumption when he was 'bout forty-five years of age, which I hab
libed ebber since in 'spectable widderhood, and wouldn't like to see
de man as would hab de imperance to ax me to change my condition,"
said Katie, rolling herself from side to side in the restlessness of
her intense self-consciousness.

"Catherine Mortimer, do you understand the nature of an oath?"
inquired the clerk.

"Hi, young marse, what should 'vent me? Where you think I done been
libbin all my days? You mus' think how I's a barbarium from the
Stingy Isles!" replied Katie indignantly.

"I ask you--do you understand the nature of an oath, and I require
you to give a straightforward answer," said the clerk.

"And I think it's berry 'sultin' in you to ax a' spectable colored
'oman any such question. Do I understan' de natur' ob an oaf? You
might 's well ax me if I knows I's got a mortal soul to be save'!
Yes, I does unnerstan' de natur' ob an oaf. I knows how, if anybody
takes a false one, which it won't be Catherine Mortimer, they'll go
right straight down to de debbil--and serbe 'em right!"

"Very well, then," said the clerk. And he put a small Bible into her
hand and dictated the usual oath, which she repeated with an awful
solemnity of manner that must have carried conviction of her perfect
orthodoxy to the minds of the most skeptical cavilers.

"Your name, you say, is Catherine Mortimer?" said the clerk, as if
requiring her to repeat this fact also under oath.

The repetition of the question nettled Katie.

"My good g'acious alibe," she said, "what I tell you? You think you
gwine catch me in a lie by 'peating of questions ober and ober in
dat a way? Now look here, young marse, I aint been tellin' of you no
lies, and if I was a-lying, you couldn't catch me dat a way, 'cause
I'se got too good a membery, dere! So, now I tell you ag'in my name
is Catherine Mortimer, and like-wise it aint Gorilla, as my lordship
and his shamwally used to call me. I done found out what dat means
now! It means monkey! which is a 'fernally false! 'cause my fambily
aint got no monkey blood in 'em. 'Dough I'd rather be a monkey dan a
lordship, if I couldn't be no better lordship den some!" said Katie,
with a vindictive nod of her head towards the viscount.

"What is the creature discoorsing anent?" inquired the perplexed
magistrate.

"She is giving in her evidence," replied the counsel for the
accused.

"You dry up! Who's you? Mus' be my lordship's new shamwally making
yourself so smart. Reckon I'll give evidence enough to fix you and
my lordship out!" snapped Katie.

"Now, then, tell us what you know of this case," said the clerk.

"What I know ob dis case? Why, in de fus' place, I know how my
lordship dere--and a perty lordship he is--and de oder shamwally,
which I don't see here present, and dat whited saltpeter, ought
ebery single one ob dem to be hung up as high as Harem. Dere! dat
what I know; and I hope you'll do it, ole marse!" said Katie
vindictively.

"Whisht, whisht, my good woman! Ye are no here to pronounce
judgment, but to gi'e testimony. Confine yoursel' to the facts!"
said the magistrate.

But this order was more easily made than obeyed. It was very
difficult for Katie to confine herself to the statement of facts,
for the reason that she seemed to imagine herself prosecutor,
witness, judge, jury, and executioner all rolled into one. It took
all the tact of the clerk to get from her what could be received as
purely legal evidence.

Katie's testimony would be nothing new to the reader. Her statement
under oath to the magistrate was the same in effect that she had
made to Judge Merlin. And although it was rather a rambling
narrative, mixed up with a good deal of bitter invective against the
accused, and gratuitous advice to the bench, and acute suggestions
of the manner of retribution that ought to be measured out to the
culprits, yet still the shrewd magistrate managed to get from it a
tolerably clear idea of the nature of the conspiracy formed against
the honor of Lady Vincent and the motive for the abduction of the
negroes. And although the counsel for the accused labored hard to
get this evidence set aside, it was accepted as good.

"James Mortimer," called the clerk.

And Jim walked forward and stood respectfully waiting to be
examined.

The clerk, after putting the same questions to Jim that he had put
to Jim's mother, and receiving the most satisfactory answers,
administered the usual oath and proceeded with the examination.

Jim said he was the son of the last witness, and he corroborated the
statements made by her, as far as his own personal experience
corresponded with hers. And although he was severely cross-examined,
he never varied from his first story, and his testimony was held
good.

"Sarah Sims," was the next called.

And Sally advanced modestly and stood respectfully before the
magistrate.

Having satisfactorily answered the preliminary questions that were
put to her, she took the prescribed oath with a deep reverence of
manner that prepossessed everyone, except the accused and their
counsel, in her favor.

And then she gave her testimony in a clear, simple, concise manner,
that met the approval of all who heard her. The counsel for the
accused cross-examined her with ingenuity, but without success.

Sally's testimony was decidedly the most conclusive of any given by
the three negroes. And she was allowed to sit down.

Then the counsel for the accused arose and made a speech, in which
he ingeniously sought to do away with the effect of all the evidence
that had been given in against the prisoners. He took exception to
Ishmael's evidence because Mr. Worth had declined to give it under
oath; to Judge Merlin's, because, he said, that ancient man was so
well stricken with years as to be falling into his dotage; to old
Katie's, because most decidedly he declared she was totally
unreliable, being half monkey, half maniac, and whole knave; to
Jim's, because he averred him to be wholly under the influence of
others; to Sally's, for the same reason. It would be monstrous, he
said, to send a nobleman and a lady to trial upon such evidence as
had been given in by such witnesses as had appeared there. And he
ended by demanding that his clients should be instantly and
honorably discharged from custody, and particularly that they should
not be remanded.

And he sat down.

"Dinna ye fash yersel', laddie! I hae na the least intention to
remaund the accused. I s'all commit them for trial," said the
magistrate. Then looking down upon his clerk, he said:

"Ross, mon, mak' out the warrants."

A perfect storm of remonstrance, strange to witness in a
magistrate's office, arose. The lawyer sprang upon his feet and
vehemently opposed the committal. Lord Vincent indignantly exclaimed
against the outrage of sending a nobleman of the house of
Hurstmonceux to trial. Faustina went into hysterics, and was
attended by Mrs. MacDonald.

Meanwhile the clerk coolly made out the warrants and placed them in
the hands of McRae for execution. That prompt policeman proceeded to
take possession of his prisoners. But the storm increased;
Faustina's screams awoke the welkin; Lord Vincent's loud
denunciation accompanied her in bass keys; the lawyer's wild
expostulations and gesticulations arose above all.

Sir Alexander had borne all this tempestuous opposition very
patiently at first; but the patience of the most long-suffering man
may give out. Sir Alexander's did.

"McRae, remove the prisoners. And, laddie," he said to the
denunciatory lawyer, "gin ye dinna haud your tongue, I'll commit
yoursel' for contempt!"

Lord Vincent, seeing that all opposition must be worse than vain,
quietly yielded the point and followed his conductor. But Faustina's
animal nature got the ascendency, and she resisted, fought and
screamed like a wildcat. It took half a dozen policemen to put her
into the carriage, and then the handcuffs had to be put on her.

As soon as quiet was restored another case was called on. It was
that of Frisbie, the ex-valet, charged with the murder of Ailsie
Dunbar.


CHAPTER XLVI

THE FATE OF THE VISCOUNT.

  Oh, vanity of youthful blood,
  So by misuse to poison good.
  Reason awakes and views unbarred
  The sacred gates she wished to guard,
  Sees approach the harpy law,
  And Nemesis beholds with awe,
  Ready to seize the poor remains
  That vice has left of all his gains.
  Cold penitence, lame after-thought,
  With fear, despair, and horror fraught,
  Call back the guilty pleasures dead,
  Whom he has robbed and whom betrayed!
                       --Bishop Hoadley.


When the carriage containing the prisoners reached the jail, they
were taken out to be conducted to the warden's office. The viscount,
who was in a mood of suppressed fury, was attended by Policeman
McRae and followed by old Cuthbert, broken-hearted by the dishonor
of his master.

Faustina, who had raged herself into a state of exhaustion and
consequently of quietude, was attended by policeman Christie and
supported by Mrs. MacDonald who tenderly soothed and flattered her.

It was a busy day in the warden's office, and the warden had but
little time to bestow on these interesting prisoners.

"And sae they ha'e committed ye for trial, me laird, mair's the
pity; and the puir lassie too; me heart is sair for her," said Auld
Saundie Gra'ame, as they were led up to his desk to have their names
re-entered upon the prison-books.

"It was a most unwarrantable proceeding! a monstrous abuse of
office! an outrage that should be punished by immediate
impeachment!" burst forth the viscount, in a fury.

"As to that, me laird, I ha'e never yet seen the prisoner enter
these wa's wi' ony verra great esteem for the authorities that sent
him here," dryly replied Auld Saundie.

Then turning to an under-warden he said:

"Ye'll convey the prisoners back to the cells occupied by them
before."

And Faustina was carried back to the woman's ward, followed by the
sympathizing Mrs. MacDonald, who promised to remain with her until
the hour of closing up.

And the viscount, attended by Cuthbert, was conducted to his corner
cell, there to abide until the day of trial.

Old Cuthbert remained with his master until he was summoned to drive
Mrs. MacDonald back to the castle.

Several days passed. Every morning Mrs. MacDonald, driven by
Cuthbert in the family carriage, came to town, to spend the day in
the cell with Faustina, while Cuthbert remained in attendance upon
the viscount. And every evening she returned to the castle.

The Earl of Hurstmonceux did not come. But news at length came of
him. His bankers wrote that he was out on his yacht, his exact
latitude being unknown.

Lord Vincent, now that he was fully committed for trial, really did
not seem to be anxious for his father's return. Perhaps he would
rather not have met the earl under the present circumstances. He
held daily consultations with his counsel. These were entirely
confidential. Being assured by Mr. Bruce that it was essentially
necessary the counsel should be in possession of all the facts, the
prisoner made a tolerably clean breast of it, at least so far as the
abduction of the negroes was concerned; he exercised some little
reticence in the matters of his relations with Faustina and his
conspiracy against Lady Vincent.

Mr. Brace of course put the fairest construction upon everything;
but still he could not help feeling the darkest misgivings as to the
result of the approaching trial. And the viscount, rendered keenly
observant by intense anxiety, detected these doubts in the mind of
his counsel, and became daily more despairing.

He looked forward to the dishonor of a public trial with burning
indignation; to the possible, nay probable, conviction and sentence
that might follow with shrinking dread, and to the execution of that
sentence with stony horror.

Penal servitude! Great Heaven! penal servitude for him, so high-
born, so fastidious, so luxurious in all his habits! Penal servitude
for him, the Viscount Vincent!

He had often made one of a party of sight-seers, visiting the
prisons, the hulks, the quarries, where the prisoners were confined
at work. He had seen them in the coarse prison garb, working in
chains, under the broiling sun of summer, and under the bitter cold
of winter. He had seen them at their loathsome meals and in their
stifling sleeping pens. He had gazed upon them with eyes of haughty,
cold, unsympathizing curiosity. To him and his friends they formed
but a spectacle of interest or amusement, like a drama.

And now to think that he might, nay, probably would, soon make one
of their shameful number! The Viscount Vincent working in chains;
gazed at by his former companions; pointed out to curious strangers!
That was the appalling picture forever present to his imagination.

How bitterly he deplored the crimes that had exposed him to this
fate. How deeply he cursed the siren whose fatal beauty had lured
him to sin. How passionately he longed for death, as the only
deliverance from the memory of the past, the terrors of the present,
the horrors of the future. Day and night that appalling future
stared him in the face. Day and night the picture of himself working
in chains, pointed out, stared at, was before his mind's eyes.

By day it obtruded between him and the face of any visitor that
might be with him. Even when in consultation with his counsel his
mind would wander from the subject in hand, and his imagination
would be drawn away to the contemplation of that dread picture.

By night it would rise up in the darkness and nearly drive him mad.

He could not eat, he could not sleep. He passed his days in pacing
to and fro in his narrow cell, and his nights in tossing about upon
his restless bed. His sufferings were pitiable, and his worst enemy
must have felt sorry for him.

His condition moved the compassion of the warden, and every
indulgence that was in the power of old Saundie to bestow was
granted to him. And as he was not yet absolutely convicted, but only
waiting his trial, these indulgences were considerable. Old Cuthbert
was allowed to visit him freely during the day, and to bring him
anything in the way of food, drink, clothing, books, stationery,
etc., that he required. And very little supervision was exercised
over these matters.

Meantime as the Assizes were sitting, and the docket was not very
full, it was thought that the trial would soon come on.

On the Wednesday following the committal of the viscount the trial
of the murderer, Frisbie, which stood before that of his master on
the docket, did come on. The detective police had been busy during
the interval between Frisbie's arrest and arraignment, and they had
succeeded in collecting a mass of evidence and a number of witnesses
besides old Katie.

Frisbie, however, was defended by the best counsel that mere money
could procure. There are many among the best lawyers who will not
take up a bad case at any price. But Frisbie, as I said, had the
best among the unscrupulous that money could buy. His master of
course paid the fees. His counsel very gratuitously instructed him
to plead "Not Guilty," and of course he did plead "Not Guilty." And
his counsel did the best thing they could to establish his
innocence. But the evidence against him was conclusive. And on the
morning of the second day of his trial Frisbie was found guilty and
sentenced to death. But a short period between sentence and
execution was then allowed in Scotland. The execution of Frisbie was
fixed for the Monday following his conviction.

From the hour that Frisbie had been brought to trial the viscount
had experienced the most vehement accession of anxiety. He refused
all food during the day, and he paced the floor of his cell all
night. And well he might; for he knew that on that trial revelations
would be made under oath that would not tend to whiten Lord
Vincent's character.

On Thursday noon Mr. Bruce entered his cell.

"Is the trial--" began the viscount; but he could not get on; his
intense emotion choked him.

"The trial is over; the jury brought in their verdict half an hour
ago," replied the counsel gravely.

"And Frisbie is--For Heaven's sake speak!" gasped the viscount.

"Frisbie is convicted!" said the lawyer.

Lord Vincent, pale before, turned paler still as he sank into the
chair and gazed upon the lawyer, who was greatly wondering at the
excessive emotion of his client.

"When is the execution fixed to take place?"

"On Monday, of course."

"Is there--can there be any hope of a pardon for him?"

"Not the shadow of a hope."

"Or--of a commutation of his sentence?"

"It is madness to think of it."

"Is there no chance of a respite?"

"I tell you it is madness, and worse than madness, to imagine such a
thing as a pardon, a commutation, or even a respite for that wretch.
The crime brought home to him was one of the darkest dye--the base
assassination of the girl that loved and trusted and was true to
him. To fancy any mercy possible for that miscreant, except it be
the infinite, all-embracing, all-pardoning mercy of God, is simply
frenzy."

"And the execution is to take place on Monday. The time is very
short," said the viscount, falling into a reverie.

The lawyer began to speak of the viscount's own affairs; he
mentioned several circumstances connected with the viscount's case
that had become known to himself only through the testimony of
certain witnesses on Frisbie's trial, and he wished to consult the
viscount upon them.

But Lord Vincent seemed to act very strangely; he was absent-minded,
stupid, distracted--in fact altogether unfit for consultation with
his counsel.

And so, after a few unsuccessful attempts to rouse him, gain his
attention, and fix it upon the subject at issue, the lawyer arose,
said that he would call again the next morning, and bowed and left
the cell.

The shame the viscount suffered was in the knowledge of the
dishonorable facts relating to himself that had been brought to
light on Frisbie's trial; the great dread he felt was that Frisbie,
at the near approach of death, would open his heart and make a full
confession; and his horrible certainty was that such a confession
was all that was wanted to ensure his own conviction.

Again on this Thursday night he could not sleep, but paced the
narrow limits of his cell the whole night through, in unutterable
agony of mind. Never was the appalling vision of himself in the
shameful prison garb, working in chains, pointed out as an
interesting object and gazed at by curious strangers, so awfully
vivid as upon this night.

The next morning, when his old servant Cuthbert entered the cell as
usual, he was frightened at his master's dreadful looks.

"Will I call a doctor to your lairdship?" inquired the old man.

"No, Cuthbert; I am not ill. I am only suffering for want of rest. I
have not been able to sleep since Frisbie's arraignment. He is
convicted, you know."

"Aye, me laird, I ken a' anent it. My brither Randy was on the jury,
and he tauld me it a' ower a pot o' ale in the taproom o' the
'Highlander,' where I was resting while my horses fed," said the old
man gravely.

A dark, crimson flush overspread the face of the viscount. Cuthbert
had heard all about it. Cuthbert had heard, then, those disgraceful
revelations concerning himself. He need not have blushed before
Cuthbert. That loyal-hearted old servant could not have been brought
to believe such evil of his beloved young master, as all that came
to. And his next words proved this.

"There must 'a' been a deal o' fause swearing, me laird," he said.

The viscount looked up and caught at the words.

"Yes, Cuthbert, a great deal of false swearing, indeed, as far as I
am concerned, in that testimony."

"Aye, me laird! I tauld them so in the taproom. There was a wheen
idle loons collected there, drinking and smoking and talking anent
the business o' their betters. And they were a' unco' free in their
comments. But when they mentioned your lairdship's name in
connection wi' sic infamy, I tauld them a' weel that they were a
pack o' fause knaves to believe sic lees."

"Yes. The execution is to take place on Monday morning, Cuthbert."

"Aye, me laird. I hope the puir, sinfu' lad will mak' guid use o'
the short time left him and repent o' a' his misdeeds, and seek his
peace wi' his Maker," said the old man solemnly.

The viscount heaved a heavy sigh; a sigh that seemed laden with a
weight of agony.

"Cuthbert," he said, "you know that I may not go to see the
condemned man, being a prisoner myself; but you, being a fellow-
servant, and at liberty, may be permitted to do so. I wish to charge
you with a note to deliver to him; but you must deliver it secretly,
Cuthbert; secretly, mind you."

"Yes, me laird."

The viscount sat down to his little table and wrote the following
note:

"Frisbie: While there is life there is hope; therefore make no
confession; for if you do, that confession will destroy your last
possibility of pardon or commutation.
                                         "Vincent."

He folded and sealed this note and delivered it to Cuthbert, saying:

"Conceal it somewhere about your person, and go to the warden's
office and ask leave to see your old fellow-servant, and no doubt
you will get it. And when you see him deliver this note secretly, as
I told you."

"Verra weel, me laird," said the old man, going and knocking on the
door of the cell to be let out. The turnkey opened the door,
released him, and locked it again. And the viscount, left alone,
paced up and down the floor in unutterable distress of mind. An hour
passed and then Cuthbert re-entered the cell, wearing a frightened
visage.

"Well, Cuthbert, well! did you find an opportunity of delivering the
note?"

"Yes, me laird, I did," said the old man hesitatingly.

"Secretly?"

"Y-yes, me laird!"

The viscount looked relieved of a great fear. He saw the great
disturbance of his servant's face, but ascribed it to the effect of
his interview with the condemned man, and sympathy for his awful
position, and he inquired:

"How did Frisbie look, Cuthbert?"

"Like a ghaist; na less! pale as deeth; trembling like a leaf about
to fa'! and waefully distraught in his mind!"

"Did he get an opportunity of reading my note while you were with
him?"

"Oh, me laird, I maun just tell you! I hope there was na ony great
secret in that same note."

The viscount started and stared wildly at the speaker, but then
everything alarmed Lord Vincent now.

"What do you mean?" he asked:

"Oh, me laird! I watched my opportunity, and I gi'e him the note in
secrecy, as your lairdship tauld me; and I stooped and whispered
till him in his lugs to keep the note till he was his lane, and read
it then. But the doitted fule, gude forgi'e me, didna seem to
compreheend; but was loike ane dazed. He just lookit at me and then
proceeded to open the note before my face. Whereupon the turnkey lad
takit it out fra his hand, saying that the prisoner, being a
condemned man, maunna receive ony faulded paper that hadna passit
under the observation of the governor, because sic faulded packets
might contain strychnine or other subtle poison. And sae he took
possession o' your note, me laird, before the prisoner could read a
word of it; and said he maun carry it to the governor whilk I
suppose he did."

To see the consternation of the viscount was dreadful.

"Oh, Cuthbert, Cuthbert, the cowardice of that miserable wretch will
ruin me!" he exclaimed bitterly.

"Oh, me laird, dinna rail at the puir sinfu' soul for cowardice.
Sure mesel' would be a coward gin I had the waefu' woodie before my
ees. 'Deed, me laird, and me heart is sair for the mischance o' the
note."

"It cannot be mended now, Cuthbert."

The time was drawing near for the closing of the prison doors, and
the old man took a dutiful leave of his master and departed.

On his way downstairs he was called into the warden's office, and
while there he was severely reprimanded for conveying letters to the
convict, and forbidden under pain of punishment to repeat the
offense. The old man bore the rebuke very patiently, and at the
lecture that was bestowed upon him he humbly bowed and took his
leave.

This night the viscount, exhausted by long vigilance and fasting and
by intense anxiety, threw himself upon his bed and slept for a few
hours. The next morning, Saturday, in his restless trouble he arose
early. And in the course of the day he questioned everyone who came
into his cell concerning the state of mind of the condemned man.

Some could give him no news at all; others could tell him something;
but they differed in their accounts of Frisbie--one saying that he
had asked for the prison chaplain, who had gone in to him; a second
that he was very contrite; a third that he was only terribly
frightened; a fourth that he was as firm as a rock, declined to
confess his guilt and persisted in declaring his innocence. The
viscount endeavored to believe the last statement.

The miserable day passed without bringing anything more satisfactory
to Lord Vincent. And the night that followed was a sleepless one to
him.

Sunday came; the last day of life that was left to the wretched
valet. On Sunday it was obligatory upon all the prisoners confined
in that jail to attend divine service in the prison chapel. They had
no choice in this matter; unless they were confined to their beds by
illness they were obliged to go.

On this particular Sunday no prisoner felt disposed to place himself
on the sick list. Quite the contrary. For, on the other hand, many
prisoners who were really ill, in the infirmary, declared themselves
well enough to get up and go to chapel.

The reason of their sudden zeal in the performance of their
religious duties was simply this: The "condemned sermon," as it was
called, was to be preached that day. And the condemned man, who was
to be executed in the morning, was to be present under guard. And
people generally have a morbid curiosity to gaze upon a man who is
doomed to death.

Lord Vincent was ill enough to be exempt from the duty of appearing
in the chapel, and haughty enough to recoil from mixing publicly
with his fellow-prisoners; but he was intensely anxious to see
Frisbie and judge for himself, from the man's appearance, whether he
seemed likely to make a confession.

And so, when the turnkey whose duty it was to attend to this ward
came around to unlock the doors and marshal the prisoners in order
to march them to the chapel, Lord Vincent, without demur, fell into
rank and went with them.

The chapel was small, and the prisoners present on this day filled
it full. The set to which Lord Vincent belonged were marched in
among the last. Consequently they sat at the lower end of the
chapel.

Lord Vincent's height enabled him to look over the heads of most
persons present. And he looked around for Frisbie. At length he
found him.

The condemned pew was immediately before the pulpit, facing the
preacher. In it sat Frisbie, unfettered, but guarded by two
turnkeys, one of whom sat on each side of him. But Frisbie's back
was towards Lord Vincent, and so the viscount could not possibly get
a glimpse of the expression of his face.

He next looked to see if he could find the selfish vixen who had
lured him to his ruin, and whom he now hated with all the power of
hatred latent in his soul. But a partition eight feet high, running
nearly the whole length of the chapel and stopping only within a few
feet of the pulpit, separated the women's from the men's side of the
church, so that even if she had been present he could not have seen
her.

"The wages of sin is death."

Such was the text from which the sermon was preached to the
prisoners that day. But the viscount heard scarcely one word of it.
Intensely absorbed in his own reflections, he paid no attention to
the services. At their close he bent his eyes again upon the form of
Frisbie.

His perseverance was rewarded. As they arose to leave the chapel
Frisbie also arose and turned around. And the viscount got a full
view of his face--a pale, wild, despairing face.

"He is desperately frightened, if he is not penitent. That is the
face of a man who, in the forlorn hope of saving his life, will deny
his guilt until the rope is around his neck, and then, in the
forlorn hope of saving his soul, confess his crime under the
gallows," said the viscount to himself, as he was marched back to
his cell.

In that the viscount wronged Frisbie. The great adversary himself is
said to be not so black as he is painted.

That same night, that last solemn night of the criminal's life, the
prison chaplain stayed with the wretched man. Mr. Godfree was a
fervent Christian; one whose faith could move mountains; one who
would never abandon a soul, however sinful, to sink into perdition
while that soul remained in its mortal tenement. Such men seem to
have a Christ-conferred power to save to the uttermost.

He kept close to Frisbie; he would not permit himself to be
discouraged by the sinfulness, the cowardice, and the utter baseness
of the poor wretch. He pitied him, talked to him, prayed with him.

With all his deep criminality Frisbie was certainly not hardened. He
listened to the exhortations of the chaplain, he wept bitterly, and
joined in the prayers. And in the silence of that night he made a
full confession to the chaplain, with the request that it might be
made public the next day.

He confessed the murder of Ailsie Dunbar; but he denied that the
crime had been premeditated, as it had been made to appear at the
trial. He killed her in a fit of passion, he said; and he had never
known an hour's peace since. Remorse for the crime and terror for
its consequences had made his life wretched. His master, Lord
Vincent, he said, had been an eye-witness to the murder; but had
withheld himself from denouncing him, because he wanted to use the
power he had thus obtained to compel him to enter a conspiracy
against Lady Vincent. And here followed a full account of the plot
and its execution.

Frisbie went on to say that nothing but the terrors of death induced
him to become a party to that base conspiracy against the honor of a
noble lady, and that he had suffered almost as much remorse for his
crimes against Lady Vincent as for his murder of Ailsie Dunbar.

All this Mr. Godfree took down in short-hand from the lips of the
conscience-stricken man.

And then, as Frisbie expressed the desire to spend the remainder of
the night in devotion, Mr. Godfree decided to remain with him. He
read aloud to the convict portions of Scripture suited to his sad
case; he prayed fervently with him for the pardon of his sins; and
then he sang for him a consoling hymn.

Oh, strangely sounded that sacred song arising in the deep silence
of the condemned cell. So the night passed there.

But how did it pass in the viscount's cell? Sleeplessly, anxiously,
wretchedly, until long after midnight, when he fell asleep. He was
awakened by a sound of sawing, dragging, and hammering, that seemed
to be in the prison yard beneath his windows. It continued a long
time, and effectually banished slumber from his weary eyes.

What could they be doing at that unusual hour? he asked himself. And
he crept from his bed and peeped through the grated window. But the
night was over-clouded and deeply dark from that darkness that
precedes the dawn. He could see nothing, but he could hear the sound
of voices amid the noise of work; although the words, at the
distance his window was from the ground, were inaudible.

He lay down again no wiser than he had risen up. After an hour or
two the noise ceased, and he dropped into that sleep of prostration
that more resembles worn-out nature's swooning than healthy slumber.


CHAPTER XLVII.

THE EXECUTION.

  What shall he be, ere night?--Perchance a thing
  O'er which the raven flaps her funeral wing.
                                  --_Byron_.


It was broad daylight when the viscount was again awakened, and this
time by the solemn tolling of the prison bell. He sprang out of bed
and looked out of the window and recoiled in horror. There in the
angle of the prison yard stood the gallows, grimly painted black.
That was what the carpenters had been at work on all night.

And the tolling of the prison bell warned him that the last hour of
the condemned man had come; that he was even now leaving his cell
for the gallows. Lord Vincent staggered back and fell upon his bed.
In the fate of Frisbie he seemed to feel a forewarning of the
certain retribution that was lying in wait for himself.

There came a sound of footsteps along the passage. They paused
before his cell. Someone unlocked the door. And, to the viscount's
astonishment, the procession that was on its way to the gallows
entered his presence. There was Frisbie, still unbound, but guarded
by a half a dozen policemen and turnkeys, and attended by the
undersheriff of the county, and the warden and the chaplain of the
prison.

Lord Vincent stared in astonishment, wondering what brought them
there; but he found no words in which to put the question.

The chaplain constituted himself the spokesman of the party.

"My lord, this unhappy man wishes to see you before he dies; and the
sheriff has kindly accorded him the privilege," said Mr. Godfree.

Lord Vincent looked from the chaplain to the prisoner in perplexity
and terror. What could the condemned man, in the last hour of his
life, want with him?

Frisbie spoke:

"My lord, I am a dying man; but I could not meet death with guilty
secrets on my soul. My lord, I have told everything, the whole truth
about the death of poor Ailsie, and the plot against my lady. I
could not help it, my lord. I could not leave the world with such
wrong unrighted behind me. I could not so face my Creator. I have
come to tell you this, my lord, and ask you to forgive me if, in
doing this, I have been compelled to do you harm," said the man,
speaking humbly, deprecatingly, almost affectionately.

"God forgive you, Frisbie, but you have ruined me!" was the somewhat
strange reply of the viscount, as he turned away; for it seemed to
those who heard him that he was asking the Lord to forgive the
sinner, not for his sins, but for his confession of them.

The procession of death left the cell; the door was locked, and the
viscount was alone again--alone, and in utter, irremediable despair.

He sat upon the side of the bed, his hands clasped and his chin
dropped upon his breast until the bell of the prison chapel suddenly
ceased to toll. Then he looked up. It was all over. The judicial
tragedy had been enacted. And he arose and went to the grated window
and looked out.

No, oh, Heaven, it was not all over! That group around the foot of
the gallows; that cart and empty coffin; that shrouded and bound
figure, convulsed and swaying in the air--blasted his sight. With a
loud cry he dashed his hand up to his eyes to shut out the horrible
vision, and fell heavily upon the floor. He lay there as one dead
until the turnkey brought his breakfast. Then he got up and threw
himself upon the bed. He eagerly drank the coffee that was brought
to him, for his throat was parched and burning; but he could not
swallow a mouthful of solid food.

"Bring me the afternoon paper as soon as it is out," he said to the
turnkey, at the same time handing him a half-crown. The man bowed in
silence and took his breakfast tray from the table and withdrew.

For some reason or other, perhaps from the fear of coming in contact
with the preparations for the execution, Mrs. MacDonald did not
present herself at the prison until nearly noon, so that the prison
clock was actually on the stroke of twelve when old Cuthbert was
admitted to his master's cell. On entering and beholding his master,
the old man started and exclaimed in affright:

"Gude guide us, me laird, what has come over ye?"

"Nothing, Cuthbert, but want of rest. What is that you have in your
hand?"

"The evening paper, me laird, that ane o' the lads gi'e me to bring
your lairdship."

"Have you looked at it?" demanded the viscount anxiously, for he
could not bear the idea of his old servant's reading the confession
of Frisbie, that was probably in that very paper. "Have you looked
at it, I ask you?" he repeated fiercely.

"Nay, no, me laird. I hanna e'en unfaulded it," said the old man
simply, handing the paper.

The viscount seized it, threw himself on the chair, and opened it;
but instead of reading the paper he looked up at old Cuthbert, who
was standing there watching his master, with the deepest concern
expressed in his venerable countenance.

"There, get about something; do anything! only don't stand there and
stare at me, as if you had gone daft!" angrily exclaimed Lord
Vincent.

The old man turned meekly, and began to put things straight in the
cell. The viscount searched and found what he had feared to see. Ah!
well might he dread the eye of old Cuthbert on him while he read
those columns.

Yes, there it was; the account of the last hours of Alick Frisbie by
the pen of the chaplain! the night in the cell, the scene of the
execution, and, last of all, the confession of the culprit with all
its shameful revelations. The viscount, with a feverish desire to
see how deeply he himself was implicated, and to know the worst at
once, read it all. How far he was implicated indeed! He was steeped
to the very lips in infamy.

Why, the crime for which Frisbie had suffered death, the murder of
that poor girl, committed in a paroxysm of passion, and repented in
bitterness, and confessed in humility, seemed only a light offense
beside the deep turpitude, the black treachery, of that long
premeditated, carefully arranged plot against Lady Vincent, in which
the viscount was the principal and the valet only the accomplice.
The plot was revealed in all its base, loathsome, revolting details.
The reader knows what these details were, for he has both seen them
and heard of them. But can he imagine what it was to the viscount to
have them discovered, published, and circulated?

When Lord Vincent had read this confession through he knew that all
was forever over with him; he knew that at that very hour hundreds
of people were reading that confession, shuddering at his guilt,
scorning his baseness, and anticipating his conviction; he knew as
well as if he had just heard the sentence of the court what that
sentence would be. Penal servitude for life!

Deep groans burst from his bosom.

"Me laird, me laird, you are surely ill," said the old man
anxiously, coming forward.

"Yes, Cuthbert, I am ill; in pain."

"Will I call a doctor?"

"No, Cuthbert; a doctor is not necessary; but attend to me a moment.
They let you bring me anything you like unquestioned, do they not?"

"Aye, surely, me laird; for you are no under condemnation yet; but
only waiting for your honorable acquittal."

"Cuthbert, I think you have a brother who is a chemist in town, have
you not?"

"Ou, aye, me laird. Joost Randy, honest man."

The viscount sat down and wrote a line on a scrap of paper and gave
it to the old man.

"Now, Cuthbert, take this to your brother. Be sure that you let no
one see that bit of paper, and when you get the medicine that I have
written for, put it in your bosom and don't take it out until you
come back to me and we are alone. Now, Cuthbert, I hope you will be
more canny over this affair than you were over the affair of the
note I sent to Frisbie, which you permitted to fall into the hands
of Philistines."

"Ah, puir Frisbie, puir lad! Gude hae mercy on him! I'll be carfu',
me laird; though it was no me, but puir Frisbie himsel', that let
the bit note drap. But I'll be carefu', me laird, though 'deed I
dinna see the use o' concealment, sin' naebody ever interferes wi'
onything I am bringing your lairdship."

"But they might interfere with this because it is medicine; for they
might think that no one but the prison doctor has a right to give
medicine here."

"Ou, aye--I comprehend, me laird, that sic might be the case where
the medicament is dangerous. But will this be dangerous?"

"Why, no; it is nothing but simple laudanum. You know how good
laudanum is to allay pain; and that there is no danger at all in
it."

"No, me laird, gin ane doesna tak' an ower muckle dose."

"Certainly, if one does not take an overdose; but I have knowledge
enough not to do that, Cuthbert."

"Surely, me laird. I'll gae noo and get it," replied the old man,
taking up his hat, and knocking at the door to be released. The
turnkey opened promptly, and Cuthbert departed on his errand.

When the viscount was left alone he resumed his restless pacing up
and down the narrow limits of his cell and continued it for a while.
Then he sat down to his little table, drew a sheet of paper before
him, and began to write a letter.

He was interrupted by the unlocking of his cell door. Hastily he
turned the paper with the blank side up and looked around. It was
Mr. Bruce, his counsel. The lawyer looked unusually grave.

"Well," he said, as soon as he was left alone with his client, "the
poor devil Frisbie is gone."

"Yes," responded the viscount, in a low voice.

"That is an ugly business of the confession."

"Very; the man was mad," said the viscount.

"Not unlikely; but I wish we may be able to persuade the jury that
he was so; or else to induce the judges to rule his evidence out
altogether."

"Can that be done? I mean can the judges be induced to rule out the
confession as evidence?" inquired the viscount, sudden hope lighting
up his hitherto dejected countenance.

"I fear not; I fear that our chance is to persuade the jury that the
man was insane or mendacious--in a word, to impeach his rationality
or his truthfulness, one or the other; we must decide which stand we
are to take, which call in question."

"You might doubt either his sanity or his truth with equally good
cause. He was always a fool and always a liar. When is the trial to
come on?"

"That is just what I came to speak to you about. It is called for
to-morrow at ten."

"To-morrow at ten?"

"Yes."

"Are you quite ready with the defense?"

"I was until this nasty business of Frisbie's confession turned up.
I shall have to take a copy of the paper containing it home with me
to-night, and study it, to see how I can pull it to pieces, and
destroy its effects upon the jury. Have you got it here?" said Mr.
Bruce, taking up the afternoon paper that lay upon the table.

"Yes."

"Have you done with it?"

"Yes."

The lawyer folded up the paper and put it in his pocket, and took
his hat to depart.

"Mr. Bruce," said the viscount earnestly, "I am about to ask you a
question, which I must entreat you to answer truthfully: What are
the chances of my acquittal?"

The lawyer hesitated and changed color. The eyes of the viscount
were fixed earnestly upon him. The eyes of the counsel fell.

"I see; you need not reply to my question. You think my chance a bad
one," said Lord Vincent despondently.

"No, my lord; I did not mean to give you any such impression," said
Mr. Bruce, recovering himself and his professional manners. "Before
this troublesome confession of Frisbie's your chance was an
excellent one--"

"But since?"

"Well, as I say, that is an ugly feature in the case; but I will do
my best. And to say nothing of my own poor abilities, my colleagues,
Stair and Drummond, are among the most successful barristers in the
kingdom. They are always safe to gain a verdict where there is a
verdict possible to be gained."

"Yes; I know that I have the best talent in the Three Kingdoms
engaged in my defense," said the viscount; but he said it with a
profound sigh.

"I will look in upon you again early to-morrow morning, before we go
into court," said Mr. Bruce, as he bowed himself out.

This interview with his counsel had only tended to confirm the fears
of the viscount and deepen his despondency, for, notwithstanding the
guarded words of the lawyer, Lord Vincent saw that he had well-nigh
given up all for lost. With a deep groan he sat down to the table
and resumed the writing of his letter. He had not written many
minutes when he was startled by the opening of the door. He hastily
concealed his writing under a piece of blotting paper, and nervously
turned to see who was the new intruder.

It was old Cuthbert, come back from his errand.

As soon as the door was closed upon them, the old man approached his
master.

"Have you got the medicine, Cuthbert?"

"Aye, me laird," replied the servant, taking a bottle, rolled in a
white paper, from his pocket, and handing it to his master. Some
instinct made the viscount conceal the bottle in his own bosom.

"And here, me laird, are two letters the turnkey gave me to hand to
your lairdship. He tauld me they had just been left at the warden's
office for you," said Cuthbert, laying two formidable-looking
epistles before his master.

Lord Vincent recognized in the superscription of the respective
letters the handwriting of his counsel, Mr. Drummond and Mr. Stair.
He hastily opened them one after the other. Several banknotes for a
large amount rolled out of each. Surprised, he rapidly cast his eyes
over each in turn. And his face turned to a deadly whiteness. The
two letters were in effect the same. It seemed as though the
writers, though not in partnership, had acted in concert on this
occasion. They each respectfully begged leave to return their
retaining fees and retire from the defense of the viscount. Since
reading the confession of the convict, Alick Frisbie, they could not
conscientiously act as counsel for Lord Vincent. Such was the
purport, if not the exact words of the two letters.

"Me laird, me laird, ye are ill again!" said old Cuthbert, anxiously
approaching his master.

"Yes; the pain has returned."

"Will ye no tak' some o' the medicine noo?"

"No, Cuthbert; not until I retire for the night," answered the
viscount; but he withdrew the bottle from his bosom, and took it to
the wash-basin and washed off the label and then threw it--the
label--into the fire.

Cuthbert watched him, and wondered at this proceeding, but was too
respectful to express surprise or make inquiries. And at this moment
the turnkey entered with Lord Vincent's supper, that had been
brought from the "Highlander"; and while he arranged it on the table
he warned Cuthbert that the prison doors were about to be closed for
the night, and that Mrs. MacDonald was waiting for him to drive her
back to the castle. Upon hearing this the old man took a respectful
leave of his master and departed. The turnkey remained in attendance
upon the prisoner, kindly pressing him to eat.

But Lord Vincent swallowed only a little tea, and then pushed the
food from him. The turnkey took away the service, locked the
prisoner in for the night, and went to the warden's office.

"Weel, Donald, what is it, mon?" inquired the warden.

"An ye please, sir, I'm no easy in my mind about me Laird; Vincent,"
said the turnkey.

"Why, what ails me laird?"

"Why, sir, he is joost like ane distraught!"

"On, aye, it will be the confession o' the malefactor, Frisbie, that
has fasht him; as weel it may!"

"He's war nor fasht; he looks joost likely to do himsel' a
mischief," said Christie, shaking his head.

"Heeh! an that be sae we maun be carefu'! Are there any sharp-edged
or pointed instruments in his cell?"

"Naught but his penknife. I was minded to bring it away, but I did
na."

"Eh, then we will pay him a visit in his cell," said the warden,
rising.

The turnkey led the way upstairs, and they entered the prisoner's
cell. The viscount, who was sitting at the table with his head
leaning upon his hand, looked up at this unusual visit. His face was
deadly pale; but beyond that the warden noticed nothing amiss in his
appearance, and that paleness was certainly natural in a prisoner
suffering from confinement and anxiety. There is usually but scant
ceremony observed between jailer and prisoner; nevertheless, in this
case Auld Saundie Gra'ame actually apologized for his unseasonable
visit.

"Me laird," he said, "I hae a verra unpleasant duty to perform here.
Donald reports that ye are no that weel in your mind. And sic being
the case, I maun, in regard to your ain guid and safety, see till
the removal of a' edged tools and sic like dangerous weapons."

"Take away what you please; I have no objection," said the viscount
indifferently.

Whereupon the warden and turnkey made a thorough search of the room;
took away his razors and scissors from his dressing-case, and his
penknife and his eraser from his writing desk.

"I shall take guid care of a' these articles, me laird, and return
them to you safe, ance you are out o' these wa's," said the warden.

The viscount made no reply.

"And ye maun ken that I only remove them to prevent ye doin'
yoursel' a mischief in your despondency," he continued.

The viscount smiled with a strange, derisive, triumphant expression;
but still did not reply in words.

"And gin ye will heed guid counsel, ye will na gi'e yoursel' up to
despair. Despair is an unco ill counselor, and the de'il is aye
ready to tak' advantage of its presence. Guid nicht, me laird, and
guid rest till ye," said Auld Saundie, as he withdrew himself and
his subordinate from the cell, and locked his prisoner in finally
for the night.

When he got back to his office he summoned all of his officers
around him and spoke to them.

"Lads, I ha'e sair misgivings anent yon Laird Vincent. Ye maun be
verra carefu'! Ye mauna let his mon Cuthbert tak' onything in, until
it ha'e passed muster under me ain twa een. And you, Donald, maun
aye gang in wi' Cuthbert or ony ither, gentle or simple, wha gaes to
see me laird, and bide in the cell wi' them to watch that the
visitor gi'es naething unlawfu' or daungerous to the prisoner. An
ounce o' prevention, ye ken, lads, is better than a pund o' cure!"

And having given this order, the warden dismissed his subordinates
to their various evening duties.

Yes, an ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure! But it
is a pity the honest warden had not known when to apply the
preventive agent.

Meanwhile, how had Faustina borne her imprisonment?

Why, excellently. Not that she had any patience, or courage, or
fortitude, for she had not the least bit of either, or any other
sort of heroism. But, as I said before, she was such a mere animal
that, so long as she was made comfortable in the present, she felt
no trouble on the score of the past or the future.

After her first fit of howling, weeping, and raging had exhausted
itself, and she had seen that her violence had no other effect than
to injure her cause, she resigned herself to circumstances and made
herself as comfortable as possible in her cell. The expenditure of a
few pounds had procured her everything she wanted, except her
liberty; and that she did not feel the want of, as a creature with
more soul might have done.

Any chance visitor who might have gone into Faustina's cell would
have been astonished to see it fitted up as a tiny boudoir, and
would have required to be told that there was no law to prevent a
prisoner, unconvicted and waiting trial, from fitting up her cell as
luxuriously as she pleased to do, if she had money to pay the
expense and friends to take the trouble. And Faustina had freely
spent money and freely used Mrs. MacDonald.

The floor of her cell was covered with crimson carpet, the festooned
window with a lace curtain, and ornamented with a bouquet of
flowers. A soft bed, with fine linen and warm coverlids, stood in
one corner; a toilet table and mirror draped with lace, in another;
a small marble washstand, with its china service, in a third; and a
French porcelain stove in the fourth. A crimson-covered easy-chair
and tiny stand filled up the middle of the small apartment.

And here, always well dressed, Faustina sat and read novels, or
worked crochet, and gossiped with Mrs. MacDonald all day long. And
here her epicurean meals, shared by her friend and visitor, were
brought.

And here Mrs. MacDonald petted and soothed and flattered her with
the hopes of a speedy deliverance.


CHAPTER XLVIII.

NEWS FOR CLAUDIA.

  Oh, in their deaths, remember they are men,
  Strain not revenge to wish their tortures grievous.
                                --_Addison_.


Death--even the most serene and beautiful death, coming to a good
old man at the close of a long, beneficent life--is awful. Sudden
and violent death, falling upon a strong young man in the midst of
his sins and follies, is horrible. But perhaps the most appalling
aspect under which the last messenger can appear is that of a
deliberately inflicted judicial death.

Such a doom, pronounced upon the greatest sinner that ever lived,
must move the pity of his bitterest enemy.

The family at Cameron Court formed a Christian household. They
received the news of Frisbie's conviction with solemn, compassionate
approbation. Justice approved the sentence; but mercy pitied the
victim. And they passed the day of his execution in a Sabbath
stillness.

They were glad when the day was over; glad when the late evening
mail brought the afternoon papers from Banff, announcing that the
tragedy was finished; glad to read there that the sinner had
repented, confessed, and died, hoping in the mercy of the Father,
through the atonement of sin.

Each one breathed a sigh of infinite relief to find that this sinner
had not endangered his soul by impenitently rushing from man's
temporal to God's eternal condemnation.

No one failed to see the immense importance of Frisbie's dying
confession as evidence for the prosecution in the approaching trial
of the Viscount Vincent and Faustina Dugald; or the fatal effect it
must have upon the accused; yet no one spoke of it then and there.
The day of stern retributive justice was not the time for unseemly
triumph.

They separated for the night, gravely and almost sadly.

Claudia went up to her room, where her women, Katie and Sally,
reinstated in her service, were in attendance. Sally, as usual, was
silent and humble; Katie, equally as usual, talkative and
dictatorial.

"And so de shamwally is hung at last! serbe him right; and I hopes
it did him good; an' I wish it was my lordship an' de whited salt-
peter along ob him!" she said, folding her arms ever her fat bosom
and rolling herself from side to side with infinite satisfaction.

"For shame, Katie, to triumph so over a dead man! I should have
thought a good Christian woman like you would have prayed for him
before he died," said Claudia gravely.

"'Deed didn't I! An' I aint gwine to do it nuther. I aint gwine to
bother my Hebbenly Master 'bout no sich grand vilyan! dere now!"

"Oh, Katie, Katie, I am afraid you are a great heathen!"

"Well, den, I just ruther be a heathen dan a whited salt-peter, or a
shamwally, or a lordship either, if I couldn't do no more credit to
it dan some," said Katie, having, as usual, the last word.

Claudia longed to be alone on this night; so she soon dismissed her
attendants, closed up her room, put out all her lights, and lay down
in darkness, solitude, and meditation.

Strange! but on this night her thoughts, and even her sympathies,
were with Lord Vincent in his prison cell. Why should she think of
him? Why should she pity him? She had never loved him, never even
fancied that she loved him, even in the delusive days of courtship;
or in the early days of marriage; and she had despised and shunned
him in the miserable days of their estranged life at Castle Cragg.
Why, then, as she lay there in the darkness, silence, and solitude
of her own chamber, should her imagination hover over him? Why did
she contemplate him in sorrow and in compassion?

Because in that dreary cell she saw the twofold man--the man that he
ought to have been, and the man that he was; because she was his
wife, and though she had never loved him, yet with better treatment
she might have been won to do so; and finally, because she was a
woman, and therefore full of sympathy with every sort of suffering.

She knew that the dying confession of Frisbie would seal Lord
Vincent's fate. And she contemplated that fate as she had never done
before.

Penal servitude.

Why it had seemed a mere, empty phrase until now. Now it was an
appalling reality brimful of horror, even for the coarsest, dullest,
and hardest criminal; but of how much more for him.

Lord Vincent in the prison garb, working in chains; inquired after
by curious sight-seers; and pointed out to strangers as the felon-
viscount.

She meditated on the effect all this would have on him, in the
unspeakable misery it would inflict upon his vain, insolent, self-
indulgent organization; and she marveled how he would ever endure
it.

And she thought of the dishonor this would reflect upon herself as
his wife. And she shrunk shudderingly away from the burning shame of
living on, the wife of a felon.

In the deep compassion she could not but feel for him, and in the
intense mortification she anticipated for herself, she earnestly
wished that in some manner he might escape the degrading penalty of
his crimes.

In these harassing thoughts and distressing feelings Claudia lay
tossing upon her restless bed until long after midnight, when at
length she dropped into a deep and dreamless sleep.

Now the circumstance that I am about to relate will be interpreted
in a different manner by different people. Rationalists who pin
their faith on Sir Walter Scott and his "Demonology" will say it was
only an optical illusion; the incredulous, who believe in nothing,
will declare it was but a dream; while Spiritualists, who follow Mr.
Robert Dale Owen in his "Footprints on the Boundaries of Another
World," will be ready to declare that it was the apparition of a
spirit; I commit myself to no opinion on the subject.

But when Claudia had slept soundly for three hours she was aroused
by hearing her name called; she awoke with a violent start; she sat
upright in bed, and stared right before her with fixed eyes, pallid
face, and immovable form, as though she were suddenly petrified.

For there at the foot of the bed, between the tall posts, in the
division formed by the festoons of the curtains, stood the figure of
the Viscount Vincent. His face was pale, still, stern, like that of
a dead man; one livid hand clutched his breast, the other was
stretched towards her; and from the cold, blue, motionless lips
proceeded a voice hollow as the distant moan of the wintry wind
through leafless woods:

"Claudia, the debt is paid!"

With these words the vision slowly dissolved to air. Then, and not
until then, was the icy spell that bound all Claudia's faculties
loosened. She uttered piercing shriek upon shriek that startled all
the sleepers in the house, and brought them rushing into her room.
Katie and Sally being the nearest, were the first to enter.

"For Marster's sake, my ladyship, what is the matter?" inquired the
old woman, while Sally stood by in a dumb terror.

"Oh, Katie, Katie! it was Lord Vincent! He has contrived to make his
escape in some manner! He is out of prison! he is in this very
house! he was in this room but a minute ago, though I do not see him
now! and he spoke to me!"

"My goodness gracious me alibe, Miss Claudia, honey, it couldn't a
been he! he's locked up safe in jail, you know! It mus' a been his
sperrit!" said superstitious Katie, with the deepest awe.

"Claudia, my dearest, what is the matter? What is all this? What has
happened?" anxiously inquired the Countess of Hurstmonceux, as,
hastily wrapped in her dressing-gown, she hurried into the chamber
and up to Claudia's bedside.

"Come closer, Berenice; stoop down; now listen! The viscount has
broken prison! he was here but a moment ago! and he is gone! but his
unexpected appearance in this place and at this hour, looking as he
did so deathly pale, so livid and so corpse-like, frightened me
nearly out of my senses, and I screamed with terror. I--I tremble
even yet."

"My dearest Claudia, you have been dreaming. Compose yourself," said
Lady Hurstmonceux soothingly.

"My dearest Berenice, it was no dream, believe me. I was indeed
asleep, fast asleep; but I was awakened by hearing myself called by
name--'Claudia, Claudia, Claudia,' three times. And I opened my eyes
and sat up in bed, and saw standing at the foot, looking at me
between the curtains, Lord Vincent."

At this moment Judge Merlin, in his dressing-gown and slippers, came
slowly into the chamber, looking around in a bewildered way and
saying:

"They told me the screams proceeded from my daughter's apartment.
What is the matter here? Claudia, my dear, what has happened? What
has frightened you?" he inquired, approaching her bedside.

"Oh, my poor papa, have you been disturbed, too? How sorry I am!"
said Claudia.

"Never mind me, my dear! What has happened to you?"

"Lady Vincent has been frightened by a disagreeable dream, sir,"
replied Lady Hurstmonceux, answering for her friend.

"My dear lady, you here!" exclaimed the judge, seeing her for the
first time since he entered the room.

"I am a light sleeper," smiled the countess.

"I am very sorry, papa, that I aroused the house in this manner,"
said Claudia, with real regret in her tone.

"It was not like you to do so, for a dream, my dear," replied the
judge gravely.

"It was no dream, papa! it was no dream, as the result will prove."

"What was it then, my dear?"

"It was the Viscount Vincent!"

"The Viscount Vincent!" exclaimed the judge, in astonishment.

"Yes, papa; he has contrived to escape and to enter this house and
this very room. It was his sudden appearance that frightened me into
the screaming fit that alarmed the household; and for which I am
very sorry."

"The Viscount Vincent here! But how on earth could he have escaped
from prison?"

"I do not know, papa. I only know by the evidence of my own senses
that he has done so."

"My dearest Claudia, believe me, you have been dreaming. Judge
Merlin, if you knew the great strength and security of our prisons,
you would also know how impossible it would be for any prisoner to
escape," said Lady Hurstmonceux, addressing in turn the father and
the daughter.

"Berenice, that I have not been dreaming to-morrow will show. For
to-morrow you and all concerned will know that Lord Vincent has
escaped from prison. But my dear Berenice, and you, my dearest
father, promise to me one thing; promise me not to give Lord Vincent
up to justice; but to suffer him to get away from the country, if he
can do so. That is doubtless all that he proposes to himself to do.
And such exile will be punishment enough in itself for him,
especially as it will involve the resignation of his rank, title,
and inheritance. So let him get away if he can. He can work no
further woe for me. Frisbie's dying confession has killed off all
his calumnies against me. He is harmless henceforth. So leave him to
God," pleaded Claudia.

"I am willing to do, or leave undone, whatever you please, my dear;
but--do you really think that you actually did see the viscount, and
that you did not only dream of seeing him?" inquired the judge,
unable to get over his amazement.

"Yes, papa; I saw him; and to-morrow will prove that I did so," said
Claudia emphatically.

Lady Hurstmonceux smiled incredulously, for she did not reflect that
there were more ways than one of breaking out of prison.

"But supposing it to have been the viscount; and supposing that he
had succeeded in bursting locks and bars and eluding guards and
sentinels; why should he have come here, of all places in the world?
What could have been his motive in so risking a recapture?" inquired
the judge, who seemed inclined to investigate the affair then and
there.

"I do not know, papa. I have not had time to think. I was so
astonished and even frightened at his mere appearance that I never
asked myself the reason of it," answered Claudia.

"Did you not ask him?"

"No, papa. I only screamed."

"Did he not speak to you?"

"Yes, papa."

"What did he say?"

"Papa, I had better tell you just how it happened," answered
Claudia, giving the judge a detailed account of the dream, vision,
or ghost, as the reader chooses to call it; but which she persisted
in declaring to be the viscount himself in the flesh.

"It is most extraordinary! How did he get out? Lady Hurstmonceux,
had we not better have the house searched for him?" inquired the
judge.

"It shall be done if you please, judge; though I think it
unnecessary."

"Papa, no! he went as he came. Let him go. I hope he will be clear
of the country before to-morrow morning."

At this moment the clock struck five, although it was still pitch-
dark and far from the dawn of day.

"There! I declare it is to-morrow morning already, as the Irish
would say. Lady Hurstmonceux, do not let me keep you up any longer.
I know your usual hour for rising at this season of the year is
eight o'clock. You will have three good hours' sleep before you yet.
Papa, dear, go to bed or you will make yourself ill."

"Are you sure you will not have anything before I go, Claudia?"
inquired the countess.

"Nothing whatever, dear; I think I shall sleep."

Lady Hurstmonceux stooped and kissed her friend, and then, with a
smile and a bow to the judge, she retired from the room.

"Do you think now that you will rest, Claudia?" inquired the judge.

"Yes, papa, yes. Go to rest yourself."

He also stooped and kissed her, and then left the chamber.

"Go to bed, Katie and Sally," said Claudia to her women.

"'Deed 'fore de Lord aint I gwine to no bed to leabe you here by
yourse'f. I don't want you to see no more sperrits," replied Katie.
And she left the room for a few minutes and returned dragging in her
mattress, which she spread upon the floor, and upon which she threw
herself to sleep for the remainder of the dark hours.

Lady Vincent submitted to this intrusion, because she knew it would
be utterly useless to expostulate. But Sally began to whimper.

"Now, den, what de matter long o' you? You seen a sperrit too?"
demanded Katie.

"I's feared to sleep by myse'f, for fear I should see somethin',"
wept Sally.

"Den you lay down here by me," ordered Katie.

And thus it was that Lady Vincent's two women shared her sleeping
room the remainder of that disturbed night--to be disturbed no
longer; for, whether it was owing to the presence of the negroes or
not, Claudia slept untroubled by dream, vision, or apparition, until
the daylight streaming through one window, that had been left
unclosed, awakened her.

It was ten o'clock, however, before the family assembled at the
breakfast table, where they were engaged in discussing the affair of
the previous night, and in each maintaining his or her own opinion
as to its character; Claudia persisting that it was the Viscount
Vincent in person that she had seen; Berenice contending that it was
a dream; and the judge hesitating between two opinions; Ishmael
silent.

"A very few hours will now decide the question," said Claudia,
abandoning the discussion and beginning to chip her egg. At this
moment came a sound of wheels on the drive before the house,
followed by a loud knock at the door.

"There! I should not in the least wonder if that is a detachment of
police coming to tell us that Lord Vincent has broken prison, and
bringing a warrant to search this house for him," said Claudia, half
rising to listen.

A servant entered the room and said:

"Sergeant McRae is out in the hall, asking to see his honor the
judge."

"I thought so," said Claudia briskly.

The judge went out to see the sergeant of police.

Claudia and Berenice suspended their breakfast, and waited in
intense anxiety the result of the interview.

Some little time elapsed, perhaps fifteen or twenty minutes, though
the impatience of the ladies made it seem an hour in length; and
then the door slowly opened and the judge gravely re-entered the
breakfast room.

"It is as I said. The Viscount Vincent has broken jail and they have
come here with a search warrant to look for him!" exclaimed Claudia,
glancing up at her father as he approached; but when she saw the
expression of profound melancholy in his countenance, she started,
turned pale, and cried:

"Good Heaven, papa, what--what has happened?"

"Partly what you have anticipated, Claudia. The Viscount Vincent has
broken out of prison, but not in the manner you supposed," solemnly
replied the judge, taking his daughter's arm and leading her to a
sofa and seating her upon it.

Lady Hurstmonceux, startled, anxious, and alarmed, followed and
stood by her and held her hand. And both ladies gazed inquiringly
into the disturbed face of the old man.

"There is something--something behind! What is it, papa? The
viscount has broken jail, you say! Has he--has he--killed one of the
guards in making his escape?" inquired Claudia, in a low, awe-
stricken voice.

"No, my dear, he has not done that. He has escaped the tribunal of
man to rush uncalled to the tribunal of God," said the judge
solemnly.

Claudia, though her dilated eyes were fixed in eager questioning on
the face of her father, and though her ears were strained to catch
his low-toned words, yet did not seem to gather in his meaning.

"What--what do you say, papa? Explain!" she breathed in scarcely
audible syllables.

"The Viscount Vincent is dead!"

"Dead!" ejaculated Claudia.

"Dead!" echoed the countess.

"Dead, by his own act!" repeated the judge.

Claudia sank back in the corner of the sofa and covered her face
with her hands--overcome, not by sorrow certainly, but by awe and
pity.

Berenice sat down beside the newly made widow, and put her arms
around her waist, and drew her head upon her bosom. Judge Merlin
stood silently before them. The only one who seemed to have the full
possession of his faculties was Ishmael.

He quietly dismissed the gaping servants from the room, closed the
doors, and drew a resting-chair to the side of his old friend, and
gently constrained him to sit down in it. And then he was about to
glide away when the judge seized his hand and detained him, saying
imploringly:

"No, no, Ishmael! no, no, my dearest young friend! do not leave us
at this solemn crisis."

Ishmael placed his hand in that of the old man, as an earnest of
fidelity, and remained standing by him.

After a little while Claudia lifted her head from the bosom of Lady
Hurstmonceux, and said:

"Oh, papa, this is dreadful!"

"Dreadful, indeed, my dear."

"That any human being should be driven to such a fate!"

"To such a crime, Claudia," gravely amended the judge.

"Crime, then, if you will call it so. But I do not wonder at it. May
God in his infinite mercy forgive him!" fervently prayed Claudia.

"Amen!" deeply responded the judge.

"Papa, they say that suicides are never forgiven--can never be
forgiven--because their sin is the last act of their life, affording
no time for repentance. Yet who knows that for certain? Who knows
but in the short interval between the deed and the death, there may
not be repentance and pardon?"

"Who knows, indeed! 'With God all things are possible.'"

"Oh, papa, I hope he repented and is pardoned!"

"I hope so too, Claudia."

She dropped her head once more upon the bosom of Lady Hurstmonceux,
in pity and in awe; but not in sorrow, for his death was an infinite
relief to her and to all connected with him. After a little while
she raised her head again, and in a low, hushed voice, inquired:

"Papa, at what hour did he die?"

"Between four and five o'clock this morning, my dear."

"Between four and five o'clock this morning! Good Heavens!"
exclaimed Claudia and Berenice simultaneously, starting and gazing
into each other's faces.

"What is the matter?" gravely inquired the judge.

"That was the very hour in which Claudia was awakened by her strange
dream!" replied Lady Hurstmonceux.

"Oh, papa! that was the very hour in which I saw Lord Vincent
standing at the foot of my bed!" exclaimed Claudia, with a shudder.

"How passing strange!" mused the judge.

"Oh, papa! can such things really be? can a parting spirit appear to
us the moment it leaves the body?" inquired Claudia, in an awe-
struck manner.

"My dear if anyone had related to me such a strange circumstance as
this, of which we are all partly cognizant, I should have
discredited the whole affair. As it is, I know not what to make of
it. It may have been a dream; nay, it must have been a dream; yet,
even as a dream, occurring just at the hour it did, it was certainly
an astonishing and a most marvelous coincidence."

Again Claudia dropped her head upon the supporting bosom of Lady
Hurstmonceux, but this time it was in weariness and in thought that
she reposed there.

A few minutes passed, and then, without lifting her head, she
murmured:

"Tell me all about it, papa; I must learn some time; as well now as
any other."

"Can you bear to hear the story now, Claudia?"

"Better now, I think, than at a future time; I am in a measure
prepared for it now. How did it happen, papa?"

The judge drew closer to his daughter, took her hand in his, and
said:

"I will tell you, as McRae told me, my dear. You must know that from
the time Lord Vincent read the published confession of Frisbie, in
the afternoon papers, he became so much changed in all respects as
to excite the attention, then the suspicion, and finally the alarm
of his keepers. At six o'clock after the turnkey, Donald, had paid
his last visit to his prisoner, and locked up the cell for the
night, he reported the condition of Lord Vincent to the governor of
the jail. Mr. Gra'ame, on hearing the account given by Donald,
determined to curtail many of the privileges his lordship had
hitherto, as an untried prisoner, enjoyed. Among the rest he
determined that nothing more should be carried to his lordship in
his cell that he, the governor, had not first examined, as a
precautionary measure against drugs or tools, with which the
prisoner might do himself a mischief."

"I should think they ought to have taken that precaution from the
first," said Claudia.

"It is not usual in the case of an untried prisoner; but, however,
the governor of Banff jail seemed to think as you do, for he farther
determined to make a special visit to the prisoner that night, to
search his cell and remove from it everything with which he might
possibly injure himself. And accordingly the governor, accompanied
by the turnkey, went to the cell and made a thorough search. They
found nothing suspicious, however. But in their late though
excessive caution they carried away, not only the prisoner's razor,
but his pen-knife and scissors. And then they left him."

"And after all, left him with the means of self-destruction,"
exclaimed Claudia.

"No, they did not. You shall hear. About eight o'clock that night,
as the watchman of that ward was pacing his rounds, he heard deep
groans issuing from Lord Vincent's cell. He went and gave the alarm.
The warden, the physician, and the turnkey entered the cell
together. They found the viscount in the agonies of death."

"Great Heavens! Alone and dying in his cell!"

"Yes; and suffering even more distress of mind than of body. When it
was too late, he regretted his rash deed. For he freely confessed
that being driven to despair and almost if not quite to madness, by
the desperate state of his affairs, he had procured laudanum through
the agency of his servant, having persuaded the old man that he
merely wanted the medicine to allay pain."

"Poor, poor soul!"

"Cuthbert, simple and unsuspicious, and as easily deceived as a
child, brought the laudanum to him and bid him adieu for the night.
And it was in the interval between the last visit of the turnkey and
the special visit of the governor that the prisoner drank the whole
of the laudanum. And then to prevent suspicion he washed the label
from the bottle and poured in a little ink from his inkstand. So
that when the governor made his visit of inspection, although he
actually handled that bottle, he took it for nothing else but a
receptacle for ink."

"Oh, how dreadful! how dreadful, that anyone should exercise so much
calculation, cunning, and foresight for the destruction of his own
soul!" moaned Claudia.

"Yes; he himself thought so at last; for no sooner did the poison
begin to do its work, no sooner did he feel death approaching, than
he was seized with horror at the enormity of his own crime, and with
remorse for the sins of his whole life. It would seem that in that
hour his eyes were opened for the first time, and he saw himself as
he really was, a rampant rebel against all the laws of God and on
the brink of eternal perdition. It was the great agony of mind
produced by this view of himself and his condition that forced from
him those deep groans that were heard by the night-watch, who
brought the relief to him."

"Then he must have repented. Oh! I hope that God forgave him!"
prayed Claudia, with earnest tones and clasped hands.

"You may be sure that God did forgive him if he truly repented!
Certainly it seemed that he repented; for he begged for antidotes,
declaring that he wished to live to atone for the sins of his past.
Antidotes were administered, but without the least good effect. And
when he repeated his earnest wish to be permitted to live that he
might 'atone by his future life for the sins of his past,' the
physician, who is a good man, sent for the chaplain of the jail, a
fervent Christian, who told the prisoner how impossible it was for
him, should he have a new lease of life, to atone, by years of
penance, for the smallest sin of his soul; but pointed him at the
same time to the One Divine Atoner, who is able to save to the
uttermost. The chaplain remained praying with the dying man until
half-past four o'clock this morning, when he breathed his last. That
is all, Claudia."

"Oh, papa, you see he did repent; and I will hope that God has
pardoned him," said Claudia earnestly; but she was very pale and
faint, and she leaned heavily upon the shoulder of Lady
Hurstmonceux.

"My dearest Claudia, let me lead you to your room; you require
repose after this excitement," said the countess, giving her arm to
the new widow.

Claudia arose; but the judge gently arrested her progress.

"Stay, my dear! One word before you go. The business of McRae here
was not only to announce the death of Lord Vincent, but also the
approaching trial of Faustina Dugald. It comes on at ten o'clock to-
morrow morning. You are summoned as a witness for the prosecution.
Therefore, my dear, we must leave Edinboro' for Banff by the
afternoon express train."

"Oh, papa! to appear in a public court at such a time!" exclaimed
Claudia, with a shudder.

"I know it is hard, my dear. I know it must be dreadful; but I also
know that the way of Justice is like the progress of the Car of
Juggernaut. It stops for nothing; it rolls on in its irresistible
course, crushing under its iron wheels all conventionalities, all
proprieties, all sensibilities. And I know also, my daughter, that
you are equal to the duties, the exertions, and the sacrifices that
Justice requires of you. There, go now! take what repose you can for
the next few hours, to be ready for the train at six o'clock," said
the judge, stooping, and pressing a kiss upon his daughter's brow,
before the countess led her away.

"Ishmael," said the judge, as soon as they were alone, "do you know
what you and I have got to do now?"

"Yes, sir," said the young man solemnly, "I know."

"That poor, unhappy man in yonder prison has no friend or relative
to claim his body, his father being absent; and if we do not claim
it, it will be ignominiously buried by the prison authorities within
the prison walls."

"I thought of that, but waited for your suggestion. If you please I
will see the proper authorities to-morrow and make arrangements with
them."

"Do, my dear young friend," said the judge, wringing his hand as he
left him.

Amid the great crises of life its small proprieties must still be
observed. This the Countess of Hurstmonceux knew. And, therefore, as
soon as she had seen Claudia reposing on her comfortable sofa in her
chamber, she ordered her carriage and drove to Edinboro', and to a
celebrated mourning warehouse where they got up outfits on the
shortest notice, and there she procured a widow's complete dress,
including the gown, mantle, bonnet, veil, and gloves, and took them
home to Claudia. For she knew that if Lady Vincent were compelled to
appear in the public courtroom the next day, she must wear widow's
weeds.

When she took these articles into Claudia's room and showed them to
her, the latter said:

"My dear Berenice, I thank you very much for your thoughtful care.
But do you know that it would seem like hypocrisy in me to wear this
mourning?"

"My dearest Claudia, conventionalities must be observed though the
heavens fall. You owe this to yourself, to society, and even to the
dead--for in his death he has atoned for much to you."

"I will wear them then," said Claudia.

And there the matter ended.

Meanwhile, the news of Lord Vincent's death had got about among the
servants. Katie and Sally also had heard of it.

So that when Lady Vincent rang for her women to come and pack up her
traveling trunk to go to Banff, Katie entered full of the subject.

"So my lordship has gone to his account, and all from takin' of an
overdose of laudamy drops. How careful people ought to be when they
meddles long o' dat sort o' truck. Well, laws! long as he's dead and
gone I forgibs him for heavin' of me down to lib long o' de rats,
and den sellin' ob me to de barbariums in de Stingy Isles. 'Deed
does I forgibs him good too. and likewise de shamwally while I'se
got my hand in at forgibness," she said.

"That's right, Katie. Never let your hatred follow a man to the
grave," said Claudia.

"I wouldn't forgib 'em if dey wasn't dead, dough. 'Deed wouldn't I.
I tell you all good too. And if dey was to come back to life I would
just take my forgibness back again. And it should all be just like
it was before," said Katie, sharply defining her position.

Claudia sadly shook her head.

"That is a very questionable species of forgiveness, Katie," she
said.

That afternoon the whole party, including the Countess of
Hurstmonceux, who declared her intention of supporting Claudia
through the approaching ordeal, left Cameron Court for Edinboro',
where they took the six o'clock train for Banff, where they arrived
at ten the same evening.

They went to the "Highlander," where they engaged comfortable
apartments and settled themselves for a few days.


CHAPTER XLIX.

THE FATE OF FAUSTINA.

  Oh, what a fate is guilt! How wild, how wretched!
  When apprehension can form naught but fears.
                                 --_Howard_.


Early the next morning Ishmael went over to the prison to see the
governor relative to the removal of the body of the unhappy Vincent.
But he was told that the old Earl of Hurstmonceux had arrived at
noon on the previous day and had claimed the body of his son and had
it removed from the prison in a close hearse at the dead of night,
to escape the observation of the mob, and conveyed to Castle Cragg,
where, without any funeral pomp, it would be quietly deposited in
the family vault.

With this intelligence Ishmael came back to Judge Merlin.

"That is well! That is a great relief to my mind, Ishmael," said the
judge, and he went to convey the news to Lady Vincent and the
countess.

At nine o'clock Katie, Sally, and Jim, who were all witnesses for
the prosecution in the approaching trial of Faustina Dugald, were
dispatched to the courthouse, under the escort of the professor.

At half-past nine Judge Merlin, Ishmael Worth, Lady Vincent, and the
Countess of Hurstmonceux entered a close carriage and drove to the
same place.

What a crowd!

It is not every day that a woman of high rank stands at the bar of a
criminal court to answer to a charge of felony. And Faustina was a
woman of high rank, at least by marriage. She was the Honorable Mrs.
Dugald; and she was about to be arraigned upon several charges, the
lightest one of which, if proved, would consign her to penal
servitude for years.

The world had got wind of this trial, and hence the great crowd that
blocked up every approach to the courthouse.

Two policemen had to clear a way for the carriage containing the
witnesses for the prosecution to draw up. And when it stopped and
its party alighted, the same two policemen had to walk before them
to open a path for their entrance into the courthouse.

Here every lobby, staircase, passage, and anteroom was full of
curious people, pressed against each other. These people could not
get into the courtroom, which was already crowded as full as it
could be packed; nor could they see or hear anything from where they
stood; and yet they persisted in standing there, crowding each other
nearly to death, and stretching their necks and straining their eyes
and ears after sensational sights and sounds.

Through this consolidated mass of human beings the policemen found
great difficulty in forcing a passage for the witnesses. But at
length they succeeded, and ushered the party into the courtroom, and
seated them upon the bench appointed to the use of the witnesses for
the prosecution.

The courtroom was even more densely packed than the approaches to it
had been. It was scarcely possible to breathe the air laden with the
breath of so many human beings. But for the inconvenience of the
great crowd and the fetid air, this was an interesting place to pass
a few hours in.

The Lord Chief Baron, Sir Archibald Alexander, presided on the
bench. He was supported on the right and left by Justices Knox and
Blair. Some of the most distinguished advocates of the Scottish bar
were present.

The prisoner had not yet been brought into court. A few minutes
passed, however, and then, by the commotion near the door and by the
turning simultaneously of hundreds of heads in one direction, it was
discovered that she was approaching in custody of the proper
officers. Room was readily made for her by the crowd dividing right
and left and pressing back upon itself, like the waves of the Red
Sea, when the Israelites passed over it dryshod. And she was led up
between two bailiffs and placed in the dock. Then for the first time
the crowd got a good view of her, for the dock was raised some three
or four feet above the level of the floor.

She was well dressed for the occasion, for if there was one thing
this woman understood better than another, it was the science of the
toilet. She wore a dark-brown silk dress and a dark-brown velvet
bonnet, and a Russian sable cloak, and cuffs, and muff, and her face
was shaded by a delicate black lace veil.

Mrs. MacDonald, who had followed her into the court, was allowed to
sit beside her; a privilege that the lady availed herself of, at
some considerable damage to her own personal dignity; for at least
one-half of the strangers in the room, judging from her position
beside the criminal, mistook her for an accomplice in the crime.

After the usual preliminary forms had been observed, the prisoner
was duly arraigned at the bar.

When asked by the clerk of arraignments whether she were guilty or
not guilty, she answered vehemently:

"I am not guilty of anything at all; no, not I! I never did conspire
against any lady! My Lord Viscount Vincent and his valet Frisbie did
that! And I never did abduct and sell into slavery any negro
persons! My Lord Vincent and his valet did that also! It was all the
doings of my lord and his valet, as you may know, since the valet
has been guillotined and my lord has suffocated himself with
charcoal! And it is a great infamy to persecute a poor little woman
for what gross big men did! And I tell you, messieurs--"

"That will do! This is no time for making your defense, but only for
entering your plea," said the clerk, cutting short her oration.

She threw herself into a chair and burst into tears, and sobbed
aloud while the Queen's Solicitor, Counselor Birnie, got up to open
the indictment setting forth the charges upon which the prisoner at
the bar had been arraigned.

At the end of the opening speech he proceeded to call the witnesses,
and the first called to the stand was:

"Claudia Dugald, Viscountess Vincent."

Judge Merlin arose and led his daughter to the stand, and then
retired.

Claudia threw aside her deep mourning veil, revealing her beautiful
pale face, at the sight of which a murmur of admiration ran through
the crowded courtroom.

The oath was duly administered, Claudia following the words of the
formula, in a low, but clear and firm voice.

Oh! but her position was a painful one! Gladly would she have
retired from it; but the exactions of justice are inexorable. It was
distressing to her to stand there and give testimony against the
prisoner, which should cast such shame upon the grave of the dumb,
defenseless dead; yet it was inevitable that she must do it. She was
under oath, and so she must testify to "the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth!"

Then being questioned, she spoke of the sinful league between.
Faustina Dugald, the prisoner at the bar, and the deceased Viscount
Vincent; she then related the conversation she had overheard between
these two accomplices on the very night of her first arrival home at
Castle Cragg; that momentous conversation in which the first germ of
the conspiracy against her honor was formed; being further
questioned, she acknowledged the complete estrangement between
herself and her husband, and the actual state of widowhood in which
she had lived in his house, while his time and attention were all
devoted to her rival, the prisoner at the bar.

Here Claudia begged leave to retire from the stand; but of course
she was not permitted to do so; the Queen's Solicitor had not done
with her yet. She was required to relate the incidents of that
evening when the valet Frisbie was dragged from his hiding-place in
her boudoir by the Viscount Vincent. And amid fiery blushes Claudia
detailed all the circumstances of that scene. She was but slightly
cross-questioned by the counsel for the prisoner, and without
effect, and was finally permitted to retire. Her father came and led
her back to her seat.

The housekeeper of Castle Cragg was the next witness called, and she
testified with a marked reluctance, that only served to give
additional weight to her statement, to the sinful intimacy between
the deceased viscount and the prisoner at the bar.

Following her came old Cuthbert, who sadly corroborated her
testimony in all respects.

Next came other servants of the castle, all with much dislike to do
the duty, speaking to the one point of the fatal attachment that had
existed between Lord Vincent and Mrs. Dugald.

And then at length came Katie. Now we all know the facts to which
Katie would bear testimony, and the style in which she would do it;
and so we need not repeat her statement here. It was sufficiently
conclusive to insure the conviction of the prisoner, even if there
had been nothing to support it.

But the most fatal evidence was yet to be produced: The Reverend
Christian Godfree, chaplain of the jail, was called to the stand and
duly sworn. And then a manuscript was placed in his hand, and he was
asked if he could identify that as the veritable last confession
made by the convict, Alick Frisbie, in his cell, on the night
previous to his execution. Mr. Godfree carefully examined it and
promptly identified it.

But here the counsel for the prisoner interposed, and would have had
the confession ruled out as evidence; and a controversy arose
between the prosecution and the defense, which was at last decided
by the bench, who ordered that the confession of Alick Frisbie
should be received as evidence in the case of Faustina Dugald.

And then the Queen's Solicitor, taking the paper from the witness,
proceeded to read the confession with all its deeply disgraceful
revelations. From it, the complicity of Faustina Dugald in the
conspiracy against Lady Vincent was clearly shown. Having read it
through, the solicitor called several witnesses from among the
servants of the castle, who swore to the signature at the bottom of
the confession as the handwriting of Alick Frisbie. And then the
solicitor passed the paper to the foreman of the jury, that he might
circulate it among his colleagues for their examination and
satisfaction. The solicitor then summed up the evidence for the
prosecution and rested the case.

Mr. Brace, leading counsel for the prisoner, arose and made the best
defense that the bad case admitted of. He tried to pull to pieces,
destroy, and discredit the evidence that had been given in; but all
to no purpose. He next tried to engage the sympathy of the judge and
jury for the beauty and misfortunes of his client; but in vain.
Finally, he called a number of paid witnesses, who testified chiefly
to the excellent moral character of Mrs. Faustina Dugald, seeking to
make it appear quite impossible that she should do any wrong
whatever, much less commit the crimes for which she stood arraigned;
and also to the malignant envy, hatred, and malice felt by every
servant at Castle Cragg and every witness for the prosecution
against the injured and unhappy prisoner at the bar, seeking to make
it appear that all their testimony was nothing but malignant calumny
leveled against injured innocence.

But, unfortunately for the defense, the only impression these
witnesses made upon the judge and the jury was that they--the
witnesses--were about the most shameless falsifiers of the truth
that ever perjured themselves before a court of justice.

The counsel for the prisoner went over the evidence for the defense
in an eloquent speech, which was worse than wasted in such evil
service.

The Queen's Solicitor had, as usual, the last word.

The Lord Chief Baron then summed up the evidence on either side and
charged the jury. And the charge amounted in effect to an
instruction to them to bring in a verdict against the prisoner. And
accordingly the jury retired and consulted about twenty minutes, and
then returned with the verdict: "Guilty."

The Lord Chief Baron arose to pronounce the sentence of the law.

The clerk of the arraigns ordered the prisoner to stand up.

"What are they going to do now?" nervously inquired Faustina, who
did not in the least understand what was going on.

"Nothing much, my dear; his lordship the judge is going to speak to
you from the bench. That is all," said Mrs. MacDonald, as she helped
the prisoner to her feet; for Mrs. MacDonald never hesitated to tell
a falsehood for the sake of keeping the peace.

Faustina stood up, looking towards the bench with curiosity,
distrust, and fear.

The Lord Chief Baron began the usual prosing preamble to the
sentence, telling the prisoner of the enormity of the crime of which
she had been accused; of the perfect impartiality of the trial to
which she had been subjected; the complete conclusiveness of the
evidence on which she had been convicted; and so forth. He gave her
to understand that the court might easily sentence her to fifteen or
twenty years' imprisonment; but that, in consideration of her early
youth and of her utter failure to carry out her felonious purposes
to their completion, he would assign her a milder penalty. And he
proceeded to sentence her to penal servitude for the term of ten
years. The Lord Chief Baron resumed his seat.

Faustina threw a wild, perplexed, appealing glance around the
courtroom, and then, as the truth of her doom entered her soul, she
uttered a piercing shriek and fell into violent hysterics. And in
this condition she was removed from the court to the jail, there to
remain until she should be transported to the scene of her
punishment.

"We have nothing more to do here, Judge Merlin. Had you not better
take Lady Vincent back to the hotel?" suggested Ishmael.

The judge, who had been sitting as if spellbound, started up, gave
his arm to his daughter, and led her out of the court and to the fly
that was in attendance to convey them back to the "Highlander."
Ishmael followed, with the countess on his arm. And the professor,
having the three negroes in charge, brought up the rear. Judge
Merlin, Ishmael, Claudia and the countess entered the fly. The
professor and his charges walked. And thus they reached the
"Highlander," where the news of Faustina Dugald's conviction had
preceded them.

The trial had occupied the whole day. It was now late in the
evening; too late for our party to think of going on to Edinboro'
that night. Besides, they all needed rest after the exciting scenes
of the day; and so they determined to remain in Banff that night.


CHAPTER L.

LADY HURSTMONCEUX'S REVELATION.

                      For life, I prize it,
  As I weigh grief which I would spare; for honor,
  'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
  And only that I stand for.
                         --_Shakspeare_.


That same evening, while our party was assembled at tea in their
private parlor, at the "Highlander," a letter was brought to Judge
Merlin.

It was a formidable-looking letter, with a black border an inch wide
running around the envelope, and sealed with a great round of black
wax, impressed with an earl's coronet. The judge opened it and read
it and passed it to Ishmael.

It proved to be a letter from the Earl of Hurstmonceux and addressed
to Judge Merlin. I have not space to give the contents of this
letter word for word.

It set forth, in effect, that under the recent distressing
circumstances it would be too painful to the Earl of Hurstmonceux to
meet Judge Merlin in a personal interview, but that the earl wished
to make an act of restitution, and so, if Judge Merlin would
dispatch his solicitor to London to the chambers of the Messrs.
Hudson, in Burton Street, Piccadilly, those gentlemen, who were the
solicitors of his lordship, would be prepared to restore to Lady
Vincent the fortune she had brought in marriage to her husband, the
late Lord Vincent.

"You will go to London and attend to this matter for me, Ishmael?"
inquired the Judge, as he received the letter back, after the young
man had read it.

"Why, certainly, Judge Merlin. Who should act for you but myself?"
said Ishmael, with an affectionate smile.

"But it may be inconvenient for you to go just now?" suggested the
judge.

"Oh, no, not at all! In fact, judge, I was intending to go up to
London to join Mr. Brudenell there in a very few days. I was only
waiting for this trial to be concluded before setting out," smiled
Ishmael.

"Papa, what is it that you are talking about? What letter is that?"
inquired Claudia, while Lady Hurstmonceux looked the question she
forbore to ask.

For all answer the judge placed the letter in the hands of his
daughter, and then, turning to the countess, said:

"It is a communication from Lord Hurstmonceux, referring us to his
solicitors in London, whom he has instructed to make restitution of
the whole of my daughter's fortune."

"The Earl of Hurstmonceux is an honorable man. But he has been
singularly unfortunate in his family. His brother and his sons, who
seem to have taken more after their uncle than their father, have
all turned out badly and given him much trouble," said the countess.

"His brother? I know of course the career of his sons; but I did not
know anything about his brother," said Judge Merlin.

"He was the Honorable Dromlie Dugald, Captain in the Tenth
Highlanders, a man whose society was avoided by all good women. And
yet I had cause to know him well," answered the countess, as a cloud
passed over her beautiful face.

"You, Berenice!" said Claudia, looking up in surprise; for it was
passing strange to hear that pure and noble woman acknowledge an
acquaintance with a man of whom she had just said that every good
woman avoided his society.

"I!" repeated the counters solemnly.

There was certainly fate in the next words she spoke:

"This Captain Dugald was a near relative and great favorite with my
first husband, the old Earl of Hurstmonceux; chiefly, I think, for
the exuberant gayety of temper and disposition of the young man,
that always kept the old one amused. But after the earl married me
he turned a cold shoulder to the captain, and complimented me by
being jealous of him. This occasioned gossip, in which my good name
suffered some injustice."

The countess paused, and turned her beautiful eyes appealingly to
Ishmael, saying:

"When you shall become one of the lawgivers of your native country,
young gentleman, I hope that the crime of slander will be made a
felony, indictable before your criminal courts."

"If I had the remodeling of the laws," said Ishmael earnestly,
"slander should be made felonious and punishable as theft is."

"But, dear Berenice, the gossip of which you speak could have done
you no lasting injury," said Claudia.

"'No lasting injury.' Well, no eternal injury, I hope, if you mean
that," sighed the countess.

"No, I mean to say that a woman like yourself lives down calumny."

"Ah! but in the living it down, how much of heartwasting."

The countess dropped her head upon her hand for a moment, while all
her long black ringlets fell around and veiled her pale and
thoughtful face. Then, looking up, she said:

"I think I will tell you all about it. Something, I know not what,
impels me to speak tonight, in this little circle of select friends,
on a theme on which I have been silent for years. Claudia, my
dearest, if the jealousy of my old husband and the gossip of my
envious rivals had been all, that would not have hurt me so much.
But there was worse to come. The wretch, denied admittance to our
house, pursued me with his attentions elsewhere; whenever and
wherever I walked or rode out he would be sure to join me. I have
said such was his evil reputation, that his society would have
brought reproach to any woman, under any circumstances; judge you,
then, what it must have brought upon me, the young wife of an old
man!"

"Had you no male relative to chastise the villain and send him about
his business?" inquired the judge.

Berenice smiled sadly and shook her head.

"My husband and my father were both very old men," she said; "I had
but one resource--to confine myself to the house and deny myself to
visitors. We were then living in our town house in Edinboro'. There
my old husband died, and there I spent the year of my widowhood.
There my father came to me, and also my kinsman Isaacs."

"Isaacs!" impulsively exclaimed Ishmael, as his thoughts flew back
to his Hebrew fellow-passenger.

"Yes; did you know him?"

"I knew a Jew of that name; most probably the same; but I beg your
pardon, dear lady; pray proceed with your narrative."

"I mentioned my kinsman Isaacs, because I always suspected him to be
a party to a stratagem formed by Captain Dugald at that time to get
me into his power. Captain Dugald scarcely let the first six months
of my widowhood pass by before he began to lay siege to my house;
not to me personally; for I always denied myself to him. But he came
on visits to my kinsman Isaacs, with whom he had struck up a great
intimacy. He had much at stake, you see, for in the first place he
did me the honor to approve of me personally, and in the second
place he highly approved of my large fortune. So he persevered with
all the zeal of a lover and all the tact of a fortune-hunter.
Several times, through the connivance of my kinsman, he contrived to
surprise me into an interview, and upon each occasion he urged his
suit; but of course, in vain. Captain Dugald was what is called a
'dare-devil,' and I think he rather gloried in that name. He acted
upon the maxim that 'all stratagems are fair in love as in war.' And
he resorted to a stratagem to get me into his power, and reduce me
to the alternative of marrying him or losing my good name forever."

"Good Heaven! he did not attempt to carry you off by violence,"
exclaimed Claudia.

The countess laughed.

"Oh, no, my dear! Such things are never attempted in this age of the
world. Captain Dugald was far too astute to break the laws. I will
tell you just how it was, as it came to my knowledge. My town house
fronted immediately on Prince's Street. You know what a thoroughfare
that is? My bedroom and dressing room were on the second floor--the
bedroom being at the back, and the dressing room in front, with
three large windows overlooking the street. Large double doors
connected the bedroom with the dressing room. I am thus particular
in describing the locality that you may better understand the
villainy of the stratagem," said the countess, looking around upon
her friends.

They nodded assent, and she resumed:

"From some peculiar sensitiveness of temperament, I can never sleep
unless every ray of light is shut out from my chamber. Thus, at
bedtime I have all my windows closed, their shutters fastened and
their curtains drawn, lest the first dawn of morning should awaken
me prematurely. Another constitutional idiosyncrasy of mine is the
necessity of a great deal of air. Therefore I always had the doors
between my bedroom and my dressing room left open."

"After all, that is like my own need; I require a great deal of air
also," said Claudia.

"Well, now to my story. On a certain spring morning, in the
beginning of the second year of my widowhood, I was awakened very
early by a glare of light in my bedroom. On looking up, I saw
through the open doors connecting my bedroom with my dressing room
that the three front windows of the dressing room, overlooking the
street, were open, and all the morning sunlight was pouring in. My
first emotion was anger with my maid for opening them so soon to
wake me up. I got out of bed, slipped on a dressing-gown and went
into the front room. Now judge what my feelings must have been to
see there Captain Dugald in his shirt-sleeves, standing before one
of the front windows deliberately brushing his hair, in the full
view of all the passengers of the street below."

"Great Heaven!" exclaimed Claudia.

"I could not speak," continued the countess. "I could only stand and
gaze at the man in speechless amazement. But he was not dismayed. He
burst into a loud laugh, and laughed himself out of breath--for he
was a great laugher. When he found his tongue, he said to me:

"'You had as well give in now, my lady. The fortress is sapped, the
mine is exploded. The city is taken. Hundreds of people, passing up
and down the street before this house, have looked up at these
windows and seen me standing here half-dressed. And they have formed
their opinions, and made their comments, and circulated their news
accordingly; and so, if our marriage be not published this morning,
you may judge what the consequences will be--to yourself.'"

"What a villain!" said Judge Merlin.

"Astonishment had struck me dumb in the first instance; and anger
kept me silent," continued the countess. "I know what I ought to
have done. I know that I ought to have summoned the police and given
the man in charge on the spot, as a common burglar and housebreaker:
only you see I did not think of it at the time. I only rang the
bell, and then, without waiting the arrival of my servant, I opened
the door and pointed silently to it. He made no motion to go; on the
contrary, he began to defend his act, to plead his cause, and to
urge his suit. He said 'that all stratagems were fair in love and
war'; that it was now absolutely necessary for my fair name that we
should be immediately married; that the bride he had won by fraud
should be worn with faithfulness. But, with an unmoved countenance,
I only pointed to the door, until my servant came in answer to the
bell. Then I told that servant to show Captain Dugald out, and if he
refused to go to summon assistance and eject him. Seeing that I was
determined to be rid of him, he put on his coat, and, laughing at my
discomfiture, took his departure. Then I instituted inquiries; but
failed to gain any information respecting his means of entrance and
concealment in my apartments. I strongly suspected my kinsman Isaacs
of being the accomplice of Captain Dugald; but I had no means of
ascertaining the fact by questioning him, as he went away that same
morning and never returned. The adventure, of course, did me some
harm at the time; but the unprincipled hero of it reaped no
advantage. He doubtless thought me another Lucretia, who would
sacrifice the reality to preserve the semblance of honor. He hoped
to find in me one who, in the base fear of being falsely condemned,
would marry a man I despised, and thus really deserve condemnation.
He was disappointed! From that hour I forbade him the house, and I
have never seen him since. A year later I married another," added
the countess, in a voice so subdued that, at the close of the
sentence, it gradually sank into silence.

Ishmael's beautiful eyes had been bent upon her all the time; now
his whole face lighted up with a smile as of a newly inspired,
benevolent hope.

"You were right-entirely right, Lady Hurstmonceux, in thus
vindicating the dignity of womanhood. And I do not believe that any
lasting blame, growing out of a misunderstanding of the
circumstances, could have attached to you," said Ishmael earnestly.

"No, indeed, there was not. And soon after that event I left
Edinboro' for the south coast of England, and at Brighton"--here the
voice of the countess sank almost to an inaudible whisper--"at
Brighton I met and married another. And now let us talk of something
else, Ishmael," she concluded, turning an affectionate glance upon
the sympathetic face of the young man. For there was a wonderful
depth of sympathy between this queenly woman of forty-five and this
princely young man of twenty-two. On her side there was the royal,
benignant, tender friendship with which such sovereign ladies regard
such young men; while, on his side, there was the loyal devotion
with which such young men worship such divinities. Such a friendship
is a blessing when it is understood; a curse when it is
misapprehended.

Ishmael turned the conversation to the subject of the act of
restitution proposed by the Earl of Hurstmonceux.

Ishmael now possessed the only clear, cool, and undisturbed
intelligence of the whole party, who were all more or less shaken by
the terrible events of the last few days. He had to think for them
all. He announced his intention of departing for London on the
ensuing Friday morning, and warned the judge that he should require
his final instructions for acting in concert with the solicitors of
the Earl of Hurstmonceux.

The judge promised that these should be ready, in writing, to place
in his hands at the moment of his departure.

"And while I am in London, had I not better see the agents of the
ocean steamers, and ascertain how soon we can obtain a passage home
for our whole party? The termination of these trials, and the
restitution of Lady Vincent's estate, really leave us nothing to do
here; and we know that Lady Vincent is pining for the repose of her
native home," said Ishmael.

"Certainly, certainly, Ishmael! The execution of Frisbie, the death
of the viscount, the conviction of Mrs. Dugald, and the act of the
Earl of Hurstmonceux, really, as you say, leave us free to go home.
I myself, as well as Claudia, pine for my home. And you, Ishmael,
though you have not said so, have sacrificed already too much of
your professional interests to our necessities. You should be at
your office. What on earth is becoming of your clients all this
time?"

"I dare say they are taken good care of, sir. Do not think of me.
Believe me, I have no interests dearer to my heart than the welfare
and happiness of my friends. Then I shall engage a passage for us
all, in the first available steamer?"

"I--I think so, Ishmael. There is nothing to keep us here longer
that I know of; we have nothing to do," said the judge hesitatingly.

"I have something yet to do, before I return home," smiled Ishmael,
with a quick and quickly withdrawn glance in the direction of the
countess; "but I shall do it before we go, or if not I can remain
behind for another steamer."

"No, no, Ishmael! You have stayed long with us; we will wait for
you. What do you say, Claudia?"

Claudia said nothing.

Ishmael replied:

"I shall endeavor to accomplish all that I propose in time to
accompany you, Judge Merlin. But if I should not be able to do so,
still I think that you had better all go by the first steamer in
which you can get a passage. You should, if possible, cross the
ocean before March sets in, if you would have anything like a
comfortable voyage."

"Heavens, yes! you are right, Ishmael. Our late voyage should teach
me a lesson. I must not expose Claudia to the chances of such
shipwreck as we suffered," said the judge gravely.

Ishmael turned and looked at Claudia. She had not once spoken since
her name had been introduced into the conversation. She had sat
there with her elbow on the table and her head bowed upon her hand,
in mournful silence. She was looking perfectly beautiful in her
widow's dress and cap--perfectly beautiful with that last divine,
perfecting touch that sorrow gives to beauty. Surely Ishmael thought
so as he looked at her. She lifted her drooping lids. Their eyes
met; hers were suffused with tears; his were full of earnest
sympathy.

"You shall not be exposed to shipwreck, Lady Vincent," he said, in a
voice rich with tenderness.

Slowly and mournfully she shook her head.

"There are other wrecks," she said:

  "'And I beneath a rougher sea,
  O'erwhelmed in deeper gulfs may be.'"

The last words were breathed in a scarcely audible voice, and her
head sank low upon her hand.

With a profound sigh, that seemed to come from the very depths of
his soul, Ishmael turned away. Passing near the Countess of
Hurstmonceux, he bent his head and murmured:

"Lady Vincent seems very weary."

The countess took the hint and rang for the bedroom candles, and
when they were brought, the party bade each other goodnight,
separated, and retired.

Early the next morning they set out for Edinboro', where they
arrived about midday.

The Countess of Hurstmonceux's servants, who had received
telegraphic orders from her ladyship, were waiting at the station
with carriages. The whole party entered these and drove to Cameron
Court, where they arrived in time for an early dinner.

After this, Ishmael and Judge Merlin were closeted in the library,
and engaged upon the preliminary measures for a final arrangement
with the Earl of Hurstmonceux's solicitors.

The judge, in his good opinion of the earl, would have trusted to a
simple, informal rendition of his daughter's fortune; but Ishmael,
the ever-watchful guardian of her interests, warned her father that
every legal form must be scrupulously observed in the restoration of
the property, lest in the event of the death of the Earl of
Hurstmonceux his brother and successor, the disreputable Captain
Dugald, should attempt to disturb her in its possession.

The judge acquiesced, and this business occupied the friends the
whole of that afternoon. In the evening they joined the ladies at
their tea-table, in the little drawing room. After tea, when the
service was removed, they gathered around the table in social
converse.

A servant brought in a small parcel that looked like a case of
jewelry done up in paper, and laid it before the countess.

She smiled, with a deprecating look, as she took it up and opened it
and passed it around to her friends for inspection. It was a
miniature of the countess herself, painted on ivory. It was a
faithful likeness, apparently very recently taken; for, on looking
at it, you seemed to see the beautiful countess herself on a
diminished scale, or through an inverted telescope.

"It has been making a visit," smiled the countess. "A poor young
artist in Edinboro' is getting up a 'Book of Beauty' on his own
account. He came here in person to beg the loan of one of my
portraits to engrave from. I gave him this, because it was the last
I had taken. I gave it to him because a refusal from me would have
wounded his feelings and discouraged his enterprise. Otherwise, I
assure you, I should not have let him have it for any such purpose
as he designed. For the idea of putting my portrait in a 'Book of
Beauty' is a rich absurdity."

"Pardon me; I do not see the absurdity at all," said Ishmael
earnestly, as in his turn he received the miniature and gazed with
admiration on its beautiful features.

"Young gentleman, I am forty-five," said the countess.

Ishmael gave a genuine start of surprise. He knew of course that she
must have been of that age, but he had forgotten the flight of time,
and the announcement startled him. He soon recovered himself,
however, and answered with his honest smile:

"Well, my lady, if you are still beautiful at forty-five, you cannot
help it, and you cannot prevent artistic eyes from seeing it. I, as
one of your friends, am glad and grateful for it. And I hope you
will remain as beautiful in form as in spirit even to the age of
seventy-five, or as long after that as you may live in this world."

"Thank you, Mr. Worth. I really do value praise from you, because I
know that it is sincere on your part, if not merited on mine," said
Lady Hurstmonceux.

Ishmael bowed low and in silence. Then he resumed his contemplation
of the picture. And presently he looked up and said:

"Lady Hurstmonceux, I am going to ask you a favor. Will you lend me
this picture for a week?"

The countess was a little surprised at the request. She looked up at
Ishmael before answering it.

Their eyes met. Some mutual intelligence passed in those meeting
glances. And she then answered:

"Yes, Mr. Worth. I will intrust it to you as long as you would like
to keep it; without reserve, and without even asking you what you
wish to do with it."

Again Ishmael bowed, and then he closed the case of the miniature
and deposited it in his breast-pocket.

"I hope that youth is not falling in love with his grandmother. I
have heard of such things in my life," thought the judge crossly
within himself, for the judge was growing jealous for Claudia. He
had apparently forgotten the existence of Bee.

As Ishmael was to leave Cameron Court at a very early hour of the
morning, before any of the family would be likely to be up to see
him off, he took leave of his friends upon this evening, and retired
early to his room to complete his preparations for the journey.


CHAPTER LI

ISHMAEL'S ERRAND.

  I tell thee, friend, I have not seen
  So likely an ambassador of love;
  A day in April never came so sweet,
  To show that costly summer was at hand.
                    --_Shakespeare._


Ishmael left Edinboro' by the earliest express train for London,
where he arrived at nightfall.

He took a cab and drove immediately to Morley's Hotel in the Strand,
where Herman Brudenell was stopping.

Carpet-bag in hand, Ishmael was shown into that gentleman's sitting
room.

Mr. Brudenell sat writing at a table, but on hearing Mr. Worth
announced and seeing him enter, he started up, threw down his pen,
and rushed to welcome the traveler.

"My dear, dear boy, a thousand welcomes!" he exclaimed, heartily
shaking Ishmael's hands.

"I am very glad to come and see you again, sir. I hope that you are
quite well?" said Ishmael, cordially responding to this warm
welcome.

"As well as a solitary man can be, my dear boy. How did you leave
our friends? In good health, I trust,"

"Yes; in tolerably good health, considering the circumstances. They
are of course somewhat shaken by the terrible events of the last few
days."

"I should think so. Heaven! what an ordeal to have passed through.
Poor Claudia. How has she borne it all?"

"With the most admirable firmness. Claudia-Lady Vincent, I should
say--has come out of her fiery trial like refined gold," said
Ishmael warmly.

"A fiery trial, indeed. Ishmael, I have read the full account of the
Banff tragedy, as they call it, in all the morning papers; no two of
them agreeing in all particulars. The account in the 'Times' I hold
to be the most reliable; it is at least the fullest--it occupies
nearly two pages of that great paper."

"You are right; the account in the 'Times' is the true one."

"But, bless my life, I am keeping you standing here, carpet-bag in
hand, all this time! Have you engaged your room?"

"No; they say the house is full."

"Not quite! Mine is a double-bedded chamber. You shall share it with
me, if you like. What do you say?"

"Thank you, I should like it very much."

"Come in, then, and have a wash and a change of clothes; after which
we will have supper. What would you like?"

"Anything at all. I know they cannot send up a bad one here."

Mr. Brudenell touched the bell. The waiter speedily answered it.

"Supper directly, James. Four dozen oysters; a roast fowl; baked
potatoes; muffins; a bottle of sherry; and, and, black tea!--that is
your milksop beverage, I believe, Ishmael," added Mr. Brudenell, in
a low voice, turning to his guest.

"That is my milksop beverage," replied Ishmael good-humoredly.

The waiter went away on his errand. And Mr. Brudenell conducted
Ishmael into the adjoining chamber, where the young man found an
opportunity of renovating his toilet. When they returned to the
sitting room they found the supper served and the waiter in
attendance, but it was not until the traveler had done full justice
to this meal, and the service was removed, and the waiter was gone,
and the father and son were alone together, that they entered upon
the confidential topics.

Mr. Brudenell questioned Ishmael minutely upon all the details of
the Banff tragedy. And Ishmael satisfied him in every particular.
One circumstance in these communications was noticeable--Mr.
Brudenell, in all his questionings, never once mentioned the name of
the Countess of Hurstmonceux. And even Ishmael avoided bringing it
into his answers.

When Mr. Brudenell had learned all that he wanted to know, Ishmael
in his turn said:

"I hope, sir, that the business which brought you to England has
been satisfactorily settled?"

Mr. Brudenell sighed heavily.

"It has been settled, not very satisfactorily, but after a fashion,
Ishmael. I never told you exactly what that business was. I intended
to do so; and I will do it now."

Mr. Brudenell paused as if he were embarrassed, and doubtful in what
terms to tell so unpleasant a story. Ishmael settled himself to
attend.

"It was connected with my mother and sisters, Ishmael. They have
been living abroad here for many years, as you have perhaps heard."

"Yes."

"And they have been living far above their means and far above mine.
And consequently debts and difficulties and embarrassments have
come. Again and again I have made large sacrifices and settled all
claims against them. I am sorry to say it of my mother and sisters,
Ishmael; but if the truth must be told, their pride and extravagance
have ruined them and me, so far as financial ruin goes. If that had
been all, it might have been borne. But there was worse to come.
About a year ago my sister Eleanor--who had reached an age when
single women begin to despair of marriage--formed the acquaintance
of a disreputable scoundrel, one Captain Dugald, a younger brother,
I hear, of the present Earl of Hurstmonceux--"

"Captain Dugald! I have heard of him!" exclaimed Ishmael.

"No doubt, most people have. He is rather a notorious character.
Well, my infatuated sister took a fancy to the fellow; misled him
into the belief that she was the mistress of a large fortune; and
played her cards so skillfully that--well, in a word, the handsome
scamp ran off with her, or rather she ran off with him; for she
seems all through to have taken the initiative in her own ruin."

"But I do not understand why she should have run off? She was of
ripe age and her own mistress. Who was there to run from?"

"Her mother, her mother; who could not endure the sight of Captain
Dugald, and who had forbidden him her house."

"Ah!"

"Well, they were married at Liverpool. He took her to the United
States. At my mother's request I followed them there to reclaim my
sister, for report said that the captain had already another wife
when he married Eleanor. This report, however, I have ascertained to
be without foundation. I could not find them in the United States,
and soon gave up the search. Captain Dugald had no love for my
sister. He appears to have treated her brutally from the first hour
that he got her into his power. And when he learned that she had
deceived him,--deceived him in every way, in regard to her fortune,
in regard to her age, in regard to her very beauty, which was but
the effect of skillful dress,--he conceived a disgust for her,
abused her shamefully, and finally abandoned her in poverty, in
sickness, and in debt."

"Poor, unhappy lady; what else could she have expected? She must
have been mad," said Ishmael.

"Mad--madness don't begin to explain it. She must have been
possessed of a devil. When thus left, she sold a few miserable
trinkets of jewelry his cupidity had spared her, and took a steerage
passage in one of our steamers and followed him back to England; but
here lost sight of him, for it seems that he is somewhere on the
Continent. She came to my mother's house in London in the condition
of a beggar, knowing that she was a pauper, and fearing that she was
not a wife. In this state of affairs my mother wrote, summoning me
to her assistance. I came over as you know. I have ascertained that
my sister's marriage is a perfectly legal one; but I have not
succeeded in finding her scoundrel of a husband and bringing him to
book. He is still on the Continent somewhere; hiding from his
creditors, it is said."

"And his unhappy wife?"

"Is on her voyage to America. I have sent them all home, Ishmael.
They must live quietly at Brudenell Hall."

"But now that the Viscount Vincent is dead, and Captain Dugald
becomes the heir presumptive to the earldom of Hurstmonceux, his
prospects are so much improved that I should think he would return
to England without fear of annoyance from his creditors; such gentry
being usually very complaisant to the heirs of rich earldoms."

"I doubt if he will live to inherit the title and estate, Ishmael.
He is nearly eaten up by alcohol. Eleanor, I know, will not live
long. She is in the last stage of consumption. Her repose at
Brudenell Hall may alleviate her sufferings, but cannot save her
life," said Mr. Brudenell sadly. "I have only waited until your
business here should be concluded, Ishmael, in order to return
thither myself. You have nothing more to do. however, but to act for
Judge Merlin in this matter of restitution, and then you will be
ready to go, I presume."

"Yes; I have something else to do, sir. I have to expose a villain,
to vindicate a lady, and to reconcile a long-estranged pair,"
replied Ishmael, in a nervous tone, yet with smiling eyes.

"Why, what have you been doing but just those things? What was Lord
Vincent? What was Claudia? What was your part in that affair? Never,
since the renowned Knight of Mancha, the great Don Quixote, lived
and died, has there been so devoted a squire of dames, so brave a
champion of the wronged, as yourself, Ishmael," said Mr. Brudenell.

"You may laugh, but you shall not laugh me out of my next
enterprise, or 'adventure,' as the illustrious personage you have
quoted would call it. And, by the way, do you know anything of a
fellow-passenger of ours in the late voyage, the German Jew, Ezra
Isaacs?"

"No; why?"

"I need him in the prosecution of this adventure."

"I have not seen him since we parted at Liverpool. I know nothing
whatever about him."

"Well, then, after I have been at the chambers of Messrs. Hudson, I
must go to Scotland Yard, and put the affair in the hands of the
detectives, for have Isaacs hunted up I must."

"Is he the villain you are about to expose?"

"No; but he has been the tool of that villain, and I want him for a
sort of state's evidence against his principal."

"Ah! I wish you joy of your adventure, Ishmael. It reminds one
forcibly of the windmills," said Mr. Brudenell.

Ishmael laughed good-humoredly.

"I think it will do so, sir, when you find that the objects that you
have been mistaking for giants are only windmills after all," he
said.

"I do not understand you, my dear fellow."

Ishmael took from his breast-pocket the miniature of the Countess of
Hurstmonceux, and opening it and gazing upon it, he said:

"This is the likeness of the injured lady whose honor I have sworn
to vindicate."

"Is it Claudia's?" inquired Mr. Brudenell, stretching his hand for
it.

"No. it is not Lady Vincent's. Pardon me, upon second thoughts, sir.
I wish to tell you this lady's story before I show you her
portrait," answered Ishmael, shutting the case and returning it to
his pocket.

Mr. Brudenell sat back, looking puzzled and attentive.

"This lady was the young and beautiful widow of an aged peer. She
was as pure and noble as she was fair and lovely. She was sought in
marriage by many attractive suitors; but in vain, for she would not
bestow her hand where she could not bestow her heart. Among the most
persevering of these suitors was a profligate fortune-hunter, who,
as the near relative of her late husband, had the entre into her
house--"

"Ah! I think I have heard this story before," said Mr. Brudenell,
with the slightest possible sneer on his handsome lip.

"One side of it, sir, the false side. Hear the other, and the true
one. The beautiful widow repulsed this suitor in disgust, and
peremptorily forbade him the house. Determined not to be baffled, he
resorted to a stratagem that should have sent him to the hulks--that
did, in fact, banish him from all decent society. Are you listening,
sir?"

"With all my soul," said Mr. Brudenell, whose mocking sneer had
disappeared before an earnest interest.

"By tempting the cupidity of a poor kinsman, who was a member of the
young widow's family, he managed to get himself secretly admitted to
her house and concealed in her dressing room, whose front windows
overlooked the street. In the morning this man opened one of these
windows, and stood before it half-dressed, in full view of the
street, brushing his hair for the entertainment of the passers-by.
The glare of light from the open window, shining through the open
door into the adjoining bedchamber of the sleeping beauty, awakened
her. At sight of the sacrilegious intruder, she was so struck with
consternation that she could not speak. He took advantage of his
position and her panic, to press his repugnant suit. He plead that
his ardent passion and her icy coldness had driven him to
desperation and to extremity. He argued that all stratagems were
fair in love. He begged her to forgive him and to marry him, and
warned her that her reputation was irretrievably compromised if she
did not do so."

Ishmael paused, and looked to see what effect this story was having
upon Mr. Brudenell. Herman Brudenell was listening with breathless
interest.

Ishmael continued, speaking earnestly, for his heart was in his
theme:

"But the beautiful and spirited young widow was not one to be
terrified into a measure that her soul abhorred. Her first act, on
recovering the possession of her senses, was to ring the bell and
order the ejectment of the intruder; and despite his attempts at
explanation and remonstrance, this order was promptly obeyed, and
the lady never saw him afterward. Soon after this she left Edinboro'
for the south of England. At Brighton she met with a gentleman who
afterward became her husband. But ah! this gentleman, some time
subsequent to their marriage, received a one-sided account of that
affair in Edinboro'. He was then young, sensitive, and jealous. He
believed all that was told him; he asked no explanation of his young
wife; he silently abandoned her. And she--faithful to the one love
of her life--has lived through all her budding youth and blooming
womanhood in loneliness and seclusion, passing her days in acts of
charity and devotion. Circumstances have lately placed in my power
the means of vindicating this lady's honor, even to the satisfaction
of her unbelieving husband."

Ishmael paused, and looked earnestly into the troubled face of
Herman Brudenell.

"Ishmael," he exclaimed, "of course I have known all along that you
have been speaking of my wife, Lady Hurstmonceux. If you have not
been deceived; if the truth is just what it has been represented to
you to be; if she was indeed innocent of all complicity in that
nocturnal visit; then, Ishmael, I have done her a great, an
unpardonable, an irreparable wrong."

"You have done that lovely lady great wrong indeed, sir; but not an
unpardonable, not an irreparable one. She will be as ready to pardon
as you to offer reparation. And in her lovely humility she will
never know that there has been anything to pardon. Angels are not
implacable, sir. If you doubt my judgment in this matter, look on
her portrait now," said Ishmael, taking her miniature once more from
his coat-pocket, opening it, and laying it before Herman Brudenell.

Mr. Brudenell slowly raised it, and wistfully gazed upon it.

"Is it a faithful portrait, Ishmael?" he asked.

"So faithful that it is like herself seen through a diminishing
glass."

"She is very, very beautiful--more beautiful even than she was in
her early youth," said Mr. Brudenell, thoughtfully gazing upon the
miniature.

"Yes, I can imagine that she is more beautiful now than she was in
her early youth; more beautiful with the heavenly beauty of the
spirit added to the earthly beauty of the flesh. Look at that
picture, dear sir; fancy those charming features, living, smiling,
speaking, and you will be better able to judge how beautiful is your
wife. Oh, sir! I think that in the times past you never loved that
sweet lady as she deserved to be loved; but if you were to meet her
now, you would love her as you never loved her before."

"If I were to meet her? Why, supposing that I have wronged her as
much as you say, how could I ever venture to present myself before
her?"

"How could you ever venture? Oh, sir! because she loves you. There
are women, sir, who love but once in all their lives, and then love
forever. The Countess of Hurstmonceux is one of these. Sir, since I
have lived in daily companionship with her, I have been led to study
her with affectionate interest. I have read her life as a wondrous
poem. Her soul has been filled with one love. Her heart is the
shrine of one idol. And oh, sir! believe me the future holds no hope
of happiness so sweet to that lovely lady as a reunion with the
husband of her youth."

"Ah, Ishmael! if I could believe this, my own youth would be
restored; I should have a motive to live. You said, just now, that
in the old sad times I had not loved this lady as she deserved to be
loved. No--I married her hastily, impulsively--flattered by her
evident preference for me; and just as I was beginning to know all
her worth and beauty, lo! this fact of the nocturnal sojourn of the
profligate Captain Dugald came to my knowledge--came to my knowledge
with a convincing power, beyond all possibility of questioning. Oh,
you see, I discovered the bare fact, without the explanation of it!
I believed myself the dupe of a clever adventuress, and my love was
nipped in the bud. If I could believe otherwise now,--if I could
believe that she was innocent in that affair, and that she has loved
me all these years, and been true to that love, and is ready and
willing to forgive and forget the long, sorrowful past,--Ishmael,
instead of being the most desolate, I should be the most contented
man alive. I should feel like a shipwrecked sailor, long tossed
about on the stormy sea, arriving safe at home at last!" said Mr.
Brudenell, gazing most longingly upon the picture he held in his
hand.

Ishmael was too wise to interrupt that contemplation by a single
word at this moment.

"The thought that such a woman as this, Ishmael,--so richly endowed
in beauty of form and mind and heart,--should be my loving companion
for life, seems to me too great a hope for mortal man to indulge."

Ishmael did not speak.

"But here is the dilemma, my dear boy! either she did deceive me, or
she did not. If she did deceive me, lovely as she is, I wish never
to see her again. If she did not deceive me, then I have wronged her
so long and so bitterly that she must wish never to see me again!"
sighed Mr. Brudenell, as he mournfully closed the case of the
miniature.

Then Ishmael spoke:

"Oh, sir! I have resolved to vindicate the honor of this lady, and I
will do it. Soon I will have the German Jew, Ezra Isaacs, looked up;
for he it was who, tempted by the false representations of Captain
Dugald, secretly admitted him to her house and concealed him in her
dressing room. And he shall be brought to confess it. Then you will
see, sir, the perfect innocence of the countess. And for the rest,
if you wish to prove her undiminished love; her perfect willingness
to forget the past; her eagerness for a reconciliation--go to her,
prove it all; and, oh, sir, be happier in your sober, middle age
than ever you hoped to be, even in your sanguine youth."

The young man spoke so fervently, so strongly, so earnestly that Mr.
Brudenell seized his hand, and gazing affectionately in his eloquent
face, said:

"What a woman's advocate you are, Ishmael!" "It is because a woman's
spirit has hovered over me, from the beginning of my life, I think."

"Your angel mother's spirit, Ishmael. Ah, brighter, and sweeter and
dearer than all things in my life, is the memory of that pastoral
poem of my boyish love. It is the one oasis in the desert of my
life."

"Forget it, dear sir; forget it all. Think of your boyhood love as
an angel in heaven, and love her only so. Do this for the sake of
that sweet lady who has a right to your exclusive earthly devotion."

"Oh strange, and passing strange, that Nora's son should advocate
the cause of Nora's rival!" said Herman Brudenell wonderingly.

"Not Nora's rival, sir. An angel in heaven, beaming in the light of
God's smile, can never have a rival--least of all, a rival in a
pilgrim of this earth. For the rest, if Nora's son speaks, it is
because Nora's spirit inspires him," said Ishmael solemnly.

"Your life, indeed, seems to have been angel-guided, and your
counsels angel-inspired, Ishmael; and they shall guide me. Yes,
Nora's son; in this crisis of my fate your hand shall lead me. And I
know that it will lead me into a haven of rest."

Soon after this the father and son retired for the night.

Ishmael, secure in his own happy love and easy in his blameless
conscience, soon fell asleep.

Herman Brudenell lay awake, thinking over all that he had heard;
blaming himself for his share of the sorrowful past, and seeing
always the figure of the beautiful countess in her years of lonely
widowhood. It is something for a solitary and homeless man, like
Herman Brudenell, to discover suddenly that he has for years been
the sole object of a good and beautiful woman's love, and to know
that a home as happy and a wife as lovely as his youthful
imagination ever pictured were now waiting to receive him, if he
would come and take possession.

Early the next morning Ishmael arose, refreshed, from a good night's
rest; but Mr. Brudenell got up, weary, from a sleepless pillow.

It was to be a busy day with Ishmael, so, after a hasty breakfast,
he took a temporary leave of Mr. Brudenell and set out. His first
visit was to the chambers of the Messrs. Hudson, solicitors, Burton
Street, Piccadilly. Where all parties are agreed business must be
promptly dispatched, despite of even the law's proverbial delays.
The Earl of Hurstmonceux and Judge Merlin were quite agreed in this
affair of restitution, and therefore their attorneys could have
little trouble.

