Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Transcriber's Note: "[_sic._]" has been inserted wherever there was an
apparent typo or non-standard grammatical construction in the original.


A SERMON

PREACHED AT

THE QUAKER'S MEETING HOUSE,

IN GRACECHURCH-STREET, LONDON,


EIGHTH MONTH 12TH, 1694.


BY WILLIAM PENN.


SALVATION FROM SIN BY CHRIST ALONE.


LONDON:
R. H. MOORE, 162, FLEET-STREET;
AND BANCKS AND CO., EXCHANGE-STREET, MANCHESTER.
1836.


BANCKS AND CO., PRINTERS, MANCHESTER.


The perusal of the first numbers of a series of tracts, containing
extracts from the writings of "early Friends," and published for the
avowed purpose of lowering the estimation in which those writings are
held by the Society, and even of proving "that many of them would
reflect discredit upon a private library, and ought truly to be
accounted dangerous books," has given rise to the present
re-publication. As an humble, but sincere admirer of those principles of
Gospel Truth, which the early Friends sought to promulgate, as well by
their writings as by eminently devoted lives, and a constant and oft
proved willingness to suffer for Christ's sake, I must protest (whether
to any purpose or not) against the illiberal, and unjust mode of conduct
resorted to by the publishers of the "Extracts," in selecting short and
partial sentences, and thus, as I conceive, grossly misrepresenting some
of the views of those Worthies long since removed from the world on
which they walked as strangers and as pilgrims, and long since, I doubt
not, permitted, through the mercy of their God and Saviour, to enter
into that "better country," where they are no more exposed to the trials
of time, no more exposed to the scoffs and persecutions of men, and no
more affected by the calumnies of "false Brethren."

Whilst, however, expressing a sincere and affectionate regard for the
memories of those who have preceded me in religious professions, I would
add that I consider them worthy to be followed only as they followed
Christ, and that if I go forth by the footsteps of this flock of my
Saviour's companions, it is that I may feed beside that good Shepherd's
tents, where, I believe, they found plentiful pasture.

I would most explicitly state, the present publication is no party act,
or an act originating in party feeling, for though I must take a
heartfelt interest in the present proceedings in our Society, yet I
deeply feel that, even if I see, or think I see, the Ark of the Covenant
of our God unsteadily placed as upon a new cart, there is a danger of
putting forth, like Uzza of old, uncalled and unprepared hands for its
support.

To the serious attention of all honest hearted enquirers after truth do
I commend this little Pamphlet, believing that the principles set forth
in the annexed Sermon, are the principles uniformly avowed and supported
by the "early Friends," and that (however their views and writings may
be distorted and belied) the whole Gospel of a crucified and risen
Saviour, in all its freeness, and in all its fullness, was what they
sought to publish, and by their lives to adorn.

C. GILPIN.

_Manchester, 4th Month, 1836._


SERMON.


The great and blessed God that made heaven and earth, the seas and the
great fountains of the deep, and rivers of water, the Almighty JEHOVAH,
who is from everlasting to everlasting. He also made man and woman; and
his design was to make them eternally happy and blessed. And therefore
he made man in his own image; "in the image of God created he him, male
and female created he them:" He made them after his own likeness holy,
wise, merciful, just, patient, and humble, endued them with knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness. But man and woman through their
transgressions lost this image of God, and with it lost their happiness
and true blessedness, that God made them in a capacity to enjoy.

Now in this state of MISERY into which we are fallen, we are come short
of the glory of God; and it is out of this wretched woful state we must
be brought, else we shall never see the face of God with comfort. This
is an eternal truth of God, and recorded in the Holy Scriptures. John
iii. 16. That "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life." God so loved the world, he gave his Son to be a light
unto the world, that all might see their way back to God again: For sin
hath darkened the understanding, and clouded the mind of man and woman,
and alienated them from the life of God, and their hearts are hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. But now is the acceptable time, now is
the day of salvation, the day of God's grace and favourable visitation,
wherein he visits men and women, illuminates their minds and spirits
with a light from heaven, that they might see the deplorable state and
condition wherein they are, and what they are doing: It is in this
light, that they have a day of grace vouchsafed to them, that it may be
well with them, both here and for ever. They that receive this light,
and come out of that which they are called from, which is sin, they may
come to enjoy peace with God. It was sin that first separated between
God and man; and it is sin now that hinders man from acquaintance with
the Lord, who brings peace unto him: It is by this light, that we are to
acquaint ourselves with God, that we may be at peace. Thus saith the
Lord by the prophet, "It is sin has separated between me and you:" Sin
hath made a partition wall between God and us, and God hath sent his Son
into the world to break down this partition wall that sin hath made;
that so fallen man might return to God, and come into Paradise again,
out of which sin hath cast him.

Now, none can bring us back to God, and into favour and communion with
him, but our Lord Jesus Christ: He is the light and leader of his
people. There is no name under heaven by which we can be saved, but the
name of JESUS: It is he that saves his people from their sins; and it is
in him alone that we are blessed: "Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered:" And for the sake of Christ alone it
is, that the Lord imputeth not iniquity to us. Now pray "Examine
yourselves, whether you be in the faith," 2 Cor. xiii. 5. "Prove your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates."
Examine yourselves, whether you have chosen the Lord for your God, and
Christ for your Redeemer? And whether you have forsaken your sins, and
returned from your evil ways, and answered the visitation of the love of
God in your souls? Do you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who came to
seek and to save them that were lost? He is the Physician of value, that
was wounded to heal our wounds: "He was wounded for our transgressions,
bruised for our iniquities, and had the chastisement of our peace upon
him; that by his stripes we might be healed:" It is he alone that could
do this. Who is sufficient for these things? The Lord found out one that
is sufficient; he hath "laid help upon one that is mighty," that is
"able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him." God hath
given him the Spirit without measure, and filled him with grace and
truth, that of his fullness we might all receive, and grace for grace:
He is mighty to save the sons and daughters of men, and to give them
power to become the children of God.

This was testified of old, John i. 12. "But as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them who believe
on his name." Men want power over their sins: When sin appears to be
exceeding sinful, they would overcome it, and be rid of it, when it is
troublesome: And when they are under a deep conviction of the evil of
it, and see the woful and miserable state that sin hath brought mankind
into how they have lost the image of God and the favour of God; they
then desire to be restored, and brought back again into their primitive
state. You that know the truth of God, see how the work goes on in your
hearts, see how the image of God is carrying on upon you. Consider, that
the Lord is a holy God, of purer eyes than to behold iniquity with
approbation: "There is no peace to the wicked," that walk in the broad
way, and grieve the Holy Spirit, and do not answer his divine call.
There is a two-fold call concerning man, a call to repentance, and a
call to judgment. The call to repentance is in this day of God's
visitation; they that receive it now, that are so wise, as to answer
God's call, and believe in the Son of God, and in his inward appearance,
that obey his voice, when they hear his call, saying, Come away, come
out of thy sins, come out of the wickedness, filthiness, and pollution
of the world; come into the divine nature of the Son of God; come into
his life: Into what life? Into the spiritual life, the divine life? Thou
hast been dead to God and alive to the world: Now that thou mayst
[_sic._] be dead to sin, and alive to God, come unto him that hath all
power in heaven and in earth committed to him. O come unto Christ, the
dear and blessed Son of God, in this day of grace and salvation, and
receive power to overcome thy sins! Then thou wilt be a conqueror, and
overcome the Devil.

We are of ourselves altogether insufficient for these things, we are
weak and impotent; and our Saviour hath told us, "Without me ye can do
nothing:" We are justified freely by God's grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ; not justified by our own works. How great a
contradiction is it to charge them with the contrary, that say, They
cannot preach nor pray, but as the Spirit of God moveth them. Blessed be
God that hath made us sensible of our own weakness, emptiness, and
poverty. Our help hath been in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth, who hath given his Son to be an helper, and an all-sufficient
Saviour to us; with him he hath given sufficient power and strength,
whereby we are enabled to overcome the Devil, the enemy of our souls: So
that we may be enabled to stand against principalities and powers,
against spiritual wickedness, and conquer all the powers, of darkness,
and fight the good fight of faith, and finish our course with joy, and
keep the faith: seeing there is laid up for us a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give us at that day; "and not
only to us, (saith the Apostle,) but unto all them that love his
appearing." We have not an High-Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we
are, yet without sin: Christ, our Redeemer, was tempted, that he might
succour those that are tempted. When the Devil tempted our Saviour in
the wilderness, and could not prevail, he went away and left him: The
prince of this world found nothing in him, upon which he could fasten
his temptation. Christ will enable those that believe in him to overcome
the Devil, and to be more than conquerors, through him that loved them:
He came into the world to purge and purify his people, and to be the
author of eternal salvation to all them that believe in him, and obey
him. But it is said, "He did not many mighty works" among some to whom
he preached the everlasting Gospel, because of their unbelief: Many will
not believe in the inward and spiritual appearance of Jesus Christ the
Son of God, who is the light of the world; they will neither believe in
the light, nor walk in the light, which will enable them to conquer the
evil one, who is the prince of darkness: It is only through Christ
Jesus, the great captain of our salvation, that we are victorious.

Therefore, my friends, open your hearts to the Lord Jesus Christ,
receive this blessed gift of God which he offers to you: And can God
give you a greater gift than the Son of his Love? And will not you
gladly receive him, and that great salvation which he hath purchased for
you with his own blood! But, say some people, we have received Christ,
and believe in him, and believe the divine authority of the Holy
Scriptures. But let me ask you, Who keeps house all this while? What
have you done for Christ? Christ hath died for you; but hast thou lived
to him? And hast thou died to the world, and died to thy sins and lusts?
Consider with yourselves, It is both your great duty and interest to die
to sin, and live to Christ that died for you. And we must stand at
Christ's tribunal, and give an account to him, of whatsoever we have
done, whether good or bad; and he will judge us at the great day of his
appearing. Blessed are you, that receive the blessed Son of God, that
now stands in Spirit at the door, and knocks: Open your heart, and make
room for him, and let not the world keep him out, and he will come in,
and sup with you, and you with him: And he will do that for you, which
you cannot do for yourselves. "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is
weak:" He will give thee power over sin, and over the world, and over
the Devil: Whenever he shall assault thee with his temptations, say,
"Get thee behind me Satan, thou savourest not the things that be of
God." When people come to be spiritually minded they will taste and
savour the things that are spiritual and heavenly: if they be not things
of God, do not touch with them, have nothing to do with them; but walk
in the Spirit, and savour the things of the Spirit. And hearken to the
counsel of Christ, who speaks to you in the name of Wisdom; "O ye simple
ones understand wisdom, and ye fools be of an understanding heart; hear,
for I will speak of excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall
be right things: Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at
my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors: For whoso findeth me findeth
life." Hearken to the blessed counsel of Christ, hear his voice and obey
it: They that do his will, shall know his doctrine: "The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will shew them his covenant."

They that have the saving knowledge of God, and Christ Jesus, which is
life eternal, they will walk in a correspondent and suitable manner to
that knowledge, and be holy in all manner of conversation: They will not
be only nominal Christians, but true Christians, Israelites indeed in
whom there is no guile; They will receive Christ Jesus who is God's
gift, and knows [_sic._] the operation of his power in their
souls. These persons are fit to live and prepared to die; when Christ,
who is their life, shall appear, they shall appear with him in glory.
When the sound of the last trumpet shall be heard at the end of the
world, Time shall be no more; Come away! that day shall not be terrible
to them that have put off the old man, and put on the new man; and have
begun to live a new life, and to have new affections, new thoughts and
resolutions, and have laid up their treasure in heaven, where their
hearts are also: They have that peace, which the world cannot give, and
which death cannot take away. Blessed are they that take sanctuary in
the name of Jesus, as in a strong tower; they shall get power over their
sins, and over the vanity of their minds, that die to sin and live to
God, and feel the constraining power and efficacy of the love of Christ,
"who hath loved them, and washed them from their sins, in his own blood,
and made them kings and priests to God."

My friends, hear the voice of Wisdom, who hath said, "Whoso findeth me,
findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord: but he that sinneth
against me, wrongeth his own soul." Be you early seekers: seek the
kingdom of God in the first place. The Lord calls from heaven; "My son,
give me thine heart:" Let thy answer be, Lord, take my heart, purify and
cleanse it; break it, and make it new, make it fit for thy acceptance,
that I may find favour in thy sight. "Without me (saith our Saviour) ye
can do nothing:" Therefore desire him to do it for thee, and to work in
thee both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. How dreadful is it
to appear at the bar of God's justice as miserable sinners! Those that
have not Christ, the great Mediator, to plead for them, are miserable
indeed: Therefore lay hold on Christ now; believe in him, lay hold on
his power and Spirit in this day of your visitation. If thou art under
the power of sin and Satan, thou mayst [_sic._] receive power from
Christ, to overcome all the power of darkness: If the strong man armed
hath got possession of thy heart, Christ will lay siege to it; and if
thou be willing to open the door, Christ will come in and cast out the
strong man, and spoil him of all his goods. He will cast out the grand
enemy of thy soul, and take possession for himself; that thou mayest be
delivered from the power of Satan, and from the bondage of corruption,
and brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: And if the Son
of God make thee free, thou shalt be free indeed. For this end Christ
came into the world, "for this purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil:" And he will not lose the
design of his coming, but will "finish transgression, and make an end of
sin, and bring in everlasting righteousness."

Let us all come to Christ, and let none deceive themselves, and live in
their sins, and yet think to come to heaven: "Be not deceived, (saith
the Apostle,) God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap: He that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
everlasting life." Labour for a sure grounded hope, a just hope in the
mercy of God for pardon and salvation; then you must know a work of
Christ upon you, and the power of the Spirit of Christ within you,
subduing your will to a holy subjection to the Divine will; that you may
say with the Apostle; "I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me." Then the call to judgment will be joyful to you; for
you shall then be justified and acquitted before the whole world, at
that great and general judgment, and have an abundant entrance into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and it shall
be well with you for ever. Now, "say to the righteous, it shall be well
with him;" not that it doth so appear at present; for through many
tribulations we must expect to enter into the kingdom of heaven; And
many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them
out of them all. So that "if in this life only (saith the apostle) we
have hope, we are of all men most miserable". Yet "say to the righteous,
it shall be well with him;" Whatsoever their trials, troubles, and
tribulations are, the Lord will deliver them in the best time; they have
heaven in their eye and they look to the recompense of reward. Now what
hast thou in thine eye? Is it the high calling in Christ? Is this the
mark thou aimest at, and which thou hast in view? Is this the port and
haven, that thou art sailing to, "looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross, despising the shame?" Heb. xii 2. The apostle, after he had
been speaking of the suffering and martyrdom of those great saints, of
whom the world was not worthy; Heb. xi. How that "through faith they
subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopt the
mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the
sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and
turned to flight the armies of the Aliens; of women, that received their
dead to life again, and others were tortured, not accepting of
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection." Then he
comes to speak of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and bids us
"Look unto him." Heb. xii. 1, 2, 3. Wherefore, "seeing we are compassed
about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight,
and the sin that doth so easily beset us; and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith: Who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God: For consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds."
Blessed are they that can endure all these things, shame, reproach,
contumely, and disdain, persecutions and afflictions that attend the
testimony of Jesus! Blessed are they that can endure the cross, and
despise the shame! It is an internal cross, which thou must endure for
Christ, or thy own heart will reprove thee, check thee and condemn thee
for it: But if thou comest to know a being crucified with Christ, thou
shalt reign with him, and be raised up to eternal glory with him. Unless
thou knowest a dying to the world, and a being crucified with Christ,
thou canst not have a well grounded hope of everlasting happiness.

Therefore now, friends, examine yourselves about your title to heaven.
It is the wisdom and practice of the world, to examine their titles and
settlements, and to see, they be sure, and firm, and stable beforehand:
So we should make sure for heaven and eternal glory, and of "an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens," before this earthly
tabernacle be dissolved; then for us to live will be Christ, and to die
will be eternal gain. Blessed are they that bear record of the Word of
God, and of the testimony of Jesus, that bear his name, and testify and
join with him against the spirit of the world, and the prince of the
power of the air. It is within that thou must join with Christ's
appearance, that so thou mayest be christianized, and thy mind made
truly christian: Thou must be purified in thy spirit, and baptized with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire, and know the powerful operation of the
Lord: They that have not experience of the new birth, they cannot enter
into the kingdom of God.

O my friends, set before you the example of Christ, who was holy,
harmless, and undefiled; his life was glorious in holiness: And as it
becomes you, so it highly concerns you, to be holy in all manner of
conversation. For if you imitate not the life of Christ, you cannot be
saved by his death: He came into the world, to redeem you from all
iniquity, and to save you from sin and hell; Labour to answer the
dignity of your high and holy calling, with a conversation becoming the
gospel of Christ: For you are called to glory and virtue. Whatsoever
troubles, temptations and tribulations may attend you in your pilgrimage
here below, if you be faithful and sincere, you will have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. In all your labours and travels on this
earth, you may look up with joy for you have a serene heaven over your
heads; let Christ be precious to you; open the door of your hearts to
him, who is the King of glory: He is oppressed in the hearts of the
unclean, but he is exalted and lifted up in the hearts of the faithful:
Blessed are they that set him upon his throne in their hearts! O learn
of Christ to be meek and lowly: Your humility will exalt Him, and will
also exalt you at the last: "Be faithful to the death and you shall
receive a crown of life:" Those that have eternal life in their eye, and
depend upon Christ alone for salvation, they have laid a sure
foundation. All other foundations will come to nothing; they are founded
in time, and in time they will come to moulder away: But that city that
God is the builder and maker of, that Abraham had in his eye, will never
decay, nor moulder away: Let us have this always in our eye, that
nothing may intercept our view. "We have here (saith the Apostle) no
continuing city; we seek one that is to come." In this world we are as
sheep among wolves: "Fear not, little flock, (saith our Saviour,) it is
your Father's good pleasure to give you a kingdom." If we be the sheep
of Christ, we shall follow him: "For his sheep follow him, and know his
voice, and a stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him,
for they know not the voice of a stranger." "My sheep (saith Christ)
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hands." Here is encouragement for us to labour abundantly in
the work of the Lord; "for our labour shall not be in vain in the Lord."
Let us, with Moses, "choose rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;" and "esteem
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; and
have respect to the recompense of reward."

Friends, I beseech you, in the fear of God, "look up unto Jesus, the
GREAT MEDIATOR of the new covenant, the author and finisher of your
faith; that by patient continuance in well doing, you may seek for
glory, honour, immortality, and eternal life:" Which you shall obtain,
if you persevere to the end: "For he that endureth unto the end shall be
saved."

"Be not weary of well doing; for in due time you shall reap if you faint
not." He that hath appeared, as a God of salvation, and a mighty
preserver of his people in all ages of the world, and hath been so both
to the primitive christians, and to all our christian friends, that are
gone before us to an eternal rest, if you faint not, but follow them,
who through faith and patience do inherit the promises, you shall lay
down your heads in peace in him, when you come to die; And when time
shall be no more, you shall be for ever with the Lord.

To God be praise, honour, and glory, who hath stretched forth his mighty
arm to save: Who is the arm of the Lord but Christ Jesus, the redeemer
of souls? When we had undone ourselves, and lost ourselves, in wandering
and departing from the Lord, the true and living God, into darkness and
the shadow of death, He stretched forth his almighty arm, to gather us,
and to bring us into the paradise of God again, when we were driven out
by our own sin, from the face and presence of the Lord. Christ Jesus,
the great and good shepherd of his sheep, came to seek and to save them
that were lost: The lost sheep that have wandered from him, he will take
them on his shoulder, and bring them to his fold: and he will make them
lie down in green pastures, and lead them by the still waters, and
satisfy them with the rivers of pleasure that are at God's right hand
for evermore. He hath promised, "That he will feed his flock like a
shepherd, and gather his lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom:" I hope CHRIST JESUS, the GREAT SHEPHERD, will find some here
this day, that have gone astray, and gather them with his divine arm,
and keep them by his mighty power, through faith unto salvation. To him
be all praise, honour, glory, dominion, and thanksgiving: For He alone
is worthy, who is GOD over all, blessed for ever and ever.--_Amen._


BANCKS AND CO., PRINTERS, MANCHESTER.