The school-children passed first into the outer room, where the keepers'
wives and our maids were presiding over two great bowls of hot wine
(with a great deal of water, naturally) and a large tray filled with
brioches. When each child had had a drink and a cake they went out, to
make room for the outsiders and old people. Henrietta and Pauline
distributed the "extras"; I think there were about twenty in all,
counting the babies in arms--also, of course, the girls from La Ferté
who had come over with the Sisters to sing. I talked to some of the old
people. There was one poor old woman--looked a hundred--still gazing
spellbound at the Tree with the candles dying out, and most of the
ornaments taken off. As I came up to her she said: "Je suis bien
vieille, mais je n'aurais jamais cru voir quelque chose de si beau! Il
me semble que le ciel est ouvert"--poor old thing! I am so glad I wasn't
sensible, and decided to give them something pretty to look at and think
about. There was wine and cakes for all, and then came the closing
ceremony.

We (the quality) adjourned to the sitting-room of the school-mistress
(where there were red arm-chairs and a piano), who produced a bottle of
better wine, and then we "trinquéd" (touched glasses) with the Mayor,
who thanked us in the name of the commune for the beautiful fête we had
made for them. I answered briefly that I was quite happy to see them so
happy, and then we all made a rush for wraps and carriages.

The Abbé came back to the château to dine, but he couldn't get away
until he had seen his Sisters and harmonium packed safely into the big
omnibus and started for La Ferté. It looked so pretty all the way home.
It was quite dark, and the various groups were struggling down the hill
and along the road, their lanterns making a bright spot on the snow;
the little childish voices talking, laughing, and little bands running
backward and forward, some disappearing at a turn of the road, the
lantern getting dimmer, and finally vanishing behind the trees. We went
very slowly, as the roads were dreadfully slippery, and had a running
escort all the way to the Mill of Bourneville, with an accompaniment of
drums and trumpets. The melancholy plains of the Valois were transformed
tonight. In every direction we saw little twinkling lights, as the
various bands separated and struck off across the fields to some lonely
farm or mill. It is a lonely, desolate country--all great stretches of
fields and plains, with a far-away blue line of forests. We often drive
for miles without meeting a vehicle of any kind, and there are such
distances between the little hamlets and isolated farms that one is
almost uncomfortable in the absolute solitude. In winter no one is
working in the fields and one never hears a sound; a dog's bark is
welcome--it means life and movement somewhere.

[Illustration: There was some poor old woman still gazing spellbound.]

It is quite the country of the "haute culture," which Cherbuliez wrote
about in his famous novel, "La Ferme du Choquart." The farms are often
most picturesque--have been "abbayes" and monasteries. The massive round
towers, great gate-ways, and arched windows still remain;
occasionally, too, parts of a solid wall. There is a fine old
ruin--the "Commanderie," near Montigny, one of our poor little villages.
It belonged to the Knights Templars, and is most interesting. The chapel
walls are still intact, and the beautiful roof and high, narrow windows.
It is now, alas! a "poulailler" (chicken-house), and turkeys and
chickens are perched on the rafters and great beams that still support
the roof. The dwelling-house, too, is most interesting with its thick
gray walls, high narrow windows, and steep winding staircase. I was
always told there were "donjons" in the cellars, but I never had the
courage to go down the dark, damp, slippery staircase.

We were quite glad to get back to our big drawing-room with the fire and
the tea-table; for of course the drawback to our entertainment was the
stuffiness (not to say bad smell) of the little room. When all the
children and grown people got inmost of them with damp clothes and
shoes-the odour was something awful. Of course no window could be opened
on account of the candles, and the atmosphere was terrible. At the end,
when it was complicated with wine and cake and all the little ones'
faces smeared with chocolate and "dragées," I really don't know how we
stood it.

We had a very cheerful dinner. We complimented the Abbé upon his sermon,
which was really very pretty and poetical. He said the children's faces
quite inspired him, and beyond, over their heads, through the open door
he got a glimpse of the tall pines with their frosted heads, and could
almost fancy he saw the beautiful star.

We were all much pleased with our first "Christmas in the Valois."


VII

A RACINE CELEBRATION


MAREUIL-SUR-OURCQ, April 20th, 1899.

I could scarcely believe I was in our quiet little town of La
Ferté-Milon to-day. Such a transformation--flags flying, draperies at
all the windows, garlands of greens and flowers across the streets, and
a fine triumphal arch--all greens and flowers arranged about the centre
of the Grande Rue. Many people standing about, looking on, and making
suggestions; altogether, an air de fête which is most unusual in these
sleepy little streets where nothing ever passes, except at four o'clock,
when the three schools come out, and clatter down the street. The École
Maternelle comes first, the good Mère Cécile bringing up the rear of the
procession, holding the smallest children, babies three and four years
old, by the hand, three or four more clinging to her skirts, and guiding
them across the perilous passage of the bridge over the canal. It is a
pretty view from the bridge. The canal (really the river Ourcq,
canalisée), which has preserved its current and hasn't the dead,
sluggish look of most canals, runs alongside of the Mail, a large green
place with grass, big trees, a broad walk down the centre, and benches
under the trees. It is a sort of promenade for the inhabitants and also
serves as a village green, where all the fairs, shows and markets are
held. The opposite bank is bordered by quaint old houses, with round
towers and gardens, full of bright flowers, running down to the water's
edge. There is one curious old colombier which has been there for
centuries; near the bridge there is a lavoir, where there are always
women washing. They are all there to-day, but much distracted, wildly
interested in all that is going on--and the unwonted stir in the
streets; chattering hard, and giving their opinions as to the decoration
of the arch, which is evidently a source of great pride to the town.

On a bright sunny day, when the red roofs and flowers are reflected in
the water, and it is not too cold, their work doesn't seem very hard;
but on a winter afternoon, when they have to break the ice sometimes,
and a biting wind is blowing down the canal, it is pitiable to see the
poor things thinly clad, shivering and damp; their hands and arms red
and chapped with cold. On the other side of the bridge, the canal
wanders peacefully along through endless green meadows, bordered with
poplars, to Marolles, a little village where there is the first écluse
on the way to Paris.

We had been talking vaguely all winter of doing something at La
Ferté-Milon to fêter the bicentenaire of Racine. They were making
preparations at Paris, also at Port Royal, and it seemed hard to do
nothing in his native place. His statue in the Grande Rue is one of the
glories of La Ferté.

Jean Racine was born in La Ferté in 1639. He lost both father and mother
young, and was brought up by his grandparents. He was sent first to
school at Beauvais, later, while still quite a youth, to Port Royal. His
stay there influenced considerably his character and his writings; and
though he separated himself entirely from the "Solitaires" during the
years of his brilliant career as poet and courtier, there remained
always in his heart a latent tenderness for the quiet green valley of
the Chevreuse, where he had passed all his years of adolescence,
listening to the good Fathers, and imbibing their doctrines of the
necessity of divine grace to complete the character. His masters were
horrified and distressed when his talent developed into plays, which
brought him into contact with actors and actresses, and made him an
habitué of a frivolous Court.

There is a pretty letter from one of his aunts, a religieuse de Port
Royal, begging him to keep away from "des fréquentations abominables,"
and to return to a Christian life.

His career was rapid and brilliant. He was named to the Académie
Française in 1673, and when he retired from the theatre was a welcome
and honoured guest at the most brilliant court of the world. He was made
private historian to the King and accompanied him on various campaigns.
There are amusing mentions of the poets-historians (Boileau was also
royal historian) in the writings of their contemporaries, "les messieurs
du sublime," much embarrassed with their military accoutrements and much
fatigued by the unwonted exercise and long days on horseback. The King
showed Racine every favour. He was lodged at Versailles and at Marly and
was called upon to amuse and distract the monarch when the cares of
state and increasing years made all diversions pall upon him. He saw the
decline and disgrace of Madame de Montespan, the marvellous good fortune
of Madame de Maintenon. His famous tragedies of Esther and Athalie were
written at Madame de Maintenon's request for her special institution of
St. Cyr, and the performances were honoured by the presence of the King.
Racine himself directed the rehearsals and the music was composed by
Jean Baptiste Moreau, organist of St. Cyr. The youthful actresses showed
wonderful aptitude in interpreting the passionate, tender verses of the
poet. Young imaginations worked and jealousies and rivalries ran high.
After a certain number of representations Mme. de Maintenon was obliged
to suspend the performances in public, with costumes and music. The
plays were only given in private at the Maison de St. Cyr; the young
scholars playing in the dress of the establishment. He made his peace
with Port Royal before he died. He submitted Phèdre to his former
masters and had the satisfaction of being received again by the "Grand
Arnauld,"[10] who had been deeply offended by his ingratitude and his
criticisms and ridicule of many of his early friends and protectors. He
asked to be buried there, and his body remained until the destruction
and devastation of Port Royal, when it was removed to Paris and placed
in the Church of St. Etienne des Monts.

[10] "Le Grand Arnauld" (Antoine), one of the first and most
influential of the celebrated "Solitaires" who established themselves
at Port Royal, and one of the founders of the famous sect of
Jansenists whose controversies with the Jesuits convulsed the whole
religious world in France during the years 1662-1668. He was followed
in his retreat by his mother (after the husband's death), his brother
and four sisters, one of whom became the "Mère Angélique," Abbesse of
Port Royal.

He returned many times to La Ferté-Milon, and the great poet and
private historian of the Roi Soleil must often have climbed the steep
little street that leads to the ruins, and thought of the changes, since
the little boy lay on the grass at the foot of the great walls, dreaming
golden dreams of the future, which for him were so brilliantly realised.

In a small country town one is slow to adopt new ideas, slower still to
carry them out, but the Mayor and curé were both most anxious to do
something in the birthplace of the poet, and that was the general
feeling in the Department. After many discussions we finally arrived at
a solution, or at least we decided what we wanted: a special service in
the fine old church of Notre Dame, which stands beautifully on the hill,
close to the ruins; a representation of the Comédie Française, and of
course a banquet at the Sauvage, with all the official world, senators,
Préfet, Académiciens--a band of music, a torch-light procession, and as
many distinguished visitors as we could get hold of. _Funds_ of course
were a necessary item, but all the countryside contributed largely, and
we knew that the artists would give their services gratis.

We arranged a breakfast at my house in Paris with Mons. Casimir-Périer,
late President of the Republic, who was always ready to lend his
influence for anything that interests the people, and teaches them
something of their great men, and Mons. Claretie, Directeur of the
Comédie Française, a most cultivated, charming man. He is generally
rather chary of letting his pensionnaires play en province, but this
really was an occasion to break through his rules, and he was quite
ready to help us in every way. We had also M. Sebline, Senator of the
Aisne, and l'Abbé Maréchal, curé of La Ferté-Milon. We had wanted one of
the Administrateurs of the Chemin de Fer du Nord to arrange about a free
transport for the actors, but there seemed some trouble about getting
hold of the right man, and Sebline promised to see about that.

The Abbe Maréchal and I were very ambitious for the theatrical part of
the entertainment and had views of Esther with the costumes, and
choruses of Moreau, but M. Claretie said that would be impossible. It
was difficult enough to arrange in Paris with all the singers,
instruments, and costumes at hand--and would be impossible in the
country with our modest resources. I think the idea of a tent on a
village green rather frightened him; and he didn't quite see the élite
of his company playing in such a cadre--no décor--and probably very bad
acoustics. However, Sebline reassured him. He knew the tent and its
capabilities, having seen it figure on various occasions, comices
agricoles, banquets de pompiers, at village fêtes generally, and said it
could be arranged quite well.

We discussed many programmes, but finally accepted whatever M. Claretie
would give--an act of "Les Plaideurs," and two or three of "Bérénice,"
with Mme. Bartet, who is charming in that rôle. The Abbé Maréchal
undertook the music in his church, and I was sure he would succeed in
having some of the choruses of Esther. His heart was quite set on it.
Once he had settled our programme, the conversation drifted away from
the purely local talk, and was brilliant enough. All the men were clever
and good talkers, and all well up in Racine, his career, and the various
phases of his work.

From the classics we got into modern plays and poets, and there of
course the differences of opinion were wide; but I think the general
public (people in the upper galleries) like better when they go to the
Française to see a classic piece--Roman emperors and soldiers, and
vestal virgins and barbarians in chains--and to listen to their long
tirades. The modern light comedy, even when it treats of the vital
subjects of the day, seems less in its place in those old walls. I quite
understand one couldn't see Britannicus,[11] Mithridate, nor the Cid
every evening.

