He smirked at her, venomously. "All right," he said. "You're wise. But get
out of town on the next train."

"I'll go when I get ready--you can't scare me. Let me alone or I'll go to
Rosalind Benham and let her in on the whole scheme."

"Yes you will--not," he laughed. "If I know anything about you, you won't
do anything that would give Miss Benham to Trevison."

"That's right; I'd rather see her married to you--that would be the
refinement of cruelty!"

He laughed sneeringly and stepped out of the door. Waiting a short time,
the woman heard his step in the hall. Then she darted to the door, locked
it, and leaned against it, panting.

"I've done it now," she murmured. "Braman--Well, it serves him right!"

                   *       *       *       *       *

Corrigan stopped in the barroom and got a drink. Then he walked to the
front door and stood in it for an instant, finally stepping down into the
street. Across the street in the banking room he saw a thin streak of
light gleaming through a crevice in the doorway that led from the banking
room to the rear. The light told him that Braman was in the rear room.
Selecting a moment when the street in his vicinity was deserted, Corrigan
deliberately crossed, standing for a moment in the shadow of the bank
building, looking around him. Then he slipped around the building and
tapped cautiously on the rear door. An instant later he was standing
inside the room, his back against the door. Braman, arrayed as he had been
the night before, had opened the door. He had been just ready to go when
he heard Corrigan's knock.

"Going out, Croft?" said Corrigan pleasantly, eyeing the other intently.
"All lit up, too! You're getting to be a gay dog, lately."

There was nothing in Corrigan's bantering words to bring on that sudden
qualm of sickening fear that seized the banker. He knew it was his guilt
that had done it--guilt and perhaps a dread of Corrigan's rage if he
_should_ learn of his duplicity. But that word "lately"! If it had been
uttered with any sort of an accent he might have been suspicious. But it
had come with the bantering ring of the others, with no hint of special
significance. And Braman was reassured.

"Yes, I'm going out." He turned to the mirror on the wall. "I'm getting
rather stale, hanging around here so much."

"That's right, Croft. Have a good time. How much money is there in the
safe?"

"Two or three thousand dollars." The banker turned from the glass. "Want
some? Ha, ha!" he laughed at the other's short nod; "there are other gay
dogs, I guess! How much do you want?"

"All you've got?"

"All! Jehoshaphat! You must have a big deal on tonight!"

"Yes, big," said Corrigan evenly. "Get it."

He followed the banker into the banking room, carefully closing the door
behind him, so that the light from the rear room could not penetrate.
"That's all right," he reassured the banker as the latter noticed the
action; "this isn't a public matter."

He stuffed his pockets with the money the banker gave him, and when the
other tried to close the door of the safe he interposed a restraining
hand, laughing:

"Leave it open, Croft. It's empty now, and a cracksman trying to get into
it would ruin a perfectly good safe, for nothing."

"That's right."

They went into the rear room again, Corrigan last, closing the door behind
him. Braman went again to the glass, Corrigan standing silently behind
him.

Standing before the glass, the banker was seized with a repetition of the
sickening fear that had oppressed him at Corrigan's words upon his
entrance. It seemed to him that there was a sinister significance behind
Corrigan's present silence. A tension came between them, portentous of
evil. Braman shivered, but the silence held. The banker tried to think of
something to say--his thoughts were rioting in chaos, a dumb, paralyzing
terror had seized him, his lips stuck together, the facial muscles
refusing their office. He dropped his hands to his sides and stared into
the glass, noting the ghastly pallor that had come over his face--the
dull, whitish yellow of muddy marble. He could not turn, his legs were
quivering. He knew it was conscience--only that. And yet Corrigan's
ominous silence continued. And now he caught his breath with a shuddering
gasp, for he saw Corrigan's face reflected in the glass, looking over his
shoulder--a mirthless smirk on it, the eyes cold, and dancing with a
merciless and cunning purpose. While he watched, he saw Corrigan's lips
open:

"Where's the board telephone, Braman?"

The banker wheeled, then. He tried to scream--the sound died in a gasping
gurgle as Corrigan leaped and throttled him. Later, he fought to loosen
the grip of the iron fingers at his throat, twisting, squirming, threshing
about the room in his agony. The grip held, tightened. When the banker was
quite still Corrigan put out the light, went into the banking room, where
he scattered the papers and books in the safe all around the room. Then he
twisted the lock off the door, using an iron bar that he had noticed in a
corner when he had come in, and stepped out into the shadow of the
building.


CHAPTER XXIII

FIRST PRINCIPLES


Judge Lindman shivered, though a merciless, blighting sun beat down on the
great stone ledge that spread in front of the opening, smothering him with
heat waves that eddied in and out, and though the interior of the
low-ceilinged chamber pulsed with the fetid heat sucked in from the plains
generations before. The adobe walls, gray-black in the subdued light, were
dry as powder and crumbling in spots, the stone floor was exposed in many
places; there was a strange, sickening odor, as though the naked,
perspiring bodies of inhabitants in ages past had soaked the walls and
floor with the man-scent, and intervening years of disuse had mingled
their musty breath with it. But for the presence of the serene-faced,
steady-eyed young man who leaned carelessly against the wall outside,
whose shoulder and profile he could see, the Judge might have yielded
completely to the overpowering conviction that he was dreaming, and that
his adventures of the past twelve hours were horrors of his imagination.
But he knew from the young man's presence at the door that his experience
had been real enough, and the knowledge kept his brain out of the
threatening chaos.

Some time during the night he had awakened on his cot in the rear room of
the courthouse to hear a cold, threatening voice warning him to silence.
He had recognized the voice, as he had recognized it once before, under
similar conditions. He had been gagged, his hands tied behind him. Then he
had been lifted, carried outside, placed on the back of a horse, in front
of his captor, and borne away in the darkness. They had ridden many miles
before the horse came to a halt and he was lifted down. Then he had been
forced to ascend a sharp slope; he could hear the horse clattering up
behind them. But he had not been able to see anything in the darkness,
though he felt he was walking along the edge of a cliff. The walk had
ended abruptly, when his captor had forced him into his present quarters
with a gruff admonition to sleep. Sleep had come hard, and he had done
little of it, napping merely, sitting on the stone floor, his back against
the wall, most of the time watching his captor. He had talked some, asking
questions which his captor ignored. Then a period of oblivion had come,
and he had awakened to the sunshine. For an hour he had sat where he was,
looking out at his captor and blinking at the brilliant sunshine. But he
had asked no questions since awakening, for he had become convinced of the
meaning of all this. But he was intensely curious, now.

"Where have you brought me?" he demanded of his jailor.

"You're awake, eh?" Trevison grinned as he wheeled and looked in at his
prisoner. "This," he waved a hand toward the ledge and its surroundings,
"is an Indian pueblo, long deserted. It makes an admirable prison, Judge.
It is also a sort of a fort. There is only one vulnerable point--the slope
we came up last night. I'll take you on a tour of examination, if you
like. And then you must return here, to stay until you disclose the
whereabouts of the original land record."

The Judge paled, partly from anger, partly from a fear that gripped him.

"This is an outrage, Trevison! This is America!"

"Is it?" The young man smiled imperturbably. "There have been times during
the past few weeks when I doubted it, very much. It _is_ America, though,
but it is a part of America that the average American sees little of--that
he knows little of. As little, let us say, as he knows of the weird
application of its laws--as applied by _some_ judges." He smiled as
Lindman winced. "I have given up hoping to secure justice in the regular
way, and so we are in the midst of a reversion to first principles--which
may lead us to our goal."

"What do you mean?"

"That I _must_ have the original record, Judge, I mean to have it."

"I deny--"

"Yes--of course. Deny, if you like. We shan't argue. Do you want to
explore the place? There will be plenty of time for talk."

He stepped aside as the Judge came out, and grinned broadly as he caught
the Judge's shrinking look at a rifle he took up as he turned. It had been
propped against the wall at his side. He swung it to the hollow of his
left elbow. "Your knowledge of firearms convinces you that you can't run
as fast as a rifle bullet, doesn't it, Judge?"

The Judge's face indicated that he understood.

"Ever make the acquaintance of an Indian pueblo, Judge?"

"No. I came West only a year ago, and I have kept pretty close to my
work."

"Well, you'll feel pretty intimate with this one by the time you leave
it--if you're obstinate," laughed Trevison. He stood still and watched the
Judge. The latter was staring hard at his surroundings, perhaps with
something of the awed reverence that overtakes the tourist when for the
first time he views an ancient ruin.

The pueblo seemed to be nothing more than a jumble of adobe boxes piled in
an indiscriminate heap on a gigantic stone level surmounting the crest of
a hill. A sheer rock wall, perhaps a hundred feet in height, descended to
the surrounding slopes; the latter sweeping down to join the plains. A
dust, light, dry, and feathery lay thickly on the adobe boxes on the
surrounding ledge on the slopes, like a gray ash sprinkled from a giant
sifter. Cactus and yucca dotted the slopes, thorny, lancelike, repellent;
lava, dull, hinting of volcanic fire, filled crevices and depressions, and
huge blocks of stone, detached in the progress of disintegration, were
scattered about.

"It has taken ages for this to happen!" the Judge heard himself
murmuring.

Trevison laughed lowly. "So it has, Judge. Makes you think of your school
days, doesn't it? You hardly remember it, though. You have a hazy sort of
recollection of a print of a pueblo in a geography, or in a geological
textbook, but at the time you were more interested in Greek roots, the
Alps, Louis Quinze, the heroes of mythology, or something equally foreign,
and you forgot that your own country might hold something of interest for
you. But the history of these pueblo towns must be pretty interesting, if
one could get at it. All that I have heard of it are some pretty weird
legends. There can be no doubt, I suppose, that the people who inhabited
these communal houses had laws to govern them--and judges to apply the
laws. And I presume that then, as now, the judges were swayed by powerful
influences in--"

The Judge glared at his tormentor. The latter laughed.

"It is reasonable to presume, too," he went on, "that in some cases the
judges rendered some pretty raw decisions. And carrying the supposition
further, we may believe that then, as now, the poor downtrodden
proletariat got rather hot under the collar. There are always some
hot-tempered fools among all classes and races that do, you know. They
simply can't stand the feel of the iron heel of the oppressor. Can you
picture a hot-tempered fool of that tribe abducting a judge of the court
of his people and carrying him away to some uninhabited place, there to
let him starve until he decided to do the right thing?"

"Starve!" gasped the Judge.

"The chambers and tunnels connecting these communal houses--they look like
mud boxes, don't they, Judge? And there isn't a soul in any of them--nor a
bite to eat! As I was about to remark, the chambers and tunnels and the
passages connecting these places are pretty bare and cheerless--if we
except scorpions, horned toads, centipedes, tarantulas--and other equally
undesirable occupants. Not a pleasant place to sojourn in until--How long
can a man live without eating, Judge? You know, of course, that the
Indians selected an elevated and isolated site, such as this, because of
its strategical advantages? This makes an ideal fort. Nobody can get into
it except by negotiating the slope we came up last night. And a rifle in
the hands of a man with a yearning to use it would make _that_ approach
pretty unsafe, wouldn't it?"

"My God!" moaned the Judge; "you talk like a man bereft of his senses!"

"Or like a man who is determined not to be robbed of his rights," added
Trevison. "Well, come along. We won't dwell on such things if they depress
you."

He took the Judge's arm and escorted him. They circled the broad stone
ledge. It ran in wide, irregular sweeps in the general outline of a huge
circle, surrounded by the dust-covered slopes melting into the plains, so
vast that the eye ached in an effort to comprehend them. Miles away they
could see smoke befouling the blue of the sky. The Judge knew the smoke
came from Manti, and he wondered if Corrigan were wondering over his
disappearance. He mentioned that to Trevison, and the latter grinned
faintly at him.

"I forgot to mention that to you. It was all arranged last night. Clay
Levins went to Dry Bottom on a night train. He took with him a letter,
which he was to mail at Dry Bottom, explaining your absence to Corrigan.
Needless to say, your signature was forged. But I did so good a job that
Corrigan will not suspect. Corrigan will get the letter by tonight. It
says that you are going to take a long rest."

The Judge gasped and looked quickly at Trevison. The young man's face was
wreathed in a significant grin.

"In the first analysis, this looks like a rather strange proceeding," said
Trevison. "But if you get deeper into it you see its logic. You know where
the original record is. I want it. I mean to have it. One life--a dozen
lives--won't stop me. Oh, well, we won't talk about it if you're going to
shudder that way."

He led the Judge up a flimsy, rotted ladder to a flat roof, forcing him to
look into a chamber where vermin fled at their appearance. Then through
numerous passages, low, narrow, reeking with a musty odor that nauseated
the Judge; on narrow ledges where they had to hug the walls to keep from
falling, and then into an open court with a stone floor, stained dark, in
the center a huge oblong block of stone, surmounting a pyramid, appalling
in its somber suggestiveness.

"The sacrificial altar," said Trevison, grimly. "These stains here,
are--"

He stopped, for the Judge had turned his back.

Trevison led him away. He had to help him down the ladder each time they
descended, and when they reached the chamber from which they had started
the Judge was white and shaking.

Trevison pushed him inside and silently took a position at the door. The
Judge sank to the floor of the chamber, groaning.

The hours dragged slowly. Trevison changed his position twice. Once he
went away, but returned in a few minutes with a canteen, from which he
drank, deeply. The Judge had been without food or water since the night
before, and thirst tortured him. The gurgle of the water as it came out of
the canteen, maddened him.

"I'd like a drink, Trevison."

"Of course. Any man would."

"May I have one?"

"The minute you tell me where that record is."

The Judge subsided. A moment later Trevison's voice floated into the
chamber, cold and resonant:

"I don't think you're in this thing for money, Judge. Corrigan has some
sort of a hold on you. What is it?"

The Judge did not answer.

The sun climbed to the zenith. It grew intensely hot in the chamber. Twice
during the afternoon the Judge asked for water, and each time he received
the answer he had received before. He did not ask for food, for he felt it
would not be given him. At sundown his captor entered the chamber and gave
him a meager draught from the canteen. Then he withdrew and stood on the
ledge in front of the door, looking out into the darkening plains, and
watching him, a conviction of the futility of resisting him seized the
Judge. He stood framed in the opening of the chamber, the lines of his
bold, strong face prominent in the dusk, the rifle held loosely in the
crook of his left arm, the right hand caressing the stock, his shoulders
squared, his big, lithe, muscular figure suggesting magnificent physical
strength, as the light in his eyes, the set of his head and the firm lines
of his mouth, brought a conviction of rare courage and determination. The
sight of him thrilled the Judge; he made a picture that sent the Judge's
thoughts skittering back to things primitive and heroic. In an earlier day
the Judge had dreamed of being like him, and the knowledge that he had
fallen far short of realizing his ideal made him shiver with
self-aversion. He stifled a moan--or tried to and did not succeed, for it
reached Trevison's ears and he turned quickly.

"Did you call, Judge?"

"Yes, yes!" whispered the Judge, hoarsely. "I want--to tell you
everything! I have longed to tell you all along!"

An hour later they were sitting on the edge of the ledge, their feet
dangling, the abyss below them, the desert stars twinkling coldly above
them; around them the indescribable solitude of a desert night filled with
mystery, its vague, haunting, whispering voice burdened with its age-old
secrets. Trevison had an arm around the Judge's shoulder. Their voices
mingled--the Judge's low, quavering; Trevison's full, deep, sympathetic.

After a while a rider appeared out of the starlit haze of the plains below
them. The Judge started. Trevison laughed.

"It's Clay Levins, Judge. I've been watching him for half an hour. He'll
stay here with you while I go after the record. Under the bottom drawer,
eh?"

Levins hallooed to them. Trevison answered, and he and the Judge walked
forward to meet Levins at the crest of the slope.

"Slicker'n a whistle!" declared Levins, answering the question Trevison
put to him. "I mailed the damn letter an' come back on the train that
brought it to him!" He grinned felinely at the Judge. "I reckon you're a
heap dry an' hungry by this time?"

"The Judge has feasted," said Trevison. "I'm going after the record.
You're to stay here with the Judge until I return. Then the three of us
will ride to Las Vegas, where we will take a train to Santa Fe, to turn
the record over to the Circuit Court."

"Sounds good!" gloated Levins. "But it's too long around. I'm for
somethin' more direct. Why not take the Judge with you to Manti, get the
record, takin' a bunch of your boys with you--an' salivate that damned
Corrigan an' his deputies!"

Trevison laughed softly. "I don't want any violence if I can avoid it. My
land won't run away while we're in Santa Fe. And the Judge doesn't want to
meet Corrigan just now. I don't know that I blame him."

"Where's the record?"

Trevison told him, and Levins grumbled. "Corrigan'll have his deputies
guardin' the courthouse, most likely. If you run ag'in 'em, they'll bore
you, sure as hell!"

"I'll take care of myself--I promise you that!" he laughed, and the Judge
shuddered at the sound. He vanished into the darkness of the ledge,
returning presently with Nigger, led him down the slope, called a low
"So-long" to the two watchers on the ledge, and rode away into the haze of
the plains.

Trevison rode fast, filled with a grim elation. He pitied the Judge. An
error--a momentary weakening of moral courage--had plunged the jurist into
the clutches of Corrigan; he could hardly be held responsible for what had
transpired--he was a puppet in the hands of an unscrupulous schemer, with
a threat of exposure hanging over him. No wonder he feared Corrigan!
Trevison's thoughts grew bitter as they dwelt upon the big man; the old
longing to come into violent physical contact with the other seized him,
raged within him, brought a harsh laugh to his lips as he rode. But a
greater passion than he felt for the Judge or Corrigan tugged at him as he
urged the big black over the plains toward the twinkling lights of
Manti--a fierce exultation which centered around Rosalind Benham. She had
duped him, betrayed him to his enemy, had played with him--but she had
lost!

Yet the thought of his coming victory over her was poignantly
unsatisfying. He tried to picture her--did picture her--receiving the news
of Corrigan's defeat, and somehow it left him with a feeling of regret.
The vengeful delight that he should have felt was absent--he felt sorry
for her. He charged himself with being a fool for yielding to so strange a
sentiment, but it lingered persistently. It fed his rage against Corrigan,
however, doubled it, for upon him lay the blame.

It was late when he reached the outskirts of Manti. He halted Nigger in
the shadow of a shed a hundred yards or so down the track from the
courthouse, dismounted and made his way cautiously down the railroad
tracks. He was beyond the radius of the lights from various windows that
he passed, but he moved stealthily, not knowing whether Corrigan had
stationed guards about the courthouse, as Levins had warned. An instant
after reaching a point opposite the courthouse he congratulated himself on
his discretion, for he caught a glimmer of light at the edge of a window
shade in the courthouse, saw several indistinct figures congregated at the
side door, outside. He slipped behind a tool shed at the side of the
track, and crouching there, watched and listened. A mumbling of voices
reached him, but he could distinguish no word. But it was evident that the
men outside were awaiting the reappearance of one of their number who had
gone into the building.

Trevison watched, impatiently. Then presently the side door opened,
letting out a flood of light, which bathed the figures of the waiting men.
Trevison scowled, for he recognized them as Corrigan's deputies. But he
was not surprised, for he had half expected them to be hanging around the
building. Two figures stepped down from the door as he watched, and he
knew them for Corrigan and Gieger. Corrigan's voice reached him.

