The centre groups are: (1) a death bed, (2) a kneeling man being
deprived of his shirt and a cripple waiting to receive it (?), and (3)
a very well-expressed burial scene. The side groups in each show Death
leading by the hand personages of various ranks, including a pope. Of
the others, Satan in chains, the General Resurrection, and a
delicately executed Tree of Jesse are the best.

[Illustration: A MISERERE, LADY CHAPEL.]

Several monuments formerly in this chapel are now elsewhere in the
church. A memorial to the Hon. F.W. Hood, killed in battle in 1814, is
by Chantrey. On the north wall is a brass plate bearing the following
inscription:

   Here lyeth Mr Thomas Bond, Draper, sometime Mayor of this Cittie
   and founder of the Hospitall of Bablake, who gave divers lands
   and tenements for the maintenance of ten poore men so long as the
   world shall endure and a woman to looke to them with many other
   good guifts; and died the XVIII day of March in the yeare of our
   Lord God MDVI.

The =Communion Table= is a fine example of early seventeenth century
work, and outside the screen is a very beautiful oak chest, believed
to date from the time of Henry VII. From the Lady Chapel we pass into
that of St. Laurence. Its two windows are filled with glass to the
memory of past mayors. The dates, 1860 and 1862, sufficiently suggest
their artistic merit. Several old monuments are upon the north wall,
one of 1648 with an extravagant inscription to Thomas Purefoy, a boy
of nine; another to Mrs. Bathona Frodsham, a daughter of the John
Hales who bought so much monastic property, and founded the Grammar
School. The tomb of his first wife, Frideswede, near which he was
buried, may be seen in the Dugdale view near the north porch.

The outer north aisle contained the Girdlers' Chapel. The arcade which
divides the aisles shows the consummation of the process which
converted columns into piers by the omission of capitals and bases and
the continuation of the mouldings from pier into arch.

The altar was below the eastern window, the piscina (restored) stands
on the south side.

The Company has been long extinct and no documents exist. We know,
however, that Haye's Chantry was founded by a Girdler in 1390, for a
Mass to be sung daily at All Saints' altar, and may therefore conclude
that it was in this chapel.

In the two western bays of the same aisle was St. Andrew's Chapel,
supported and probably founded by the Smiths' Company. The first
notice of its existence occurs in 1449, but as this part was not built
until 1500 it was perhaps originally in the adjoining aisle. The
window tracery is modern. The panelling within the internal arches and
between the windows should be noted. The floor near the wall is partly
paved with much worn ancient tiles.

Several large monuments have been brought hither from the Drapers'
Chapel. An altar tomb of black marble is to the memory of Sir Thomas
Berkeley, only son of Henry, Lord Berkeley, who died in 1611; another
of 1640, to William Stanley, Master of the Merchant Taylors' Company
of London and a benefactor of St. Bartholomew's Hospital and of his
native city, Coventry. While these are ponderous and unlovely that of
Julian Nethermyl, at the west end of the principal north aisle, is a
work of interest and much beauty. It is an altar tomb with a
sculptured panel on one end and one side, the other end and side
having been next to walls. It is of interest as an early example of
the Italian style then finding its way into England, and an example so
free from Gothic influence that there can be little doubt that a
foreign craftsman was employed upon it. On the centre of the long
panel is a mutilated crucifix, and a brief inscription with a shield
of arms beneath. On either hand kneel Julian Nethermyl and his wife,
with five sons behind him and five daughters behind her. A cherub at
each end pushes aside a curtain. The group of sons is well treated,
the variations in pose and dress show the hand of one who was
accustomed to study composition, and the result is very different from
the formal repetition of equal or lessening figures usual on mediæval
brasses and Elizabethan tombs. The Latin inscription is partly
illegible, translated it runs:

   Here lies Julian Nethermyl, Draper, formerly Mayor of this City,
   who died the 11th day of the month of April in the year of our
   Lord 1539 and also Joan his wife, to whose souls God be
   propitious. Amen.

[Illustration: CHEST IN NORTH AISLE.]

A small brass on the wall to the memory of Mary Hinton, wife of a
vicar, who died in 1594, represents her kneeling at a faldstool, and
facing a row of four swaddled infants laid upon the floor.

Near by is the old Purbeck marble font, said to have been given by
John Cross, Mayor, in 1394.

As, however, the form, material, and shallow decoration are all quite
consistent with a thirteenth-century date there can be little doubt
that this one is the predecessor of that given by John Cross, which
was condemned and removed by the Puritans as superstitious. A small
brass, bearing a shield with four crosses, the ancient merchant mark,
is fixed upon it.

[Illustration: THE NETHERMYL TOMB.]

Beyond the west door is the north-east buttress of the tower,
strengthened by a mass of masonry, part of which formed part of the
old nave wall. The tower arch is high and very narrow, owing to the
narrowness of the old nave. The interior of the tower is very
effective, both from the height, which is almost 100 feet to the crown
of the vault, and the beautiful lighting of the upper stages. Each of
the large windows of the ground story is set in a recessed arch, and
between the two lantern stages is a range of panelling. The vertical
lines of the various stages are not continuous, a want of regularity,
which would probably not have occurred had it been built a century
later. Upon the floor of the tower are two small brasses, which mark
respectively the centre of the tower and the point below the apex of
the spire, showing that the spire has an inclination of 3 feet 6
inches towards the north-west. On the walls of the tower two very
large brasses record the names of the Vicars of the church since 1242,
and of the Bishops in whose Dioceses Coventry has been included from
the earliest times. Of the latter, four were Bishops of Mercia,
twenty-seven of Lichfield, six of Coventry, thirty-three of Coventry
and Lichfield, thirteen of Lichfield and Coventry, four of Worcester,
and two Bishops-Suffragan of Coventry.

The south aisle is 6 feet narrower than the north at the west end, but
its want of parallelism adds 7 feet to its width at its far eastern
end.

The south-west doorway has its original doors, though these have been
subjected to restoration. The first chapel on the south side belonged
to the Dyers' Company. When the principal trade of Coventry was the
manufacture of woollen and worsted stuffs and the production of a
special blue thread, so excellent that it gave rise to a proverbial
expression, "he is true Coventry Blue", the Dyers were an important
Company.[6] A chantry known as Tale's was probably attached to this
chapel, as the salary of the priest, _£5 6s. 8d._, was paid by the
Dyers' Company of London. An upper chamber for the priest existed as
late as 1607; the floor corbels still remain. A large marble monument
(removed hither from the chancel) has medallion portraits of two
ladies--Dame Mary Bridgeman and Mrs. Eliza Samwell. The former with
her husband, Sir Orlando (Lord Keeper of the Great Seal under Charles
II), both died in 1701. The latter, dying in 1724, "ordered this
monument to be erected as a remembrance of their great and loving
friendship."

The Chapel is now the =Baptistery=. A large eighteenth-century marble
font was removed to the Lady Chapel and a new Gothic one put in its
place, so that there are now three in the church.

The south porch (1300) is the earliest part of the existing church.
The inner doors appear to be of the early sixteenth century, the
outer, though old, are of much later date and are not part of the
original scheme. On the wall on each side of the inner doors are
brasses of some interest. That on the right hand has a curious epitaph
which runs thus:

   Here lies the body of Captn Gervase Scrope, of the family of
   Scropes, of Bolton in the County of York, who departed this life
   the 26 of August, Anno Dni 1705, aged 66.

   An Epitaph, written by himself, in the agony and dolorous paines
   of the gout and dyed soon after.

    Here lyes an old toss'd Tennis Ball
    Was racketted, from spring to fall,
    With so much heat and so much hast,
    Time's arm for shame grew tyred at last.
    Four kings in camps he truly served.
    And from his loyalty ne'er swerved,
    Father ruin'd and son slighted,
    And from the Crown ne'er requited.
    Loss of estate, relations, blood,
    Was too well known, but did no good;
    With long Campaigns and paines oth' gout
    He cou'd no longer hold it out.
    Always a restless life he led,
    Never at quiet till quite dead.
    He marry'd in his later days,
    One who exceeds the common praise
    But wanting breath still to make known
    Her true affection and his own,
    Death kindly came, all wants supplied
    By giving rest--which life deny'd.

The other brass, of 1609, has a portrait of Ann Sewell in Jacobean
costume, kneeling, with an epitaph in which she is described as "a
worthy stirrer up of others to all holy virtues."

A doorway leads to a priest's chamber over the porch, sometimes
incorrectly spoken of as the Cappers' Chapel. It is still used for the
annual meeting of the Company, but is inaccessible to the public.

The next chapel eastwards is St. Thomas', belonging until 1629 to the
Cappers' and Feltmakers' Company. In 1531 they were associated in its
maintenance with the Woollen Cardmakers who had founded it in 1467 and
had after declined in importance. Leland, as we have seen records
also the decay of the Cappers' industry. A large eighteenth-century
monument conceals the original doorway from the porch. The eastern
part of the south aisle as far as the screen formed another chapel as
the dilapidated piscina in the south wall shows. The organ is now
placed in the first bay of the chancel aisle, the whole aisle having
once formed the Mercers' Chapel.

[Illustration: THE SWILLINGTON TOMB.]

Where the altar once stood are now steps descending to the sacristies.
On the right of the window is the statue of St. Michael brought hither
from the tower (p. 32). The finely carved corbel on which it stands
was discovered among rubbish in the recess below. Three altar tombs
now stand against the south wall. The eastern has the recumbent
effigies of Elizabeth Swillington and her two husbands. The
inscription (translated) runs: "Pray for the soul of Elizabeth
Swillington, widow, late the wife of Ralph Swillington, Attorney
General of our Lord King Henry VIII, Recorder of the city of Coventry,
formerly the wife of Thomas Essex Esq: which said Elizabeth died A.D.
15..." She died after 1543. The side and ends have arcaded panelling
containing shields of arms. At the west end is a realistic
representation of the Five Wounds. The effigy of Thomas Essex is in
armour, that of the Recorder in official robe and chain. The head of
each rests on a helmet, and the lady wears the "pedimental" headdress
of Tudor fashion. The arcading is purely Renaissance in detail though
the general treatment is mediæval. The figures are in dignified
repose, wholly free from the later affectations of the Elizabethan
school yet evidently individual portraits. The second tomb dates from
1640. The top is far too heavy for the little Ionic pilasters below.

The third, traditionally called Wade's tomb, probably belongs to John
Wayd, a Mercer, who lived in Coventry in 1557, but no inscription
remains.

There are seven shields of arms on the side, nearly all defaced, a
motto "Ryen saunce travayle," and nine images in low relief which
present quaint studies of early sixteenth-century costume.

The matrices of brasses are still visible in several parts of the
church. Sir James Harrington, writing in the reign of James I, tells a
curious story of their loss:

   The pavement of Coventry church is almost all tombstones, and
   some very ancient, but there came in a zealous fellow with a
   counterfeit commission, that for avoiding superstition, hath not
   left one pennyworth nor penny breadth of brass upon all the
   tombs, of all the inscriptions, which had been many and costly.

The last monument that need be mentioned is upon the wall over "Wade's
tomb." Twenty-six verses of eulogy follow these opening lines:

   An Elegicall epitaph, made upon the death of that mirror of women
   Ann Newdigate; Lady Skeffington, wife of that true moaneing
   turtle Sir Richard Skeffington, Kt., and consecrated to her
   eternal memorie by the unfeigned lover of her vertues, Willm.
   Bulstrode, Knight. (She died in 1637, aged 29).

The present organ was built by Henry Willis and erected in 1887. It is
a four-manual and pedal instrument and has fifty-three stops.

The old organ on which Handel played more than once, stood on a raised
platform at the west end. It was the work of Thomas Swarbrick of
Warwick, a German by birth, in 1733. He also built those of Trinity
Church, St. Mary, Warwick, Lichfield, St. Saviour Southwark,
Stratford-on-Avon, and Amsterdam.

The best of the ancient glass now remaining has been collected into two
windows, one on either side of the apse. Much was brought from the
clearstory where six windows on the south and all save one on the north
side still have panels made up of a mosaic of fragments with portions
here and there of which the subject is intelligible. From what remains
in the tracery we may gather that there was a row of eight angel
figures filling the spaces immediately over the lights. Some of these
or similar ones, are now in the apse. They are represented as covered
with feathers and standing on wheels and each holds a scroll over the
head with inscriptions in very contracted Latin. A few less fragmentary
pieces may be found, _e.g._, in the north window, Judas giving the
traitor's kiss, in the north clearstory the arms of Trenton and
Stafford, mentioned and figured by Dugdale, in the south, the figure of
a man in a red gown kneeling with a scroll inscribed "deo gracias" and
over his head "groc(er) de london"--doubtless a donor. Of modern glass
there is a great amount but little worth mentioning save on account of
the persons commemorated. One window in the Lady Chapel is a memorial
of the Prince Consort and one in the Mercers' Chapel is of interest as
a deserved memorial to Thomas Sharp the Antiquary to whose labours all
later historians of the city are so deeply indebted. He died in 1841.

[Illustration: ALMS-BOX.]

The pulpit is of brass and wrought iron, the work of Frank Skidmore a
native of Coventry who made also the choir screen of Hereford
Cathedral and the metal work of the Albert Memorial at Kensington. It
was placed here in 1869. The bells, ten in number, now hang in the
octagon. They were cast in 1774 and weigh nearly seven tons. The first
peal was hung in 1429 and a clock existed in 1467. In 1496 an Order of
Leet ordained that "all manner of persons that will have the bells to
ring after the decease of any of their friends, shall pay for a peal
ringing with all the bells, _2s._ and with four bells, _16d._, and
three bells _4d._"

The six bells were cast into eight in 1674 and the present tenth has
the same inscription as the heaviest of the old peal:

    I am and have been call'd the common bell
    To ring, when fire breaks out, to tell.

The chimes, which existed as early as 1465, were restored in 1895,
after a silence of ten years, in memory of Lieut.-Col. Francis William
Newdigate. Electric lighting has been introduced throughout the
church.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 6: _See_ Fuller's "Worthies of England." In 1428 an Act of
Leet ordered that no person should dye any wool or cloth with "a
deceitful colour called Masters or Medleys brought into Coventry by a
Frenchman."]


[Illustration: HOLY TRINITY FROM THE NORTH.
_From a lithograph--about 1850_.]


HOLY TRINITY CHURCH


CHAPTER I

HISTORY OF THE CHURCH


Although the first mention of this church which the indefatigable
Dugdale could find was its appropriation to the priory in 1259-1260,
it is tolerably certain that its foundation was much earlier. As
before said, it is reputed to be older than St. Michael's and its
position close to the monastery suggests that it had been built, as
often happened, for the parishioners by the monks who disliked their
intrusion within the priory church. The appropriation at this time may
have been rather of the nature of a confirmation of the rights of the
priory than the institution of a new condition of things. As, in 1391,
the chancel had to be rebuilt being "ruinated and decayed" we may
conclude that it was probably older than the present north porch which
is certainly not later than 1259. It was at the same time lengthened
by twenty-four feet, the convent giving one hundred shillings per
annum for eight years and six trees, the parishioners finding all
other material and workmanship. The convent and parish also agreed to
support and keep it in repair at their joint charges.

From 1298, when Henry de Harenhale was appointed, the list of vicars
is complete, but in a cartulary of the priory mention is made of Ralph
de Sowe, vicar of Trinity, as giving a tenement in Well Street, for
the celebration of his anniversary.

There are but few landmarks in its history, and dates affecting the
structure can generally be assigned by internal evidence alone. The
nave arcades had already been rebuilt before the chancel was touched,
and a piece of work of the same period is to be seen in the five-light
Decorated window, in the Consistory Court which now opens into the
large chamber over the porch. We have no record of the building of the
clearstory and roof of the nave. The resemblances between this
clearstory, and that of St. John's chancel, raise the question of
priority. The fuller development at St. John's of the peculiar
treatment of the angles points to its being a little later but
probably both fall within the second and third quarters of the
fifteenth century.

For a church of this size the chapels, altars and chantries were very
numerous, there being probably fifteen altars in all. In 1522 the
establishment of clergy consisted of a vicar, eleven parochial priests
and two chantry priests. Dugdale enumerates six chantries so that it
is evident that here as often elsewhere some of the parochial priests
derived the whole or a part of their support from their performance of
the duties of chantry priests.

Many chantry priests on the other hand had other duties and took part
in other services than the daily mass for which the chantry was
founded.

So much that is of interest in the religious life of the period is
connected with the chantries that it is worth while recording some of
the scattered notices that have come down to us.

To begin with the Chapel of Our Lady, the earliest mention we have of
it is in 1364 while in 1392 the Corpus Christi Gild endowed a priest
there to sing mass for the good estate of Richard II, Anne his queen,
and the whole realm of England, to be called St. Mary's priest. The
indenture sets forth that "he is to be at Divine service on Sundays
and double Feasts in the chancel and at Matins, Hours, Masses,
Evensong, Compline and other offices used in the said church and also
daily at _Salve_ in our Lady's Chapel unless hindered by reasonable
cause." The records of the Dissolution of the Chantries show how much
town property must have been held by them, while from these and other
sources we learn the extent of their belongings in tenements,
messuages, rent charges and the like. Thus in 1454 Emot Dowte gave
several tenements to this altar and in 1492 Richard Clyff "late parson
of St. George in London," left a house in Well St. to the church "to
the intent that the mass of Our Lady may be observed the better." In
1558 (the year of Elizabeth's accession) William Hyndeman, alderman
and butcher, directs that his body be buried in the Lady Chapel "as
aldermen are wont to be buried, towards the charges whereof I give
twenty nobles to be levied of my quick cattle and if it be too little
then I will that Sybil my wife shall lay down _20s._ more." He also
orders an obit to be kept after the death of his wife "yearly for
ever;" a form of words that must surely have sounded unreal after the
changes of the last two reigns.

Perceye's chantry again, which Dugdale considered the oldest (though
he does not give the date) was endowed in 1350 with six messuages, one
shop, six acres of land and 40s. rent, all lying in Coventry, to which
in 1407 William Botoner and others, added a messuage and twenty-four
acres of land in the city for another priest.

Then the chantry of the Holy Cross (1357) founded for two priests to
sing daily a mass for the good estate before death and for the souls
after of the royal family, and for the founders and the members of the
Fraternity of the Holy Cross, was endowed with seven messuages,
fourteen shops and sixteen acres of land in the city.

Dugdale enumerates also four others, Cellet's, Corpus Christi,
Lodynton's and Allesley's, to which should probably be added Marler's,
assigned by him to St. Michael's. The first two are doubtless the same
foundation, for in 1329 land and tenements were granted to the priest
of Corpus Christi Chapel for the health of the soul of William Celet
and others.

It was almost certainly situated in the south transept, on the upper
level over the vaulted passage. The position of Lodynton's chantry
(1393) is not known; Allesley's, founded in the reign of Edward I, was
sung at St. Thomas's altar.

Richard Marler stipulates in his will that his priest is to have the
"stypend or wagis of nyne marks by yere so long as he shall be of good
and prestly conversacyon and demeanor, wt' a p'vyso that yf the seyde
prest be ffounde otherwyse, after monyc'on and reasonable warnyng to
hym geven, he to be removed."

Much of the later history of the church relates to the destruction of
its fittings and furniture or to restorations almost as grievous. In
1560 _2s. 6d._ was paid for taking down the carving about the high
altar, while the Mayor bought the panelling of the altar for _33s.
4d._, the vail for _5s._, the "thing that the sacrament was in over
the altar _1s._," the "peyre [pair of candlesticks?] that was upon the
altar _5d._" Perhaps he thought that all these things would be wanted
again ere long. In 1547 a quantity of costly vestments and banners had
been sold and we find in the accounts a number of such items as
these: "Sold the 6 day of Jennery 5 copps of red teyssew to Mr.
Roghers, now mayre (and 4 other persons) pryce of the sayd copps,
_10l._ To Bawden Desseld one cope of red velvet, _5l._ Mr. Schewyll a
grene velvet cope, _30s._"

But before Mary's death we have a lengthy inventory of copes,
vestments, albs, banners and the like, some of which may have come
back to the church from the buyers at the sale eleven years before.

The church must have looked like a builder's yard in 1643 when the
Committee and Council of War pulled down divers houses outside
Bishop's and Spon Gates and stacked the materials here, while the
changes of government are indicated by the payment in 1647 of _3s.
6d._ "to Hopes for defacing the King's Arms" and in 1660 of _6s._ to
"Hope for the King's Arms."

Five years after this the spire, which had caused much anxiety and
expense for many years, was blown down in a gale, falling across the
chancel and causing much destruction. All was restored and the spire
rebuilt in three years. Reference has been made to the existence of a
vaulted passage through the south transept. This was made necessary by
the position of an ancient building known as Jesus Hall which adjoined
the transept and thus blocked the way from "the Butchery" in this
direction. The Hall had probably been long used as the residence of
the priests attached to the church but nothing is known of its origin.
It was destroyed in 1742. Only in 1834, when the exterior of the
church was recased was the passage blocked and the floor of the upper
chapel removed.

The Register records the marriage of Sarah Kemble with William Siddons
on 25th November, 1773.


CHAPTER II

THE EXTERIOR OF THE CHURCH


The church of Holy Trinity loses much, in popular estimation at least,
by its nearness to St. Michael's. It invites comparison of the most
obvious sort. It is not nearly so large and its spire is not so high,
these facts alone are sufficient to account for the popular view.
Fuller, in his "Worthies" says of the two churches, "How clearly would
they have shined if set at competent distance! Whereas now, such their
Vicinity, that the Archangel eclipseth the Trinity."

The plan is quite unlike that of its neighbour, being cruciform, with
a central tower, a short nave, and a chancel distinctly longer than
the nave. On the south both nave and chancel have a single aisle, the
transept projecting beyond it and there is a vestry at the east end.
On the north there is a similar aisle with a Lady Chapel at the east
corresponding to the Vestry, but a large porch and several chapels
fill up the spaces so that the transept does not in plan project.

Looking at the exterior as a whole it may be said that the more
moderate length (194 feet), the central spire, 230 feet high, and the
transepts unite in forming a more satisfactory composition than the
long body and immense western steeple of St. Michael's. There however,
the superiority ceases for the frequent "recasings" and restorations
have left hardly a stone of the exterior that has not been renewed
again and again, and the dates of these operations, 1786, 1826, 1843,
sufficiently suggest the degree of knowledge and feeling likely to be
manifested in the work.

Probably most of the structure was first built of the same friable red
sandstone as its greater neighbour. Much of the recasing has been
executed in a rather harder gray sandstone, but the tower and spire
are still red.

