Produced by David Widger


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                  AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                         DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           OCTOBER & NOVEMBER
                                  1664

October 1st.  Up and at the office both forenoon and afternoon very busy,
and with great pleasure in being so.  This morning Mrs. Lane (now Martin)
like a foolish woman, came to the Horseshoe hard by, and sent for me while
I was: at the office; to come to speak with her by a note sealed up, I
know to get me to do something for her husband, but I sent her an answer
that I would see her at Westminster, and so I did not go, and she went
away, poor soul.  At night home to supper, weary, and my eyes sore with
writing and reading, and to bed.  We go now on with great vigour in
preparing against the Dutch, who, they say, will now fall upon us without
doubt upon this high newes come of our beating them so, wholly in Guinny.

2nd (Lord's day).  My wife not being well to go to church I walked with my
boy through the City, putting in at several churches, among others at
Bishopsgate, and there saw the picture usually put before the King's book,
put up in the church, but very ill painted, though it were a pretty piece
to set up in a church.  I intended to have seen the Quakers, who, they
say, do meet every Lord's day at the Mouth at Bishopsgate; but I could see
none stirring, nor was it fit to aske for the place, so I walked over
Moorefields, and thence to Clerkenwell church, and there, as I wished, sat
next pew to the fair Butler, who indeed is a most perfect beauty still;
and one I do very much admire myself for my choice of her for a beauty,
she having the best lower part of her face that ever I saw all days of my
life.  After church I walked to my Lady Sandwich's, through my Lord
Southampton's new buildings in the fields behind Gray's Inn; and, indeed,
they are a very great and a noble work.  So I dined with my Lady, and the
same innocent discourse that we used to have, only after dinner, being
alone, she asked me my opinion about Creed, whether he would have a wife
or no, and what he was worth, and proposed Mrs. Wright for him, which, she
says, she heard he was once inquiring after.  She desired I would take a
good time and manner of proposing it, and I said I would, though I
believed he would love nothing but money, and much was not to be expected
there, she said.  So away back to Clerkenwell Church, thinking to have got
sight of la belle Boteler again, but failed, and so after church walked
all over the fields home, and there my wife was angry with me for not
coming home, and for gadding abroad to look after beauties, she told me
plainly, so I made all peace, and to supper.  This evening came Mrs. Lane
(now Martin) with her husband to desire my helpe about a place for him.
It seems poor Mr. Daniel is dead of the Victualling Office, a place too
good for this puppy to follow him in.  But I did give him the best words I
could, and so after drinking a glasse of wine sent them going, but with
great kindnesse.  Go to supper, prayers, and to bed.

3rd.  Up with Sir J. Minnes, by coach, to St. James's; and there all the
newes now of very hot preparations for the Dutch: and being with the Duke,
he told us he was resolved to make a tripp himself, and that Sir W. Pen
should go in the same ship with him.  Which honour, God forgive me! I
could grudge him, for his knavery and dissimulation, though I do not envy
much the having the same place myself.  Talke also of great haste in the
getting out another fleete, and building some ships; and now it is likely
we have put one another by each other's dalliance past a retreate. Thence
with our heads full of business we broke up, and I to my barber's, and
there only saw Jane and stroked her under the chin, and away to the
Exchange, and there long about several businesses, hoping to get money by
them, and thence home to dinner and there found Hawly. But meeting
Bagwell's wife at the office before I went home I took her into the office
and there kissed her only.  She rebuked me for doing it, saying that did I
do so much to many bodies else it would be a stain to me.  But I do not
see but she takes it well enough, though in the main I believe she is very
honest. So after some kind discourse we parted, and I home to dinner, and
after dinner down to Deptford, where I found Mr. Coventry, and there we
made, an experiment of Holland's and our cordage, and ours outdid it a
great deale, as my book of observations tells particularly. Here we were
late, and so home together by water, and I to my office, where late,
putting things in order.  Mr. Bland came this night to me to take his
leave of me, he going to Tangier, wherein I wish him good successe.  So
home to supper and to bed, my mind troubled at the businesses I have to
do, that I cannot mind them as I ought to do and get money, and more that
I have neglected my frequenting and seeming more busy publicly than I have
done of late in this hurry of business, but there is time left to recover
it, and I trust in God I shall.

4th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and this morning
Sir W. Pen went to Chatham to look: after the ships now going out thence,
and particularly that wherein the Duke and himself go.  He took Sir G.
Ascue with: him, whom, I believe, he hath brought into play.  At noon to
the 'Change and thence home, where I found my aunt James and the two she
joyces.  They dined and were merry with us.  Thence after dinner to a
play, to see "The Generall;" which is so dull and so ill-acted, that I
think it is the worst.  I ever saw or heard in all my days.  I happened to
sit near; to Sir Charles Sidly; who I find a very witty man, and he did at
every line take notice of the dullness of the poet and badness of the
action, that most pertinently; which I was mightily taken with; and among
others where by Altemire's command Clarimont, the Generall, is commanded
to rescue his Rivall, whom she loved, Lucidor, he, after a great deal of
demurre, broke out; "Well, I'le save my Rivall and make her confess, that
I deserve, while he do but possesse."  "Why, what, pox," says Sir Charles
Sydly, "would he have him have more, or what is there more to be had of a
woman than the possessing her?"  Thence-setting all them at home, I home
with my wife and Mercer, vexed at my losing my time and above 20s. in
money, and neglecting my business to see so bad a play. To-morrow they
told us should be acted, or the day after, a new play, called "The
Parson's Dreame," acted all by women.  So to my office, and there did
business; and so home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up betimes and to my office, and thence by coach to New Bridewell to
meet with Mr. Poyntz to discourse with him (being Master of the Workhouse
there) about making of Bewpers for us.  But he was not within; however his
clerke did lead me up and down through all the house, and there I did with
great pleasure see the many pretty works, and the little children
employed, every one to do something, which was a very fine sight, and
worthy encouragement.  I cast away a crowne among them, and so to the
'Change and among the Linnen Wholesale Drapers to enquire about Callicos,
to see what can be done with them for the supplying our want of Bewpers
for flaggs, and I think I shall do something therein to good purpose for
the King.  So to the Coffeehouse, and there fell in discourse with the
Secretary of the Virtuosi of Gresham College, and had very fine discourse
with him.  He tells me of a new invented instrument to be tried before the
College anon, and I intend to see it.  So to Trinity House, and there I
dined among the old dull fellows, and so home and to my office a while,
and then comes Mr. Cocker to see me, and I discoursed with him about his
writing and ability of sight, and how I shall do to get some glasse or
other to helpe my eyes by candlelight; and he tells me he will bring me
the helps he hath within a day or two, and shew me what he do.  Thence to
the Musique-meeting at the Postoffice, where I was once before.  And
thither anon come all the Gresham College, and a great deal of noble
company: and the new instrument was brought called the Arched Viall,

     ["There seems to be a curious fate reigning over the instruments
     which have the word 'arch' prefixed to their name.  They have no
     vitality, and somehow or other come to grief.  Even the famous
     archlute, which was still a living thing in the time of Handel, has
     now disappeared from the concert room and joined Mr. Pepys's 'Arched
     Viall' in the limbo of things forgotten .  .  .  .  Mr. Pepys's
     verdict that it would never do .  .  .  has been fully confirmed by
     the event, as his predictions usually were, being indeed always
     founded on calm judgment and close observation."--B. (Hueffer's
     Italian and other Studies, 1883, p.  263).]

where being tuned with lute-strings, and played on with kees like an
organ, a piece of parchment is always kept moving; and the strings, which
by the kees are pressed down upon it, are grated in imitation of a bow, by
the parchment; and so it is intended to resemble several vyalls played on
with one bow, but so basely and harshly, that it will never do.  But after
three hours' stay it could not be fixed in tune; and so they were fain to
go to some other musique of instruments, which I am grown quite out of
love with, and so I, after some good discourse with Mr. Spong, Hill,
Grant, and Dr. Whistler, and others by turns, I home to my office and
there late, and so home, where I understand my wife has spoke to Jane and
ended matters of difference between her and her, and she stays with us,
which I am glad of; for her fault is nothing but sleepiness and
forgetfulness, otherwise a good-natured, quiet, well-meaning, honest
servant, and one that will do as she is bid, so one called upon her and
will see her do it.  This morning, by three o'clock, the
Prince--[Rupert]--and King, and Duke with him, went down the River, and
the Prince under sail the next tide after, and so is gone from the Hope.
God give him better successe than he used to have!  This day Mr. Bland
went away hence towards his voyage to Tangier.  This day also I had a
letter from an unknown hand that tells me that Jacke Angier, he believes,
is dead at Lisbon, for he left him there ill.

6th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, among other things
about this of the flags and my bringing in of callicos to oppose Young and
Whistler.  At noon by promise Mr. Pierce and his wife and Madam Clerke and
her niece came and dined with me to a rare chine of beefe and spent the
afternoon very pleasantly all the afternoon, and then to my office in the
evening, they being gone, and late at business, and then home to supper
and to bed, my mind coming to itself in following of my business.

7th.  Lay pretty while with some discontent abed, even to the having bad
words with my wife, and blows too, about the ill-serving up of our
victuals yesterday; but all ended in love, and so I rose and to my office
busy all the morning.  At noon dined at home, and then to my office again,
and then abroad to look after callicos for flags, and hope to get a small
matter by my pains therein and yet save the King a great deal of money,
and so home to my office, and there came Mr. Cocker, and brought me a
globe of glasse, and a frame of oyled paper, as I desired, to show me the
manner of his gaining light to grave by, and to lessen the glaringnesse of
it at pleasure by an oyled paper.  This I bought of him, giving him a
crowne for it; and so, well satisfied, he went away, and I to my business
again, and so home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

8th.  All the morning at the office, and after dinner abroad, and among
other things contracted with one Mr. Bridges, at the White Bear on
Cornhill, for 100 pieces of Callico to make flaggs; and as I know I shall
save the King money, so I hope to get a little for my pains and venture of
my own money myself.  Late in the evening doing business, and then comes
Captain Tayler, and he and I till 12 o'clock at night arguing about the
freight of his ship Eagle, hired formerly by me to Tangier, and at last we
made an end, and I hope to get a little money, some small matter by it.
So home to bed, being weary and cold, but contented that I have made an
end of that business.

9th (Lord's day).  Lay pretty long, but however up time enough with my
wife to go to church.  Then home to dinner, and Mr. Fuller, my Cambridge
acquaintance, coming to me about what he was with me lately, to release a
waterman, he told me he was to preach at Barking Church; and so I to heare
him, and he preached well and neatly.  Thence, it being time enough, to
our owne church, and there staid wholly privately at the great doore to
gaze upon a pretty lady, and from church dogged her home, whither she went
to a house near Tower hill, and I think her to be one of the prettiest
women I ever saw.  So home, and at my office a while busy, then to my
uncle Wight's, whither it seems my wife went after sermon and there
supped, but my aunt and uncle in a very ill humour one with another, but I
made shift with much ado to keep them from scolding, and so after supper
home and to bed without prayers, it being cold, and to-morrow washing day.

10th.  Up and, it being rainy, in Sir W. Pen's coach to St. James's, and
there did our usual business with the Duke, and more and more preparations
every day appear against the Dutch, and (which I must confess do a little
move my envy) Sir W. Pen do grow every day more and more regarded by the
Duke,

     ["The duke had decided that the English fleet should consist of
     three  squadrons to be commanded by himself, Prince Rupert, and Lord
     Sandwich, from which arrangement the two last, who were land
     admirals; had concluded that Penn would have no concern in this
     fleet.  Neither the duke, Rupert, nor Sandwich had ever been engaged
     in an encounter of fleets .  .  .  .  Penn alone of the four was
     familiar with all these things.  By the duke's unexpected
     announcement that he should take Penn with him into his own  ship,
     Rupert and Sandwich at once discovered that they would be really and
     practically under Penn's command in everything."]

because of his service heretofore in the Dutch warr which I am confident
is by some strong obligations he hath laid upon Mr. Coventry; for Mr.
Coventry must needs know that he is a man of very mean parts, but only a
bred seaman: Going home in coach with Sir W. Batten he told me how Sir J.
Minnes by the means of Sir R. Ford was the last night brought to his house
and did discover the reason of his so long discontent with him, and now
they are friends again, which I am sorry for, but he told it me so plainly
that I see there is no thorough understanding between them, nor love, and
so I hope there will be no great combination in any thing, nor do I see
Sir J. Minnes very fond as he used to be.  But: Sir W. Batten do raffle
still against Mr. Turner and his wife, telling me he is a false fellow,
and his wife a false woman, and has rotten teeth and false, set in with
wire, and as I know they are so, so I am glad he finds it so.  To the
Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, and therewith Sir W. Warren to
the Coffee-house behind the 'Change, and sat alone with him till 4 o'clock
talking of his businesses first and then of business in general, and
discourse how I might get money and how to carry myself to advantage to
contract no envy and yet make the world see my pains; which was with great
content to me, and a good friend and helpe I am like to find him, for
which God be thanked!  So home to dinner at 4 o'clock, and then to the
office, and there late, and so home to supper and to bed, having sat up
till past twelve at night to look over the account of the collections for
the Fishery, and the loose and base manner that monies so collected are
disposed of in, would make a man never part with a penny in that manner,
and, above all, the inconvenience of having a great man, though never so
seeming pious as my Lord Pembroke is.  He is too great to be called to an
account, and is abused by his servants, and yet obliged to defend them for
his owne sake.  This day, by the blessing of God, my wife and I have been
married nine years: but my head being full of business, I did not think of
it to keep it in any extraordinary manner.  But bless God for our long
lives and loves and health together, which the same God long continue, I
wish, from my very heart!

11th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  My wife this
morning went, being invited, to my Lady Sandwich, and I alone at home at
dinner, till by and by Luellin comes and dines with me.  He tells me what
a bawdy loose play this "Parson's Wedding" is, that is acted by nothing
but women at the King's house, and I am glad of it.  Thence to the Fishery
in Thames Street, and there several good discourses about the letting of
the Lotterys, and, among others, one Sir Thomas Clifford, whom yet I knew
not, do speak very well and neatly.  Thence I to my cozen Will Joyce to
get him to go to Brampton with me this week, but I think he will not, and
I am not a whit sorry for it, for his company both chargeable and
troublesome.  So home and to my office, and then to supper and then to my
office again till late, and so home, with my head and heart full of
business, and so to bed.  My wife tells me the sad news of my Lady
Castlemayne's being now become so decayed, that one would not know her; at
least far from a beauty, which I am sorry for.  This day with great joy
Captain Titus told us the particulars of the French's expedition against
Gigery upon the Barbary Coast, in the Straights, with 6,000 chosen men.
They have taken the Fort of Gigery, wherein were five men and three guns,
which makes the whole story of the King of France's policy and power to be
laughed at.

12th.  This morning all the morning at my office ordering things against
my journey to-morrow.  At noon to the Coffeehouse, where very good
discourse.  For newes, all say De Ruyter is gone to Guinny before us. Sir
J. Lawson is come to Portsmouth; and our fleete is hastening all speed: I
mean this new fleete. Prince Rupert with his is got into the Downes.  At
home dined with me W. Joyce and a friend of his.  W. Joyce will go with me
to Brampton.  After dinner I out to Mr. Bridges, the linnen draper, and
evened with (him) for 100 pieces of callico, and did give him L208 18s.,
which I now trust the King for, but hope both to save the King money and
to get a little by it to boot.  Thence by water up and down all the timber
yards to look out some Dram timber, but can find none for our turne at the
price I would have; and so I home, and there at my office late doing
business against my journey to clear my hands of every thing for two days.
So home and to supper and bed.

13th.  After being at the office all the morning, I home and dined, and
taking leave of my wife with my mind not a little troubled how she would
look after herself or house in my absence, especially, too, leaving a
considerable sum of money in the office, I by coach to the Red Lyon in
Aldersgate Street, and there, by agreement, met W. Joyce and Tom Trice,
and mounted, I upon a very fine mare that Sir W. Warren helps me to, and
so very merrily rode till it was very darke, I leading the way through the
darke to Welling, and there, not being very weary, to supper and to bed.
But very bad accommodation at the Swan.  In this day's journey I met with
Mr. White, Cromwell's chaplin that was, and had a great deale of discourse
with him.  Among others, he tells me that Richard is, and hath long been,
in France, and is now going into Italy.  He owns publiquely that he do
correspond, and return him all his money.  That Richard hath been in some
straits at the beginning; but relieved by his friends.  That he goes by
another name, but do not disguise himself, nor deny himself to any man
that challenges him.  He tells me, for certain, that offers had been made
to the old man, of marriage between the King and his daughter, to have
obliged him, but he would not.

     [The Protector wished the Duke of Buckingham to marry his daughter
     Frances.  She married, 1. Robert Rich, grandson and heir to Robert,
     Earl of Warwick, on November 11th, 1657, who died in the following
     February;  2. Sir John Russell, Bart.  She died January 27th,
     1721-22, aged eighty-four. In T. Morrice's life of Roger, Earl of
     Orrery, prefixed to Orrery's "State Letters" (Dublin, 1743, vol.
     i., p. 40), there is a circumstantial account of an interview
     between Orrery (then Lord Broghill) and Cromwell, in which the
     former suggested to the latter that Charles II. should marry Frances
     Cromwell.  Cromwell gave great attention to the reasons urged, "but
     walking two or three turns, and pondering with himself, he told Lord
     Broghill the king would never forgive him the death of his father.
     His lordship desired him to employ somebody to sound the king in
     this matter, to see how he would take it, and offered himself to
     mediate in it for him. But Cromwell would not consent, but again
     repeated, 'The king cannot and will not forgive the death of his
     father;' and so he left his lordship, who durst not tell him he had
     already dealt with his majesty in that affair.  Upon this my lord
     withdrew, and meeting Cromwell's wife and daughter, they inquired
     how he had succeeded; of which having given them an account, he
     added they must try their interest in him, but none could prevail."]

He thinks (with me) that it never was in his power to bring in the King
with the consent of any of his officers about him; and that he scorned to
bring him in as Monk did, to secure himself and deliver every body else.
When I told him of what I found writ in a French book of one Monsieur
Sorbiere, that gives an account of his observations herein England; among
other things he says, that it is reported that Cromwell did, in his
life-time, transpose many of the bodies of the Kings of England from one
grave to another, and that by that means it is not known certainly whether
the head that is now set up upon a post be that of Cromwell, or of one of
the Kings; Mr. White tells me that he believes he never had so poor a low
thought in him to trouble himself about it.  He says the hand of God is
much to be seen; that all his children are in good condition enough as to
estate, and that their relations that betrayed their family are all now
either hanged or very miserable.

14th.  Up by break of day, and got to Brampton by three o'clock, where my
father and mother overjoyed to see me, my mother, ready to weepe every
time she looked upon me.  After dinner my father and I to the Court, and
there did all our business to my mind, as I have set down in a paper
particularly expressing our proceedings at this court.  So home, where W.
Joyce full of talk and pleased with his journey, and after supper I to bed
and left my father, mother, and him laughing.

15th.  My father and I up and walked alone to Hinchingbroke; and among the
other late chargeable works that my Lord hath done there, we saw his
water-works and the Oral which is very fine; and so is the house all over,
but I am sorry to think of the money at this time spent therein. Back to
my father's (Mr. Sheply being out of town) and there breakfasted, after
making an end with Barton about his businesses, and then my mother called
me into the garden, and there but all to no purpose desiring me to be
friends with John, but I told her I cannot, nor indeed easily shall, which
afflicted the poor woman, but I cannot help it.  Then taking leave, W.
Joyce and I set out, calling T. Trice at Bugden, and thence got by night
to Stevenage, and there mighty merry, though I in bed more weary than the
other two days, which, I think, proceeded from our galloping so much, my
other weariness being almost all over; but I find that a coney skin in my
breeches preserves me perfectly from galling, and that eating after I come
to my Inne, without drinking, do keep me from being stomach sick, which
drink do presently make me.  We lay all in several beds in the same room,
and W. Joyce full of his impertinent tricks and talk, which then made us
merry, as any other fool would have done.  So to sleep.

16th (Lord's day).  It raining, we set out, and about nine o'clock got to
Hatfield in church-time; and I 'light and saw my simple Lord Salsbury sit
there in his gallery.  Staid not in the Church, but thence mounted again
and to Barnett by the end of sermon, and there dined at the Red Lyon very
weary again, but all my weariness yesterday night and to-day in my thighs
only, the rest of my weariness in my shoulders and arms being quite gone.
Thence home, parting company at my cozen Anth. Joyce's, by four o'clock,
weary, but very well, to bed at home, where I find all well.  Anon my wife
came to bed, but for my ease rose again and lay with her woman.

17th.  Rose very well and not weary, and with Sir W. Batten to St.
James's; there did our business.  I saw Sir J. Lawson since his return
from sea first this morning, and hear that my Lord Sandwich is come from
Portsmouth to town. Thence I to him, and finding him at my Lord Crew's, I
went with him home to his house and much kind discourse.  Thence my Lord
to Court, and I with Creed to the 'Change, and thence with Sir W. Warren
to a cook's shop and dined, discoursing and advising him about his great
contract he is to make tomorrow, and do every day receive great
satisfaction in his company, and a prospect of a just advantage by his
friendship.  Thence to my office doing some business, but it being very
cold, I, for fear of getting cold, went early home to bed, my wife not
being come home from my Lady Jemimah, with whom she hath been at a play
and at Court to-day.

18th.  Up and to the office, where among other things we made a very great
contract with Sir W. Warren for 3,000 loade of timber.  At noon dined at
home. In the afternoon to the Fishery, where, very confused and very
ridiculous, my Lord Craven's proceedings, especially his finding fault
with Sir J. Collaton and Colonell Griffin's' report in the accounts of the
lottery-men.  Thence I with Mr. Gray in his coach to White Hall, but the
King and Duke being abroad, we returned to Somersett House.  In discourse
I find him a very worthy and studious gentleman in the business of trade,
and among-other things he observed well to me, how it is not the greatest
wits, but the steady man, that is a good merchant: he instanced in Ford
and Cocke, the last of whom he values above all men as his oracle, as Mr.
Coventry do Mr. Jolliffe.  He says that it is concluded among merchants,
that where a trade hath once been and do decay, it never recovers again,
and therefore that the manufacture of cloath of England will never come to
esteem again; that, among other faults, Sir Richard Ford cannot keepe a
secret, and that it is so much the part of a merchant to be guilty of that
fault that the Duke of Yoke is resolved to commit no more secrets to the
merchants of the Royall Company; that Sir Ellis Layton is, for a speech of
forty words, the wittiest man that ever he knew in his life, but longer he
is nothing, his judgment being nothing at all, but his wit most absolute.
At Somersett House he carried me in, and there I saw the Queene's new
rooms, which are most stately and nobly furnished; and there I saw her,
and the Duke of Yorke and Duchesse were there.  The Duke espied me, and
came to me, and talked with me a very great while about our contract this
day with Sir W. Warren, and among other things did with some contempt ask
whether we did except Polliards, which Sir W. Batten did yesterday (in
spite, as the Duke I believe by my Lord Barkely do well enough know) among
other things in writing propose. Thence home by coach, it raining hard,
and to my office, where late, then home to supper and to bed.  This night
the Dutch Embassador desired and had an audience of the King.  What the
issue of it was I know not.  Both sides I believe desire peace, but
neither will begin, and so I believe a warr will follow.  The Prince is
with his fleet at Portsmouth, and the Dutch are making all preparations
for warr.

19th.  Up and to my office all the morning.  At noon dined at home; then
abroad by coach to buy for the office "Herne upon the Statute of
Charitable Uses," in order to the doing something better in the Chest than
we have done, for I am ashamed to see Sir W. Batten possess himself so
long of so much money as he hath done.  Coming home, weighed, my two
silver flaggons at Stevens's.  They weigh 212 oz. 27 dwt., which is about
L50, at 5s. per oz., and then they judge the fashion to be worth above 5s.
per oz. more--nay, some say 10s.  an ounce the fashion.  But I do not
believe, but yet am sorry to see that the fashion is worth so much, and
the silver come to no more.  So home and to my office, where very busy
late.  My wife at Mercer's mother's, I believe, W. Hewer with them, which
I do not like, that he should ask my leave to go about business, and then
to go and spend his time in sport, and leave me here busy.  To supper and
to bed, my wife coming in by and by, which though I know there was no hurt
in it; I do not like.

20th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon my uncle
Thomas came, dined with me, and received some money of me.  Then I to my
office, where I took in with me Bagwell's wife, and there I caressed her,
and find her every day more and more coming with good words and promises
of getting her husband a place, which I will do.  So we parted, and I to
my Lord Sandwich at his lodgings, and after a little stay away with Mr.
Cholmely to Fleete Streete; in the way he telling me that Tangier is like
to be in a bad condition with this same Fitzgerald, he being a man of no
honour, nor presence, nor little honesty, and endeavours: to raise the
Irish and suppress the English interest there; and offend every body, and
do nothing that I hear of well, which I am sorry for. Thence home, by the
way taking two silver tumblers home, which I have bought, and so home, and
there late busy at my office, and then home to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up and by coach to Mr. Cole's, and there conferred with him about
some law business, and so to Sir W. Turner's, and there bought my cloth,
coloured, for a suit and cloake, to line with plush the cloak, which will
cost me money, but I find that I must go handsomely, whatever it costs me,
and the charge will be made up in the fruit it brings.  Thence to the
Coffee-house and 'Change, and so home to dinner, and then to the office
all the afternoon, whither comes W. Howe to see me, being come from, and
going presently back to sea with my Lord. Among other things he tells me
Mr. Creed is much out of favour with my Lord from his freedom of talke and
bold carriage, and other things with which my Lord is not pleased, but
most I doubt his not lending my Lord money, and Mr. Moore's reporting what
his answer was I doubt in the worst manner.  But, however, a very unworthy
rogue he is, and, therefore, let him go for one good for nothing, though
wise to the height above most men I converse with.  In the evening (W.
Howe being gone) comes Mr. Martin, to trouble me again to get him a
Lieutenant's place for which he is as fit as a foole can be. But I put him
off like an arse, as he is, and so setting my papers and books in order: I
home to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon comes
my uncle Thomas and his daughter Mary about getting me to pay them the L30
due now, but payable in law to her husband.  I did give them the best
answer I could, and so parted, they not desiring to stay to dinner. After
dinner I down to Deptford, and there did business, and so back to my
office, where very late busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up and to church.  At noon comes unexpected Mr.
Fuller, the minister, and dines with me, and also I had invited Mr. Cooper
with one I judge come from sea, and he and I spent the whole afternoon
together, he teaching me some things in understanding of plates.  At night
to the office, doing business, and then home to supper. Then a psalm, to
prayers, and to bed.

24th.  Up and in Sir J. Minnes' coach (alone with Mrs. Turner as far as
Paternoster Row, where I set her down) to St. James's, and there did our
business, and I had the good lucke to speak what pleased the Duke about
our great contract in hand with Sir W. Warren against Sir W. Batten,
wherein the Duke is very earnest for our contracting.  Thence home to the
office till noon, and then dined and to the 'Change and off with Sir W.
Warren for a while, consulting about managing his contract.  Thence to a
Committee at White Hall of Tangier, where I had the good lucke to speak
something to very good purpose about the Mole at Tangier, which was well
received even by Sir J. Lawson and Mr. Cholmely, the undertakers, against
whose interest I spoke; that I believe I shall be valued for it.  Thence
into the galleries to talk with my Lord Sandwich; among other things,
about the Prince's writing up to tell us of the danger he and his fleete
lie in at Portsmouth, of receiving affronts from the Dutch; which, my Lord
said, he would never have done, had he lain there with one ship alone: nor
is there any great reason for it, because of the sands. However, the
fleete will be ordered to go and lay themselves up at the Cowes. Much
beneath the prowesse of the Prince, I think, and the honour of the nation,
at the first to be found to secure themselves.  My Lord is well pleased to
think, that, if the Duke and the Prince go, all the blame of any
miscarriage will not light on him; and that if any thing goes well, he
hopes he shall have the share of the glory, for the Prince is by no means
well esteemed of by any body.  Thence home, and though not very well yet
up late about the Fishery business, wherein I hope to give an account how
I find the Collections to have been managed, which I did finish to my
great content, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day the great
O'Neale died; I believe, to the content of all the Protestant pretenders
in Ireland.

25th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and finished
Sir W. Warren's great contract for timber, with great content to me,
because just in the terms I wrote last night to Sir W. Warren and against
the terms proposed by Sir W. Batten.  At noon home to dinner, and there
found Creed and Hawley. After dinner comes in Mrs. Ingram, the first time
to make a visit to my wife. After a little stay I left them and to the
Committee of the Fishery, and there did make my report of the late public
collections for the Fishery, much to the satisfaction of the Committee,
and I think much to my reputation, for good notice was taken of it and
much it was commended.  So home, in my way taking care of a piece of plate
for Mr. Christopher Pett, against the launching of his new great ship
tomorrow at Woolwich, which I singly did move to His Royall Highness, and
did obtain it for him, to the value of twenty pieces.  And he, under his
hand, do acknowledge to me that he did never receive so great a kindness
from any man in the world as from me herein.  So to my office, and then to
supper, and then to my office again, where busy late, being very full now
a days of business to my great content, I thank God, and so home to bed,
my house being full of a design, to go to-morrow, my wife and all her
servants, to see the new ship launched.

26th.  Up, my people rising mighty betimes, to fit themselves to go by
water; and my boy, he could not sleep, but wakes about four o'clock, and
in bed lay playing on his lute till daylight, and, it seems, did the like
last night till twelve o'clock.  About eight o'clock, my wife, she and her
woman, and Besse and Jane, and W. Hewer and the boy, to the water-side,
and there took boat, and by and by I out of doors, to look after the
flaggon, to get it ready to carry to Woolwich.  That being not ready, I
stepped aside and found out Nellson, he that Whistler buys his bewpers of,
and did there buy 5 pieces at their price, and am in hopes thereby to
bring them down or buy ourselves all we spend of Nellson at the first
hand.  This jobb was greatly to my content, and by and by the flaggon
being finished at the burnisher's, I home, and there fitted myself, and
took a hackney-coach I hired, it being a very cold and foule day, to
Woolwich, all the way reading in a good book touching the fishery, and
that being done, in the book upon the statute of charitable uses, mightily
to my satisfaction.  At Woolwich; I there up to the King and Duke, and
they liked the plate well.  Here I staid above with them while the ship
was launched, which was done with great success, and the King did very
much like the ship, saying, she had the best bow that ever he saw.  But,
Lord! the sorry talke and discourse among the great courtiers round about
him, without any reverence in the world, but with so much disorder.  By
and by the Queene comes and her Mayds of Honour; one whereof, Mrs.
Boynton, and the Duchesse of Buckingham, had been very siclee coming by
water in the barge (the water being very rough); but what silly sport they
made with them in very common terms, methought, was very poor, and below
what people think these great people say and do. The launching being done,
the King and company went down to take barge; and I sent for Mr. Pett, and
put the flaggon into the Duke's hand, and he, in the presence of the King,
did give it, Mr. Pett taking it upon his knee.  This Mr. Pett is wholly
beholding to me for, and he do know and I believe will acknowledge it.
Thence I to Mr. Ackworth, and there eat and drank with Commissioner Pett
and his wife, and thence to Shelden's, where Sir W. Batten and his Lady
were.  By and by I took coach after I had enquired for my wife or her
boat, but found none.  Going out of the gate, an ordinary woman prayed me
to give her room to London, which I did, but spoke not to her all the way,
but read, as long as I could see, my book again.  Dark when we came to
London, and a stop of coaches in Southwarke. I staid above half an houre
and then 'light, and finding Sir W. Batten's coach, heard they were gone
into the Beare at the Bridge foot, and thither I to them.  Presently the
stop is removed, and then going out to find my coach, I could not find it,
for it was gone with the rest; so I fair to go through the darke and dirt
over the bridge, and my leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge, but, the
constable standing there to keep people from it, I was catched up,
otherwise I had broke my leg; for which mercy the Lord be praised!  So at
Fanchurch I found my coach staying for me, and so home, where the little
girle hath looked to the house well, but no wife come home, which made me
begin to fear [for] her, the water being very rough, and cold and darke.
But by and by she and her company come in all well, at which I was glad,
though angry.  Thence I to Sir W. Batten's, and there sat late with him,
Sir R. Ford, and Sir John Robinson; the last of whom continues still the
same foole he was, crying up what power he has in the City, in knowing
their temper, and being able to do what he will with them.  It seems the
City did last night very freely lend the King L100,000 without any
security but the King's word, which was very noble.  But this loggerhead
and Sir R. Ford would make us believe that they did it.  Now Sir R. Ford
is a cunning man, and makes a foole of the other, and the other believes
whatever the other tells him. But, Lord!  to think that such a man should
be Lieutenant of the Tower, and so great a man as he is, is a strange
thing to me.  With them late and then home and with my wife to bed, after
supper.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy.  At noon, Sir G.
Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and myself, were
treated at the Dolphin by Mr. Foly, the ironmonger, where a good plain
dinner, but I expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner,
only very good merry discourse at dinner.  Thence with Sir G. Carteret by
coach to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, and thence back to London,
and 'light in Cheapside and I to Nellson's, and there met with a rub at
first, but took him out to drink, and there discoursed to my great content
so far with him that I think I shall agree with him for Bewpers to serve
the Navy with.  So with great content home and to my office, where late,
and having got a great cold in my head yesterday home to supper and to
bed.

28th.  Slept ill all night, having got a very great cold the other day at
Woolwich in [my] head, which makes me full of snot.  Up in the morning,
and my tailor brings me home my fine, new, coloured cloth suit, my cloake
lined with plush, as good a suit as ever I wore in my life, and mighty
neat, to my great content.  To my office, and there all the morning.  At
noon to Nellson's, and there bought 20 pieces more of Bewpers, and hope to
go on with him to a contract.  Thence to the 'Change a little, and thence
home with Luellin to dinner, where Mr. Deane met me by appointment, and
after dinner he and I up to my chamber, and there hard at discourse, and
advising him what to do in his business at Harwich, and then to discourse
of our old business of ships and taking new rules of him to my great
pleasure, and he being gone I to my office a little, and then to see Sir
W. Batten, who is sick of a greater cold than I, and thither comes to me
Mr. Holliard, and into the chamber to me, and, poor man (beyond all I ever
saw of him), was a little drunk, and there sat talking and finding
acquaintance with Sir W. Batten and my Lady by relations on both sides,
that there we staid very long.  At last broke up, and he home much
overcome with drink, but well enough to get well home.  So I home to
supper and to bed.

29th.  Up, and it being my Lord Mayor's show, my boy and three mayds went
out; but it being a very foule, rainy day, from morning till night, I was
sorry my wife let them go out.  All the morning at the office.  At dinner
at home.  In the afternoon to the office again, and about 9 o'clock by
appointment to the King's Head tavern upon Fish Street Hill, whither Mr.
Wolfe (and Parham by his means) met me to discourse about the Fishery, and
great light I had by Parham, who is a little conceited, but a very knowing
man in his way, and in the general fishing trade of England. Here I staid
three hours, and eat a barrel of very fine oysters of Wolfe's giving me,
and so, it raining hard, home and to my office, and then home to bed.  All
the talke is that De Ruyter is come over-land home with six or eight of
his captaines to command here at home, and their ships kept abroad in the
Straights; which sounds as if they had a mind to do something with us.

30th (Lord's day).  Up, and this morning put on my new, fine, coloured
cloth suit, with my cloake lined with plush, which is a dear and noble
suit, costing me about L17.  To church, and then home to dinner, and after
dinner to a little musique with my boy, and so to church with my wife, and
so home, and with her all the evening reading and at musique with my boy
with great pleasure, and so to supper, prayers, and to bed.

31st.  Very busy all the morning, at noon Creed to me and dined with me,
and then he and I to White Hall, there to a Committee of Tangier, where it
is worth remembering when Mr. Coventry proposed the retrenching some of
the charge of the horse, the first word asked by the Duke of Albemarle
was, "Let us see who commands them," there being three troops.  One of
them he calls to mind was by Sir Toby Bridges. "Oh!" says he, "there is a
very good man.  If you must reform

     [Reform, i.e.  disband.  See "Memoirs of Sir John Reresby,"
     September 2nd, 1651.  "A great many younger brothers and reformed
     officers of the King's army depended upon him for their meat and
     drink."  So reformado, a discharged or disbanded officer.--M. B.]

two of them, be sure let him command the troop that is left."  Thence
home, and there came presently to me Mr. Young and Whistler, who find that
I have quite overcome them in their business of flags, and now they come
to intreat my favour, but I will be even with them.  So late to my office
and there till past one in the morning making up my month's accounts, and
find that my expense this month in clothes has kept me from laying up
anything; but I am no worse, but a little better than I was, which is
L1205, a great sum, the Lord be praised for it!  So home to bed, with my
mind full of content therein, and vexed for my being so angry in bad words
to my wife to-night, she not giving me a good account of her layings out
to my mind to-night.  This day I hear young Mr. Stanly, a brave young
[gentleman], that went out with young Jermin, with Prince Rupert, is
already dead of the small-pox, at Portsmouth.  All preparations against
the Dutch; and the Duke of Yorke fitting himself with all speed, to go to
the fleete which is hastening for him; being now resolved to go in the
Charles.

                           DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 NOVEMBER
                                   1664

November 1st.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, at noon
(my wife being invited to my Lady Sandwich's) all alone dined at home upon
a good goose with Mr. Wayth, discussing of business.  Thence I to the
Committee of the Fishery, and there we sat with several good discourses
and some bad and simple ones, and with great disorder, and yet by the men
of businesse of the towne. But my report in the business of the
collections is mightily commended and will get me some reputation, and
indeed is the only thing looks like a thing well done since we sat. Then
with Mr. Parham to the tavern, but I drank no wine, only he did give me
another barrel of oysters, and he brought one Major Greene, an able
fishmonger, and good discourse to my information.  So home and late at
business at my office.  Then to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and down with Mr. Castle to Redriffe, and there walked
to Deptford to view a parcel of brave knees--[Knees of timber]--of his,
which indeed are very good, and so back again home, I seeming very
friendly to him, though I know him to be a rogue, and one that hates me
with his heart.  Home and to dinner, and so to my office all the
afternoon, where in some pain in my backe, which troubled me, but I think
it comes only with stooping, and from no other matter.  At night to
Nellson's, and up and down about business, and so home to my office, then
home to supper and to bed.

3rd.  Up and to the office, where strange to see how Sir W. Pen is flocked
to by people of all sorts against his going to sea.  At the office did
much business, among other an end of that that has troubled me long, the
business of the bewpers and flags.  At noon to the 'Change, and thence by
appointment was met with Bagwell's wife, and she followed me into
Moorfields, and there into a drinking house, and all alone eat and drank
together.  I did there caress her, but though I did make some offer did
not receive any compliance from her in what was bad, but very modestly she
denied me, which I was glad to see and shall value her the better for it,
and I hope never tempt her to any evil more. Thence back to the town, and
we parted and I home, and then at the office late, where Sir W. Pen came
to take his leave of me, being to-morrow, which is very sudden to us, to
go on board to lie on board, but I think will come ashore again before the
ship, the Charles,

     ["The Royal Charles" was the Duke of York's ship, and Sir William
     Penn, who hoisted his flag in the "Royal James" on November 8th,
     shifted to the "Royal Charles" on November 30th.  The duke gave Penn
     the command of the fleet immediately under himself.  On Penn's
     monument he is styled "Great Captain Commander under His Royal
     Highness" (Penn's "Memorials of Sir William Penn," vol. ii.,
     p. 296).]

can go away.  So home to supper and to bed.  This night Sir W. Batten did,
among other things, tell me strange newes, which troubles me, that my Lord
Sandwich will be sent Governor to Tangier, which, in some respects,
indeed, I should be glad of, for the good of the place and the safety of
his person; but I think his honour will suffer, and, it may be, his
interest fail by his distance.

4th.  Waked very betimes and lay long awake, my mind being so full of
business. Then up and to St. James's, where I find Mr. Coventry full of
business, packing up for his going to sea with the Duke.  Walked with him,
talking, to White Hall, where to the Duke's lodgings, who is gone thither
to lodge lately.  I appeared to the Duke, and thence Mr. Coventry and I an
hour in the Long Gallery, talking about the management of our office, he
tells me the weight of dispatch will lie chiefly on me, and told me freely
his mind touching Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, the latter of whom, he
most aptly said, was like a lapwing; that all he did was to keepe a
flutter, to keepe others from the nest that they would find.  He told me
an old story of the former about the light-houses, how just before he had
certified to the Duke against the use of them, and what a burden they are
to trade, and presently after, at his being at Harwich, comes to desire
that he might have the setting one up there, and gets the usefulness of it
certified also by the Trinity House.  After long discoursing and
considering all our stores and other things, as how the King hath resolved
upon Captain Taylor

     [Coventry, writing to Secretary Bennet (November 14th, 1664), refers
     to the objections made to Taylor, and adds: "Thinks the King will
     not easily consent to his rejection, as he is a man of great
     abilities and dispatch, and was formerly laid aside at Chatham on
     the Duchess of Albemarle's earnest interposition for another.  He is
     a fanatic, it is true, but all hands will be needed for the work cut
     out; there is less danger of them in harbour than at sea, and profit
     will convert most of them" ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic,
     1664-65, p. 68).]

and Colonell Middleton, the first to be Commissioner for Harwich and the
latter for Portsmouth, I away to the 'Change, and there did very much
business, so home to dinner, and Mr. Duke, our Secretary for the Fishery,
dined with me. After dinner to discourse of our business, much to my
content, and then he away, and I by water among the smiths on the other
side, and to the alehouse with one and was near buying 4 or 5 anchors, and
learned something worth my knowing of them, and so home and to my office,
where late, with my head very full of business, and so away home to supper
and to bed.

5th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, at noon to the 'Change,
and thence home to dinner, and so with my wife to the Duke's house to a
play, "Macbeth,"  a pretty good play, but admirably acted. Thence home;
the coach being forced to go round by London Wall home, because of the
bonefires; the day being mightily observed in the City. To my office late
at business, and then home to supper, and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Up and with my wife to church.  Dined at home.  And I
all the afternoon close at my office drawing up some proposals to present
to the Committee for the Fishery to-morrow, having a great good intention
to be serviceable in the business if I can.  At night, to supper with my
uncle Wight, where very merry, and so home.  To prayers and to bed.

7th.  Up and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where mighty thrusting
about the Duke now upon his going.  We were with him long.  He advised us
to follow our business close, and to be directed in his absence by the
Committee of the Councell for the Navy.  By and by a meeting of the
Fishery, where the Duke was, but in such haste, and things looked so
superficially over, that I had not a fit opportunity to propose my paper
that I wrote yesterday, but I had chewed it to Mr. Gray and Wren before,
who did like it most highly, as they said, and I think they would not
dissemble in that manner in a business of this nature, but I see the
greatest businesses are done so superficially that I wonder anything
succeeds at all among us, that is publique.  Thence somewhat vexed to see
myself frustrated in the good I hoped to have done and a little reputation
to have gained, and thence to my barber's, but Jane not being in the way I
to my Lady Sandwich's, and there met my wife and dined, but I find that I
dine as well myself, that is, as neatly, and my meat as good and
well-dressed, as my good Lady do, in the absence of my Lord. Thence by
water I to my barber's again, and did meet in the street my Jane, but
could not talk with her, but only a word or two, and so by coach called my
wife, and home, where at my office late, and then, it being washing day,
to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up and to the office, where by and by Mr. Coventry come, and after
doing a little business, took his leave of us, being to go to sea with the
Duke to-morrow.  At noon, I and Sir J. Minnes and Lord Barkeley (who with
Sir J. Duncum, and Mr. Chichly, are made Masters of the Ordnance), to the
office of the Ordnance, to discourse about wadding for guns. Thence to
dinner, all of us to the Lieutenant's of the Tower; where a good dinner,
but disturbed in the middle of it by the King's coming into the Tower: and
so we broke up, and to him, and went up and down the store-houses and
magazines; which are, with the addition of the new great store-house, a
noble sight.  He gone, I to my office, where Bagwell's wife staid for me,
and together with her a good while, to meet again shortly.  So all the
afternoon at my office till late, and then to bed, joyed in my love and
ability to follow my business.  This day, Mr. Lever sent my wife a pair of
silver candlesticks, very pretty ones.  The first man that ever presented
me, to whom I have not only done little service, but apparently did him
the greatest disservice in his business of accounts, as Purser-Generall,
of any man at the board.

9th.  Called up, as I had appointed, by H. Russell, between two and three
o'clock, and I and my boy Tom by water with a gally down to the Hope, it
being a fine starry night.  Got thither by eight o'clock, and there, as
expected, found the Charles, her mainmast setting.  Commissioner Pett
aboard.  I up and down to see the ship I was so well acquainted with, and
a great worke it is, the setting so great a mast.  Thence the Commissioner
and I on board Sir G. Ascue, in the Henery, who lacks men mightily, which
makes me think that there is more believed to be in a man that hath
heretofore been employed than truly there is; for one would never have
thought, a month ago, that he would have wanted 1000 men at his heels.
Nor do I think he hath much of a seaman in him: for he told me, says he,
"Heretofore, we used to find our ships clear and ready, everything to our
hands in the Downes.  Now I come, and must look to see things done like a
slave, things that I never minded, nor cannot look after." And by his
discourse I find that he hath not minded anything in her at all. Thence
not staying, the wind blowing hard, I made use of the Jemmy yacht and
returned to the Tower in her, my boy being a very droll boy and good
company. Home and eat something, and then shifted myself, and to White
Hall, and there the King being in his Cabinet Council (I desiring to speak
with Sir G. Carteret), I was called in, and demanded by the King himself
many questions, to which I did give him full answers. There were at this
Council my Lord Chancellor, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Treasurer, the
two Secretarys, and Sir G. Carteret.  Not a little contented at this
chance of being made known to these persons, and called often by my name
by the King, I to Mr. Pierces to take leave of him, but he not within, but
saw her and made very little stay, but straight home to my office, where I
did business, and then to supper and to bed.  The Duke of York is this day
gone away to Portsmouth.

10th.  Up, and not finding my things ready, I was so angry with Besse as
to bid my wife for good and all to bid her provide herself a place, for
though she be very good-natured, she hath no care nor memory of her
business at all.  So to the office, where vexed at the malice of Sir W.
Batten and folly of Sir J. Minnes against Sir W. Warren, but I prevented,
and shall do, though to my own disquiet and trouble.  At noon dined with
Sir W. Batten and the Auditors of the Exchequer at the Dolphin by Mr.
Wayth's desire, and after dinner fell to business relating to Sir G.
Carteret's account, and so home to the office, where Sir W. Batten begins,
too fast, to shew his knavish tricks in giving what price he pleases for
commodities.  So abroad, intending to have spoke with my Lord Chancellor
about the old business of his wood at Clarendon, but could not, and so
home again, and late at my office, and then home to supper and bed.  My
little girle Susan is fallen sicke of the meazles, we fear, or, at least,
of a scarlett feavour.

11th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten to the Council Chamber
at White Hall, to the Committee of the Lords for the Navy, where we were
made to wait an houre or two before called in.  In that time looking upon
some books of heraldry of Sir Edward Walker's making, which are very fine,
there I observed the Duke of Monmouth's armes are neatly done, and his
title, "The most noble and high-born Prince, James Scott, Duke of
Monmouth, &c.;" nor could Sir J. Minnes, nor any body there, tell whence
he should take the name of Scott?  And then I found my Lord Sandwich, his
title under his armes is, "The most noble and mighty Lord, Edward, Earl of
Sandwich, &c."  Sir Edward Walker afterwards coming in, in discourse did
say that there was none of the families of princes in Christendom that do
derive themselves so high as Julius Caesar, nor so far by 1000 years, that
can directly prove their rise; only some in Germany do derive themselves
from the patrician familys of Rome, but that uncertainly; and, among other
things, did much inveigh against the writing of romances, that 500 years
hence being wrote of matters in general, true as the romance of Cleopatra,
the world will not know which is the true and which the false. Here was a
gentleman attending here that told us he saw the other day (and did bring
the draught of it to Sir Francis Prigeon) of a monster born of an
hostler's wife at Salisbury, two women children perfectly made, joyned at
the lower part of their bellies, and every part perfect as two bodies, and
only one payre of legs coming forth on one side from the middle where they
were joined. It was alive 24 hours, and cried and did as all hopefull
children do; but, being showed too much to people, was killed.  By and by
we were called in, where a great many lords:  Annesly in the chair.  But,
Lord! to see what work they will make us, and what trouble we shall have
to inform men in a business they are to begin to know, when the greatest
of our hurry is, is a thing to be lamented; and I fear the consequence
will be bad to us. Thence I by coach to the 'Change, and thence home to
dinner, my head akeing mightily with much business.  Our little girl
better than she was yesterday. After dinner out again by coach to my Lord
Chancellor's, but could not speak with him, then up and down to seek Sir
Ph. Warwicke, Sir G. Carteret, and my Lord Berkely, but failed in all, and
so home and there late at business.  Among other things Mr. Turner making
his complaint to me how my clerks do all the worke and get all the profit,
and he hath no comfort, nor cannot subsist, I did make him apprehend how
he is beholding to me more than to any body for my suffering him to act as
Pourveyour of petty provisions, and told him so largely my little value of
any body's favour, that I believe he will make no complaints again a good
while.  So home to supper and to bed, after prayers, and having my boy and
Mercer give me some, each of them some, musique.

12th.  Up, being frighted that Mr. Coventry was come to towne and now at
the office, so I run down without eating or drinking or washing to the
office and it proved my Lord Berkeley.  There all the morning, at noon to
the 'Change, and so home to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me, and then to the
office, where mighty busy till very late, but I bless God I go through
with it very well and hope I shall.

13th (Lord's day).  This morning to church, where mighty sport, to hear
our clerke sing out of tune, though his master sits by him that begins and
keeps the tune aloud for the parish.  Dined at home very well, and spent
all the afternoon with my wife within doors, and getting a speech out of
Hamlett, "To bee or not to bee,"' without book.  In the evening to sing
psalms, and in come Mr. Hill to see me, and then he and I and the boy
finely to sing, and so anon broke up after much pleasure, he gone I to
supper, and so prayers and to bed.

14th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, to the Lords of the
Admiralty, and there did our business betimes.  Thence to Sir Philip
Warwicke about Navy business: and my Lord Ashly; and afterwards to my Lord
Chancellor, who is very well pleased with me, and my carrying of his
business.  And so to the 'Change, where mighty busy; and so home to
dinner, where Mr. Creed and Moore: and after dinner I to my Lord
Treasurer's, to Sir Philip Warwicke there, and then to White Hall, to the
Duke of Albemarle, about Tangier; and then homeward to the Coffee-house to
hear newes.  And it seems the Dutch, as I afterwards found by Mr.
Coventry's letters, have stopped a ship of masts of Sir W. Warren's,
coming for us in a Swede's ship, which they will not release upon Sir G.
Downing's claiming her: which appears as the first act of hostility; and
is looked upon as so by Mr. Coventry.  The Elias,' coming from New England
(Captain Hill, commander), is sunk; only the captain and a few men saved.
She foundered in the sea.  So home, where infinite busy till 12 at night,
and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  That I might not be too fine for the business I intend this day, I
did leave off my fine new cloth suit lined with plush and put on my poor
black suit, and after office done (where much business, but little done),
I to the 'Change, and thence Bagwell's wife with much ado followed me
through Moorfields to a blind alehouse, and there I did caress her and eat
and drink, and many hard looks and sooth the poor wretch did give me, and
I think verily was troubled at what I did, but at last after many
protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would, with great pleasure,
and then in the evening, it raining, walked into town to where she knew
where she was, and then I took coach and to White Hall to a Committee of
Tangier, where, and every where else, I thank God, I find myself growing
in repute; and so home, and late, very late, at business, nobody minding
it but myself, and so home to bed, weary and full of thoughts. Businesses
grow high between the Dutch and us on every side.

16th.  My wife not being well, waked in the night, and strange to see how
dead sleep our people sleep that she was fain to ring an hour before any
body would wake.  At last one rose and helped my wife, and so to sleep
again.  Up and to my business, and then to White Hall, there to attend the
Lords Commissioners, and so directly home and dined with Sir W. Batten and
my Lady, and after dinner had much discourse tending to profit with Sir W.
Batten, how to get ourselves into the prize office

     [The Calendars of State Papers are full of references to
     applications for Commissionerships of the Prize Office.  In
     December, 1664, the Navy Committee appointed themselves the
     Commissioners for Prize Goods, Sir Henry Bennet being appointed
     comptroller, and Lord Ashley treasurer.]

or some other fair way of obliging the King to consider us in our
extraordinary pains.  Then to the office, and there all the afternoon very
busy, and so till past 12 at night, and so home to bed.  This day my wife
went to the burial of a little boy of W. Joyce's.

17th.  Up and to my office, and there all the morning mighty busy, and
taking upon me to tell the Comptroller how ill his matters were done, and
I think indeed if I continue thus all the business of the office will come
upon me whether I will or no.  At noon to the 'Change, and then home with
Creed to dinner, and thence I to the office, where close at it all the
afternoon till 12 at night, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day
I received from Mr. Foley, but for me to pay for it, if I like it, an iron
chest, having now received back some money I had laid out for the King,
and I hope to have a good sum of money by me, thereby, in a few days, I
think above L800.  But when I come home at night, I could not find the way
to open it; but, which is a strange thing, my little girle Susan could
carry it alone from one table clear from the ground and set upon another,
when neither I nor anyone in my house but Jane the cook-mayde could do it.

18th.  Up and to the office, and thence to the Committee of the Fishery at
White Hall, where so poor simple doings about the business of the Lottery,
that I was ashamed to see it, that a thing so low and base should have any
thing to do with so noble an undertaking.  But I had the advantage this
day to hear Mr. Williamson discourse, who come to be a contractor with
others for the Lotterys, and indeed I find he is a very logicall man and a
good speaker.  But it was so pleasant to see my Lord Craven, the
chaireman, before many persons of worth and grave, use this comparison in
saying that certainly these that would contract for all the lotteries
would not suffer us to set up the Virginia lottery for plate before them,
"For," says he, "if I occupy a wench first, you may occupy her again your
heart out you can never have her maidenhead after I have once had it,"
which he did more loosely, and yet as if he had fetched a most grave and
worthy instance.  They made mirth, but I and others were ashamed of it.
Thence to the 'Change and thence home to dinner, and thence to the office
a good while, and thence to the Council chamber at White Hall to speake
with Sir G. Carteret, and here by accident heard a great and famous cause
between Sir G. Lane and one Mr. Phill. Whore, an Irish business about Sir
G. Lane's endeavouring to reverse a decree of the late Commissioners of
Ireland in a Rebells case for his land, which the King had given as
forfeited to Sir G. Lane, for whom the Sollicitor did argue most angell
like, and one of the Commissioners, Baron, did argue for the other and for
himself and his brethren who had decreed it. But the Sollicitor do so pay
the Commissioners, how four all along did act for the Papists, and three
only for the Protestants, by which they were overvoted, but at last one
word (which was omitted in the Sollicitor's repeating of an Act of
Parliament in the case) being insisted on by the other part, the
Sollicitor was put to a great stop, and I could discern he could not tell
what to say, but was quite out. Thence home well pleased with this
accident, and so home to my office, where late, and then to supper and to
bed.  This day I had a letter from Mr. Coventry, that tells me that my
Lord Brunkard is to be one of our Commissioners, of which I am very glad,
if any more must be.

19th.  All the morning at the office, and without dinner down by galley up
and down the river to visit the yards and ships now ordered forth with
great delight, and so home to supper, and then to office late to write
letters, then home to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife to church, where Pegg Pen very
fine in her new coloured silk suit laced with silver lace.  Dined at home,
and Mr. Sheply, lately come to town, with me.  A great deal of ordinary
discourse with him.  Among other things praying him to speak to Stankes to
look after our business.  With him and in private with Mr. Bodham talking
of our ropeyarde stores at Woolwich, which are mighty low, even to
admiration.  They gone, in the evening comes Mr. Andrews and sings with
us, and he gone, I to Sir W. Batten's, where Sir J. Minnes and he and I to
talk about our letter to my Lord Treasurer, where his folly and simple
confidence so great in a report so ridiculous that he hath drawn up to
present to my Lord, nothing of it being true, that I was ashamed, and did
roundly and in many words for an houre together talk boldly to him, which
pleased Sir W. Batten and my Lady, but I was in the right, and was the
willinger to do so before them, that they might see that I am somebody,
and shall serve him so in his way another time.  So home vexed at this
night's passage, for I had been very hot with him, so to supper and to
bed, out of order with this night's vexation.

21st.  Up, and with them to the Lords at White Hall, where they do single
me out to speake to and to hear, much to my content, and received their
commands, particularly in several businesses.  Thence by their order to
the Attorney General's about a new warrant for Captain Taylor which I
shall carry for him to be Commissioner in spite of Sir W. Batten, and yet
indeed it is not I, but the ability of the man, that makes the Duke and
Mr. Coventry stand by their choice. I to the 'Change and there staid long
doing business, and this day for certain newes is come that Teddiman hath
brought in eighteen or twenty Dutchmen, merchants, their Bourdeaux fleete,
and two men of wary to Portsmouth.

     [Captain Sir Thomas Teddiman (or Tyddiman) had been appointed
     Rear-Admiral of Lord Sandwich's squadron of the English fleet.  In a
     letter from Sir William Coventry to Secretary Bennet, dated November
     13th, 1664, we read, "Rear Admiral Teddeman with four or five ships
     has gone to course in the Channel, and if he meet any refractory
     Dutchmen will teach them their duty" ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     Domestic, 1664.-65, p. 66).]

And I had letters this afternoon, that three are brought into the Downes
and Dover; so that the warr is begun: God give a good end to it!  After
dinner at home all the afternoon busy, and at night with Sir W. Batten and
Sir J. Minnes looking over the business of stating the accounts of the
navy charge to my Lord Treasurer, where Sir J. Minnes's paper served us in
no stead almost, but was all false, and after I had done it with great
pains, he being by, I am confident he understands not one word in it.  At
it till 10 at night almost. Thence by coach to Sir Philip Warwicke's, by
his desire to have conferred with him, but he being in bed, I to White
Hall to the Secretaries, and there wrote to Mr. Coventry, and so home by
coach again, a fine clear moonshine night, but very cold. Home to my
office awhile, it being past 12 at night; and so to supper and to bed.

22nd.  At the office all the morning.  Sir G. Carteret, upon a motion of
Sir W. Batten's, did promise, if we would write a letter to him, to shew
it to the King on our behalf touching our desire of being Commissioners of
the Prize office.  I wrote a letter to my mind and, after eating a bit at
home (Mr. Sheply dining and taking his leave of me), abroad and to Sir G.
Carteret with the letter and thence to my Lord Treasurer's; wherewith Sir
Philip Warwicke long studying all we could to make the last year swell as
high as we could. And it is much to see how he do study for the King, to
do it to get all the money from the Parliament all he can: and I shall be
serviceable to him therein, to help him to heads upon which to enlarge the
report of the expense. He did observe to me how obedient this Parliament
was for awhile, and the last sitting how they begun to differ, and to carp
at the King's officers; and what they will do now, he says, is to make
agreement for the money, for there is no guess to be made of it.  He told
me he was prepared to convince the Parliament that the Subsidys are a most
ridiculous tax (the four last not rising to L40,000), and unequall.  He
talks of a tax of Assessment of L70,000 for five years; the people to be
secured that it shall continue no longer than there is really a warr; and
the charges thereof to be paid.  He told me, that one year of the late
Dutch warr cost L1,623,000.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there
staid long with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, to speak with my lord
about our Prize Office business; but, being sicke and full of visitants,
we could not speak with him, and so away home. Where Sir Richard Ford did
meet us with letters from Holland this day, that it is likely the Dutch
fleete will not come out this year; they have not victuals to keep them
out, and it is likely they will be frozen before they can get back.
Captain Cocke is made Steward for sick and wounded seamen.  So home to
supper, where troubled to hear my poor boy Tom has a fit of the stone, or
some other pain like it.  I must consult Mr. Holliard for him.  So at one
in the morning home to bed.

23rd.  Up and to my office, where close all the morning about my Lord
Treasurer's accounts, and at noon home to dinner, and then to the office
all the afternoon very busy till very late at night, and then to supper
and to bed. This evening Mr. Hollyard came to me and told me that he hath
searched my boy, and he finds he hath a stone in his bladder, which
grieves me to the heart, he being a good-natured and well-disposed boy,
and more that it should be my misfortune to have him come to my house. Sir
G. Carteret was here this afternoon; and strange to see how we plot to
make the charge of this warr to appear greater than it is, because of
getting money.

24th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy answering of
people. About noon out with Commissioner Pett, and he and I to a
Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good; and so by coach to
Westminster, being the first day of the Parliament's meeting.  After the
House had received the King's speech, and what more he had to say,
delivered in writing, the Chancellor being sicke, it rose, and I with Sir
Philip Warwicke home and conferred our matters about the charge of the
Navy, and have more to give him in the excessive charge of this year's
expense.  I dined with him, and Mr. Povy with us and Sir Edmund Pooly, a
fine gentleman, and Mr. Chichly, and fine discourse we had and fine talke,
being proud to see myself accepted in such company and thought better than
I am. After dinner Sir Philip and I to talk again, and then away home to
the office, where sat late; beginning our sittings now in the afternoon,
because of the Parliament; and they being rose, I to my office, where late
till almost one o'clock, and then home to bed.

25th.  Up and at my office all the morning, to prepare an account of the
charge we have been put to extraordinary by the Dutch already; and I have
brought it to appear L852,700; but God knows this is only a scare to the
Parliament, to make them give the more money.  Thence to the Parliament
House, and there did give it to Sir Philip Warwicke; the House being hot
upon giving the King a supply of money, and I by coach to the 'Change and
took up Mr. Jenings along with me (my old acquaintance), he telling me the
mean manner that Sir Samuel Morland lives near him, in a house he hath
bought and laid out money upon, in all to the value of L1200, but is
believed to be a beggar; and so I ever thought he would be.  From the
'Change with Mr. Deering and Luellin to the White Horse tavern in Lombard
Street, and there dined with them, he giving me a dish of meat to
discourse in order to my serving Deering, which I am already obliged to
do, and shall do it, and would be glad he were a man trusty that I might
venture something along with him.  Thence home, and by and by in the
evening took my wife out by coach, leaving her at Unthanke's while I to
White Hall and to Westminster Hall, where I have not been to talk a great
while, and there hear that Mrs. Lane and her husband live a sad life
together, and he is gone to be a paymaster to a company to Portsmouth to
serve at sea.  She big with child. Thence I home, calling my wife, and at
Sir W. Batten's hear that the House have given the King L2,500,000 to be
paid for this warr, only for the Navy, in three years' time; which is a
joyfull thing to all the King's party I see, but was much opposed by Mr.
Vaughan and others, that it should be so much. So home and to supper and
to bed.

26th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning.  Home a while to
dinner and then to the office, where very late busy till quite weary, but
contented well with my dispatch of business, and so home to supper and to
bed.

27th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, then dined at home, and to
my office, and there all the afternoon setting right my business of
flaggs, and after all my pains find reason not to be sorry, because I
think it will bring me considerable profit.  In the evening come Mr.
Andrews and Hill, and we sung, with my boy, Ravenscroft's 4-part psalms,
most admirable musique.  Then (Andrews not staying) we to supper, and
after supper fell into the rarest discourse with Mr. Hill about Rome and
Italy; but most pleasant that I ever had in my life.  At it very late and
then to bed.

28th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and W. Batten to White Hall, but no
Committee of Lords (which is like to do the King's business well).  So to
Westminster, and there to Jervas's and was a little while with Jane, and
so to London by coach and to the Coffee-house, where certain news of our
peace made by Captain Allen with Argier, which is good news; and that the
Dutch have sent part of their fleete round by Scotland; and resolve to pay
off the rest half-pay, promising the rest in the Spring, hereby keeping
their men.  But how true this, I know not.  Home to dinner, then come Dr.
Clerke to speak with me about sick and wounded men, wherein he is like to
be concerned.  After him Mr. Cutler, and much talk with him, and with him
to White Hall, to have waited on the Lords by order, but no meeting,
neither to-night, which will spoil all.  I think I shall get something by
my discourse with Cutler.  So home, and after being at my office an hour
with Mr. Povy talking about his business of Tangier, getting him some
money allowed him for freight of ships, wherein I hope to get something
too.  He gone, home hungry and almost sick for want of eating, and so to
supper and to bed.

29th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to the Committee of Lords at the Council
Chamber, where Sir G. Carteret told us what he had said to the King, and
how the King inclines to our request of making us Commissioners of the
Prize office, but meeting him anon in the gallery, he tells me that my
Lord Barkely is angry we should not acquaint him with it, so I found out
my Lord and pacified him, but I know not whether he was so in earnest or
no, for he looked very frowardly.  Thence to the Parliament House, and
with Sir W. Batten home and dined with him, my wife being gone to my Lady
Sandwich's, and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon, and I
at my office till past 12 at night, and so home to bed. This day I hear
that the King should say that the Dutch do begin to comply with him.  Sir
John Robinson told Sir W. Batten that he heard the King say so.  I pray
God it may be so.

30th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to the Committee of
the Lords, and there did our business; but, Lord! what a sorry dispatch
these great persons give to business.  Thence to the 'Change, and there
hear the certainty and circumstances of the Dutch having called in their
fleete and paid their men half-pay, the other to be paid them upon their
being ready upon beat of drum to come to serve them again, and in the
meantime to have half-pay.  This is said. Thence home to dinner, and so to
my office all the afternoon.  In the evening my wife and Sir W. Warren
with me to White Hall, sending her with the coach to see her father and
mother.  He and I up to Sir G. Carteret, and first I alone and then both
had discourse with him about things of the Navy, and so I and he calling
my wife at Unthanke's, home again, and long together talking how to order
things in a new contract for Norway goods, as well to the King's as to his
advantage.  He gone, I to my monthly accounts, and, bless God!  I find I
have increased my last balance, though but little; but I hope ere long to
get more.  In the meantime praise God for what I have, which is L1209.
So, with my heart glad to see my accounts fall so right in this time of
mixing of monies and confusion, I home to bed.