"The first man who put the idea into my head was a half-caste Mexican,
who had an extraordinary grip on the history of his country, especially
as far as legends and traditions were concerned. He was a well-educated
man, and an exceedingly fascinating story-teller. It was he who first
gave me the history of what he called the Four Finger Mine. It appears
that this mine had been discovered some century or more ago by a
Frenchman, who had settled down in the country and married the daughter
of a native chief. The original founder of the mine was a curious sort of
man, and was evidently possessed of strong miserly tendencies. Most men
in his position would have gathered together a band of workers, and
simply exploited the mine for all it was worth. However, this man, Le
Fenu, did nothing of the kind. He kept his discovery an absolute secret,
and what mining was to be done, he did himself. I understand that he was
a man of fine physique, and that his disposition was absolutely fearless.
It was his habit at certain seasons of the year to go up to his mine, and
there work it for a month or two at a time, spending the rest of the year
with his family. It is quite certain, too, that he kept his secret, even
from his grown-up sons; for when he died, they had not the slightest idea
of the locality of the mine, which fact I know from Le Fenu's
descendants.

"And now comes the interesting part of my story, Le Fenu went up into
the mountains early in May one year, to put in his solitary two months'
mining, as usual. For, perhaps, the first time in his life, he suffered
from a serious illness--some kind of fever, I suppose, though he had just
strength of will enough to get on the back of a horse and ride as far as
the nearest _hacienda_.

"Now, on this particular farm there dwelt a Dutchman, who, I believe, was
called Van Fort. Whether or not Le Fenu partially disclosed his secret in
his delirium, will never actually be known. At any rate, two or three
weeks later the body of Le Fenu was discovered not very far away from the
scene of his mining operations, and from the evidence obtainable, there
was no doubt in the world that he was foully murdered. Justice in that
country walks with very tardy footsteps, and though there was little
question who the real murderer was, Van Fort was never brought to
justice. Perhaps that was accounted for by the fact that he seemed to be
suddenly possessed of more money than usual, and was thus in a position
to bribe the authorities.

"And now comes a further development. Soon after the death of Le Fenu, it
was noted that Van Fort spent most of his time away from his farm in the
mountains, no doubt prospecting for Le Fenu's mine. Whether he ever found
it or not will never be known. Please to bear in mind the fact that for a
couple of centuries at least Le Fenu's mysterious property was known as
the Four Finger Mine. With this digression, I will go on to speak further
of Van Fort's movements. To make a long story short, from his last
journey to the mountains he never returned. His widow searched for him
everywhere; I have seen her--a big sullen woman, with a cruel mouth and a
heavy eye. From what I have heard, I have not the slightest doubt that it
was she who inspired the murder of the Frenchman.

"She had practically given up all hope of ever seeing her husband again,
when, one dark and stormy night, just as she was preparing for bed, she
heard her husband outside, screaming for assistance. From his tone, he
was evidently in some dire and deadly peril. The woman was by no means
devoid of courage; she rushed out into the night and searched far and
near, but no trace of Van Fort could be found, nor did the imploring cry
for assistance come again. But the next morning, on the doorstep lay a
bleeding forefinger, which the woman recognised as coming from her
husband's hand. To make identity absolutely certain, on the forefinger
was a ring of native gold, which the Dutchman always wore. Please to
remember once more that this mine was known as the Four Finger Mine."

Venner paused just for a moment to give dramatic effect to his point.
Gurdon said nothing; he was too deeply interested in the narrative to
make any comment.

"That was what I may call the first act in the drama," Venner went on.
"Six months had elapsed, and Van Fort's widow was beginning to forget all
about the startling incident, when, one night, just at the same time, and
in just the same circumstances, came that wild, pitiful yell for
assistance outside the Dutchman's farm. Half mad with dread and terror
the woman sat there listening. She did not dare to go outside now; she
knew how futile such an act would be. Also, she knew quite well what was
going to happen in the morning. She sat up half the night in a state
bordering on madness. I need not insult your intelligence, my dear
fellow, by asking you to guess what she found on the doorstep in the
daylight."

"Of course, I can guess," Gurdon said. "Beyond all question, it was the
third finger of the Dutchman's hand."

"Quite so," Venner resumed. "I need not over elaborate my story or bore
you by telling how, six months later, the second finger of the hand
appeared in the same sensational circumstances, and how, at the end of a
year, the four fingers were complete. Let me once more impress upon you
the fact that this mine was called the Four Finger Mine for more than a
century before these strange things happened."

"It is certainly an extraordinary thing," Gurdon muttered. "I don't think
I ever listened to a weirder tale. And did the Dutch woman confess to
her crime? This strikes me as being a fitting end to the story. I suppose
it came from her lips."

"She didn't confess, for the simple reason that she had no mind to
confess with," Venner explained. "Of course, certain neighbors knew
something of what was going on, but they never knew the whole truth,
because, after the appearance of the last finger, Mrs. Van Fort went
stark raving mad. She lived for a few days, and at the end of that time
her body was found in a waterfall close to her house. That is the story
of the Four Finger Mine so far as it goes, though I should not be
surprised if we manage to get to the last chapter yet. Now, you are an
observant man--did you notice anything peculiar in Fenwick's appearance
to-night?"

Gurdon shook his head slowly. It was quite evident that he had not
noticed anything out of the common in the appearance of the millionaire.
Venner proceeded to explain.

"Let me tell you this," he said. "When I married my wife, we were within
an easy ride of the locality where the Four Finger Mine is situated. Mind
you, our marriage was a secret one, and I presume that Fenwick is still
in ignorance of it, though, of course, he was fully aware of the fact
that I had more than a passing admiration for Vera. I merely mention this
by way of accentuating the little point that I am going to make. It is
more than probable that, when I stumbled upon Fenwick and the girl who
passes for his daughter, he also was in search of the Four Finger Mine.
When he came in to-night he, of course, recognised me, though I treated
him as an absolute stranger whom I had met for the first time. You will
see presently why I treated him in this fashion. I am glad I spoke to
him, because I noticed a slight thing that throws a flood of light upon
the mystery. Now, did it escape your observation, or did you notice that
Fenwick took the box I gave him in his right hand?"

"Oh, dear, no," Gurdon said. "A little thing like that would be almost
too trivial for the typical detective of the cheap story."

"All the same, it is very important," Venner said. "He took the box in
his right hand; he made as if to extend his left, then suddenly changed
his mind, and put it in his pocket. But he was too late to disguise from
me that he had--"

"I know," Gurdon shouted. "He had lost all the fingers on his left
hand. What an amazing thing! We must get to the bottom of this business
at all costs."

"That is precisely what we are going to do," Venner said grimly. "I am
glad you are so quick in taking up the point. When I noted the loss of
those fingers, I was absolutely staggered for a moment. If he had been
less agitated than he was, Fenwick would have guessed what I had seen. I
need not tell you that when I last saw Fenwick his left hand was as sound
as yours or mine. The inference of this is, that Fenwick has fallen under
the ban of the same strange vengeance that overtook Van Fort and his
wife. There is not the slightest doubt that he discovered the mine, and
that he has not yet paid the penalty for his temerity."

"I presume the penalty is coming," Gurdon said. "What a creepy sort of
idea it is, that terrible vengeance reaching across a continent in such a
sinister fashion. But don't forget that we know something as to the way
in which this thing is to be brought about. Don't forget the cripple who
sat at yonder table to-night."

"I am not likely to forget him," Venner observed. "All the more because
he evidently knows more about this matter than we do ourselves. When he
came here to-night, he little dreamed that there was one man in the
room, at least, who had a fairly good knowledge of the Four Finger
Mystery. We shall have to look him out, and, if necessary, force him to
speak. But it is a delicate matter, and as far as I can see, one not
unattended with danger."

Gurdon smoked in thoughtful silence for some little time, turning the
strange thing over in his mind. The more he dwelt upon it, the more wild
and dramatic did it seem.

"There is one thing in our favor," he said, presently. "The mysterious
cripple is evidently a deadly enemy of Fenwick's. We shall doubtless find
him ready to accept our offer, provided that we put it in the right way."

"I am not so sure of that," Venner replied. "At any rate, we can make no
move in that direction without thinking the whole thing out carefully and
thoroughly. Our crippled friend is evidently a fanatic in his way, and he
is not alone in his scheme. Do not forget that we have also the little
man who played the part of the waiter to deal with. I am sorry that I did
not notice him. A man who could carry off a thing like that with such
splendid audacity is certainly a force to be reckoned with."

Gurdon rose from his seat with a yawn, and intimated that it was time to
go to bed. It was long past twelve now and the hotel was gradually
retiring to rest. The Grand Empire was not the sort of house to cater to
the frivolous type of guest, and usually within an hour of the closing of
the theatres the whole of the vast building was wrapped in silence.

"I think I will go now," Gurdon said. "Come and lunch with me to-morrow,
and then you can tell me something about your own romance. What sort of a
night is it, waiter?"

"Very bad, sir," the waiter replied. "It's pouring in torrents. Shall I
call you a cab, sir?"


CHAPTER IV

IN THE LIFT


Gurdon looked out from the shelter of the great portico to see the sheets
of rain falling on the pavement. Silence reigned supreme but for the
steady plash of the raindrops as they rattled on the pavements. To walk
half a mile on such a night meant getting wet through; and Gurdon
somewhat ruefully regarded his thin slippers and his light dust overcoat.
Half a dozen times the night porter blew his whistle, but no sign of a
cab could be seen.

"We shan't get one to-night," Venner said. "They are all engaged. There
is only one thing for it--you must take a room here, and stay till the
morning. I've no doubt I can fit you up in the way of pyjamas and the
things necessary."

Gurdon fell in readily enough with the suggestion. Indeed, there was
nothing else for it. He took his number and key from the sleepy clerk in
the office, and made his way upstairs to Venner's bedroom.

"I'll just have one cigarette before I turn in," he said. "It seems as if
Fate had ordained that I am to keep in close touch with the leading
characters of the mystery. By the way, we never took the trouble to find
out who the handsome cripple was."

"That is very easily done in the morning," Venner replied. "A striking
personality like that is not soon lost sight of. Besides, he has
doubtless been here before, for, if you will recollect, his attendants
took him to the right table as if it had been ordered beforehand. And
now, if you don't mind, I'll turn in--not that I expect to sleep much
after an exciting evening like this. Good night, old fellow."

Gurdon went on to his own room, where he slowly undressed and sat
thinking the whole thing out on the edge of his bed. Perhaps he was
suffering from the same suppressed excitement which at that moment was
keeping Venner awake, for he felt not the slightest disposition to turn
in. Usually he was a sound sleeper; but this night seemed likely to prove
an exception to the rule.

An hour passed, and Gurdon was still sitting there, asking himself
whether it would not be better to go to bed and compel sleep to come to
him. Impatiently he turned out his light and laid his head resolutely on
the pillow.

But it was all in vain--sleep was out of the question. The room was not
altogether in darkness, either; for the sleeping apartments on that
landing had been arranged back to back with a large, open ventilator
between them. Through this ventilator came a stream of light; evidently
the occupant of the adjoining room had not yet retired. The light
worried Gurdon; he asked himself irritably why his neighbor should be
permitted to annoy him in this way. A moment or two later the sound of
suppressed voices came through the ventilator, followed by the noise of a
heavy fall.

At any ordinary time Gurdon would have thought nothing of this, but his
imagination was aflame now, and his mind was full of hidden mysteries. It
seemed to him that something sinister and underhand was going on in the
next room.

Usually, no one would identify the Grand Empire Hotel with crime and
intrigue; but that did not deter Gurdon from rising from his bed and
making a determined effort to see through the ventilator into the
adjoining room. It was not an easy matter, but by dint of balancing two
chairs one on top of the other the thing was accomplished. Very
cautiously Gurdon pushed back the glass slide and looked through. So far
as he could see, there was nothing to justify any suspicion. The room
was absolutely empty, though it was brilliantly lighted; and for a
moment Gurdon felt ashamed of his suspicions, and turned away, half
determined to try and sleep. It was at that instant that he noticed
something out of the common. To his quickened ear there came a sound
unmistakably like a snore, and pushing his body half through the
ventilator he managed to make out the bed in the next room. On it lay
the body of a boy in uniform, unmistakably a messenger boy or hotel
attendant of that kind. Gurdon could see the hotel name embroidered in
gold letters on his collar.

Perhaps there was nothing so very suspicious in this, except that the boy
was lying on the bed fully dressed, even to his boots. It was a luxurious
room; not at all the class of apartment to which the hotel management
would relegate one of their messenger boys, nor was it possible that the
lad had had the temerity to go into the vacant room and sleep.

"Something wrong here," Gurdon muttered. "Hang me if I don't get through
the ventilator and see what it is."

It was no difficult matter for an athlete like Gurdon to push his way
through and drop on to the bed on the other side. Then he shook the form
of the slumbering lad without reward. The boy seemed to be plunged in a
sleep almost like death. As Gurdon turned him over, he noticed on the
other side of the lad's collar the single word "Lift." It began to dawn
upon Gurdon exactly what had happened. In large hotels like the Grand
Empire there is no fixed period when the lift is suspended, and
consequently, it has its attendants night and day. For some reason, this
boy had evidently been drugged and carried into the room where he now
lay. There was no doubt whatever about it, for it was impossible to
shake the lad into the slightest semblance of life. Gurdon crossed to
the door, and found, not to his surprise, that it was locked. His first
impulse was to return to his room and call the night porter; but a
strange, wild idea had come into his mind, and he refrained from doing
so. It occurred to him that perhaps Mark Fenwick or the cripple had had
a hand in this outrage.

"I'll wait a bit," Gurdon told himself. "It is just possible that my key
will fit this door. Anyway, it is worth trying."

Gurdon made his way back to his own room again, to return a minute or two
later with his key. To his great delight the door opened, and he stood in
a further corridor, close against the cage in which the lift worked
noiselessly up and down.

It was absolutely quiet, so that anybody standing there would have been
able to carry out any operation of an unlawful kind without observation.
Gurdon stood, looking down the lift shaft, until he saw that the cage was
once more beginning to ascend. It came up slowly and smoothly and without
the least noise, until it was level with the floor on which Gurdon was
standing. It was one of the open kind, so he could see inside quite
clearly. To all practical purposes, the lift was empty, save for the
presence of one man, who lay unconscious on the floor. The cage was
ascending so leisurely that Gurdon was in a position to make a close
examination of the figure before the whole structure had risen to the
next floor. It did not need a second glance to tell Gurdon that the man
in the cage was the attendant, and that he was suffering from the same
drug which had placed his boy assistant beyond all power of interfering.

"Now what does all this mean?" Gurdon muttered. "Who is there on the
floor above who is interested in getting these two people out of the way?
What do they want to bring up or send down which it is not safe to
dispose of by the ordinary means? I think I'll wait and see. No sleep for
me to-night."

The lift vanished in the same silent way. It hung overhead for some
little time, and once more appeared in sight, this time absolutely empty,
save for a small square box with iron bands at the corners, which lay
upon the floor. As the cage descended, Gurdon suddenly made up his mind
what to do. He sprang lightly on to the top of the falling cage, and
grasped the rope with both hands. A moment later and he was descending in
the darkness.

As far as he could judge, the lift went down to the basement, where, for
the time being, it remained. There was a warm damp smell in the air,
suggestive of fungus, whereby Gurdon judged that he must be in the vaults
beneath the hotel. As his eyes became accustomed to the gloom, he could
make out just in front of him a circular patch of light, which evidently
was a coal shoot.

He had no need to wait now for the full development of the adventure.
He could hear whispered voices and the clang of metal, as if somebody
had opened the door of the lift. One of the voices he failed to
understand, but with a thrill he recognised the fact that the speaker
was talking in either Spanish or Portuguese. Instantly it flashed into
his mind that this was the language most familiar to the man who called
himself Mark Fenwick. Beyond doubt he was quite right when he
identified this last development with the actors in the dramatic events
earlier in the evening.

"Now don't be long about it," a hoarse voice whispered. "There are two
more cases to send up, and two more to come down here. Has that van come
along, or shall we have to wait until morning?"

"The van is there right enough," another hoarse voice said. "We have
the stuff out on the pavement. Let's have the last lot here, and get it
up at once."

Gurdon could hear the sound of labored breathing as if the unseen man was
struggling with some heavy burden. Presently some square object was
deposited on the floor of the lift. It seemed to slip from someone's
hands, and dropped with a heavy thud that caused the lift to vibrate like
a thing of life."

"Clumsy fool," a voice muttered. "You might have dropped that on my foot.
What did you want to let go for?"

"I couldn't help it," another voice grumbled. "I didn't know it was half
so heavy. Besides, the rope broke."

"Oh, are you going to be there all night?"--another voice, with a
suggestion of a foreign accent in it, asked impatiently. "Don't forget
you have to bring the man down yet, and see that the boy is taken to his
place. Now, up with it."

Standing there, holding on to the rope and quivering with excitement,
Gurdon wondered what was going to happen next. Once more he felt himself
rising, and an instant later he was in the light again. He waited till
the lift had reached his own floor; then he jumped quickly down, taking
care as he went to note the heavy box which lay on the floor of the lift.
A corner of it had been split open by the heavy jar, and some shining
material like sand lay in a little heap, glittering in the rays of the
electric light.

Gurdon stood there panting for a moment, and rather at a loss to know
what to do next. Once more the lift came down, this time with two boxes
of a smaller size. They vanished; and as the lift rose once again, Gurdon
had barely time to hide himself behind the bedroom door, and thus escape
the observation of two men who now occupied the cage. He just caught a
fleeting glimpse of them, and saw that one was an absolute stranger, but
he felt his heart beating slightly faster as he recognised in the other
the now familiar form of Mark Fenwick. The mystery was beginning to
unfold itself.

"That was a close thing," Gurdon muttered, as he wiped his hot face. "I
think I had better go back to my own room, and wait developments. One
can't be too careful."

The lift-boy was still sleeping on the bed; but his features were
twitching, as if already the drug was beginning to lose its effect. At
least, so Gurdon shrewdly thought, and subsequent events proved that he
was not far wrong. He was standing in his own room now, waiting by the
ventilator, when he heard the sound of footsteps on the other side of the
wall. Two men had entered the room, and by taking a little risk, Gurdon
could see that they were examining the unconscious boy coolly and
critically.

"I should think about five minutes more would do it," one of them said.
"Better carry him out, and shove him in that little sentry box of his.
When he comes to himself again he won't know but what he has fallen
asleep; barring a headache, the little beggar won't be any the worse for
the adventure."

"Have we got all the stuff up now?" the other man asked.

"Every bit of it," was the whispered reply. "I hope the old man is
satisfied now. It was not a bad idea of his to work this little game in a
great hotel of this kind. But, all the same, it is not without risks,
and I for one should be glad to get away to that place in the country
where we are going in a week or two."

Gurdon heard no more. He allowed the best part of half-an-hour to pass
before he ventured once more to creep through the ventilator and reach
the landing in the neighborhood of the lift. Everything looked quite
normal now, and as if nothing had happened. The lift boy sat in his
little hut, yawning and stretching himself. It was quite evident that he
knew nothing of the vile uses he had been put to. A sudden idea occurred
to Gurdon.

"I want you to bring the lift up to this floor," he said to the boy. "No,
I don't want to use it; I have lost something, and it occurs to me that I
might have left it in the lift."

In the usual unconcerned manner of his class the boy touched an electric
button, and the lift slowly rose from the basement.

"Does this go right down to the cellars?" Gurdon asked.

"It can if it's wanted to," the boy replied. "Only it very seldom does.
You see, we only use this lift for our customers. It's fitted with what
they call a pneumatic cushion--I mean, if anything goes wrong, the lift
falls into a funnel shaped well, made of concrete, which forms a cushion
of air, and so breaks the fall. They say you could cut the rope and let
it down without so much as upsetting a glass of water. Not that I should
like to try it, sir, but there you are."

Gurdon entered the lift, where he pretended to be searching for something
for a moment or two. In reality, he was scraping up some of the yellow
sand which had fallen from the box to the floor of the lift, and this he
proceeded to place in a scrap of paper. Then he decided that it was
absolutely necessary to retire to bed, though he was still in full
possession of his waking faculties. As a matter of fact, he was asleep
almost as soon as his head touched the pillow. Nevertheless, he was up
early the following morning, and in Venner's bedroom long before
breakfast. He had an exciting story to tell, and he could not complain
that in Venner he had anything but an interested listener.

"We are getting on," the latter said grimly. "But before you say anything
more, I should like to have a look at that yellow sand you speak of.
Bring it over near the light."

Venner let the yellow stuff trickle through his hands; then he turned to
Gurdon with a smile.

"You look upon this as refuse, I suppose?" he said. "You seem to imagine
that it is of no great value."

"Well, is it?" Gurdon asked. "What is it?"

"Gold," Venner said curtly. "Pure virgin gold, of the very finest
quality. I never saw a better sample."


CHAPTER V

A PUZZLE FOR VENNER


Venner sat just for a moment or two with the thin stream trickling
through his fingers, and wondering what it all meant. With his superior
knowledge of past events, he could see in this something that it was
impossible for Gurdon to follow.

"I suppose this is some of the gold from the Four Finger Mine?" Gurdon
suggested. "Do you know, I have never handled any virgin gold before. I
had an idea that it was more brilliant and glittering. Is this very
good stuff?"

"Absolutely pure, I should say," Venner replied. "There are two ways of
gold mining. One is by crushing quartz in machinery, as they do in South
Africa, and the other is by obtaining the metal in what are called
pockets or placers. This is the way in which it is generally found in
Australia and Mexico. I should not be in the least surprised if this came
from the Four Finger Mine."

"There is no reason why it shouldn't," Gurdon said. "It is pretty
evident, from what you told me last night, that Mark Fenwick has
discovered the mysterious treasure house, but that does not account for
all these proceedings. Why should he have taken all the trouble he did
last night, when he might just as well have brought the stuff in, and
taken the other boxes out by the front door?"

"That is what we have to find out," Venner said. "That fellow may call
himself a millionaire, but I believe he is nothing more nor less than a
desperate adventurer."

Gurdon nodded his assent. There must have been something very urgent to
compel Mark Fenwick to adopt such methods. Why was he so strangely
anxious to conceal the knowledge that he was receiving boxes of pure gold
in the hotel, and that he was sending out something of equal value?
However carefully the thing might have been planned the drugging of lift
attendants must have been attended with considerable risk. And the
slightest accident would have brought about a revelation. As it was,
everything seemed to have passed off smoothly, except for the chance by
which Gurdon had stumbled on the mystery.

"We can't leave the thing here," the latter said. "For once in my life I
am going to turn amateur detective. I have made up my mind to get into
Fenwick's suite of rooms and see what is going on there. Of course, the
thing will take time, and will have to be carefully planned. Do you think
it is possible for us to make use of your wife in this matter?"

"I don't think so," Venner said thoughtfully.

"In the first place, I don't much like the idea; and in the second, I
am entirely at a loss to know what mysterious hold Mark Fenwick has on
Vera. As I told you last night, she left me within a very short time of
our marriage, and until a few hours ago I had never looked upon her
again. Something terrible must have happened, or she would never have
deserted me in the way she did. I don't for a moment believe that Mark
Fenwick knew anything about our marriage, but on that point I cannot be
absolutely certain. You had better come back to me later in the day, and
I will see what I can do. It is just possible that good fortune may be
on my side."

The afternoon was dragging on, and still Venner was no nearer to a
practical scheme which would enable him to make an examination of
Fenwick's rooms without the chance of discovery. He was lounging in the
hall, smoking innumerable cigarettes, when Fenwick himself came down the
stairs. Obviously the man was going on a journey, for he was closely
muffled up in a big fur coat, and behind him came a servant, carrying two
bags and a railway rug. It was a little gloomy in the lobby, so Venner
was enabled to watch what was going on without being seen himself. He did
not fail to note a certain strained anxiety that rested on Fenwick's
face. The man looked behind him once or twice, as if half afraid of being
followed. Venner had seen that same furtive air in men who are wanted by
the police. Fenwick stopped at the office and handed a couple of keys to
the clerk. His instructions were quite audible to Venner.

"I shan't want those for a day or two," he said. "You will see that no
one has them under any pretext. Probably, I shall be back by Saturday at
the latest."

Venner did not scruple to follow Fenwick's disappearing figure as far as
the street. He was anxious to obtain a clue to Fenwick's destination.
Straining his ears, he just managed to catch the words "Charing Cross,"
and then returned to the hall, by no means dissatisfied. Obviously,
Fenwick was intending to cross the Channel for a day or two, and he had
said to the clerk that he would not be back before Saturday.

Here was something like a chance at last. Very slowly and thoughtfully,
Venner went up the stairs in the direction of his own room. He had
ascertained by this time that one part of Fenwick's suite was immediately
over his own bedroom. His idea now was to walk up to the next floor, and
make a close examination of the rooms there. It did not take him long to
discover the fact that Fenwick's suite was self contained, like a flat.
That is to say, a strong outer door once locked made communication with
the suite of rooms impossible. Venner was still pondering over his
problem when the master door opened, and Vera came out so hurriedly as
almost to fall into Venner's arms. She turned pale as she saw him; and as
she closed the big door hurriedly behind her, Venner could see that she
had in her hand the tiny Yale key which gave entrance to the suite of
rooms. The girl looked distressed and embarrassed, but not much more so
than Venner, who was feeling not a little guilty.

But all this was lost upon Vera; her own agitation and her own
unhappiness seemed to have blinded her to everything else.

"What are you doing here?" she stammered.

"Perhaps I am looking for you," Venner said. He had quite recovered
himself by this time. "I was in the lobby just now, when I saw that
scoundrel, Fenwick, go out. He is not coming back for a day or two, I
understand."

"No," Vera said with accents of evident relief. "He is gone, but I don't
know where he is gone. He never tells me."

Just for a moment Venner looked somewhat sternly at his companion. Here
was an opportunity for an explanation too good to be lost.

"There is a little alcove at the end of the corridor," he said. "I see it
is full of ferns and flowers. In fact, the very place for a confidence.
Vera, whether you like it or not, I am going to have an explanation."

The girl shrank back, and every vestige of color faded from her face.
Yet at the same time, the pleading, imploring eyes which she turned upon
her companion's face were filled with the deepest affection. Badly as he
had been treated, Venner could not doubt for a moment the sincerity of
the woman who had become his wife. But he did not fail to realise that
few men would have put up with conduct like this, however much in love
they might have been. Therefore, the hand that he laid on Vera's arm was
strong and firm, and she made no resistance as he led her in the
direction of the little alcove.

"Now," he said. "Are you going to tell me why you left me so mysteriously
on our wedding day? You merely went to change your dress, and you never
returned. Am I to understand that at the very last moment you learned
something that made it absolutely necessary for us to part? Do you really
mean that?"

"Indeed, I do, Gerald," the girl said. "There was a letter waiting for me
in my bedroom. It was a short letter, but long enough to wreck my
happiness for all time."

"No, no," Venner cried; "not for all time. You asked me to trust you
absolutely and implicitly, and I have done so. I believe every word that
you say, and I am prepared to wait patiently enough till the good time
comes. But I am not going to sit down quietly like this and see a pure
life like yours wrecked for the sake of such a scoundrel as Fenwick.
Surely it is not for his sake that you--"

"Oh, no," the girl cried. "My sacrifice is not for his sake at all, but
for that of another whose life is bound up with his in the strangest
possible way. When you first met me, Gerald, and asked me to be your
wife, you did not display the faintest curiosity as to my past history.
Why was that?"

"Why should I?" Venner demanded. "I am my own master, I have more money
than I know what to do with and I have practically no relations to
consider. You were all-sufficient for me; I loved you for your own sake
alone; I cared nothing, and I care nothing still for your past. What I
want to know is, how long this is going on?"

"That I cannot tell you," Vera said sadly. "You must go on trusting me,
dear. You must--"

The speaker broke off suddenly, as someone in the corridor called her
name. She slipped away from Venner's side, and, looking through the palms
and flowers, he could see that she was talking eagerly to a woman who had
the appearance of a lady's maid. Venner could not fail to note the calm
strength of the woman's face. It was only for a moment; then Vera came
back with a telegram in her hand.

"I must go at once," she said. "It is something of great importance. I
don't know when I shall see you again--"

"I do," Venner said grimly. "You are going to dine with me to-night.
Come just for once; let us imagine we are on our honeymoon. That
blackguard Fenwick is away, and he will be none the wiser. Now, I want
you to promise me."

"I really can't," Vera protested. "If you only knew the danger--"

However, Venner's persistency got its own way. A moment later Vera was
hurrying down the corridor. It was not until she was out of sight that
Venner found that she had gone away, leaving the little Yale key behind
her on the table. He thrilled at the sight of it. Here was the
opportunity for which he had been waiting.

Not more than ten minutes had elapsed when, thanks to the use of the
telephone, Gurdon had reached the Grand Empire Hotel. In a few hurried
words, Venner gave him a brief outline of what had happened. There was no
time to lose.

"Of course, it is a risk," Venner said, "and I am not altogether sure
that I am justified in taking advantage of this little slip on the part
of my wife. What do you think?"

"I think you are talking a lot of rot," Gurdon said emphatically. "You
love the girl, you believe implicitly in her, and you are desperately
anxious to get her out of the hands of that blackguard, Fenwick. From
some morbid idea of self sacrifice, your wife continues to lead this life
of misery rather than betray what she would probably call a trust. It
seems to me that you would be more than foolish to hesitate longer."

"Come along, then," Venner said. "Let's see what we can do."

The key was in the lock at length, and the big door thrown open,
disclosing a luxurious suite of rooms beyond. So far as the explorers
could see at present, they had the place entirely to themselves. No
doubt Fenwick's servants had taken advantage of his absence to make a
holiday. For the most part, the rooms presented nothing out of the
common; they might have been inhabited by anybody possessing large
means. In one of the rooms stood a desk, carefully locked, and by its
side a fireproof safe.

"No chance of getting into either of those," Gurdon said. "Besides, the
attempt would be too risky. Don't you notice a peculiar noise going on?
Sounds almost like machinery."

Surely enough, from a distant apartment there came a peculiar click and
rumble, followed by a whirr of wheels, as if someone was running out a
small motor close by. At the same time, the two friends noticed the
unmistakable odor of petrol on the atmosphere.

"What the dickens can that be?" Gurdon said. "Its most assuredly in the
flat, and not far off, either."

"The only way to find out is to go and see," Venner replied. "I fancy
this is the way."

They came at length to a small room at the end of a long corridor. It
was evidently from this room that the sound of machinery came, for the
nearer they came the louder it grew. The door was slightly ajar, and
looking in, the friends could see two men, evidently engaged on some
mechanical task. There was a fire of charcoal in the grate, and attached
to it a pair of small but powerful bellows, driven by a small motor. In
the heart of the fire was a metal crucible, so white and dazzling hot
that it was almost impossible for the eye to look upon it. Venner did not
fail to notice that the men engaged in this mysterious occupation were
masked; at least, they wore exceedingly large smoked spectacles, which
came to much the same thing. Behind them stood another man, who had every
appearance of being a master workman. He had a short pipe in his mouth, a
pair of slippers on his feet, and his somewhat expansive body was swathed
in a frock coat. Presently he made a sign, and with the aid of a long
pair of tongs, the white hot crucible was lifted from the fire. It was
impossible for the two men outside to see what became of it, but
evidently the foreman was satisfied with the experiment, for he gave a
grunt of approval.

"I think that will do," he muttered. "The impression is excellent.
Now, you fellows can take a rest whilst I go off and finish the other
lot of stuff."

"He's coming out," Venner whispered. "Let us make a bolt for it. It
won't do to be caught here."

They darted down the corridor together, and stood in an angle of a
doorway, a little undecided as to what to do next. The man in the frock
coat passed them, carrying under one arm a square case, that bore some
resemblance to the slide in which photographers slip their negatives
after taking a photograph. The man in the frock coat placed his burden on
a chair, and then, apparently, hurried back for something he had
forgotten.

"Here is our chance," Gurdon whispered. "Let's see what is in that case.
There may be an important clue here."

The thing was done rapidly and neatly. Inside the case, between layers of
cotton wool, lay a great number of gold coins, obviously sovereigns. They
appeared to be in a fine state of preservation, for they glistened in the
light like new gold.

"Put one in your pocket," whispered Venner.

"I'm afraid we are going to have our journey for our pains; but still,
you can't tell. Better take two while you are about it."

Gurdon slipped the coins into his pocket, then turned away in the
direction of the door as the man in the frock coat came back,
thoughtfully whistling, as if to give the intruders a chance of escape.
Before he appeared in sight the outer door closed softly, and Venner and
Gurdon were in the corridor once more.


CHAPTER VI

A PARTIAL FAILURE


"Do you notice anything peculiar about these coins?" Venner said, when
once more they were back in the comparative seclusion of the
smoking-room. "Have a good look at them."

Gurdon complied; he turned the coins over in his hand and weighed them on
his fingers. So far as he could see they were good, honest, British
coins, each well worth the twenty shillings which they were supposed to
represent.

"I don't see anything peculiar about them at all," he said. "So far as I
can judge, they appear to be genuine enough. At first I began to think
that our friend Fenwick had turned coiner. Look at this."

As he spoke Gurdon dashed the coin down upon a marble table. It rang true
and clear.

"I'd give a pound for it," he said. "The weight in itself is a good test.
No coiner yet has ever discovered a metal that will weigh like gold and
ring as true. The only strange thing about the coin is that it is in such
a wonderful state of preservation. It might have come out of the Mint
yesterday. I am afraid we shall have to abandon the idea of laying
Fenwick by the heels on the charge of making counterfeit money. I'll
swear this is genuine."

"I am of the same opinion, too," Venner said. "I have handled too much
gold in my time to be easily deceived. Still, there is something wrong
here, and I'll tell you why. Look at those two coins again, and tell me
the dates on them."

"That is very easily done. One is dated 1901 and the other is dated 1899.
I don't see that you gain anything by pointing out that fact to me. I
don't see what you are driving at."

"Well the thing is pretty clear. It would be less clear if those coins
had been worn by use and circulation. But they are both of them Mint
perfect, and they are of different dates. Do you suppose that our friend
Fenwick makes a hobby of collecting English sovereigns? Besides, the man
in the frock coat was going to do something with these coins; and, of
course, you noticed how carefully they were wrapped up in cotton wool."

"I should like to make assurance doubly sure," Gurdon said. "Let's
take these two coins to some silversmith's shop and ask if they are
all right."

It was no far journey to the nearest silversmiths, where the coins were
cut up, tested, and weighed. The assistant smiled as he handed the pieces
back to Venner.

"We will give you eighteen and sixpence each for them, sir," he said,
"which is about the intrinsic value of a sovereign; and, as you are
probably aware, sir, English gold coinage contains a certain amount of
alloy, without which it would speedily deteriorate in circulation, just
as the old guinea used to; but there is no doubt that I have just lost
you three shillings by cutting up those coins."

Venner smiled as he left the shop. As a matter of fact, he was a little
more puzzled now than he had been before. He had expected to find
something wrong with the two coins.

"We must suspend judgment for the present," he said. "Still, I feel
absolutely certain that there is some trick here, though what the
scheme is I am utterly at a loss to know. Will you come in this evening
after dinner and take your coffee and cigar with me? My wife is dining
with me, but it was an express stipulation that she should go directly
dinner is over."

At a little after seven Venner was impatiently waiting the coming of
Vera. He was not altogether sorry to notice that the dining-room was
filling up more rapidly than it had done for some days past. Perhaps, on
the whole, there would be safety in numbers. Venner had secured a little
table for two on the far side of the room, and he stood in the doorway
now, waiting somewhat restlessly and impatiently for Vera to appear. He
was not a little anxious and nervous in case something should happen at
the last moment to prevent his wife's appearance. As a rule, Venner was
not a man who was troubled much with nerves, though he became conscious
of the fact that he possessed them to-night.

Was ever a man so strangely placed as himself, he wondered? He marvelled,
too, that he could sit down so patiently without asserting his rights. He
was the possessor of ample means, and if money stood in the way he was
quite prepared to pay Fenwick his price.

On these somewhat painful meditations Vera intruded. She was simply
dressed in white, and had no ornaments beyond a few flowers. Her face was
flushed now, and there was in her eyes a look of something that
approached happiness.

"I am so glad you have come, dear," Venner said, as he pressed the girl's
hand. "I was terribly afraid that something might come in the way. If
there is any danger--"

"I don't think there is any danger," Vera whispered, "though there are
other eyes on me besides those of Mark Fenwick. But, all the same, I am
not supposed to know anybody in the hotel, and I come down to dinner as a
matter of course, I am glad the place is so crowded, Gerald, it will make
us less conspicuous. But it is just possible that I may have to go before
dinner is over. If that is so, I hope you will not be annoyed with me."

"You have given me cause for greater annoyance than that," Venner smiled.
"And I have borne it all uncomplainingly. And now let us forget the
unhappy past, and try and live for the present. We are on our honeymoon,
you understand. I wonder what people in this room would say if they heard
our amazing story."

"I have no doubt there are other stories just as sad here," Vera said, as
she took her place at the table. "But I am not going to allow myself to
be miserable to-night. We are going to forget everything; we are going to
believe that this is Fairyland, and that you are the Prince who--"

Despite her assumed gaiety there was just a little catch in Vera's voice.
If Venner noticed it he did not appear to do so. For the next hour or so
he meant resolutely to put the past out of his mind, and give himself
over to the ecstasy of the moment.... All too soon the dinner came to an
end, and Gurdon appeared.

"This is my wife," Venner said simply. "Dear, Mr. Gurdon is a very old
friend of mine, and I have practically no secrets from him. All the same,
he did not know till last night that I was married--until you came into
the room and my feelings got the better of me. But we can trust Gurdon."

"I think I am to be relied upon," Gurdon said with a smile. "You will
pardon me if I say that I never heard a stranger story than yours; and if
at any time I can be of assistance to you, I shall be sincerely happy to
do all that is in my power."

"You are very good," Vera said gratefully. "Who knows how soon I may
call upon you to fulfil your promise? But I am afraid that it will not be
quite yet."

They sat chatting there for some half an hour longer, when a waiter came
in, and advancing to their table proffered Vera a visiting card, on the
back of which a few words had been scribbled. The girl looked a little
anxious and distressed as her eyes ran over the writing on the card. Then
she rose hurriedly.

"I am afraid I shall have to go," she said. "I have been anticipating
this for some little time."

She turned to the waiter, and asked if her maid was outside, to which the
man responded that it was the maid who had brought the card, and that she
was waiting with her wraps in the corridor. Vera extended her hand to
Gurdon as she rose to go.

"I am exceedingly sorry," she said. "This has been a pleasant evening for
me: perhaps the most pleasant evening with one exception that I ever
spent in my life. Gerald will know what evening I mean."

As she finished she smiled tenderly at Venner. He had no words in reply.
Just at that moment he was filled with passionate and rebellious anger.
He dared not trust himself to speak, conscious as he was that Vera's
burden was already almost more than she could bear. She held out her hand
to him with an imploring little gesture, as if she understood exactly
what was passing in his mind.

"You will forgive me," she whispered. "I am sure you will forgive me. It
is nothing but duty which compels me to go. I would far rather stay here
and be happy."

Venner took the extended hand and pressed it tenderly. His yearning eyes
looked after the retreating figure; then, suddenly, he turned to Gurdon,
who affected to be busy over a cigar.

"I want you to do something for me," he said. "It is a strange fancy,
but I should like you to follow her. I suppose I am beginning to get
old and nervous; at any rate, I am full of silly fancies tonight. I am
possessed with the idea that my unhappy little girl is thrusting
herself into some danger. You can quite see how impossible it is for me
to dog her footsteps, but your case is different. Of course, if you
like to refuse--"

"I am not going to refuse," Gurdon said. "I can see nothing dishonorable.
I'll go at once, if you like."

Venner nodded curtly, and Gurdon rose from the table. He passed out into
the street just as the slim figure of Vera was descending the steps of
the hotel. He had no difficulty in recognising her outline, though she
was clad from head to foot now in a long, black wrap, and her fair hair
was disguised under a hood of the same material. Rather to Gurdon's
surprise, the girl had not called a cab. She was walking down the street
with a firm, determined step, as of one who knew exactly where she was
going, and meant to get there in as short a time as possible.

Gurdon followed cautiously at a distance. He was not altogether satisfied
in his own mind that his action was quite as straightforward as it might
have been. Still, he had given his promise, and he was not inclined to
back out of it now. For about a quarter of an hour he followed, until
Vera at length halted before a house somewhere in the neighborhood of
Grosvenor Square. It was a fine, large corner mansion, but so far as
Gurdon could see there was not a light in the place from parapet to
basement. He could see Vera going up the steps; he was close enough to
hear the sound of an electric bell; then a light blazed in the hall, and
the door was opened. So far as Gurdon could see, it was an old man who
opened the door; an old man with a long, grey beard, and a face lined and
scored with the ravages of time. All this happened in an instant. The
door was closed again, and the whole house left in darkness.

Gurdon paused, a little uncertain as to what to do next. He would have
liked, if possible, to be a little closer to Vera, for if there were any
dangers threatening her he would be just as powerless to help now as if
he had been in another part of the town. He walked slowly down the side
of the house, and noted that there was a line garden behind, and a small
green door leading to the lane. Acting on the impulse of the moment he
tried the door, which yielded to his touch. If he had been asked why he
did this thing he would have found it exceedingly difficult to reply.
Still, the thing was done, and Gurdon walked forward over the wide
expanse of lawn till he could make out at length a row of windows,
looking out from the back of the house. It was not so very easy to
discern all this, for the night was dark, and the back of the house
darker still. Presently a light flared out in one of the rooms, and then
Gurdon could make out the dome of a large conservatory leading from the
garden to the house.

"I shall find myself in the hands of the police, if I don't take care,"
Gurdon said to himself. "What an ass I am to embark on an adventure like
this. It isn't as if I had the slightest chance of being of any use to
the girl, seeing that I--"

He broke off, suddenly conscious of the fact that another of the rooms
was lighted now--a large one, by the side of the conservatory. In the
silence of the garden it seemed to him that he could hear voices raised
angrily, and then a cry, as if of pain, from somebody inside.

Fairly interested at last, Gurdon advanced till he was close to the
window. He could hear no more now, for the same tense silence had
fallen over the place once more. Gurdon pressed close to the window; he
felt something yield beneath his feet, and the next moment he had
plunged headlong into the darkness of something that suggested an
underground cellar. Perhaps he had been standing unconsciously on a
grating that was none too safe, for now he felt himself bruised and half
stunned, lying on his back on a cold, hard floor, amid a mass of broken
glass and rusty ironwork.

Startled and surprised as he was, the noise of the breaking glass sounded
in Gurdon's ears like the din of some earthquake. He struggled to his
feet, hoping that the gods would be kind to him, and that he could get
away before his presence there was discovered. He was still dazed and
confused; his head ached painfully, and he groped in the pitch darkness
without any prospect of escape. He could nowhere find an avenue. So far
as he could judge, he was absolutely caught like a rat in a trap.

He half smiled to himself; he was still too dazed to grasp the
significance of his position, when a light suddenly appeared overhead, at
the top of a flight of stairs, and a hoarse voice demanded to know who
was there. In the same dreamy kind of way, Gurdon was just conscious of
the fact that a strong pair of arms lifted him from the floor, and that
he was being carried up the steps. In the same dreamy fashion, he was
cognisant of light and warmth, a luxurious atmosphere, and rows upon
rows of beautiful flowers everywhere. He would, no doubt, awake
presently, and find that the whole thing was a dream. Meanwhile, there
was nothing visionary about the glass of brandy which somebody had put to
his lips, or about the hands which were brushing him down and removing
all traces of his recent adventure.

"When you feel quite up to it, sir," a quiet, respectful voice said, "my
master would like to see you. He is naturally curious enough to know what
you were doing in the garden."

"I am afraid your master must have his own way," Gurdon said grimly. "I
am feeling pretty well now, thanks to the brandy. If you will take me to
your master, I will try to explain matters."

The servant led the way into a large, handsome apartment, where a man in
evening dress was seated in a big armchair before the fire. He looked
round with a peculiar smile as Gurdon came in.

"Well, sir," he said. "And what does this mean?"

Gurdon had no voice to reply, for the man in the armchair was the
handsome cripple--the hero of the forefinger.


CHAPTER VII

THE WHITE LADY


Gurdon looked hopelessly about him, utterly at a loss for anything to
say. The whole thing had been so unexpected, so very opposite to the
commonplace ending he had anticipated, that he was too dazed and
confused to do anything but smile in an inane and foolish manner. He had
rather looked forward to seeing some eccentric individual, some elderly
recluse who lived there with a servant or two. And here he was, face to
face with the man who, at the present moment, was to him the most
interesting in London.

"You can take your time," the cripple said. "I am anxious for you to
believe that I am not in the least hurry. The point of the problem is
this: a well dressed man, evidently a gentleman, is discovered at a late
hour in the evening in my cellar. As the gentleman in question is
obviously sober, one naturally feels a little curiosity as to what it
all means."

The speaker spoke quite slowly and clearly, and with a sarcastic emphasis
that caused Gurdon to writhe impotently. Every word and gesture on the
part of the cripple spoke of a strong mind and a clear intellect in that
twisted body. Despite the playful acidity of his words, there was a
distinct threat underlying them. It occurred to Gurdon as he stood there
that he would much rather have this man for a friend than a foe.

"Perhaps you had better take a seat," the cripple said. "There is plenty
of time, and I don't mind confessing to you that this little comedy
amuses me. Heaven knows, I have little enough amusement in my dreary
life; and, therefore, in a measure, you have earned my gratitude. But
there is another side to the picture. I have enemies who are utterly
unscrupulous. I have to be unscrupulous in my turn, so that when I have
the opportunity of laying one of them by the heels, my methods are apt to
be thorough. Did you come here alone to-night, or have you an
accomplice?"

"Assuredly, I came alone," Gurdon replied.

"Oh, indeed. You found your way into the garden. To argue out the thing
logically, we will take it for granted that you had no intention whatever
of paying a visit to my garden when you left home. If such had been your
intention, you would not be wearing evening dress, and thin, patent
leather shoes. Your visit to the garden was either a resolution taken on
the spur of the moment, or was determined upon after a certain discovery.
I am glad to hear that you came here entirely by yourself."

There was an unmistakable threat in these latter words; and as Gurdon
looked up he saw that the cripple was regarding him with an intense
malignity. The grey eyes were cold and merciless, the handsome face hard
and set, and yet it was not a countenance which one usually associates
with the madman or the criminal. Really, it was a very noble face--the
face of a philanthropist, a poet, a great statesman, who devotes his
money and his talents to the interests of his country. Despite a feeling
of danger, Gurdon could not help making a mental note of these things.

"Won't you sit down?" the cripple asked again. "I should like to have a
little chat with you. Here are whisky and soda, and some cigars, for the
excellence of which I can vouch, as I import them myself. Perhaps, also,
you share with me a love of flowers?"

With a wave of his strong arm, the speaker indicated the wealth of
blossoms which arose from all sides of the room. There were flowers
everywhere. The luxuriant blooms seemed to overpower and dwarf the
handsome furnishings of the room. At the far end, folding doors
opened into the conservatory, which was a veritable mass of brilliant
colors. The cripple smiled upon his blossoms, as a mother might smile
on her child.

"These are the only friends who never deceive you," he said. "Flowers and
dogs, and, perhaps, little children. I know this, because I have
suffered from contact with the world, as, perhaps, you will notice when
you regard this poor body of mine. I think you said just now you came
here entirely by yourself."

"That is a fact," Gurdon replied. He was beginning to feel a little more
at his ease now. "Let me hasten to assure you that I came here with no
felonious intent at all. I was looking for somebody, and I thought that
my friend came here. You will pardon me if I do not explain with any
amount of detail, because the thing does not concern myself altogether.
And, besides--"

Gurdon paused; he could not possibly tell this stranger of the startling
events which had led to his present awkward situation. In any case, he
would not have been believed.

"We need not go into that," the cripple said. "It is all by the way. You
came here alone; and, I take it, when you left your home, you had not the
slightest intention of coming here. To make my meaning a little more
clear, if you disappeared from this moment, and your friends never saw
you again, the police would not have the slightest clue to your
whereabouts."

Gurdon laughed just a little uneasily; he began to entertain the idea
that he was face to face with some dangerous lunatic, some man whose
dreadful troubles and misfortunes had turned him against the world.
Evidently, it would be the right policy to humor him.

"That is quite correct," he said. "Nobody has the least idea where I am;
and if the unpleasant contingency you allude to happened to me, I should
go down to posterity as one of the victims of the mysterious type of
crime that startles London now and again."

"I should think," said the stranger, in a thin, dry tone, that caused
Gurdon's pulses to beat a little faster--"I should think that your
prophecy is in a fair way to turn out correct. I don't ask you why you
came here, because you would not tell me if I did. But you must have been
spying on the place, or you would not have had the misfortune to tread on
a damaged grating, and finish your adventure ignominiously in the cellar.
As I told you just now, I have enemies who are absolutely unscrupulous,
and who would give much for a chance of murdering me if the thing could
be done with impunity. Common sense prompts me to take it for granted
that you are in some wry connected with the foes to whom I have alluded."

"I assure you, I am not," Gurdon protested. "I am the enemy of no man. I
came here to night--"

Gurdon stopped in some confusion. How could he possibly tell this man why
he had come and what he had in his mind? The thing was awkward--almost to
the verge of absurdity.

"I quite see the quandary you are in," said the cripple, with a smile.
"Now, let me ask you a question. Do you happen to know a man by the name
of Mark Fenwick?"

The query was so straight and to the point that Gurdon fairly started.
More and more did he begin to appreciate the subtlety and cleverness of
his companion. It was impossible to fence the interrogation; it had to be
answered, one way or the other.

"I know the man by sight," he said; "but I beg to assure you that until
last night I had never seen him."

"That may be," the cripple said drily. "But you know him now, and that
satisfies me. Now, listen. You see what I have in my hand. Perhaps you
are acquainted with weapons of this kind?"

So saying, the speaker wriggled in his chair, and produced from somewhere
behind him a small revolver. Despite its silver plated barrel and ivory
handle, it was a sinister looking weapon, and capable of deadly mischief
in the hands of an expert. Though no judge of such matters, it occurred
to Gurdon that his companion handled the revolver as an expert should.

"I have been used to this kind of thing from a boy," the cripple said. "I
could shoot you where you sit within a hair's breadth of where I wanted
to hit you."

"Which would be murder," Gurdon said quietly.

"Perhaps it would, in the eyes of the law; but there are times when one
is tempted to defy the mandates of a wise legislature. For instance, I
have told you more than once before that I have enemies, and everything
points to the fact that you are the tool and accomplice of some of them.
I have about me one or two faithful people, who would do anything I ask.
If I shoot you now the report of a weapon like this will hardly be
audible beyond the door. You lie there, dead, shot clean through the
brain. I ring my bell and tell my servants to clear this mess away. I
give them orders to go and bury it quietly somewhere, and they would obey
me without the slightest hesitation. Nothing more would be said. I should
be as safe from molestation as if the whole thing had happened on a
desert island. I hope I have succeeded in making the position clear,
because I should be loth to think that a little incident like this should
cause inconvenience to one who might after all have been absolutely
innocent."

The words were spoken quietly, and without the slightest trace of
passion. Still, there was no mistaking the malignity and intense fury
which underlay the well chosen and well balanced sentences.

Gurdon was silent; there was nothing for him to say. He was in a position
in which he could not possibly explain; he could only sit there, looking
into the barrel of the deadly weapon, and praying for some diversion
which might be the means of saving his life. It came presently in a
strange and totally unexpected fashion. Upon the tense, nerve-breaking
silence, a voice suddenly intruded like a flash of light in a dark place.
It was a sweet and girlish voice, singing some simple ballad, with a
natural pathos which rendered the song singularly touching and
attractive. As the voice came nearer the cripple's expression changed
entirely; his hard eyes grew soft, and the handsome features were
wreathed in a smile. Then the door opened, and the singer came in.

Gurdon looked at her, though she seemed unconscious of his presence
altogether. He saw a slight, fair girl, dressed entirely in white, with
her long hair streaming over her shoulders. The face was very sad and
wistful, the blue eyes clouded with some suggestion of trouble and
despair. Gurdon did not need a second glance to assure him that he was in
the presence of one who was mentally afflicted. She came forward and took
her place by the side of the cripple.

"They told me that you are busy," she said, "Just as if it mattered
whether you were busy or not, when I wanted to see you."

"You must go away now, Beth," the cripple said, in his softest and most
tender manner. "Don't you see that I am talking with this gentleman?"

The girl turned eagerly to Gurdon; she crossed the room with a swift,
elastic step, and laid her two hands on him.

"I know what you have come for," she said, eagerly. "You have come to
tell me all about Charles. You have found him at last; you are going to
bring him back to me. They told me he was dead, that he had perished in
the mine; but I knew better than that. I know that Charles will come back
to me again."

"What mine?" Gurdon asked.

"Why, the Four Finger Mine, of course," was the totally unexpected
reply. "They said that Charles had lost his life in the Four Finger
Mine. It was in a kind of dream that I saw his body lying there,
murdered. But I shall wake from the dream presently, and he will come
back to me, come back in the evening, as he always used to when the sun
was setting beyond the pines."

There was something so utterly sad and hopeless in this that Gurdon
averted his eyes from the girl's face. He glanced in the direction of the
door; then it required all his self control to repress a cry, for in the
comparative gloom of the passage beyond, he could just make out the
figure of Vera, who stood there with her finger on her lip as if imposing
silence. He could see that in her hand she held something that looked
like a chisel. A moment later she flitted away once more, leaving Gurdon
to puzzle his brain as to what it all meant.

"I am sorry for all this," the cripple said. "You have entirely by
accident come face to face with a phase in my life which is sacred and
inviolate. Really, if I had no other reason for reducing you to silence,
this would be a sufficiently powerful inducement. My dear Beth, I really
must ask you--"

Whatever the cripple might have intended to say, the speech was never
finished; for, at that moment, the electric lights vanished suddenly,
plunging the whole house into absolute darkness. A moment later,
footsteps came hurrying along in the hall, and a voice was heard to say
that the fuse from the meter had gone, and it would be impossible to turn
on the light again until the officials had been called in to repair the
damage. At the same moment, Gurdon rose to his feet and crept quietly in
the direction of the door. Here, at any rate, was a chance of escape, for
that his life was in dire peril he had felt for some little time. He had
hardly reached the doorway when he felt a slim hand touch his, and he was
guided from the room into the passage beyond. He could give a pretty fair
idea as to the owner of the slim fingers that trembled in his own, but he
made no remark; he allowed himself to be led on till his feet stumbled
against the stairs.

"This way," a voice whispered. "Say nothing, and make no protest. You
will be quite safe from further harm."

Gurdon did exactly as he was told. He found himself presently at the top
of a staircase, and a little later on in a room, the door of which was
closed very quietly by his guide.

"I think I can guess who I have to thank for this," Gurdon murmured. "But
why did you not take me to the front door, or the back entrance leading
to the garden? It was lucky for me that the lights failed at the critical
moment--a piece of nominal good fortune, such as usually only happens in
a story. But I should feel a great deal safer if I were on the other side
of the front door."

"That is quite impossible," Vera said, for it was she who had come to
Gurdon's rescue. "Both doors are locked, and all the rooms on the
ground floor are furnished with shutters. As to the light going out, I
am responsible for it. I learned all about the electric light when I
lived in a mining camp in Mexico. I had only to remove one of the lamps
and apply my chisel to the two poles, and thereby put out every fuse in
the house. That is why the light failed, for it occurred to me that in
the confusion that followed the darkness, I should be in a position to
save you. But you little realise how near you have been to death
to-night. And, why, oh, why did you follow me in this way? It was very
wrong of you."

"It was Venner's idea," Gurdon said. "He had a strange fear that you were
going into some danger. He asked me to follow you, and I did so. As to
the manner of my getting here--"

"I know all about that," Vera said hurriedly. "I have been listening to
your conversation. I dare say you are curious to know something more
about this strange household; but, for the present, you will be far
better employed in getting away from it. I shall not be easy in my mind
till you are once more in the street."


CHAPTER VIII

MISSING


Gurdon waited to hear what his companion was going to say now. He had
made up his mind to place himself implicitly in her hands, and let her
decide for the best. Evidently, he had found himself in a kind of lunatic
asylum, where one inhabitant at least had developed a dangerous form of
homicidal mania, and he had a pretty sure conclusion that Vera had saved
his life. It was no time now to ask questions; that would come later on.

"I am sure I am awfully grateful to you," Gurdon said. "Who are these
people, and why do they behave in this insane fashion? This is not
exactly the kind of menage one expects to find in one of the best
appointed mansions in the West End."

"I can tell you nothing about it," Vera said. There was a marked coldness
in her voice that told Gurdon he was going too far. "I can tell you
nothing. One thing you may rest assured of--I am in no kind of danger,
nor am I likely to be. My concern chiefly at the present moment is with
you. I want you to get back as soon as you can to the Great Empire Hotel,
and ease Gerald's mind as to myself."

"I hardly like to go, without you," Gurdon murmured.

"But you must," Vera protested. "Let me assure you once more that I am as
absolutely safe here as if I were in my own room. Now, come this way. I
dare not strike a light. I can only take you by the hand and lead you to
the top of the house. Every inch of the place is perfectly familiar to
me, and you are not likely to come to the least harm. Please don't waste
a moment more of your time."

Gurdon yielded against his better judgment. A moment or two later, he
found himself climbing through a skylight on to the flat leads at the
top of the house. By the light of the town he could now see what he
was doing, and pretty well where he was. From the leads he could look
down into the garden, though, as yet, he could not discern any avenue
of escape.

"The thing is quite easy," Vera explained. "The late occupant of the
house had a nervous dread of fire, and from every floor he had a series
of rope ladders arranged. See, there is one fixed to this chimney. I have
only to throw it over, and you can reach the garden without delay; then I
will pull the ladder up again and no one will be any the wiser. Please,
leave me without any further delay, in the absolute assurance that I
shall be back again within an hour."

A few minutes later Gurdon was in the street again, making his way back
to the hotel where Venner was waiting for him.

It was a strange story that he had to tell; a very thrilling and
interesting adventure, but one which, after all, still further
complicated the mystery and rendered it almost unintelligible.

"And you mean to say that you have been actually face to face with our
cripple friend?" Venner said. "You mean to say that he would actually
have murdered you if Vera had not interfered in that providential manner?
I suppose I must accept your assurance that she is absolutely safe,
though I can't help feeling that she has exaggerated her own position. I
am terribly anxious about her. I have an idea which I should like to
carry out. I feel tolerably sure that this picturesque cripple of ours
could tell us everything that we want to know. Besides, unless I do
something I shall go mad. What do you say to paying the interesting
cripple a visit to-morrow night, and forcing him to tell us everything?"

Gurdon shook his head; he was not particularly impressed with the
suggestion that Venner had made.

"Of course, we could get into the house easily enough," he said. "Now
that I have learned the secret of the cellar, there will be no
difficulty about that. Still, don't you think it seems rather ridiculous
to try this sort of thing when your wife is in a position to tell you
the whole thing?"

"But she would decline to do anything of the kind," Venner protested.
"She has told me that her lips are sealed; she has even no explanation to
offer for the way in which she left me within half-an-hour of our
becoming man and wife. I should almost be justified in forcing her to
speak; but, you see, I cannot do that. Therefore, I must treat her in a
way as if she were one of our enemies. I have a very strong fancy for
paying a visit to our cripple friend, and, if the worst came to the
worst, we could convince him that we are emphatically not on the side of
Mark Fenwick. At any rate, I mean to have a try, and if you don't like to
come in--"

"Oh, I'll come in fast enough," Gurdon said. "You had better meet me
to-morrow night at my rooms, say, about eleven; then, we will see what we
can do with a view to a solution of the mystery."

At the appointed time, Venner duly put in an appearance. He was clothed
in a dark suit and cap, Gurdon donning a similar costume. Under his arm
Venner had a small brown paper parcel.

"What have you got there?" Gurdon asked.

"A pair of tennis shoes," was the response. "And if you take my advice,
you should have a pair, too. My idea is to take off our boots directly we
get into the seclusion of the garden and change into these shoes. Now
come along, let's get it over."

It was an easy matter to reach the garden without being observed, and in
a very short time the two friends were standing close to the windows of
the large room at the back of the house. There was not so much as a
glimmer of light to be seen anywhere within. Very cautiously they felt
their way along until they came at length to the grating through which
Gurdon had made so dramatic an entrance on the night before. He took
from his pocket a box of vestas, and ventured to strike one. He held it
down close to the ground, shading the tiny point of flame in the hollow
of his hand.

"Here is a bit of luck to begin with," he chuckled. "They haven't
fastened this grating up again. I suppose my escape last night must have
upset them. At any rate, here is a way into the house without running the
risk of being arrested on a charge of burglary, and if the police did
catch us we should find it an exceedingly awkward matter to frame an
excuse carefully, to satisfy a magistrate."

"That seems all right," Venner said. "When we get into the cellar it's
any odds that we find the door of the stairs locked. I don't suppose the
grating has been forgotten. You see, it is not such an easy matter to get
the British workman to do a job on the spur of the moment."

"Well, come along; we will soon ascertain that," Gurdon said. "Once down
these steps, we shall be able to use our matches."

They crept cautiously down the stairs into the damp and moldy cellar;
thence, up the steps on the other side, where Gurdon lighted one of his
matches. The door was closed, but it yielded quite easily to the touch,
and at length the two men were in the part of the house which was given
over to the use of the servants. So far as they could judge the place was
absolutely deserted. Doubtless the domestic staff had retired to bed. All
the same, it seemed strange to find no signs of life in the kitchen. The
stove was cold, and though the grate was full of cinders, it was quite
apparent that no fire had been lighted there for the past four and twenty
hours. Again, there was no furniture in the kitchen other than a large
table and a couple of chairs. The dressers were empty, and the shelves
deprived of their usual burden.

"This is odd," Venner murmured. "Perhaps we shall have better luck on the
dining-room floor. I suppose we had better not turn on the lights!"

"That would be too risky," Gurdon said. "However, I have plenty of
matches, which will serve our purpose equally well."

On cautiously reaching the hall a further surprise awaited the intruders.
There was absolutely nothing there--not so much as an umbrella stand. The
marble floor was swept bare of everything, the big dining-room which the
night before had been most luxuriously furnished, was now stripped and
empty; not so much as a flower remained; and the conservatory beyond
showed nothing but wooden staging and glittering glass behind that. A
close examination of the whole house disclosed the fact that it was
absolutely empty.

"If I did not know you as well as I do," Venner said grimly, "I should
say that you had been drinking. Do you mean to tell me that you sat in
this dining-room last night, and that it was furnished in the luxurious
way you described? Do you mean to tell me that you sat here, opposite
our cripple friend, waiting for him to shoot you? Are you perfectly
certain that we have made our way into the right house? You have no
doubt on that score?"

"Of course, I haven't," Gurdon said, a little hotly. "Would there be two
houses close together, both of them with a broken grating over the
cellar? I tell you this is the same house right enough. It was just in
this particular spot I was seated when the lights went out, and your
wife's fertility of resource saved my life. It may be possible that the
electric fuses have not yet been repaired. At any rate, I'll see."

Gurdon laid his hand upon the switch and snapped it down. No light came;
the solitary illuminating point in the room was afforded by the match
which Venner held in his hand.

"There," Gurdon said, with a sort of gloomy triumph. "Doesn't that
prove it? I suppose that our cripple took alarm and has cleared out of
the house."

"That's all very well, but it is almost impossible to remove the
furniture of a great place like this in the course of a day."

"My dear chap, I don't think it has been removed in the course of a
day. Didn't you notice just now what a tremendous lot of dust we
stirred up as we were going over the house? My theory is this--only
three or four of the rooms were furnished, and the rest of the house
was closed. When I made my escape last night, the cripple must have
taken alarm and gone away from here as speedily as possible. What
renders the whole thing more inexplicable is the fact that your wife
could explain everything if she pleased. But after a check-mate like
this, I don't see the slightest reason for staying here any longer. The
best thing we can do is to get back to my rooms and discuss the matter
over a whiskey and soda and cigar. But, talking about cigars, will you
have the goodness to look at this?"

From the empty grate Gurdon picked up a half smoked cigar of a somewhat
peculiar make and shape.

"I want you to notice this little bit of evidence," he said. "This is the
very cigar that the cripple gave me last night. I can't say that I
altogether enjoyed smoking it, but it was my tip to humor him. I smoked
that much. When the white lady came in I naturally threw the end of the
cigar into the fireplace. In the face of this, I don't think you will
accuse me of dreaming."

More than one cigar was consumed before Venner left his friend's rooms,
but even the inspiration of tobacco failed to elucidate a solitary point
at issue. What had become of the cripple, and where had he vanished so
mysteriously? Gurdon was still debating this point over a late breakfast
the following morning, when Venner came in. His face was flushed and his
manner was excited. He carried a copy of an early edition of an evening
paper in his hand--the edition which is usually issued by most papers a
little after noon.

"I think I've discovered something," he said. "It was quite by accident,
but you will not fail to be interested in something that appears in the
_Comet_. It alludes to the disappearance of a gentleman called Bates, who
seems to have vanished from his house in Portsmouth Square. You know the
name of the Square, of course?"

Gurdon pushed his coffee cup away from him, and lighted a cigarette. He
felt that something of importance was coming.

"I suppose I ought to know the name of the square," he said grimly.
"Seeing that I nearly lost my life in a house there the night before
last. But please go on. I see you have something to tell me that is well
worth hearing."

"That's right," Venner said. "Most of it is in this paper. It appears
that the aforesaid Mr. Bates is a gentleman of retiring disposition, and
somewhat eccentric habits. As far as one can gather, he has no friends,
but lives quietly in Portsmouth Square, his wants being ministered to by
a body of servants who have been in his employ for years. Of necessity,
Mr. Bates is a man of wealth, or he could not possibly live in a house
the rent of which cannot be less than five or six hundred a year. As a
rule, Mr. Bates rarely leaves his house, but last night he seems to have
gone out unattended, and since then, he has not been seen."

"Stop a moment," Gurdon exclaimed eagerly. "I am beginning to see
daylight at last. What was the number of the house where this Bates
lived? I mean the number of the square."

Venner turned to his paper, and ran his eye down the printed column. Then
he smiled as he spoke.

"The number of the house," he said, "is 75."

"I knew it," Gurdon said excitedly. "I felt pretty certain of it. The man
who has disappeared lived at No. 75, and the place where we had our
adventure, or rather, I had my adventure, is No. 74. Now, tell me, who
was it who informed the police of the disappearance of Mr. Bates? Some
servant, I suppose?"

"Of course; and the servant goes on to suggest that Mr. Bates had
mysterious enemies, who caused him considerable trouble from time to
time. But now I come to the interesting part of my story. At the foot of
the narrative which is contained in the _Comet_, that I hold in my hand,
is a full description of Mr. Bates."

"Go on," Gurdon said breathlessly. "I should be little less than an idiot
if I did not know what was coming."

"I thought you would guess," Venner said. "A name like Bates implies
middle age and respectability. But this Bates is described as being young
and exceedingly good looking. Moreover, he is afflicted with a kind of
paralysis, which renders his movements slow and uncertain. And now you
know all about it. There is not the slightest doubt that this missing
Bates is no other than our interesting friend, the good-looking cripple.
The only point which leaves us in doubt is the fact that Mr. Bates is a
respectable householder, living at 75, Portsmouth Square, while the man
who tried to murder you entertained you at No. 74, which house, now, is
absolutely empty. We need not discuss that puzzle at the present moment,
because there are more important things to occupy our attention. There
can be no doubt that this man who calls himself Bates has been kidnapped
by somebody. You will not have much difficulty in guessing the name of
the culprit."

"I guess it at once," Gurdon said. "If I mention the name of Mark
Fenwick, I think I have said the last word."


CHAPTER IX

A NEW PHASE


There was not the slightest doubt that Gurdon had hit the mark. As far as
they could see at present, the man most likely to benefit by the death or
disappearance of the cripple was Mark Fenwick. Still, it was impossible
to dismiss the thing in this casual way, nor could it be forgotten that
the cripple had actually been present at the Grand Empire Hotel on the
night when the alleged millionaire received his message by means of the
mummified finger. Therefore, logically speaking, it was only fair to
infer that on the night in question Fenwick had not been acquainted with
the personality of the cripple. Otherwise, the latter would have scarcely
ventured to show himself in a place where his experiment had been brought
to a conclusion.

On the other hand, it was just possible that Fenwick had been looking for
the cripple for some time past. But all this was more or less in the air,
though there was a great deal to be said for the conclusion at which the
two friends had arrived.

"I work it out like this," Venner said, after a long, thoughtful pause.
"You know all about the Four Finger Mine; you know exactly what happened
to the Dutchman Van Fort after the murder of Le Fenu. It will be fresh in
your recollection how, by some mysterious agency, the fingers of the
Dutchman were conveyed to his wife, though he himself was never seen
again. It is quite fair to infer that Fenwick has contrived to get hold
of the same mine, though that dangerous property does not seem to have
harmed him as much as it did the other thief. Still, we know that he has
lost all the fingers of his left hand, and we have evidence of the fact
that the vengeance has been worked out in the same mysterious fashion as
it was worked out on the Dutchman. We know, too, who is at the bottom of
the plot, we know that the cripple could tell us all about it if he
liked. Obviously, this same cripple is a deadly enemy of Fenwick's. And,
no doubt, Fenwick has found out where to lay his hands upon his man quite
recently. Fenwick is a clever man, he is bold and unscrupulous, and
without question he set to work at once to get the better of the cripple.
Of course, this may be nothing but a wrong theory of mine, and it may
lead us astray, but it is all I can see to work upon at present."

"I don't think you are very far wrong," Gurdon said, "but I am still
puzzled about the house in Portsmouth Square."

"Which house do you mean?" Venner asked.

"The one in which my adventure took place. The house from which the
furniture vanished so mysteriously."

"That seems to me capable of an easy explanation," Venner replied. "There
is no doubt that the man called Bates and the cripple are one and the
same person. You must admit that."

"Yes, I admit that freely enough. Go on."

"Well, this Bates, as we will call him, has a large establishment at 75,
Portsmouth Square. The house next door was empty, possibly it belonged to
Mr. Bates. He had a whim for furnishing a room or two in an empty house,
or perhaps there was some more sinister purpose behind it. Anyway, after
you had blundered on the place and had taken your life in your hands, it
became necessary for the man to disappear from No. 74. Therefore, he had
that furniture removed at once. I daresay if we investigated the house
carefully we should find that there was some means of communication
between the two; at least, that is the only explanation I can think of."

"You've got it," Gurdon cried. "I'll wager any money, you are right. But
I am sorry the man has vanished in this mysterious way, because it checks
our investigations at the very outset. The last thing you wanted in this
matter was police interference. Now the whole thing has got into the
papers, and the public are sure to take the matter up. It is the very
class of mystery that the cheap press loves to dwell upon. It has all
the attributes of the _cause celebre_. Here is a handsome man,
picturesque looking, a cripple into the bargain, a man leading an
absolutely secluded life, and the very last person in the world one would
expect to have enemies. He is very rich, too, and lives in one of the
finest houses in the West End of London. He disappears in the most
mysterious manner. Unless I am greatly mistaken, within the next two or
three days London will be disclosing this matter and the newspapers will
be full of it."

"I am afraid you are right," Venner admitted; "but I don't see how we are
going to gain any thing by telling the police what we have found out. As
you know, I investigated this matter solely in the interests of the woman
I love, and with the one intention of freeing her life from the cloud
that hangs over it. In any other circumstances I would go direct to
Scotland Yard and tell them everything we know. But not now. I think you
will agree with me that we should go our own way and say nothing to
anybody about our discovery."

The events of the next day or so fully verified the fears of the two
friends. The Bates case appealed powerfully to the large section of the
public who delight in crimes of the mysterious order. Within a couple of
days most of the papers were devoting much space to the problem. It so
happened, too, that the week was an exceedingly barren one from a news
point of view; therefore, the Bates case had the place of honor. There
was absolutely no fresh information, not a single line that pointed to a
definite solution of the problem. Indeed, the ingenious way in which most
of the papers contrived to fill some three columns a day was beyond all
praise. But both Gurdon and Venner searched in vain for a scrap of
information that threw any light on the identity of the missing man. His
habits were described at some length, a tolerably accurate description of
his household appeared in several quarters; but nothing very much beyond
that. The missing man's servants were exceedingly reticent, and if they
knew anything whatever about their master they had preferred to confide
it to the police in preference to the inquisitive reporter. Not a single
relative turned up, though it was generally understood that the missing
man was possessed of considerable property.

It was on the third day that Venner began to see daylight. One of the
evening papers had come out with a startling letter which seemed to point
to a clue, though it conveyed nothing to the police. Venner came round to
Gurdon's rooms with a copy of the evening paper in his hand. He laid it
before his friend and asked him to read the letter, which, though it
contained but a few lines, was of absorbing interest to both of them.

"You see what this man says?" Venner remarked. "He appears to be a
workingman who got himself into trouble over a drinking bout. Two days
ago he was charged before the magistrate with being drunk and disorderly,
and was sentenced to a fine of forty shillings or fourteen days'
imprisonment. According to his story, the money was not forthcoming,
therefore he was taken to gaol. At the end of two days his friends
contrived to obtain the necessary cash and he was released. He writes all
this to show how it was that he was entirely ignorant of the startling
events which had taken place in the Bates case. This man goes on to say
that on the night when Mr. Bates disappeared he was passing Portsmouth
Square on his way home from some public-house festivities. He was none
too sober, and has a hazy recollection of what he saw. He recollects
quite clearly, now that he has time to think the matter over, seeing a
cab standing at the corner of the Square within three doors of No. 75. At
the same time, a telegraph boy called at No. 75 with a message. It was at
this point that the narrator of the story stopped to light his pipe. It
was rather a windy evening, so that he used several matches in the
process. Anyway, he stood there long enough to see the telegraph boy
deliver his message to a gentleman who appeared to have great difficulty
in getting to the door. No sooner had the telegraph boy gone than the
gentleman crept slowly and painfully down the steps and walked in the
direction of the cab. Then somebody stepped from the cab and accosted the
cripple, who, beyond all question, was the mysterious Bates. The writer
of the letter says that he heard a sort of cry, then someone called out
something in a language that he was unable to understand. He rather
thinks it was Portuguese, because among his fellow workmen is a
Portuguese artisan, and the language sounded something like his."

"We are getting on," Gurdon said. "That little touch about the Portuguese
language clearly points to Fenwick."

"Of course, it does," Venner went on. "But that is not quite all. The
letter goes on to say that something like a struggle took place, after
which the cripple was bundled into the cab, which was driven away. It was
a four-wheeled cab, and the peculiarity about it was that it had india
rubber tires, which is a most unusual thing for the typical growler. The
author of all this information says that the struggle appeared to be of
no very desperate nature, for it was followed by nothing in the way of a
call for help. Indeed, the workman who is telling all this seemed to
think that it was more or less in the way of what he calls a spree. He
said nothing whatever to the police about it, fearing perhaps that he
himself was in no fit state to tell a story; and, besides, there was just
the possibility that he might find himself figuring before a magistrate
the next morning. That is the whole of the letter, Gurdon, which though
it conveys very little to the authorities, is full of pregnant
information for ourselves. At any rate, it tells us quite clearly that
Fenwick was at the bottom of this outrage."

"Quite right," Gurdon said. "The little touch about the Portuguese
language proves that. Is there anything else in the letter likely to be
useful to us?"

"No, I have given you the whole of it. Personally, the best thing we can
do is to go and interview the writer, who has given his name and address.
A small, but judicious, outlay in the matter of beer will cause him to
tell us all we want to know."

It was somewhere in the neighborhood of the Docks where the man who had
given his name as James Taylor was discovered later on in the day. He was
a fairly intelligent type of laborer, who obtained a more or less
precarious livelihood as a docker. As a rule, he worked hard enough four
or five hours a day when things were brisk, and, in slack periods when
money was scarce, he spent the best part of his day in bed. He had one
room in a large tenement house, where the friends found him partially
dressed and reading a sporting paper. He was not disposed to be
communicative at first, but the suggestion of something in the way of
liquid refreshment stimulated his good-nature.

"Right you are," he said. "I've had nothing today besides a mouthful of
breakfast, and when I've paid my rent I shall have a solitary tanner
left; but I 'ope you gents are not down here with a view of getting a
poor chap into trouble?"

Gurdon hastened to reassure him on that head. He was balancing a
half-sovereign thoughtfully on his forefinger.

"We are not going to hurt you at all," he said. "We want you to give us a
little information. In proof of what I say you can take this
half-sovereign and obtain what liquid refreshment you require. Also, you
can keep the change. If you don't like my proposal, there is an end of
the matter."

"Don't be short, guv'nor," Taylor responded. "I like that there
proposition of yours so well that I'm going to take it; 'alf-sovereigns
ain't so plentiful as all that comes to. If you just wait a moment, I'll
be back in 'alf a tick. Then I'll tell you all you want to know."

The man was back again presently, and professed himself ready to answer
any questions that might be put to him. His manner grew just a little
suspicious as Venner mentioned the name of Bates.

"You don't look like police," he said. "Speaking personally, I ain't fond
of 'em, and I don't want to get into trouble."

"We have no connection whatever with the police," Venner said. "In fact,
we would rather not have anything to do with them. It so happens that we
are both interested in the gentleman that you saw getting into the cab
the other night. I have read your letter in the paper, and I am quite
prepared to believe every word of it. The only thing we want to know is
whether you saw the man in the cab--"

"Which one?" Taylor asked. "There were two blokes in the cab."

"This is very interesting," Venner murmured. "I shall be greatly obliged
to you if you will describe both of them."

"I couldn't describe the one, guv'nor," Taylor replied. "His back was to
me all the time, and when you come to think of it, I wasn't quite so
clear in the head as I might have been. But I caught a glimpse of the
other man's face; as he looked out of the cab the light of the lamp shone
on his face. He'd a big cloak on, as far as I could judge, with the
collar turned up about his throat, and a soft hat on his head. He knocks
the hat off looking out of the cab window, then I see as 'is head was
bald like a bloomin' egg, and yellow, same as if he had been painted. I
can't tell you any more than that, not if you was to give me another
'alf-sovereign on the top of the first one."

"Just another question," Gurdon said. "Then we won't bother you any more.
About what age do you suppose the man was?"

Taylor paused thoughtfully for a moment before he replied.

"Well, I should think he was about fifty-five or sixty," he said. "Looked
like some sort of a foreigner."

"That will do, thank you," Venner said. "We will not detain you any
longer. At the same time I should be obliged if you would keep this
information to yourself; but, of course, if the police question you, you
will have to speak. But a discreet silence on the subject of this visit
of ours would be esteemed."

Taylor winked and nodded, and the friends departed, not displeased to get
away from the stuffy and vitiated atmosphere of Taylor's room. On the
whole, they were not dissatisfied with the result of their expedition. At
any rate, they had now proof positive of the fact that Fenwick was at the
bottom of the mysterious disappearance of the man called Bates.

"I don't quite see what we are going to do next," Venner said. "So
far, we have been exceedingly fortunate to find ourselves in
possession of a set of clues which would be exceedingly valuable to
the police. But how are we going to use these clues is quite another
matter. What do you suggest?"

"Keeping a close eye upon Fenwick at any rate. For that purpose it would
not be a bad idea to employ a private inquiry agent. He need know
nothing of what we are after."

Thereupon it was decided that Gurdon was to dine with Venner that night
and go fully into the matter.


CHAPTER X

THE SECOND FINGER


It was, perhaps, fortunate for all concerned that, though Venner was so
closely identified by the irony of Fate with the movements of Mark
Fenwick, he was not known to the latter personally, though they had been
almost side by side three years previous in Mexico. Therefore, it was
possible for Venner to get a table in the dining-room quite close to that
of the alleged millionaire. It was all the more fortunate, as things
subsequently turned out, that Fenwick had returned to town that afternoon
and had announced his intention of dining at the hotel the same evening.
This information Venner gave to Gurdon when the latter turned up about
half-past seven. Then the host began to outline the plan of campaign
which he had carefully thought out.

"Fenwick is dining over there," he said. "He generally sits with his back
to the wall, and I have had our table so altered that we can command all
his movements. Vera, of course, will dine with him. Naturally enough, she
will act as if we were absolute strangers to her. That will be
necessary."

"Of course," Gurdon admitted. "But isn't it a strange thing that you
should be an absolute stranger to Fenwick?"

"Well, it does seem strange on the face of it. But it is capable of the
easiest explanation. You see, when I first met Vera, she was at school in
a town somewhere removed from the Four Finger Mine. I saw a good deal of
her there, and when finally she went up country, we were practically
engaged. At her urgent request the engagement was kept a secret, and when
I followed to the Mines it was distinctly understood that I should not
call at Fenwick's house or make myself known to him except in the way of
business. As it happens, we never did meet, and whenever I saw Vera it
was usually by stealth. The very marriage was a secret one, and you may
charge me fairly with showing great weakness in the matter. But there, I
have told you the story before, and you must make the best of it. On the
whole, I am glad things turned out as they did, for now I can play my
cards in the game against Fenwick without his even suspecting that he has
me for an opponent. It is certainly an advantage in my favor."

Venner had scarcely ceased speaking before Fenwick and Vera appeared. She
gave one timid glance at Venner; then, averting her eyes, she walked
demurely across to her place at the table. Fenwick followed, looking
downcast and moody, and altogether unlike a man who is supposed to be
the happy possessor of millions. His manner was curt and irritable, and
he seemed disposed to find fault with everything. Venner noticed, too,
that though the man ate very little he partook of far more champagne than
was good for anyone. Thanks no doubt to the wine, the man's dark mood
lifted presently, and he began chatting to Vera. The two men at the other
table appeared to be deeply interested in their dinner, though, as a
matter of fact, they were listening intently to every word that Fenwick
was saying. He was talking glibly enough now about some large house in
the country which he appeared to have taken for the winter months. Vera
listened with polite indifference.

"In Kent," Fenwick was saying. "Not very far from Canterbury. A fine old
house, filled with grand furniture, just the sort of place you'd like.
I've made all arrangements, and the sooner we get away from London the
better I shall be pleased."

"It will be rather dull, I fear," Vera replied. "I don't suppose that I
shall get on very well with county people--"

"Hang the county people," Fenwick growled. "Who cares a straw for them?
Not but what they'll come along fast enough when they hear that Mark
Fenwick, the millionaire, is in their midst. Still, there is a fine park
round the house, and you'll be able to get as much riding as you want."

Venner watching furtively saw that Vera was interested for the first
time. He had not forgotten the fact that she was an exceedingly fine
horsewoman; he recollected the glorious rides they had had together.
Interested as he was in the mysterious set of circumstances which had
wound themselves into his life, he was not without hope that this change
would enable him to see more of Vera than was possible in London. In the
lonely country he would be able to plan meetings with her; indeed, he had
made up his mind to leave London as soon as Vera had gone. Moreover, in
this instance, duty and inclination pointed the same way. If the mystery
were to be solved and Vera freed from her intolerable burden, it would be
essential that every movement of Fenwick's should be carefully watched.
The only way to carry out this plan successfully would be to follow him
into Kent.

"You heard that?" he murmured to Gurdon. "We must find out exactly where
this place is, and then look out some likely quarters in the
neighborhood. I must contrive to see Vera and learn her new address
before she goes."

"No reason to worry about that," Gurdon said. "It will all be in the
papers. The doings of these monied men are chronicled as carefully now
as the movements of Royalty. It is any odds when you take up your
_Morning Post_ in the morning that you will know not only exactly where
Fenwick is going to spend the winter, but get an exact history of the
house. So far as I can see we might finish our dinner and go off to a
theatre. We are not likely to hear any more to-night, and all this
mystery and worry is beginning to get on my nerves. What do you say to
an hour or two at the Gaiety?"

Venner pleaded for a few moments' delay. So far as he was personally
concerned he felt very unlike the frivolity of the typical musical
comedy; but still, he had finished his dinner by this time and was not
disposed to be churlish. Fenwick had completed his repast also, and was
sipping his coffee in an amiable frame of mind, heedless apparently of
business worries of all kinds.

At the same moment a waiter came into the room and advanced to the
millionaire's table with a small parcel in his hand.

"A letter for you, sir. An express letter which has just arrived. Will
you be good enough to sign the receipt?"

"Confound the people," Fenwick growled. "Can't you leave me alone for
half an hour when I am having my dinner? Take the thing up to my room.
You sign it, Vera."

"I'll sign it, of course," Vera replied. "But don't you think you had
better open the parcel? It may be of some importance. People don't
usually send express letters at this time of night unless they are
urgent. Or, shall I open it for you?"

The waiter had gone by this time, taking the receipt for the letter with
him. With a gesture Fenwick signified to Vera that she might open the
parcel. She cut the string and opened the flat packet, disclosing a small
object in tissue paper inside. This she handed to Fenwick, who tore the
paper off leisurely. Then the silence of the room was startled by the
sound of an oath uttered in tones of intense fury.

"Curse the thing!" Fenwick cried. His yellow face was wet and ghastly
now. The big purple veins stood out like cords on his forehead. "Am I
never to be free from the terror of this mystery? Where did it come from?
How could it be possible when the very man I have most reason to dread is
no longer in a position--"

The speaker broke off suddenly, as if conscious that he was betraying
himself. The little object in the tissue paper lay on the table in such a
position that it was impossible for Venner or Gurdon to see what it was,
but they could give a pretty shrewd guess. Venn or looked inquiringly at
his friend.

"Well, what do you suppose it is?" he asked.

"Personally, I have no doubt whatever as to what it is," Gurdon said. "I
am as sure as if I held the thing in my hand at the present moment. It
is the second finger which at some time or another was attached to
Fenwick's hand."

"You've got it," Venner said. "Upon my word, the farther we go with this
thing the more complicated it becomes. No sooner do we clear up one point
than a dozen fresh ones arrive. Now, is not this amazing? We know
perfectly well that the man whom we have to call Bates has been kidnapped
by our interesting friend opposite, and yet here the second warning
arrives just as if Bates were still free to carry out his vengeance. What
can one make of it?"

"Well, the logical conclusion is that Bates has an accomplice. I fail to
see any other way of accounting for it."

Fenwick still sat there mopping his heated face and turning a disgusted
eye upon the little object on the table. He seemed to be terribly
distressed and upset, though there was nothing like the scene on the
previous occasion, and, doubtless, few diners besides Venner and Gurdon
knew that anything out of the common was taking place there. But they
were watching everything carefully; they noted Fenwick's anxious face,
they could hear his stertorous breathing. Though he had dined so freely
he called for brandy now, a large glass of which he drank without any
addition whatever. Then his agitation became less uncontrollable and a
little natural color crept into his cheeks. Without glancing at it he
slipped the little object on the table into his pocket and rose more or
less unsteadily to his feet.

"I have had a shock," he muttered. "I don't deny that I have had a
terrible shock. You don't understand it, Vera, and I hope you never will.
I wish I had never touched that accursed mine. I wish it had been fathoms
under the sea before I heard of it, but the mischief has been done now,
and I shall have to go on to the end. You can stay here if you like--as
to me, I am going to my own room. I want to be alone for a bit and think
this matter out."

Fenwick lurched across the room with the air of a man who is more or less
intoxicated, though his head was clear enough and his faculties undimmed.
Still, his limbs were trembling under him and he groped his way to the
door with the aid of a table here and there. It was perhaps rather a
risky thing to do, but Venner immediately crossed over and took the seat
vacated so recently by Fenwick. Vera welcomed him shyly, but it was
palpable that she was ill at ease. She would have risen had not Venner
detained her.

"Don't you think you are very imprudent?" she said. "Suppose he should
change his mind and come back here again?"

"I don't think there is much chance of that," Venner said, grimly.
"Fenwick will only be too glad to be by himself for a bit. But tell me,
dear, what was it that gave him such a shock?"

"I don't understand it at all," Vera said. "It was something to do
with that dreadful mine and the vengeance connected with it. This is
the second time the same thing has happened within the last few days,
and I fear that it will culminate sooner or later in some fearful
tragedy. I have some hazy idea of the old legend, but I have almost
forgotten what it is."

"I don't think you need worry about that," Venner said. "Though it
will have to be spoken of again when the whole thing is cleared up;
but now I wish to talk to you on more personal matters. Did I not
understand Fenwick to say to-night that he was taking a large house
somewhere in Kent?"

"That is his intention, I believe," Vera replied. "I understand it is a
large, dull place in the heart of the country. Personally I am not
looking forward to it with the least pleasure. Things are bad enough here
in London, but there is always the comfortable feeling that one is
protected here, whereas in a lonely neighborhood the feeling of
helplessness grows very strong."

"You are not likely to be lonely or neglected," Venner smiled. "As soon
as I have definitely ascertained where you are going, Gurdon and myself
will follow. It is quite necessary that we should be somewhere near you;
but, of course, if you object--"

But Vera was not objecting. Her face flushed with a sudden happiness. The
knowledge that the man she loved was going to be so near her filled her
with a sense of comfort.

"Don't you think it will be dangerous?" she asked.

"Not in the least," Venner said. "Don't forget that I am a stranger to
Mark Fenwick, which remark applies with equal force to Gurdon. And if we
take a fancy to spend a month or two hunting in the neighborhood of
Canterbury, surely there is nothing suspicious in that. I am looking
forward to the hunting as a means whereby we may manage to get some long
rides together. And even if Fenwick does find it out, it will be easy to
explain to him that you made my acquaintance on the field of sport."

"I am glad to hear you say that," Vera whispered. "I may be wrong, of
course, but I feel that strange things are going to happen, and that I
shall need your presence to give me courage."

Vera might have said more, but a waiter came into the room at the same
moment with an intimation to the effect that Mr. Fenwick desired to speak
to her. She flitted away now, and there was nothing for it but for Venner
to fall in with Gurdon's suggestion of a visit to the theatre.

It was not long after breakfast on the following morning that Venner
walked into Gurdon's rooms with a new proposal.

"I have been thinking out this confounded thing," he said. "I have an
idea; as you know, the house where you had your adventure the other night
is empty, it has occurred to me that perhaps it may be to let. If so, we
are going to call upon the agent in the characters of prospective
tenants. What I want to do is to ascertain if possible the name of the
owner of the premises."

"I see," Gurdon said thoughtfully. "I am ready for you now."

It was some little time before the friends got on the right track, but
they found the right man at length. The agent was not quite sure whether
he was in a position at present to make any definite arrangements on the
part of the owner.

"I presume he wants to let the house," he said, "though I have no
instructions, and it is some considerable time since I have heard from my
client. You see, he lives abroad."

"Can't you give us his address," Venner asked, "and let us write to him
direct? It would save time."

"That I fear is equally impossible," the agent explained. "My client
wanders about from place to place, and I haven't the remotest idea where
to find him. However, I'll do my best."

"You might tell us his name," Venner said.

"Certainly. His name is Mr. Le Fenu."

"What do you make of it?" Venner said, when once more he and Gurdon were
in the street. "I see you have forgotten what the name of Le Fenu
implies. Don't you remember my telling you that the original owner of
the Four Finger Mine who was murdered by the Dutchman, Van Fort, was
called Le Fenu?"


CHAPTER XI

AN UNEXPECTED MOVE


On the whole the discovery was startling enough. It proved to
demonstration that the man who called himself Bates must have been in
some way connected with the one-time unfortunate owner of the Four Finger
Mine. There was very little said as the two friends walked down the
street together. Venner paused presently, and stood as if an idea had
occurred to him.

"I have a notion that something will come of this," he said. "I had a
great mind to go back to the agent's and try to get the key of the empty
house under some pretext or another."

"What do you want it for?" Gurdon asked.

"I am not sure that I want it for anything," Venner admitted. "I have a
vague idea, a shadowy theory, that I am on the right track at last, but I
may be wrong, especially as I am dealing with so unscrupulous an opponent
as Fenwick. All the same, I think I'll step round to that agent's office
this afternoon and get the key. Sooner or later, I shall want a town
house, and I don't see why that Portsmouth Square place shouldn't suit me
very well."

Venner was true to his intention, and later in the afternoon was once
more closeted with the house-agent.

"Do you really want to let the place?" he asked.

"Well, upon my word, sir, I'm not quite sure," the agent replied. "As
I said before, it is such a difficult matter to get in contact with
the owner."

"But unless he wanted to let it, why did he put it in your hands?" Venner
asked. "Still, you can try to communicate with him, and it will save time
if you let me have the keys to take measurements and get estimates for
the decorating, and so on. I will give you any references you require."

"Oh, there can be no objection to that," the agent replied. "Yes, you can
have the keys now, if you like. You are not in the least likely to run
away with the place."

Venner departed with the keys in his possession, and made his way back to
the hotel. He had hardly reached his own room before a waiter came in
with a note for him. It was from Vera, with an urgent request that Venner
would see her at once, and the intimation that there would be no danger
in his going up to the suite of rooms occupied by Mark Fenwick. Venner
lost no time in answering this message. He felt vaguely uneasy and
alarmed. Surely, there must be something wrong, or Vera would not have
sent for him in this sudden manner. He could not quite see, either, how
it was that he could call at Fenwick's rooms without risk. However, he
hesitated no longer, but knocked at the outer door of the self-contained
rooms, which summons was presently answered by Vera herself.

"You can come in," she said. "I am absolutely alone. Mr. Fenwick has gone
off in a great hurry with all his assistants, and my own maid will not be
back for some little time."

"But is there no chance of Fenwick coming back?" Venner asked. "If he
caught me here, all my plans would be ruined. My dear girl, why don't you
leave him and come to me? I declare it makes me miserable to know that
you are constantly in contact with such a man as that. It isn't as if you
were any relation to him."

"Thank goodness, I am no relation at all," Vera replied. "It is not for
my own sake that I endure all this humiliation."

"Then, why endure it?" Venner urged.

"Because I cannot help myself. Because there is someone else whom I have
to look after and shield from harm. Some day you will know the whole
truth, but not yet, because my lips are sealed. But I did not bring you
here to talk about myself. There are other and more urgent matters. I am
perfectly sure that something very wrong is going on here. Not long after
breakfast this morning, Mr. Fenwick was sitting here reading the paper,
when he suddenly rose in a state of great agitation and began sending
telegrams right and left. I am certain that there was terribly disturbing
intelligence in that paper; but what it was, I, of course, cannot say. I
have looked everywhere for a clue and all in vain. No sooner were the
telegrams dispatched than the three or four men here, whom Mr. Fenwick
calls his clerks, gathered all his papers and things together and sent
them off by express vans. Mr. Fenwick told me that everything was going
to the place that he had taken at Canterbury, but I don't believe that,
because none of the boxes were labelled. Anyway, they have all gone, and
I am instructed to remain here until I hear from Mr. Fenwick again."

Venner began to understand; in the light of his superior knowledge it was
plain to him that these men had been interrupted in some work, and that
they feared the grip of the law. He expressed a wish to see the paper
which had been the cause of all the trouble. The news-sheet lay on the
floor where Fenwick had thrown it, and Venner took it up in his hands.

"This has not been disturbed?" he asked.

"No," Vera replied. "I thought it best not to. I have looked at both
sides of the paper myself, but I have not turned over a leaf. You see,
it must have been on one side or another of this sheet that the
disturbing news appeared, and that is why I have not looked further.
Perhaps you will be able to pick out the particular paragraph? There is
plenty of time."

Very carefully Venner scanned the columns of the paper. He came at length
to something that seemed to him to bear upon the sudden change of plans
which appeared to have been forced upon Fenwick. The paragraph in
question was not a long one, and emanated from the New York correspondent
of the _Daily Herald_.

"We are informed," the paragraph ran, "that the police here believe that
at length they are on the track of the clever gang of international
swindlers who were so successful in their bank forgeries two years ago.
Naturally enough, the authorities are very reticent as to names and other
details, but they declare that they have made a discovery which embraces
what is practically a new crime, or, at any rate, a very ingenious
variant upon an old one. As far as we can understand, the police were
first put on the track by the discovery of the fact that the head of the
gang had recently transported some boxes of gold dust to London. Quite by
accident this discovery was made, and, at first, the police were under
the impression that the gold had been stolen. When, however, they had
proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that the gold in question was
honestly the property of the gang, they naturally began to ask themselves
what it was intended for. As the metal could be so easily transferred
into cash, what was the object of the gang in taking the gold to Europe?
This question the Head of the Criminal Investigation Department feels
quite sure that he has successfully solved. The public may look for
startling developments before long. Meanwhile, two of the smartest
detectives in New York are on their way to Europe, and are expected to
reach Liverpool by the _Lusitania_ to-day."

"There is the source of the trouble," Venner said. "I hardly care about
telling you how I know, because the less information you have on this
head the better. And I don't want your face to betray you to the sharp
eyes of Mark Fenwick. But I am absolutely certain that that paragraph is
the source of all the mischief."

"I daresay it is," Vera sighed. "I feel so terribly lonely and frightened
sometimes, so afraid of something terrible happening, that I feel
inclined to run away and hide myself. What shall I do now, though I am
afraid you cannot help me?"

"I can help you in a way you little dream of," Venner said through his
teeth. "For the present, at any rate, you had better do exactly as
Fenwick tells you. I am not going to leave you here all alone, when we
have a chance like this; after dinner, I am going to take you to a
theatre. Meanwhile, I must leave you now, as I have much work to do, and
there is no time to be lost. It will be no fault of mine if you are not
absolutely free from Mark Fenwick before many days have passed."

Venner sat alone at dinner, keeping a critical eye open for whatever
might be going on around him. He had made one or two little calculations
as to time and distance, and, unless his arithmetic was very far out, he
expected to learn something useful before midnight.

The meal had not proceeded very far when two strangers came in and took
their places at a table close by. They were in evening dress and appeared
to be absolutely at home, yet, in some subtle way, they differed
materially from the other diners about them. On the whole, they might
have passed for two mining engineers who had just touched civilisation
after a long lapse of time. Venner noticed that they both ate and drank
sparingly, and that they seemed to get through their dinner as speedily
as possible. They went off to the lounge presently to smoke over their
coffee, and Venner followed them. He dropped into a seat by their side.

"You have forgotten me, Mr. Egan," he said to the smaller man of the two.
"Don't you remember that night on the Bowery when I was fortunate enough
to help you to lay hands on the notorious James Daley? You were in rather
a tight place, I remember."

"Bless me, if it isn't Mr. Venner," the other cried. "This is my friend,
Grady. I daresay you have heard of him."

"Of course I have," Venner replied. "Mr. Grady is quite as celebrated
in his way as you are yourself. But you see, there was a time when I took
a keen interest in crime and criminals, and some of my experiences in New
York would make a respectable volume. When I heard that you were coming
over here--"

"You heard we were coming here?" Egan exclaimed. "I should very much like
to know how you heard that."

"Oh, you needn't be alarmed," Venner laughed. "Nobody has betrayed your
secret mission to Europe, though, strangely enough, I fancy I shall be in
a position to give you some considerable assistance. I happened to see a
paragraph in the _Herald_ to-day alluding to a mysterious gang of
swindlers who had hit upon a novel form of crime--something to do with
gold dust, I believe it was. At the end of the paragraph it stated that
two of the smartest detectives in the New York Force were coming over
here, and, therefore, it was quite fair to infer that you might be one of
them. In any case, if you had not been, I could have introduced myself to
your colleagues and used your name."

Egan looked relieved, but he said nothing.

"You are quite right to be reticent," Venner said. "But, as I remarked
before, I think I can help you in this business. You hoped to lay hands
on the man you wanted in this hotel."

"I quite see you know something," Egan replied. "As a matter of fart, we
are a long way at present from being in a position to lay hands on our
man with a reasonable hope of convicting him. There will be a great deal
of watching to do first, and a lot of delicate detective work. That is
the worst of these confounded newspapers. How that paragraph got into the
_Herald,_ I don't know, but it is going to cause Grady and myself a great
deal of trouble. To be quite candid, we did expect to find our man here,
but when he had vanished as he did, just before we arrived, I knew at
once that somebody must have been giving him information."

"Do I know the name of the man?" Venner asked.

"If you don't, I certainly can't tell you," Egan said. "One has to be
cautious, even with so discreet a gentleman as yourself."

"That's very well," Venner said. "But it so happens that I am just as
much interested in this individual as yourself. Now let me describe him.
He is short and stout, he is between fifty and sixty years of age, he has
beady black eyes, and a little hooked nose like a parrot. Also, he has an
enormous bald head, and his coloring is strongly like that of a yellow
tomato. If I am mistaken, then I have no further interest in the matter."

"Oh, you're not mistaken," Egan said. "That is our man right enough.
But tell me, sir, do you happen to know what his particular line is
just at present?"

"I have a pretty good idea," Venner said; "but I am not quite sure as
yet. I have been making a few inquiries, and they all tend to confirm my
theory, but I am afraid I cannot stay here discussing the matter any
longer, as I have an important appointment elsewhere. Do you propose to
stay at the Empire Hotel for any time?"

Egan replied that it all depended upon circumstances. They were in no way
pressed for time, and as they were there on State business they were not
limited as to expenses. With a remark to the effect that they might meet
again later on in the evening, Venner went on his way and stood waiting
for Vera at the foot of the stairs. She came down presently, and they
entered a cab together.

"We won't go to a theatre at all," Venner said. "We will try one of the
music halls, and we shall be able to talk better there; if we have a box
we shall be quite secure from observation."

"It is all the same to me," Vera smiled. "I care very little where I go
so long as we are together. How strange it is that you should have turned
up in this extraordinary way!"

"There is nothing strange about it at all," Venner said. "It is only Fate
making for the undoing of the criminal. It may be an old-fashioned theory
of mine, but justice always overtakes the rogue sooner or later, and
Fenwick's time is coming. I have been the instrument chosen to bring
about his downfall, and save you from your terrible position. If you
would only confide in me--"

"But I can't, dear," Vera said. "There is somebody else. If it were not
for that somebody else, I could end my troubles to-morrow. But don't let
us talk about it. Let us have two delightful hours together and thank
Providence for the opportunity."

The time passed all too quickly in the dim seclusion of one of the boxes;
indeed, Vera sat up with a start when the orchestra began to play the
National Anthem. It seemed impossible that the hour was close upon
twelve. As to the performance itself, Vera could have said very little.
She had been far too engrossed in her companion to heed what was taking
place upon the stage.

"Come along," Venner said. "It has been a delightful time, but all too
brief. I am going to put you in a cab and send you back to the hotel, as
I have to go and see Gurdon."

Vera made no demur to this arrangement, and presently was being conveyed
back to the hotel, while Venner thoughtfully walked down the street. Late
as it was, the usual crop of hoarse yelling newsboys were ranging the
pavement and forcing their wares on the unwilling passers-by.

"Here you are, sir. 'Late Special.' Startling development of the Bates
Case. The mystery solved."

"I'll take one of those," Venner said. "Here's sixpence for you, and you
can keep the change. Call me that cab there."


CHAPTER XII

THE HOUSE NEXT DOOR


Venner lost no time in reaching the rooms of his friend Gurdon, and was
fortunate enough to find the latter at home. He was hard at work on some
literary matter, but he pushed his manuscript aside as Venner came
excitedly into the room.

"Well, what is it?" he asked. "Anything fresh? But your face answers that
question. Have you found Bates?"

"No, I haven't," Venner said; "but he seems to have been discovered. I
bought this paper just now in Piccadilly, but I have not been able to
look at it yet. It is stated here that the mystery has been solved."

"Hand it over," Gurdon cried excitedly. "Let's see if we can find it. Ah!
here we are. The Press Association has just received a letter which
appears to come from Mr. Bates himself. He says he is very much annoyed
at all this fuss and bother in the papers, about his so-called
kidnapping. He goes on to say that he was called to the Continent by
pressing business, and that he had not even time to tell his servants he
was going, as it was imperatively necessary that he should catch the
midnight boat to Dieppe. The correspondent of the Press Association says
that Mr. Bates has been interviewed by a foreign journalist, who is
absolutely certain as to his identity. Moreover, an official has called
at Mr. Bates' residence and found that his servants have had a letter
from their master instructing them to join him at once, as he has let his
house furnished for the next two months. Well, my dear man, that seems to
be very satisfactory, and effectually disposes of the idea that Mr. Bates
has been mysteriously kidnapped. I am rather sorry for this in a way,
because it upsets all our theories and makes it necessary to begin our
task all over again."

"I don't believe a word of it," Venner said. "I believe it's a gigantic
bluff. I was coming to see you to-night in any case, but after buying
that paper I came on here post haste. Now that story of the Press
Association strikes me as being decidedly thin. Here is a man living
comfortably at home who suddenly disappears in a most mysterious manner,
and nothing is heard of him for some time. Directly the public began to
regard it as a fascinating mystery and the miscreants realising what a
storm they were likely to stir up, the man himself writes and says that
it is all a mistake. Now, if he had come back and shown himself, it would
have been quite another matter. Instead of doing that, he writes a
letter from abroad, or sends a telegram or something of that kind, saying
that he has been called away on urgent business. That might pass easily
enough, but mark what follows. He writes to his servants asking them to
join him at once in some foreign town because he has let his house for
two months, and the new tenant wishes to get in without delay. Did ever
anybody hear anything so preposterous? Just as if a man would let a house
in that break-neck fashion without giving his servants due warning. The
thing is not to be thought of."

"Then you think the servants have been lured away on a fools' errand?"
Gurdon asked. "You don't think there is anybody in the house?"

"Oh, yes, I do," Venner said drily. "I have a very strong opinion that
there _are_ people in the house, and I also have a pretty shrewd idea as
to who they are. It happens, also, that I am in a position to test my
theory without delay."

"How do you propose to do that?" Gurdon asked.

"Quite easily. After I left you this afternoon I went back to the agent
and succeeded in obtaining possession of the keys of the empty house in
Portsmouth Square. My excuse was that I wanted to go into detail and to
take measurements and the like. I need not remind you that Bates' house
is next door to the empty one. In fact, there is no question that both
houses belong to the same person. You will remember, also, the mysterious
way in which that furniture vanished from the scene of your adventure."

"I remember," Gurdon said grimly. "But all the same I don't quite see
what you are driving at."

"The thing is quite plain. That furniture did not vanish through the
prosaic medium of a van, nor was it carted through the front door from
one house to the other. The two houses communicated in some way, and it
will be our business to find the door. As I have the keys and every
legitimate excuse for being on the premises, we can proceed to make our
investigations without the slightest secrecy, and without the least fear
of awkward questions being asked. Now do you follow me?"

"I follow you fast enough. I suppose your game is to try and get into the
next house by means of the door?"

"You have hit it exactly," Venner said. "That is precisely what I mean
to do. We shall find it necessary to discover the identity of Mr.
Bates' tenant."

"When are we going to make the experiment?" Gurdon asked.

"We are going to make it now," Venner replied. "We will have a cab as far
as the Empire Hotel, so that I can get the keys. After that, the thing
will be quite easy. Come along, and thank me for an exciting evening's
adventure. I shall be greatly surprised if it is not even more exciting
than the last occasion."

They were in the empty house at last. The windows were closed and
shuttered, so that it was possible to use matches in the various rooms
without attracting attention from the outside. But search how they would,
for upwards of two hours, they could find no trace whatever of a means of
communication between the two houses. They tapped the walls and sounded
the skirtings, but without success. Venner paced the floor of the
drawing-room moodily, racking his brains to discover a way out of the
difficulty.

"It must be here somewhere," he muttered. "I am sure all that
furniture was moved backwards and forwards through some door, and a
wide one at that."

"Then it must be on the ground floor," Gurdon remarked. "When you come to
think of it, some of that furniture was so heavy and massive that it
would not go through an ordinary doorway, neither could it have been
brought upstairs without the assistance of two or three men of great
strength. We shall have to look for it in the hall; if we don't find it
there, we shall have to give it up as a bad job and try some other plan."

"I am inclined to think you are right," Venner said. "Let us go down and
see. At any rate, there is one consolation. If we fail to-night we can
come again to-morrow."

Gurdon did not appear to be listening. He strode resolutely down the
stairs into the hall and stood for some moments contemplating the panels
before him. The panels were painted white; they were elaborately
ornamented with wreaths of flowers after the Adams' style of decoration.
Then it seemed to Gurdon that two pairs of panels, one above and one
below, had at one time taken the formation of a doorway. He tapped on one
of the panels, and the drumming of his fingers gave out a hollow sound.
Gurdon tapped again on the next panel, but hardly any sound came in
response. He looked triumphantly at Venner.

"I think we have got it at last," he said. "Do you happen to have a knife
in your pocket? Unless I am greatly mistaken, the decorations around
these panels come off like a bead. If you have a knife with you we can
soon find out."

Venner produced a small knife from his pocket, and Gurdon attempted to
insinuate the point of the blade under the elaborate moulding. Surely
enough, the moulding yielded, and presently came away in Gurdon's hands.

"There you are," he said. "It is exactly as I told you. I thought at
first that those mouldings were plaster, but you can see for yourself now
that they are elaborately carved wood."

Venner laid the ornament aside and stood watching Gurdon with breathless
interest while the latter attacked another of the mouldings. They came
away quite easily, pointing to the fact that they must have been removed
before within a very short period. Once they were all cleared away,
Gurdon placed the point of the knife behind one of the panels, and it
came away in his hands, disclosing beyond a square hole quite large
enough for anybody to enter. Here was the whole secret exposed.

"Exactly what I thought," Gurdon said. "If I removed all the mouldings
from the other three panels there would be space enough here to drive a
trap through. I think we have been exceedingly lucky to get to the bottom
of this. How clever and ingeniously the whole thing has been managed!
However, I don't think there is any occasion for us to worry about moving
any more of the panels, seeing that we can get through now quite easily.
Wouldn't it be just as well to put all the lights out?"

"I haven't thought of that," Venner muttered. "On the whole, it would be
exceedingly injudicious not to extinguish all the lights. We had better
go on at once, I think, and get it over."

The house was reduced to darkness, and very quietly and cautiously the
two adventurers crept through the panel. They were in the hall on the
other side, of which fact there was no doubt, for they stepped at once
off a marble floor on to a thick rug which deadened the sound of their
footsteps. They had, naturally enough, expected to find the whole place
in darkness, and the tenant of the house and his servants in bed. This,
on the whole, would be in their favor, for it would enable them to take
all the observations they required with a minimum chance of being
disturbed.

A surprise awaited them from the first. True, the hall was in darkness,
and, as far as they could judge, so was the rest of the house. But from
somewhere upstairs came the unmistakable sound of a piano, and of
somebody singing in a sweet but plaintive soprano voice. Gurdon clutched
his companion by the arm.

"Don't you think it is just possible that we have made a mistake?" he
whispered. "Isn't it quite on the cards that this is a genuine affair,
and that we are intruding in an unwarrantable manner upon some
respectable private citizen? I am bound to say that that beautiful voice
does not suggest crime to me."

"We must go on now," Venner said, impatiently. "It won't do to judge by
appearances. Let us go up the stairs and see what is going on for
ourselves. If we are intruding, we will get away as speedily as
possible."

Gurdon made no further objection, and together they crept up the stairs.
There was no chance of their being surprised from behind by the servants,
for they had taken good care to notice that the basement was all in
darkness. They were getting nearer and nearer now to the sound of the
music, which appeared to come from the drawing-room, the door of which
was widely enough open for the brilliant light inside to illuminate the
staircase. A moment later the music ceased, and someone was heard to
applaud in a hoarse voice.

"Sing some more," the voice said. "Now don't be foolish, don't begin to
cry again. Confound the girl, she makes me miserable."

"Do you recognise the voice?" Venner whispered.

"Lord! yes," was Gurdon's reply. "Why, it's Fenwick. No mistaking those
tones anywhere. Now, what on earth does all this mean?"

"We shall find out presently," Venner said. "You may laugh at me, but I
quite expected something of this kind, which was one of the reasons why I
obtained the keys of the house."

"It's a most extraordinary thing," Gurdon replied. "Now isn't this
man--Fenwick--one of the last persons in the world you would credit with
a love of music?"

"I don't know," Venner said. "You never can tell. But don't let's talk.
We are here more to listen than anything else. I wish we could get a
glimpse of the singer."

"I am going to," Gurdon declared. "Unless I am greatly mistaken, I have
made a discovery, too. Oh, I am not going to take any risk. Do you see
that mirror opposite the door? It strikes me if I get close enough to
look into it that I shall be able to see who is in the room without
betraying my presence."

So saying, Gurdon crept forward till he was close enough to the mirror to
get a very good idea of the room and its occupants. He could see a pale
figure in white standing by a piano; he could see that Fenwick was
sprawling in a big armchair, smoking a large cigar. Then he noticed that
the girl crossed the floor and laid a slim hand half timidly, half
imploringly, on Fenwick's shoulder.

"Why are you so unkind to me?" she said. "Why so cruel? How many times
have you promised me that you will bring him back to me again? I get so
tired of waiting, I feel so sad and weary, and at times my mind seems to
go altogether."

"Have patience," Fenwick said. "If you will only wait a little longer he
will come back to you right enough. Now go to the piano and sing me
another song before I go to bed. Do you hear what I say?"

The last words were harshly uttered; the girl reeled back as if fearing
a blow. Gurdon standing there clenched his fists impulsively; he had
considerable difficulty in restraining himself.

"Very well," she said; "just one more, and then I will go to bed, for I
am so tired and weary."

Once more the sweet pathetic voice rang out in some simple song; the
words gradually died away, and there was silence. Gurdon had barely time
to slip back to the head of the stairs before the girl came out and made
her way to the landing above. Standing just below the level of the floor,
Venner gazed eagerly at the pretty tired face and mournful blue eyes. He
grasped his companion by the arm in a grip that was almost painful.

"We are getting to it," he said. "It was a good night's work coming here
to-night. Do you mean to say you don't notice the likeness? Making due
allowance for the difference in height and temperament, that poor girl is
the image of my wife."

"I must have been a dolt not to have noticed it before," Gurdon said.
"Now that you mention it, the likeness is plain enough. My dear fellow,
can't you see in this a reason for your wife's reticence in speaking of
the past?"

There was no time to reply, for the sinister evil face of Fenwick
appeared in the doorway, and he called aloud in Spanish some hoarse
command, which was answered from above by someone, in the same language.
Gurdon whispered to his companion, with a view to ascertaining what had
been said.

"You will see for yourself in a minute," Venner said in an excited
whisper. "You are going to have another surprise. You wanted to know just
now what had become of Bates. Unless I am greatly mistaken, you will be
able to judge for yourself in a few moments. I believe the man to be a
prisoner in his own house."


CHAPTER XIII

THE WHITE LADY AGAIN


It was perhaps an imprudent thing for the two friends to remain there,
exposed as they were to the danger of discovery at any moment; but, so
completely were they fascinated by what was going on about them, that
they had flung caution to the winds. One thing was in their favor,
however; there was not much likelihood of their being attacked from
below, seeing that all the servants had gone to bed; unless, perhaps,
some late comer entered the house. Still, the risk had to be run, and so
they stood there together, waiting for the next move. It was Venner who
spoke first.

"I cannot get over the extraordinary likeness of that girl to my wife,"
he said. "Is she anything like the woman you saw next door? I mean the
poor half-demented creature who happened to come into the room when you
were talking with the owner?"

"Why, of course, it is the same girl," Gurdon replied.

"Then I am sure she is Vera's sister. I'll ask her about it the first
time I have an opportunity. Be silent and get a little lower down the
stairs. There is somebody coming from the top of the house. We can see
here without being seen."

Assuredly there were sounds emanating from the top of the house. A voice
was raised in angry expostulation, followed by other voices morose and
threatening. As far as the listeners could judge, two men were dragging a
third down the stairs against his will. But for that, the house was
deadly silent; the watchers could hear the jingle of a passing cab bell,
a belated foot passenger whistled as he went along. It seemed almost
impossible to believe that so close to light and law and order and the
well-being of the town a strange tragedy like this should be in progress;
hidden from the eye of London, by mere skill of brick and mortar, this
strange thing was going on. Venner wondered to himself how many such
scenes were taking place in London at the same moment.

But he had not much time for his meditation, for the shuffling of feet
came closer. There were no more sounds of expostulation now; only the
heavy breathing of three people, as if the captive had ceased to struggle
and was making but a passive resistance. Then there emerged on the
landing the figure of the handsome cripple with a guardian on either
side. His face was no longer distorted with pain; rather was it white
with an overpowering anger--his eyes shone like points of flame. On his
right side Venner and Gurdon recognised the figure of the man in the
list slippers--the man who had been handling the sovereigns in Fenwick's
rooms. His comrade was a stranger, though of the same type, and it seemed
to Venner that anyone would have been justified in repudiating either of
them as an acquaintance. It was perfectly evident that the cripple came
against his will, though he was struggling no longer. Probably the
condition of his emaciated frame had rendered the task of his captors an
easy one. They dragged him, limp and exhausted, into the drawing-room
where Fenwick was seated and they stood in the doorway awaiting further
instructions.

"You needn't stay there," Fenwick growled. "If I want you I can call. You
had better go back to your cards again."

The two men disappeared up the stairs, and just for a moment there was
silence in the drawing-room. It was safe for Venner and his companion
now to creep back to the drawing-room door and take a careful note of
what was going on. With the aid of a friendly mirror on the opposite
side of the room, it was possible to see and note everything. The
cripple had fallen into a chair, where he sat huddled in a heap, his
hand to his head, as if some great physical pain racked him. His heavy
breathing was the only sound made, except the steady puffing of
Fenwick's cigar. A fit of anger gripped Venner for the moment; he would
have liked to step in and soundly punish Fenwick for his brutality.
Doubtless the poor crippled frame was racked with the pain caused by the
violence of his late captors.

But under that queer exterior was a fine spirit. Gradually the cripple
ceased to quiver and palpitate; gradually he pulled himself up in his
chair and faced his captor. His face was still deadly white, but it was
hard and set now; there was no sign of fear about him. He leaned forward
and stared Fenwick between the eyes.

"Well, you scoundrel," he said in a clear, cold voice, "I should like to
know the meaning of this. I have heard of and read of some strange
outrages in my time, but to kidnap a man and keep him prisoner in his own
house is to exceed all the bounds of audacity."

"You appear to be annoyed," Fenwick said. "Perhaps you have not already
learned who I am?"

"I know perfectly well who you are," the cripple responded. "Your name is
Mark Fenwick, and you are one of the greatest scoundrels unhung. At
present, you are posing as an American millionaire. Fools may believe
you, but I know better. The point is, do you happen to know who I am?"

"Yes, I know who you are," Fenwick said with a sardonic smile. "You elect
to call yourself Mr. Bates, or some such name, and you pretend to be a
recluse who gives himself over to literary pursuits. As a matter of
fact, you are Charles Le Fenu, and your father was, at one time, the
practical owner of the Four Finger Mine."

"We are getting on," Venner whispered. "It may surprise you to hear this,
but I have suspected it for some little time. The so-called absent owner
of these houses is the man sitting opposite Fenwick there. Now do you
begin to see something like daylight before you? I wouldn't have missed
this for worlds."

"We have certainly been lucky," Gurdon replied.

There was no time for further conversation, for the cripple was speaking
again. His voice was still hard and cold, nor did his manner betray the
slightest sign of fear.

"So you have found that out," he said. "You know that I am the son of the
unfortunate Frenchman who was murdered by a rascally Dutchman at your
instigation. You thought that once having discovered the secret of the
mine you could work it to your own advantage. How well you worked it your
left hand testifies."

The jeer went home to Fenwick, his yellow face flushed, and he half rose
from his chair with a threatening gesture.

"Oh, you can strike me," the cripple said. "I am practically helpless as
far as my lower limbs are concerned, and it would be just the sort of
cowardly act that would gratify a dirty little soul like yours. It
hurts me to sit here, helpless and useless, knowing that you are the
cause of all my misfortunes; knowing that, but for you, I should be as
straight and strong as the best of them. And yet you are not safe--you
are going to pay the penalty of your crime. Have you had the first of
your warnings yet?"

Fenwick started in his seat; in the looking-glass the watchers could see
how ghastly his face had grown.

"I don't know what you mean," he muttered.

"Liar!" the cripple cried. "Paltry liar! Why, you are shaking from head
to foot now--your face is like that of a man who stands in the shadow of
the gallows."

"I repeat, I don't know what you mean," Fenwick said.

"Oh, yes, you do. When your accomplice Van Fort foully murdered my
father, you thought that the two of you would have the mine to
yourselves; you thought you would work it alone as my father did, and
send your ill-gotten gains back to England. That is how the murdered man
accomplished it, that is how he made his fortune--and you were going to
do the same thing, both of you. When you had made all your arrangements
you went down to the coast on certain business, leaving the rascally
Dutchman behind. He was quite alone in the mine, there was no one within
miles of that secret spot. And yet he vanished. Van Fort was never heard
of again. The message of his fingers was conveyed to his wife, for she
was implicated in the murder of my father, and how she suffered you
already know. But you are a brave man--I give you all the credit for
that. You went back to the mine again, determined not to be deterred by
what had happened. What happened to you, I need not go into. Shall I tell
the story, or will you be content with a recollection of your sufferings?
It is all the same to me."

"You are a bold man," Fenwick cried. He was trembling with the rage that
filled him. "You are a bold man to defy me like this. Nobody knows that I
am here, nobody knows that you are back in your own house again. I could
kill you as you sit there, and not a soul would suffer for the crime."

The cripple laughed aloud; he seemed to be amused at something.

"Really!" he sneered. "Such cheap talk is wasted upon me. Besides, what
would you gain by so unnecessary a crime, and how much better off would
you be? You know as well as I do, disguise it as you will, that the long
arm has reached for you across five thousand miles of sea, and that,
when the time comes, you will be stricken down here in London as surely
and inevitably as if you had remained in Mexico under the shadow of the
mountains. The dreadful secret is known to a few, in its entirety it is
even unknown to me. I asked you just now if you had received the first
of your messages, and you denied that you knew what I meant. You
actually had the effrontery to deny it to me, sitting opposite to you as
I am, and looking straight at the dreadful disfigurement of your left
hand. For over three centuries the natives of Mexico worked the Four
Finger Mine till only two of the tribe who knew its secret remained.
Then it was that my father came along. He was a brave man, and an
adventurer to his finger tips. Moreover, he was a doctor. His healing
art made those rough men his friends, and when their time came, my
father was left in possession of the mine. How that mine was guarded and
how the spirit of the place took its vengeance upon intruders, you know
too well. Ah, I have touched you now."

Fenwick had risen, and was pacing uneasily up and down the room. All the
dare-devil spirit seemed to have left the man for a moment; he turned a
troubled face on the cripple huddled in his chair. He seemed half
inclined to temporise, and then, with a short laugh, he resumed his own
seat again.

"You seem to be very sure of your ground," he sneered.

"I am," the cripple went on. "What does it matter what becomes of a
melancholy wreck like myself? Doctors tell me that in time I may become
my old self again, but in my heart I doubt it, and as sure as I sit here
the mere frame-work of a human being, my injuries are due to you. I
might have had you shot before now, or I might even have done it myself,
but I spared you. It would have been a kindness to cut your life short,
but I had another use for you than that. And now, gradually, but surely,
the net is closing in around you, though you cannot yet see its meshes,
and you are powerless to prevent the inevitable end."

"You seem to have mapped it all out," Fenwick replied. "You seem to have
settled it all to your own satisfaction, but you forget that I may have
something to say in the matter. When I discovered, as I did quite by
accident, that you were in London, I laid my plans for getting you into
my hands. It suits me very well, apart from the criminal side of it, to
hide myself in your house, but that is not all. I am in a position now to
dictate terms, and you have nothing else to do but to listen. I am
prepared to spare your life on one condition. Now kindly follow me
carefully."

"I am listening," the cripple said, coldly. "If you were not the blind
fool you seem to be you would know that there could be no conditions
between us; but go on. Let me hear what you have to say."

"I am coming to that. I want you to tell me where I can find Felix Zary."

Suddenly, without the slightest premonition, the cripple burst into a
hearty laugh. He rocked backward and forward in a perfect ecstasy of
enjoyment; for the moment, at any rate, he might have been on the very
best of terms with his companion.

"Oh, that is what you are driving at?" he said. "So you think that if you
could get Felix Zary out of the way you would be absolutely safe? Really,
it is marvellous how an otherwise clever man could be so blind to the
true facts of the case. My good sir, I will give you Zary's address with
pleasure."

Fenwick was obviously puzzled. Perhaps it was beginning to dawn upon
him that he had a man of more than ordinary intellect to grapple with.
He looked searchingly at the cripple, who was leaning back with eyes
half closed.

"Hang me, if I can understand you," he muttered. "I am in imminent danger
of my life, though I should be safe enough if Felix Zary and yourself
were out of the way."

"And you are quite capable of putting us out of the way," the cripple
said, gently. "Is not that so, my friend?"

"Aye, I could, and I would," Fenwick said in a fierce whisper. "If you
were both dead I could breathe freely; I could go to bed at night feeling
sure that I should wake in the morning. Nothing could trouble me then. As
to that accursed mine, I have done with it. Never again do I plant my
foot in Mexico."

"Fool that you are!" the cripple said in tones of infinite pity. "So you
think that if Zary and myself were out of the way you might die
eventually in your bed honored and respected of men? I tell you, never!
The vengeance is upon you, it is following you here, it is close at hand
now. You have already had your warning. Perhaps, for all I know to the
contrary, you may have had your second warning; that you have had one,
your face told me eloquently enough a few moments ago. I am quite sure
that a little quiet reflection will show you the absurdity of keeping me
a prisoner in my own house. Of course, I know I am entirely in your
hands, and that you may keep me here for weeks if you choose. It will be
very awkward for me, because I have important business on hand."

"I know your important business," Fenwick sneered. "Everything that goes
in your favor will naturally spell disaster to me. As I told you before,
it was only an accident that told me where you were; indeed, so changed
are you that I should not have recognised you if I had met you in the
street. No, on the whole, you will stay where you are."

At this point Venner clutched Gurdon's arm and dragged him hurriedly
across the landing down to the half staircase. So quickly was this done
that Gurdon had no time to ask the reason for it all.

"Someone coming down the stairs," Venner whispered. "Didn't you hear a
voice? I believe it is the girl in white again."

Surely enough, looking upward, they could see the slim white figure
creeping down the stairs. The girl was crooning some little song to
herself as she came along. She turned into the drawing-room and called
aloud to the cripple in the chair. With an oath on his lips, Fenwick
motioned her away.


CHAPTER XIV

MASTER OF THE SITUATION


"What have you come back here for?" Fenwick demanded. "You said you were
tired, and that you were going to bed, long ago."

The girl looked dreamily about her; it was some little time before she
appeared to appreciate the significance of Fenwick's question. She was
more like one who walks in her sleep than a human being in the full
possession of understanding.

"I don't know," she said, helplessly. She rubbed her eyes as if there had
been mist before them. "I was so tired that I lay on the bed without
undressing, and I fell fast asleep. Then I had a dream. I dreamed that
all the miserable past was forgotten, and that Charles was with me once
more. Then he seemed to call me, and I woke up. Oh, it was such a vivid
dream, so vivid, that I could not sleep again! I was so restless and
anxious, that I made up my mind to come downstairs, and, as I was passing
a door just now, it opened, and the face of Charles looked out. It was
only for a moment, then two men behind him dragged him back and the door
closed once more."

"A foolish fancy," Fenwick growled.

"It was not," the girl cried almost passionately. "I tried the door a
moment later, and it was locked. I tell you that Charles is in that room.
I cannot go to bed again until I am certain of the truth. Oh, why do you
keep me in suspense like this?"

"Mad," Fenwick muttered. "Mad as a March hare. Why don't you send her to
an asylum?"

"She is not mad," the cripple said in a curiously hard voice. "Something
tells me that she has made a discovery. You rascal, is it possible that
you have Charles Evors under this roof?"

Fenwick laughed, but there was something uneasy and strained about his
mirth. He glanced defiantly at the cripple, then his eyes dropped before
the latter's steady gaze.

"Why should I worry about Evors?" he asked. "The man is nothing to me,
and if by chance--"

The rest of Fenwick's sentence was drowned in a sudden uproar which
seemed to break out in a room overhead. The tense silence was broken by
the thud of heavy blows as if someone were banging on a door, then came
muttered shouts and yells of unmistakable pain. Hastily Fenwick rose from
his seat and made in the direction of the door. He had hardly advanced
two steps before he found himself confronted with the rim of a
silver-plated revolver, which the cripple was holding directly in the
line of his head.

"Sit down," the latter said tersely. "Sit down, or, as sure as I am a
living man, I'll fire. I could say that I fired the shot in self-defence,
and when the whole story comes to be told I have no fear that a jury
would disbelieve me. Besides, there is nothing to be afraid of. Those
sounds don't come from the police trying to force their way into the
house. On the contrary, it seems to me that some of your parasites are
having a misunderstanding over their cards. At any rate, you are not to
move. If you do, there will be an end once and for all of the millionaire
Mark Fenwick. Sit down, my child--you are trembling from head to foot."

"It was his voice," the girl cried. "I am certain that it was Charles who
called out just now."

Once more the shouts and cries broke out, once more came that banging on
the panels, followed by a splitting crash, after which the uproar
doubled. Evidently a door had given way and the conflict was being fought
out on the stairs.

"Shall we go and take a hand?" Gurdon whispered excitedly. "Murder might
be going on here."

"I think we had better risk it a little longer," was Venner's cautious
reply. "After all is said and done, we must not make ourselves too
prominent. If necessary we will take a hand, but, unless I am greatly
mistaken, the prisoner upstairs has got the better of his captors. Ah, I
thought so."

The sound of strife overhead suddenly ceased after two smashing blows,
in which evidently a man's clenched fist had come in contact with naked
flesh. There was a groan, the thud of a falling body, and the man in the
list slippers came rolling down the stairs. He was followed a moment
later by a young clean-shaven man dressed in a grey Norfolk suit. His
frame suggested power and strength, though his face was white like that
of one who is just recovering from a long illness. He was breathing very
hard, but otherwise he did not appear to have suffered much in the
struggle out of which he had emerged in so victorious a fashion. He made
his way direct to the drawing-room, and immediately a woman's voice
uprose in a long wailing cry.

"I'd give something to see that," Venner whispered. "Only I am afraid we
can't do anything until the man in the list slippers comes to his senses
and takes himself off. There is another one coming now. He doesn't look
much better off than his colleague."

Another man crept down the stairs, swaying as he came and holding on to
the balusters. He had a tremendous swelling over his left eye and a
terrible gash in his lip, from which the blood was flowing freely.
Altogether he presented a terrible aspect as he bent over the prostrate
form of his unconscious companion.

"Here, get up, wake up," he said. "What are you lying there for? He'll
be out of the house before we can turn round, and what will the governor
say then?"

The man in the slippers gradually assumed a sitting position and stared
stupidly about him. A hearty kick in the ribs seemed to restore him to
some measure of consciousness.

"Don't ask me," he said. "I never saw anything like it. Here's a chap who
has been in bed on and off for months coming out in this unexpected
manner and knocking us about as if we had been ninepins. What's become of
him, I should like to know?"

"What are you two ruffians doing there?" came Fenwick's voice from the
drawing-room. "Go back to your room, and I will send for you when I
want you."

The men slunk back again, probably by no means sorry to be out of further
trouble. No sooner had they disappeared than the two friends stood in the
entrance to the door of the drawing-room once more. The friendly mirror
again stood them in good stead, for by its aid they watched as dramatic
and thrilling a picture as ever was presented on any stage.

The young man in the Norfolk suit stood there side by side with the girl
in white. He had his arm about her waist. She clung to him, with her head
upon his shoulder; there were words of endearment on her lips. Just for
the moment she seemed to have forgotten that they were not alone; all
the world might have been made for herself and her lover. For the moment,
too, the dreamy look had left her face, and she no longer conveyed the
impression to a stranger's eyes that she was suffering from some form of
insanity. She was alert and vigorous once more.

"Oh, I knew that you would come back to me," she said. "I knew that you
were not dead, for all they told me so. How cruel they were to tell me
these things--"

"Stop," the cripple cried. "It sounds cruel and heartless for me to have
to interfere just now, but I must insist that you go back to your room,
Beth. Back at once."

"Can't I stay a little longer?" the girl pleaded. "It is such a long time
since Charles and I--"

"No, no, you must do as I tell you. It will be far better in the long
run. We are only two men against three, and there may be others concealed
in the house for all I know. For myself, I am perfectly helpless, and
Charles looks as if he had just come from the grave. Evidently his
struggles have tried him."

"Well, I must confess, I am feeling rather down," Charles Evors said. "I
could not stand it any longer, and I made a dash for liberty. Goodness
knows how long I have been in the hands of those men; and how long they
have kept me under the influence of drugs. I suppose the supply fell
short. Anyway, I had just sense enough to take advantage of my first
opportunity. You can explain all to me presently, but the mere fact of
Fenwick being here is enough to tell me who is at the bottom of this
business."

Fenwick placed his fingers to his lips and whistled shrilly. Almost
immediately sounds of footsteps broke out overhead, and a door opened
somewhere with a loud crash. The cripple turned to the girl, who had
crept reluctantly as far as the doorway.

"Now listen to me," he said quickly. "Listen and act quickly. Go
downstairs into the street and bring here the first policeman you can
find. Tell him a violent quarrel has broken out between Mr. Bates and
some of his guests, and say you fear that some mischief will be done. Do
you understand me?"

The girl nodded quickly. Evidently she quite understood. She
disappeared so suddenly that Venner and Gurdon had barely time to get
out of her way. They heard the street door open--they were conscious of
the sudden draught rushing up the stairs; the sound of passing cabs was
distinctly audible.

The girl had hardly time to get outside before three or four men came
down the stairs. They rushed headlong into the drawing-room, where they
seemed to pause, no doubt deterred in their violence for a moment by the
sight of the cripple's revolver.

"Here's our chance," Gurdon whispered. "The girl will be back with the
police in two minutes, and we have heard quite enough to know the
ingenious scheme which is uppermost in the cripple's mind. Let's lock
them in. Don't you see that the key is in on this side of the door? Turn
it quickly."

"Good business," Gurdon chuckled as he snapped the key in the lock. "Now
they can fight as long as they like. At any rate, they can't do much
mischief so long as they are caged in there."

A din of mingled voices came from the other side of the door, followed
quickly by the whiplike crack of a revolver shot. Then someone tried the
door and yelled aloud that it was locked. Fists battered violently on the
panels, and just as the din was at its height the helmets of two
policemen appeared mounting the stairs. Venner stepped coolly forward as
if he had every right to be there.

"I'm glad you officers have come," he said. "There seems to be something
in the nature of a free fight going on here. We took the liberty of
turning in as the door was open to see what had happened. You had better
go in yourself."

The policeman tried the door, which, naturally, did not yield to his
hand, and he called out to those inside to open in the name of the law. A
voice on the other side pleaded that the door was locked. Venner turned
the key in the door.

"Probably the young lady had the sense to lock them in," he said. "You
had better go inside, officer. No, there is no reason why we should
accompany you. As a matter of fact our presence here is more or less an
intrusion."

The policemen stepped into the room and demanded to know what was the
matter. They could see the master of the house sitting there in his
chair, with a tall young man in a Norfolk suit by his side, and opposite
him Fenwick, flushed and sullen, with his satellites behind him. There
were four of them altogether, and the appearance they made was by no
means attractive, seeing that two at least of them were showing
unmistakable signs of violence.

It was the cripple who first recovered his self-possession.

"I am sorry to trouble you," he said, "but I am afraid we have rather
forgotten ourselves. You know me, of course?"

"Oh, yes, sir," the first officer replied. "You are Mr. Bates, the
gentleman who is supposed to have been kidnapped the other night; the
inspector told me that you were still on the Continent."

"Well, I am not," the cripple said curtly. "I am back home again, as you
can see with your own eyes. The gentleman over there with the yellow
face is Mr. Mark Fenwick, the well-known millionaire. I daresay you have
heard of him."

Both officers touched their hats respectfully; they had probably come
here prepared to make more than one arrest and thus cover themselves with
comparative glory; but the mere mention of Fenwick's name settled that
point once and for all.

"As you are probably aware," the cripple went on, "until quite recently
Mr. Fenwick was staying at the Great Empire Hotel, but the place was too
public for one of his gentle and retiring disposition, and so he made
arrangements to take my house furnished, though the understanding was
that nobody should know anything about it, and nobody would have known
anything about it but for the fact that in the way of business Mr.
Fenwick had to consult these other gentlemen. Perhaps they don't look in
the least like it, but they are all American capitalists, having made
their money by gold mining. They don't look a very attractive lot,
officer, but if you knew them as well as I do you would learn to love
them for their many engaging qualities, and their purity of heart."

The officers touched their helmets again, and appeared to be undecided in
their minds as to whether the cripple was chaffing them or not. But
though his voice had a certain playfulness of tone, his face was quite
grave and steadfast.

"Very well, sir," the foremost of the constables said. "I understand that
neither of you gentlemen desires to make any charge against the other. I
shall have to make a note of this."

"Of course you will," the cripple said sweetly. "Now I appeal to Mr.
Fenwick and his companions as to whether or not the whole thing has not
been a silly misunderstanding. You see, officer, gold mining is rather a
thirsty business, and occasionally leads to rather more champagne than is
good for one. I can only apologise to my tenant, Mr. Fenwick, for losing
my temper, and I will at once rid him of my presence. It is getting very
late, and I can come round in the morning and make my peace here. As I am
a little lame, I will ask one of you officers to give me your arm.
Charles, will you be good enough to give me your arm also? I wish you
good-night, Mr. Fenwick. In fact, I wish all of you good-night. I shall
not fail to call round in the morning--"

"But you are not going," Fenwick cried in dismay. "You are not going away
from your own house at this time of night?"

"You forget," the cripple said, gravely, "that for the time being you are
my tenant, and that I have no more right in this house, indeed, not so
much right, as one of these policemen. I have sent my servants away, and
I am at present staying--in fact, it does not matter much where I am
staying. Come along."

The trap was so neatly laid and so coolly worked that Fenwick could only
sit and gasp in his chair, while his two victims walked quietly away in
the most natural manner in the world.

"We had better be off," Gurdon whispered. "There is no occasion for us to
stay any longer. Let us follow the cripple. By Jove, I never saw anything
done more neatly than that!"


CHAPTER XV

FELIX ZARY


It would have been a comparatively easy matter for the two friends to
have slipped out of the house before the cripple came down the stairs
accompanied by the young man who called himself Charles Evors. The front
door was still open, and there was no one to bar their way. Then it
suddenly occurred to Gurdon that by so doing they would betray the secret
of the moveable panel which communicated with the house next door.

"It would never do to go away like this," he said, hurriedly. "Besides,
it is more than likely that we shall want to use that entrance again.
We shall have to run the risk of losing sight of the cripple; anything
is better than leaving that panel open for the servants to discover in
the morning."

Venner could see for himself at once that there was no help for it, so
without any further discussion on the matter, the two men hurried down
the stairs, their feet making no noise on the thick carpet, and then they
darted through the hole into the house next door. It was only the work of
a moment to replace the panel, but hardly had they done so before they
heard a confused murmur of voices on the other side. Gurdon pressed his
back to the panel until the noise of the voices ceased.

"That was a pretty close call," he said. "Give me the mouldings and I
will try to make them secure without any unnecessary noise. I daresay we
can get the nails to fit the same holes. Anyway, there must be no
hammering, or we shall be pretty sure to rouse the suspicions of the
people next door."

It was perhaps fortunate that the mouldings fitted so well, for Gurdon
managed to work the nails into the original holes and complete a more or
less workmanlike job to his own satisfaction. Certainly, anybody who was
not in the secret would never have detected anything wrong with the
panels or imagined for a moment that they had been so recently moved.

"That's a good job well done," Venner said.

"Yes, but what do you do it for? In fact, what are you two gentlemen
doing here at all?"

The voice came with a startling suddenness. It was an exceedingly clear,
melodious voice, yet with a steely ring in it. The two friends wheeled
round sharply to find themselves face to face with an exceedingly tall
individual, whose length was almost grotesquely added to by the amazing
slimness of his figure. In that respect he was not at all unlike the type
of human skeleton which one generally expects to find in a travelling
circus, or some show of that kind. The man, moreover, was dressed in
deep black, which added to his solemnity. He had an exceedingly long,
melancholy face, on both sides of which hung a mass of oily-looking black
hair; his nose, too, was elongated and thin, and a long drooping
moustache concealed his mouth. On the whole his appearance was redeemed
from the grotesque by an extraordinary pair of black eyes, which were
round and large as those of a Persian cat. Despite the man's exceeding
thinness, he conveyed a certain suggestion of strength. At that moment he
had a handkerchief between his fingers, and Gurdon could see that his
wrists were supple and pliable as if they had been made of india rubber.
Gurdon had heard that sort of hands before described as conjurer's hands.
As he looked at them he half expected to see the handkerchief disappear
and an orange or apple or something of that kind take its place. Then the
stranger coolly walked across the hall and turned up another of the
lights. He seemed to be perfectly at home, and conveyed a curious
impression to the visitors that he expected to find them there.

"I beg to remind you that you have not yet answered my question," he
said. "What are you doing here?"

"Let me answer your question with another," Venner said. "Who are you,
and what may you be doing here?"

The man smiled in a peculiar fashion. His big black eyes seemed to
radiate sparks; they were luminous and full of vivid fury, though, at the
same time, the long horse-like face never for a moment lost its look of
profound dejection. They might have been eyes gleaming behind a dull,
painted mask.

"We will come to that presently," he said. "For the moment the mention of
my name must content you. It is just possible that you might have heard
the name of Felix Zary."

Venner and Gurdon fairly started. The name of Felix Zary was familiar to
them, but only during the last three-quarters of an hour. In fact, that
was the name of the man as to whose whereabouts Fenwick had been so
anxious to hear. Here was another element in the mystery, which, up to
this moment, had not advanced very far towards solution.

"I have heard the name before," Venner said, "but only quite
recently--within the last hour, in fact."

"Oh, yes," the stranger said, "I know exactly what you mean. You
probably heard it next door when you were listening so intently to
the conversation between my friend Charles Le Fenu, the cripple, and
that scoundrel who calls himself Fenwick. He is exceedingly anxious
to know where I am, though without the smallest intention of
benefitting me. Before long, his curiosity will be gratified; but
not in the way he thinks."

The latter words came from the speaker's lips with a spitting hiss, such
as a cat emits in the presence of a dog. The great round black eyes
added intensity to the threat, and rendered the feline simile complete.
The prophecy boded ill for Fenwick when at length he and Felix Zary came
face to face.

"I see my conjecture is quite right," the stranger went on. "And as to
you gentlemen, I have asked your names merely as a matter of courtesy. As
a matter of fact I know perfectly well who you are--you are Mr. Gerald
Venner and Mr. James Gurdon. But there is one thing I don't know, and
that is why you have thrust yourself into this diabolical business. You
must be brave men, or absolutely unconscious of the terrible danger you
are running. If either of you are friends of Fenwick's--"

"Not for a moment," Venner cried. "You pay us a poor compliment indeed if
you take us to be in any way friendly with that scoundrel."

"And yet you are here," Zary went on. "You are spying on the movements of
my friend, Le Fenu. You have contrived to obtain possession of the keys
of his house for no other purpose. Why?"

Venner paused before he answered the question. He did not recognise the
right of this man to put him through a cross-examination. Indeed, it
seemed to him, the less he said the better. Perhaps Zary saw something
of what was going on in his mind, for his big black eyes smiled, though
the dejected visage remained the same.

"I see, you do not trust me," he said. "Perhaps you are right to be
cautious. Let me ask you another question, assuring you at the same time
that I am the friend of Charles Le Fenu and his sisters, and that if
necessary I will lay down my life to save them from trouble. Tell me, Mr.
Venner, why are you so interested in saving the girl who passes for
Fenwick's daughter from her miserable position? Tell me."

Zary came a step or two closer to Venner and looked down into his face
with a searching yearning expression in those magnetic black eyes. The
appeal to Venner was irresistible. The truth rose to his lips; it refused
to be kept back.

"Because," he said slowly, "because she is my wife."

A great sigh of relief came from Zary.

"I am glad of that," he said. "Exceedingly glad. And yet I had suspected
something of the kind. It is good for me to know that I am with friends,
and that you two are only actuated by the best motives. For some days now
I have had you under close observation. I followed you here to-night;
indeed, I was in the house when you removed those panels. As a matter of
fact, Mr. Gurdon's first involuntary visit here absolutely ruined a
carefully laid plan of mine for getting Mark Fenwick into my hands. But
I will tell you later on all about the mystery of the furnished
dining-room and how and why the furniture vanished so strangely. When I
followed you here to-night I was quite prepared to shoot you both if
necessary, but some strange impulse came over me to speak to you and ask
you what you were doing. I am rather glad I did, because I should not
like to have a tragedy on my hands. Now would you like to come with me as
far as my own rooms, where I shall be in a position to throw a little
light upon a dark place or two?"

Venner and Gurdon clutched eagerly at the suggestion. Without further
words, they passed into the street, and would have walked down the steps
had not Zary detained them.

"One moment," he whispered. "Hang back in the shadow of the portico.
Don't you see that there are two or three men on the steps of the house
next door? Ah, I can catch the tones of that rascal Fenwick. If only that
vile scoundrel knew how close to him I was at the present moment! But let
us listen. Perhaps we may hear something useful."

It was very still and quiet in the Square now, for the hour was late, and
therefore the voices from the portico came clear and distinct to the
listeners' ears.

"What is the good of it?" one of the voices said. "Why on earth can't you
wait till morning? Le Fenu has got clear away, and there isn't much
chance of catching him again in a hurry. It was one of the coolest
things I have seen for a long time."

"Oh, he doesn't lack brains, or pluck either," Fenwick said. "I should
have been proud of a trick like that myself. I ought to have poisoned him
when I had the chance. I ought to have got him out of the way without
delay. But it seemed such a safe thing to kidnap him and hide him in his
own house, where we could go on with our work without the slightest
danger or interruption from those accursed police. And then, when Fate
played into our hands and we got hold of Evors as well, it looked as if
everything was going our way. How you fools ever contrived to let him get
the upper hand of you is more than I can understand."

"It was Jones's fault," another voice growled. "He forgot the drug, and
we ran clean out of it. Then, I suppose, we got interested over a game of
cards, and one way and another, Evors managed to get six or seven hours'
sleep without having any of that stuff inside him. Bless me, if it wasn't
all like a dream, guv'nor. There we were, interested in our cards, and
before we knew where we were our heads were banged together, and I was
lying on the floor thinking that the end of the world had come. That
fellow has got the strength of the very devil itself."

"Poor weak creature," Fenwick sneered.

"Weak-minded, perhaps, and easily led," the first speaker said. "But
there is not much the matter with him when it comes to fists."

"We can't stop chattering here all night," Fenwick cried. "It is all very
well for you men, who don't care so long as you have something to eat and
drink. You would be quite satisfied to sit like a lot of hogs in a sty in
Le Fenu's house, but he'll certainly be back in the morning with some
infernal scheme or other for getting the best of us. Don't you see it is
impossible for me any longer to play the part of a tenant of a furnished
house, now that the owner of the house is at large again? It is a very
fortunate thing, too, in a way, that I can pass all you people off as my
servants. Now get away at once and do as I tell you. As for me, I am
going to take a cab as far as the old place by the side of the river. In
an hour's time I hope to be on my way to Canterbury. Now, you are quite
sure you all know what to do? It's confoundedly awkward to have one's
plans upset like this, but a clever man always has an alternative scheme
on hand, and I've got mine. There, that will do. Be off at once."

"That's all very well, guv'nor," another voice said. "It is easy enough
to put the door on the latch and turn out of the crib, leaving it empty,
but what about the girl in the white dress? I ain't very scrupulous as a
rule, but it seems rather cruel to leave the poor kid behind and she not
more than half right in her head."

"Devil fly away with the girl," Fenwick said passionately. "We can
pick her up at any time we want to. Besides, I think I can see a way
to arrange for her and a method of getting her out of the house within
the next hour. It was no bad thing for men who get their living as we
do when some genius invented motor cars. Now do go along or we shall
never finish."

The little group on the portico steps melted away, and one by one the
slouching figures vanished into the darkness. Zary stepped on to the
pavement, and proceeded to open the front door of the next house. It
yielded to his touch.

"I am glad of this," he said; "and, really, we owe quite a debt of
gratitude to the tender-hearted ruffian who was averse to leaving a poor
girl in this house all alone. We will spare Fenwick the trouble of any
inconvenience so far as she is concerned."

So saying, Zary proceeded to walk up the stairs, turning up the lights as
he went. He called the name of Beth softly three or four times, and
presently a door opened overhead and a girl in a white dress came out. A
pleased smile spread over her face as she looked over the balusters and
noted the caller.

"Felix," she said softly, "is it really you? I have been hiding myself in
my room because I was terrified, and after Charles had gone those men
quarrelled so terribly among themselves! I suppose Charles forgot all
about me in the excitement of the moment."

"Oh, no, he didn't, dear one," Zary said very gently. "He would have
come back to you in any case. But I am going to take you away from this
house where you have been so miserable; I am going to see that you are
not molested in the future."

"That is all very well," Venner interposed, "but where can the young lady
go? She is quite alone and helpless, and unless you have some reputable
female relation--"

"It is not a matter of my relations," Zary smiled. "Miss Beth will go to
one who is her natural protector, and one who will watch over her welfare
with unceasing care. To put it quite plainly, Miss Beth is going to the
Great Empire Hotel, and you are going to take her. To-night she will
sleep under the same roof as her sister."

Venner was just a little startled by the suddenness of the proposal, yet,
on the whole, the suggestion was an exceedingly natural one, for who was
better capable of looking after the unfortunate Beth than her own sister?
True, the hour was exceedingly late; but then a huge place like the Great
Empire Hotel was practically open night and day, and a request at one
o'clock in the morning that a guest in the house should be awakened to
receive another guest would be nothing in the way of a novelty.

"Very well," Venner said. "Let her put on her hat and jacket, and she can
come with me at once."


CHAPTER XVI

FENWICK MOVES AGAIN


Beth raised no objection to the programme; indeed, the suggestion seemed
to fill her with delight. She would not be a moment, she said. She would
put certain necessaries in a handbag, and come back for the rest of her
wardrobe on the morrow. Venner had expressed a desire that Zary should
accompany him, but the latter shook his head emphatically.

"No, no," he said; "you are going alone. As for me, I have important
business on hand which will not brook the slightest delay. Mr. Gurdon had
best return to his own rooms; and, for his own sake, I would advise him
to keep in the middle of the road. You two little know the danger you
incurred when you decided to thrust your head into this hornet's nest.
Now I will see you both off the premises and put out all the lights. I
may mention in passing that I have a latchkey to this place."

A few minutes later Venner found himself walking down the deserted
streets with his fair little companion hanging on his arm. She chattered
to him very prettily and daintily, but there was a great deal in her
remarks which conveyed nothing to him at all. She constantly alluded to
matters of which he was entirely ignorant, apparently taking it for
granted that he was _au fait_ with what she was saying. It struck Venner
that though not exactly mentally deficient, she was suffering from
weakness of intellect, brought about, probably, by some great shock or
terrible sorrow. On the whole, he was not sorry to find himself in the
great hall of the hotel, the lights of which were still burning, and
where several guests were lounging for a final cigar.

"I know it is exceedingly late," Venner said to the clerk, "but it is
quite imperative that this young lady should see Miss Fenwick. Will
you be good enough to send up to her room and tell her how sorry I am
to disturb her at this time of night, but that the matter is
exceedingly urgent?"

"Miss Fenwick is not in, sir," came the startling response. "She went out
shortly after eleven o'clock, and she told me that she might not be back
for some considerable time. You see, she wanted to be quite sure that she
could get back into the hotel at any time she returned. Oh, no doubt she
is returning, or I don't suppose for a moment that she would have asked
me all those questions."

The information was sufficiently disturbing, but there was no help for
it. All they had to do was to sit down and wait patiently till Vera came
back. They were not in the least likely to attract any attention, seeing
that several men in evening dress together with their wives were seated
in the hall for a final chat after the theatre or some party or
reception. In her long white frock, partially concealed by a cloak and
hood, Beth would have easily passed for a girl fresh from a theatre or a
dance. It was a long weary wait of over an hour, and Venner was feeling
distinctly anxious, when the big folding doors at the end of the hall
opened and Vera's tall, graceful figure emerged.

"Here is your sister," Venner said. There was just a stern suggestion in
his voice. "Now, you are not to cry or make any scene, you are not to
attract any attention to yourself, but take it all for granted. You can
be as emotional as you please when you are alone together in your room."

Vera came across the hall in a jaded, weary way, as if she were
thoroughly tired out. Her face flushed a little as she recognised Venner.
Then she looked at his companion and almost paused, while the blood ebbed
from her face, leaving it deadly pale.

"Gerald," she whispered. "Gerald and Beth. What does it mean? What
strange thing has happened to bring you both together here."

"Don't make a scene, for goodness' sake," Venner said. "Take it as calmly
as you can. Unless you are self-possessed, your sister is sure to give
way, and that is the last thing in the world to be desired. I cannot
possibly stop now to tell you all the extraordinary things which have
happened to-night. Let it be sufficient to say that it is absolutely
imperative that you give your sister shelter, and that nobody but
yourself should know where she is."

"But how did you find her?" Vera asked. "And who was it suggested that
you should bring her to me?"

"Let me just mention the name of Zary," Venner replied. "Oh, I can come
round here to-morrow and tell you all about it. If you think that there
is any possible danger--"

"Of course there is danger," Vera said. "Mr. Fenwick may be back at any
moment. He does not know that I am aware that my sister is even alive. If
he became acquainted with the fact that we had come together again, all
my plans would be absolutely ruined, and my three years of self-sacrifice
would be in vain."

"I am afraid you must run the risk now," Venner said. "At any rate, your
sister will have to stay here till the morning. It is perhaps a good
thing that she does not understand what is going on."

Apparently the girl had no real comprehension of all the anxieties and
emotions of which she was unconsciously the centre. She was holding her
sister's hand now and smiling tenderly into her face, like a child who
has found a long-lost friend.

"You may rest assured on one point," Venner went on. "For the present
there is not the slightest reason to fear Fenwick. He has had a great
shock to-night; all his plans have been upset, and he finds himself in a
position of considerable danger. I know for a fact that he is going
straight away to Canterbury, and probably by this time he is on his way
there. According to what your mysterious friend Zary said, he had some
plan cut and dried for providing for your sister's safety to-morrow. Now
take the poor child to bed, for she is half asleep already, and when once
you have made her comfortable I want you to come down again and have a
few words with me. You need not hesitate; surely a man can talk to his
wife whenever he pleases--and, besides, there are several people here who
show not the slightest signs of going to bed yet."

"Very well," Vera said. "Come along, dear, I see you are dreadfully
sleepy--so sleepy that you do not appear to recognise the sister you have
met for the first time for three years."

Venner had time to smoke the best part of a cigar before Vera reappeared.
They took a seat in a secluded corner of the hall, where it was possible
to talk without interruption.

"Now, please, tell me everything," the girl said.

"I am afraid that is impossible," Venner replied. "This is one of the
most extraordinary and complicated businesses that I ever heard of. In
the first place, I came to England, weary and worn out with my search for
you, and half inclined to abandon it altogether. In the very last place
in the world where I expect to meet you, I come In contact with you in
this hotel. I find that you are being passed off as the daughter of one
of the greatest scoundrels who ever cheated the gallows. But that does
not check my faith in you. I had kept my trust in you intact. Ever since
you left me on the day of our marriage I have had nothing but a few words
to explain your amazing conduct; and now here am I doing my best to free
you from the chains that bind you, and all the while you seem to be
struggling to hug those chains about you and to baffle all my efforts.
Why do you do this? What is the secret that you conceal so carefully from
the man who would do anything to save you from trouble, from the man you
profess to love? If you do care for me--"

"Oh, I do indeed," Vera whispered. There were tears in her eyes now and
her cheeks were wet. "It is not for my own sake--it is for the sake of
the poor girl upstairs. I had promised to say nothing of that to
anyone--to try and save her--and I left you and ran the risk of for ever
forfeiting your affection. But if Beth is better in the morning I will
try to get her to absolve me from my promise and induce her--"

"She is not capable of giving a promise of rescinding it," Venner said.
"Don't you think it would be far better if, instead, you discussed the
matter with your brother, Charles Le Fenu?"

"So you know all about that?" Vera cried.

"Yes, I do. I have seen him to-night. Gurdon has already had an interview
with him--an interview that almost cost him his life. We have been having
some pretty fine adventures the last two or three days--but if it all
ends in saving you and lifting this cloud from your life I shall be well
content. I am not going to ask you to go into explanations now, because I
see they would be distasteful to you, and because you have given some
foolish promise which you are loth to break. But tell me one thing. You
said just now that you had not seen your sister for three years, though
she has been living with your brother, whom you visited quite recently."

"That is easily explained," Vera said. "It was deemed necessary to tell
Beth one or two fictions with a view to easing her mind and leaving her
still with some slight shadow of hope, which was the only means of
preventing her reason from absolutely leaving her. These fictions
entailed my keeping out of the way. Beth is exceedingly different from
me, as you know."

"Indeed, she is," said Venner, smiling for the first time. "But does it
not strike you as an extraordinary thing that I should be fighting in
this fierce way in your behalf, and that you should be placing negative
obstacles in my way all the time? I won't worry you any more to-night,
dearest--you look tired and worn out. You had better go to your own
room, and we can discuss this matter further in the morning."

It was dark enough and sheltered enough in that secluded corner of the
hall for Venner to draw the girl towards him and kiss her lips
passionately. Just for a brief moment Vera lay in her husband's arms;
then, with a little sigh, she disengaged herself and disappeared slowly
up the stairs.

She had placed Beth in her own room, which they would share together for
that night, at any rate. The younger girl was sleeping placidly; there
was a smile on her face--her lips were parted like those of one who is
utterly and entirely happy. She made a fair picture as she lay there,
with her yellow hair streaming over her shoulders. She just murmured
something in her sleep, as Vera bent over her and brushed her forehead
lightly with her lips.

"Oh, I wonder how long this cloud will last!" Vera murmured--"how much
longer I shall be till I am free! How terrible it is to have the offer of
a good man's love, and be compelled to spoil it as I do, or, at least, as
I appear to do. And yet I should be a happy woman if I could only throw
off these shackles--"

Vera paused, unable to say more, for something seemed to rise in her
throat and choke her. She was utterly tired and worn out, almost too
tired to undress and get into bed--and yet once her head was on the
pillow she could not sleep; she tossed and turned wearily. All London
seemed to be transformed into one noisy collection of clocks. The noise
and the din seemed to stun Vera and throb through her head like the
beating of hammers on her brain. She fell off presently into a troubled
sleep, which was full of dreams. It seemed to her that she was locked in
a safe, and that somebody outside was hammering at the walls to let her
free. Then she became conscious of the fact that somebody really was
knocking at the door. As Vera stumbled out of bed a clock somewhere
struck three. She flicked up the light and opened the door. A
sleepy-looking chambermaid handed her a note, which was marked "Urgent"
on the envelope. With a thrill, she recognised the handwriting of Mark
Fenwick. What new disaster was here? she wondered.

"Is there anybody waiting for an answer?" she asked tremblingly. "Is the
messenger downstairs?"

"Yes, miss," the sleepy chambermaid replied. "It was brought by a
gentleman in a motor. I told him you were in bed and fast asleep, but he
said it was of the greatest importance and I was to wake you. Perhaps you
had better read it."

With a hand that trembled terribly, Vera tore open the envelope. There
were only two or three lines there in Fenwick's stiff handwriting;
they were curt and discourteous, and very much to the point. They ran
as follows--

"I am writing you this from Canterbury, where I have been for the last
hour, and where I have important business. I have sent one of the cars
over for you, and you are to come back at once. Whatever happens, see
that you obey me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You will tell the gentleman I will be down in a few moments," Vera said.
"I will not detain him any longer than I can help."

"What is to be done?" the girl wondered directly she was alone. She felt
that she dared not disobey this command; she would have to go at all
costs. She knew by bitter experience that Fenwick was not the man to
brook contradiction. Besides, at the present moment it would be a fatal
thing to rouse his suspicions. And yet, she felt how impossible it was
for her to leave Beth here in the circumstances. Nor could she see her
way to call up Venner at this hour and explain what had happened. All she
could do was to scribble a short note to him with a view to explaining
the outline of the new situation. Ten minutes later she was downstairs in
the hall, where she found the man awaiting her. He was clad in furs, his
motor cap was pulled over his eyes as if he shrank from observation; but
all the same Vera recognised him.

"So it is you, Jones," she said. "Do you know that you have been sent all
the way from Canterbury to fetch me at this time in the morning? It is
perfectly monstrous that I should be dragged out of bed like this;
perfectly disgraceful!"

"I don't know anything about that, miss," the man said sullenly. "It is
the guv'nor's orders, and he gave me pretty plainly to understand that
he would want to know the reason why if I came back without you. Don't
blame me."

"I'm not blaming you at all," Vera said, coldly. "Nor am I going to stand
here bandying words with you. I will just go to my room and put on a fur
coat--then I shall be ready."

"Very well, miss. That's the proper way to take it. But where is the
other young lady?"

Vera's heart fairly stood still for a moment. Fenwick's note had said
nothing about her sister, though this man seemed to be aware of the fact
that she was here. There was only one thing for it, and that was to lie
boldly and without hesitation. She looked the speaker in the face in
blank astonishment.

"I fail to understand you," she said. "There is nobody here but me; there
could be nobody here but me. And now I have nothing further to say. One
moment and I will be with you."


CHAPTER XVII

MERTON GRANGE


Vera came down a few moments later ready for her journey. Now that she
had had time to think matters over, she was looking forward with some
dread to her forthcoming interview with Mark Fenwick. Surely something
out of the common must have taken place, or he would never have sent for
her at such an extraordinary time, and Vera had always one thing to
contend with; she had not forgotten, in fact, she could not forget, that
for the last three years she had been engaged in plotting steadily
against the man by whose name she was known. Moreover, she was not in the
least blind to Fenwick's astuteness, and there was always the unpleasant
feeling that he might be playing with her. She had always loathed and
detested this man from the bottom of her soul; there were times when she
doubted whether or not he was a relation of hers. As far as Vera knew, he
was supposed to be her mother's half-brother, and so much as this she
owed the man--he had come to her at the time when she was nearly
destitute, and in no position to turn her back on his advances. That it
suited Fenwick to have a well-bred and graceful girl about him, she knew
perfectly well. But long before would she have left him, only she was
quite certain that Fenwick was at the bottom of the dreadful business
which had resulted in Beth's deplorable state of mind.

But as to all this, Vera could say nothing at the moment. All she had to
do now was to guard herself against a surprise on the part of Fenwick.
She had been startled by the mere suggestion on the part of her companion
that she had not been alone at the Great Empire Hotel. Much as she would
have liked illumination on this point, she had the prudence to say
nothing. Silently she stepped into the car, a big Mercedes with great
glaring eyes; silently, too, she was borne along the empty streets. It
wanted yet three hours to daylight, and Vera asked how long they would be
in reaching their destination. Her companion put on speed once the
outskirts of town were reached. Vera could feel the cold air streaming
past her face like a touch of ice.

"Oh, about an hour and a half," the driver said carelessly. "I suppose it
is about fifty-five miles. With these big lamps and these clear roads
we'll just fly along."

The speaker touched a lever, and the car seemed to jump over the smooth
roads. The hedges and houses flew by and the whole earth seemed to
vibrate to the roar and rattle of the car. It was Vera's first experience
of anything like racing, and she held her breath in terror.

"What would happen if a wheel gave way?" she asked. She had muffled her
face in her veil, so that she could breathe more freely now. "Surely a
pace like this is dangerous."

"You have to take risks, miss," the driver said coolly. "We are moving at
about five and forty miles an hour now. I'm very sorry if it makes you
nervous, but my instructions were to get back as quickly as possible."

"I don't feel exactly nervous," Vera said.

"Oh, no, you are getting over it. Everybody does after the first few
moments. When you get used to the motion you will like it. It gives you a
feeling like a glass of champagne when you're tired. You'll see for
yourself presently."

Surely enough Vera did see for herself presently. As the feeling of
timidity and unfamiliarity wore off she began to be conscious of a glow
in her blood as if she were breathing some pure mountain air. The breeze
fairly sang past her ears, the car ran more smoothly now with nothing to
check its movement, and Vera could have sung aloud for the very joy of
living. She began to understand the vivid pleasure of motoring; she could
even make an excuse for those who travelled the high roads at top speed.
Long before she had reached her destination she had forgotten everything
else beside the pure delight of that trip in the dark.

"Here we are, miss," the driver said at length, as he turned in through
a pair of huge iron gates. "It's about a mile up the avenue to the
house--but you can see the lights in front of you."

"Have we really come all that way in this short time?" Vera asked. "It
only seems about ten minutes since we started."

The driver made no reply, and Vera had little time to look curiously
about her. So far as she could judge, they were in a large park, filled
with magnificent oak trees. Here and there through the gloom she seemed
to see shadowy figures flitting, and these she assumed to be deer. On
each side of the avenue rose a noble line of elm trees, beyond which were
the gardens; then a series of terraces, culminating in a fine house of
the late Tudor period. Beyond question, it was a fine old family mansion
in which Fenwick had taken up his quarters for the present.

"What do you call the place?" Vera asked.

"This is Merton Grange, miss," the driver explained. "It belongs to Lord
Somebody or another, I forget his name. Anyway, he has had to let the
house for a time and go abroad. You had better get out here, and I'll
take the car to the garage. I wouldn't ring the bell if I were you, miss.
I'd just walk straight into the house. You'll find the door open and the
guv'nor ready to receive you. He is sure to have heard the car coming up
the drive."

Vera descended and walked up the flight of steps which led to a noble
portico. Here was a great massive oak door, which looked as if it
required the strength of a strong man to open it, but it yielded to
Vera's touch, and a moment later she was standing in the great hall.

Tired as she was and frightened as she was feeling now, she could not
but admire the beauty and symmetry of the place. Like most historic
mansions of to-day, the place had been fitted with electric light, and
a soft illuminating flood of it filled the hall. It was a magnificent
oak-panelled apartment, filled with old armor and trophies, and lined
with portraits of the owner's ancestors. It seemed to Vera that
anybody might be happy here. It also seemed strange to her that a man
of Fenwick's type should choose a place like this for his habitation.
She was destined to know later what Fenwick had in his mind when he
came here.

Vera's meditations were cut short by the appearance of the man himself.
To her surprise she noted that he was dressed in some blue material, just
like an engineer on board ship. His hands were grimy, too, as if he had
been indulging in some mechanical work. He nodded curtly to the girl.

"So you've come at last," he said. "I daresay you wonder why I sent for
you. There is a little room at the back yonder, behind the
drawing-room, that I have turned into a study. Go in there and wait
for me, and I'll come to you as soon as I have washed my hands. I hope
you have brought all you want with you; for there is precious little
accommodation for your sex here at present. You can take your choice of
bed-rooms--there are enough of those and to spare. I have something
serious to say to you."

With a sinking at her heart Vera passed into the little room that Fenwick
had pointed out to her. At any other time she would have admired the old
furniture and the elegant refined simplicity of it all; now she had other
things to think of. She stood warming her hands at the fire till Fenwick
came in and carefully closed the door behind him.

"Now we can get to business," he said. "I daresay you wonder why I sent
for you instead of leaving you in London for the present. Up to now I
have always regarded you as perfectly safe--indeed, I thought you were
sufficiently grateful to me for all my kindness to you. I find I am
mistaken."

Vera looked up with a challenge in her eyes. She knew that she had
something to face now, and she meant to see it through without showing
the white feather. She was braced up and ready, now that the moment for
action had come.

"Have you ever really been kind to me?" she challenged. "I mean, have you
really been kind to me for my own sake, and out of pure good-nature? I
very much doubt it."

"This is your gratitude," Fenwick sneered. "I think we had better
understand one another."

"I would give a great deal to understand you," the girl said boldly. "But
we are wasting time fencing here like this, and I am very tired. You sent
for me at this extraordinary hour, and I came. I have every right to know
why you asked me to come here."

"Sit down," Fenwick growled. "I sent for you because I did not trust you.
I sent for you because you have betrayed your promise. You are doing
something that you told me you would not do."

"And what is that?" Vera asked.

"Just as if you did not know. Let us go back a bit, back three years and
a half ago. Your father was alive in those days; it was just before he
met his death in Mexico."

"I remember perfectly well," Vera said, quietly. "I am not likely to
forget the time. Pray continue."

"Have patience please, I am coming to it all in time. Your father died
more or less mysteriously, but there is not the shadow of a doubt that he
was murdered. Nobody knows how he was murdered, but a good many people
behind the scenes can guess why. The thing was hushed up, possibly
because the tragedy took place in so remote a corner of the
world--possibly because the authorities were bribed. Tell me the name of
the man, or, at least, tell me the name of the one man who was with your
father at the time of his death."

Vera's face paled slightly, but she kept her eyes steadily fixed on her
companion's face. She began to understand where the point of the torture
was coming in.

"I will not affect to misunderstand you," she said. "The man who was with
my father at that time was Mr. Charles Evors. He was a sort of pupil of
my father's, and had more than once accompanied him on his excursions.
You want to insinuate that my father met his death at the hands of this
young man, who, overcome by certain temptation and a desire to obtain the
secret of the Four Finger Mine, murdered his master?"

"I am in a position to prove it," Fenwick said sternly. "I have given you
practical proof of it, more than once. Why should I have interfered in
the way I did, unless it was that I desired to save you pain? I could
have brought the whole thing into the light of day, but I refrained from
doing so because, it seemed to me, nothing could be gained by bringing
the criminal to justice. I had another reason, too, as you know."

"Yes, I am aware of that," Vera said. "I could never make it out--I could
never really believe that Charles Evors was guilty of that dreadful
crime. He was so frank and true, so kind to everybody! I know he was
weak--I know that he had been sent away from England because he had
fallen into bad company; I know, too, that he was a little fond of drink.
There was only one point on which he was reticent--he never spoke much
about his people; but I rather gathered that they were in a high
position."

"They were," Fenwick grinned. "You'd be surprised if you knew how high a
position. But go on."

"I was saying that I could not credit Charles Evors with such a crime. A
man who is so fond of children, so sympathetic to things weaker than
himself, could not have taken the life of a fellow-creature. He was fond
of my father, too, but that was not the strangest feature of the mystery.
Do you suppose for a moment that the man who was engaged to be married to
my sister could have laid violent hands on her father?"

"But he did do it," Fenwick cried impatiently. "Otherwise why did he
vanish so mysteriously? Why did he go away and leave us to infer that he
had perished at sea? It was the kindest thing we could do to let your
sister think that her lover was dead, though the shock seems to have
deprived her of her reason; and, though I acted all for the best, your
brother chose to proclaim me an abandoned scoundrel, and to say that your
father's death lay at my door. You know why it became necessary for you
to remain with me and treat your brother henceforth as a stranger. You
volunteered to do it, you volunteered to turn your back on your family
and remain with me. Why did you do so?"

No reply came from Vera's lips. It seemed to her that her safest course
lay in silence. To her great relief, Fenwick went on without waiting for
an answer.

"Now I am coming to my point," he said. "You have broken faith with me.
Three or four times since we came to England you have seen your brother.
You have seen him by stealth; you know all about that strange household
in Portsmouth Square where he chooses to hide himself under the name of
Bates. I want to know why it is that you have chosen to break your word
with me? I have had you watched to-night, and I have learned all your
movements by means of the telephone. You will stay down here during my
pleasure. If you fail to do so, or if you try to deceive me again, as
sure as I stand here at the present moment I will betray Charles Evors
into the hands of the police. Now look me in the face and answer my
question truthfully Do you know where that young man is?"

It was fortunate for Vera that she could reply in the negative. A few
more hours, perhaps, and she might have been able to afford the
information; but, luckily for her, the startling events that had recently
taken place in Portsmouth Square were not known to her in their entirety.
She could look Fenwick in the face.

"I don't," she said. "I have never seen him since that fateful
morning--but I don't care to go into that. I admit that I have seen my
brother. I admit, too, that I have seen my sister; the temptation to find
them and see them once more was too strong for me. You will not be
surprised to find that I have some natural feelings left. It is not so
very extraordinary."

Fenwick shot a suspicious glance at Vera, but she was gazing into the
fire with a thoughtful look. She was acting her part splendidly; she
was deceiving this man who, as a rule, could read the thoughts of
most people.

"Perhaps you are right," he said doubtfully. "But to make assurance
doubly sure you are going to help me out of a difficulty. I suppose you
have not forgotten Felix Zary?"

"No," Vera said, in a curiously low voice. "I have not forgotten my
father's faithful companion. I should very much like to see him again. If
you know where he is--"

"Oh, I know where he is," Fenwick said with a laugh. "We will have him
down here as a pleasant surprise. That is all I want you to do--I want
you to write a letter to Zary, telling him that you are in great trouble,
and asking him to come down here and see you at once. I should like you
to write that letter now."


CHAPTER XVIII

A COUPLE OF VISITORS


Something in the tone of Fenwick's voice caused Vera to look up
hastily. Perhaps it was her imagination that in the unsteady light of
the flickering fire his face seemed to have changed almost beyond
recognition. The features were dark and murderous and the eyes were
full of a lust for vengeance. It was only just for a moment--then the
man became his normal self again, just as if nothing had happened. A
violent shudder passed over Vera's frame, but Fenwick appeared to
notice nothing of this.

"You want me to write that letter now?" she asked.

"At once," Fenwick responded. "I don't mind telling you that I am in
great trouble over business matters; there is a conspiracy on foot
amongst certain people to get me into trouble. I may even find myself
inside the walls of a prison. The man who can save me from all this is
your friend, Felix Zary. Unfortunately for me, the man has the bad taste
to dislike me exceedingly. He seems to think that I was in some way
responsible for your father's death. And, as you know, he loved your
father with a devotion that was almost dog-like. If I could get Zary
down here I should have no difficulty in convincing him that he was
wrong. But he would not come near the place so long as he knew that I
was present; so, therefore, I want you to write to him and conceal the
fact that I am on the premises. Directly he gets your letter he will
come at once."

"I have not the slightest doubt of it," Vera said slowly. "There is
nothing that Zary would not do for one of us, if you will assure me that
you mean no harm by him--"

"Harm?" Fenwick shouted. "What harm could I do the man? Didn't I tell you
just now that I want him to do me a service? One does not generally
ill-treat those who are in a position to bestow favors. Now sit down like
the good girl that you are, and write that letter at once. Then you can
go to bed."

"I will write it in the morning," Vera said. "Surely there cannot be
all this desperate hurry. If the letter is written before the post goes
out tomorrow afternoon it will be in good time. I am much too tired to
do it now."

Just for a moment Fenwick's eyes blazed angrily again. It seemed to Vera
that the man was about to burst forth into a storm of passion. The hot
words did not come, however, for Fenwick restrained himself. Perhaps he
was afraid of going a little too far; perhaps he was afraid of arousing
Vera's suspicions, and thus defeating his own object by a refusal on her
part to write the letter. He knew from past experience that she could be
as firm of purpose as himself if she chose.

"Very well," he said, with an almost grotesque attempt at good-humor.
"You look very tired tonight, and I daresay you have had a fatiguing
journey--and, after all, there is no great hurry. I will show you up to
the room which I have set apart for your use."

Vera was only too glad to get away. Despite her strange surroundings, and
despite the sense of coming danger, she threw herself on the bed and
slept the sleep of utter exhaustion. It was getting towards noon before
she came back to herself, invigorated and refreshed by her long rest.

So far as the girl could see, there were no servants in the house at
present besides an old retainer of the family and her husband. Fenwick
had made some excuse about the staff of domestics who were to follow
later on; but up to now he only had about him the men whom Vera had known
more or less well for the last two years. The meals appeared to be served
in a remarkably irregular fashion; even the lunch was partaken of
hurriedly by Fenwick, who pleaded the pressure of business.

"I can't stop a minute," he said. "I have more to do now than I can
manage. I should just like to have a look at that letter that you have
written to Zary. There is no excuse for not doing it now, and I want to
put it in the post-bag."

"Very well," Vera said serenely. "If you will come with me to the library
you will see exactly what I write. I know you are a suspicious man and
that you don't trust anybody, therefore I shall be very glad for you to
know that I have carried out your request to the letter."

Fenwick laughed as if something had pleased him. Nevertheless, he looked
over Vera's shoulder until she had penned the last word. She slowly
folded up the communication and sealed it.

"How am I to address the envelope?" she said. "I have not the slightest
idea where Zary is to be found. For all I know to the contrary, he may
not even be in England."

"Oh, yes, he is," Fenwick chuckled. "He is in London at the present
moment. If you address that letter, 17, Paradise Street, Camberwell, Zary
will be in receipt of it to-morrow morning."

Vera wrote the address boldly and firmly, and handed the letter with more
or less contempt to her companion. She wanted him to feel that she held
his suspicions with scorn. She wanted him to know that so far as she was
concerned here was an end of the matter. Nevertheless, she followed him
carelessly from the room and saw him place the letter, together with
others, on the hall table. A moment later he had vanished, and she was
left alone to act promptly. She did not hesitate for a moment; she made
her way back to the drawing-room and addressed a second envelope to the
house in Paradise Street, into which envelope she slipped a blank sheet
of notepaper. Then she stamped the envelope and made her way back
cautiously to the hall. There was a chance of being discovered, a chance
that she was being watched, but she had to run the risk of that. She was
crossing the hall freely and carelessly now, and so contrived as to sweep
the mass of letters with her sleeve to the floor, exclaiming at her own
clumsiness as she did so. Like a flash she picked out the one letter that
she needed and swiftly exchanged it for the other. A moment later she was
out of doors, with the dangerous communication in her pocket.

So far as she could see, she had succeeded beyond her wildest
expectations. It was only a simple ruse, but like most simple things,
generally successful. Vera was trembling from head to foot now, but the
fresh air of the park and the broad, beautiful solitude of it soothed her
jarred nerves, and brought back a more contented frame of mind. Her
spirits rose as she walked along.

"I am glad I did that," she told herself, "I may be mistaken, but I
firmly believe that I have saved Zary's life. Had he come down here he
would never have left the place again. And yet there is danger for him
still, and I must warn him of it. I must manage to communicate in some
way with Gerald. I wonder if it would be safe to send him a telegram from
the village. I wonder, too, in what direction the village lies. Still, I
have all the afternoon before me, and a brisk walk will do me good."

With a firm, elastic step, Vera walked across the grass in the direction
of a wood, beyond which she could see the slope of the high road. She had
hardly entered the wood before she heard a voice calling her name, and to
her intense delight she turned to find herself face to face with Venner.

"Oh, this is glorious," she said, as she placed both her hands in his.
"But do you think that it is quite safe for you to come here so soon? For
all I know, I may be followed.

"I don't think so," Venner said. "Now let me take you in my arms and kiss
you. Let us sit down here in this snug corner and try to imagine that we
are back in the happy days when no cloud loomed between us, and we were
looking forward to many joyous years together. We will talk mundane
matters presently."

Vera yielded to the ecstasy of the moment. Everything was so dark and
melancholy that it seemed a sin to lose a gleam of sunshine like this.
But the time crept on and the November sun was sinking, and it was borne
in upon Vera that she must get back to the house again. Very gently, she
disengaged herself from Venner's embrace.

"We must be really practical now," she said. "Tell me what has happened
since I left the hotel last night?"

"So far as I can see, nothing," Venner replied. "I asked for you this
morning, and to my surprise I found that you had vanished in the dead of
the night with a mysterious chauffeur and a Mercedes car. By great good
luck I found a policeman who had made a note of the number of the car;
after which I went to the makers, or rather the agents of the makers, and
it was quite easy to find out that the Mercedes in question had recently
been delivered to Mr. Mark Fenwick's order at Merton Grange near
Canterbury. After that, you will not be surprised to find that I came
down here as soon as possible, and that I have been hiding here with a
pair of field-glasses trying to get a glimpse of you."

"That was very interesting," Vera laughed. "But tell me about my sister.
I am so anxious over her."

"No reason to be," said Venner. "I have seen to that. She has gone back
to your brother."

"Oh, I am so glad. Now listen to me carefully."

She went on with some detail to tell the story of her last night's
experiences. She spoke of Felix Zary and the letter which she had been
more or less compelled to write to him. Also, she described the ruse by
which the letter had been regained.

"Now you must go and see this Zary," she said. "Tell him that you come
from me, and tell him all about the letter. Mind, he must reply to my
letter just as if it had reached him in the ordinary way through the
post, because, as you see, I shall have to show the answer to Mr.
Fenwick, and I want to lull his suspicions to rest entirely. You may find
Zary a little awkward at first."

"I don't think I shall," Venner smiled. "In fact, he and I are already
acquainted. But I am not going to tell you anything about that; you
prefer to keep your secrets as far as I am concerned, and I am going to
guard mine for the present. I am working to put an end to all this
mystery and bother, and I am going to do it my own way. Anyway, I will
see Zary for you and tell him exactly what has happened. In fact, I will
go to town this evening for the express purpose. Then I will come back in
the morning and meet you here the same time to-morrow afternoon."

They parted at that, and Vera made her way back to the house. She saw
that the letters were no longer on the hall table, and therefore she
concluded that they had been posted. She assumed a quiet, dignified
manner during the rest of the evening. She treated Fenwick more or less
distantly, as if she were still offended with his suspicions. Fenwick, on
the other hand, was more than usually amiable. Something had evidently
pleased him, and he appeared to be doing his best to wipe out the
unpleasant impression of the morning. Vera felt quite easy in her mind
now; she knew that her ruse had been absolutely successful. All the same,
she ignored Fenwick's request of a little music, professing to be
exceedingly tired, which, indeed, was no more than the truth.

"I am going to bed quite early to-night," she said. "I have been sleeping
very indifferently of late."

It was barely ten before she was in her room, and there she lay,
oblivious of all that was taking place around her, till she woke
presently with an idea that she could hear the sound of hammering close
by. As she sat up in bed with all her senses about her, she could hear
the great stable clock strike the hour of three. Her ears had not
deceived her; the sound of metal meeting metal in a kind of musical chink
came distinct and clear. Then from somewhere near she could hear voices.
The thing was very strange, seeing that Fenwick was a business man pure
and simple, and that he had never confessed to any knowledge of
mechanics. It came back to her mind now, that directly she had entered
the house Fenwick had greeted her in a suit of blue overalls which she
understood men who followed mechanical pursuits generally wore. She
recollected, too, that his hands were black and grimy. What could be
going on, and why had she seen nothing of this during the day-time? She
could comprehend men sitting up all night and working in a factory, but
surely there could be no occasion for a thing like this in a private
house, unless, perhaps, Fenwick and his satellites were engaged in some
pursuit that needed careful concealment from the eyes of the law.

It would be well, perhaps, Vera thought, if she could find out what was
going on. The discovery might be the means of putting another weapon
into her hands. She rose from her bed and partially dressed herself.
Then, with a pair of slippers on her feet and a dark wrap round her
shoulders, she stole into the corridor. A dim light was burning there,
so that she had no fear of being discovered, especially as the walls
were draped with tapestry, and here and there armored figures stood,
which afforded a capital means of concealment. As Vera sidled along she
noticed that at the end of the corridor was a small room down a flight
of steps. From where she stood she could see into the room, the door of
which was open. Fenwick stood there apparently engaged in superintending
the melting of metal in a crucible over a fire, which was driven to
white heat by a pair of bellows. The rest of his gang seemed to be doing
something on an iron table with moulds and discs. Vera could see the
gleam of yellow metal, then somebody closed the door of the room and she
could learn no more. It was all very strange and mysterious, and there
was a furtive air about it which did not suggest honesty of purpose.
There was nothing more for it now except for Vera to return to her
room, with a determination to see the inside of that little apartment
the first time that the coast was clear.

She hurried along back to her own room, and had almost succeeded in
reaching it, when she came face to face with a man who had stepped out of
a doorway so suddenly that the two figures came almost in contact. A
fraction of a second later a hand was laid over Vera's mouth, while
another grasped her wrist; then she saw that the intruder had been joined
by a companion.

"Please don't say a word, miss; and, whatever you do, don't call out,"
one of the men whispered. "We know all about you and who you are. Believe
me, we are here to do you the greatest service in our power. My colleague
will tell you the same."

"But who are you?" Vera asked, as the man removed his hand from her
mouth. Her courage had come back to her now. "Why do you come in
this fashion?"

"My name is Egan," the stranger said, "and this is my companion, Grady.
We are New York detectives, over here on important business. The man we
are after is Mark Fenwick."


CHAPTER XIX

PHANTOM GOLD


Vera had entirely recovered her self-possession by this time. She was
able to regard the men coolly and critically. There was nothing about
them that suggested anything wrong or underhand; on the contrary, the
girl rather liked their appearance. All the same it was a strange and
unique experience; and though Vera had been through a series of trials
and tribulations, she thrilled now as she recognised how near she had
been to the man who was thus running himself into the hands of justice.

"But how can you know anything about me?" she said. "You surely do not
mean to say that you suspect--"

"Not at all, miss," Egan said, civilly. "Only, you see, it is always our
business to know a great deal more than people imagine. I hope you won't
suppose that we are going to take any advantage of our position here, or
that we want you to betray Mr. Fenwick into our hands; but since we have
been unfortunate enough to be discovered by you, we will ask you to go so
far as to say nothing to Mr. Fenwick. If you tell him, you will be doing
considerable harm to a great many deserving people who have suffered
terribly at that man's hands. I think you understand."

Vera understood only too well, and yet her delicate sense of honor was
slightly disturbed at the idea of continuing there without warning
Fenwick of the danger that overshadowed him. Personally, she would have
liked to have told him exactly how he stood, and given him the
opportunity to get away. Perhaps Egan saw something of this in Vera's
face, for he went on to speak again.

"I know it isn't very nice for you, miss," he said, "and I am not
surprised to see you hesitate; but seeing that Mr. Fenwick has done you
as much harm as anybody else--"

"How do you know that?" Vera exclaimed.

"Well, you see, it is our business to know everything. I feel quite
certain that on reflection you will do nothing to defeat the ends
of justice."

"No," Vera said, thoughtfully. "In any case, it cannot much matter. You
are here to arrest Mr. Fenwick, and you probably know where he is to be
found at the present moment."

"There you are wrong, miss," Grady said. "We are not in a position at
present to lay hands on our man. We came here prepared to take a few
risks--but I don't suppose you would care to hear anything about our
methods. It will be a great favor to us if you will retire to your room
and stay there till morning."

Vera went off without any further ado, feeling that once more the current
of events had come between her and the sleep that she so sorely needed.
But, in spite of everything, she had youth and health on her side, and
within a few minutes she was fast asleep. It was fairly late when she
came down the next morning, and she was rather surprised to find that
Fenwick had not finished his breakfast. He sat there sullen and
heavy-eyed, and had no more than a grunt for Vera in response to her
morning greeting. He turned over his food with savage disapproval.
Evidently, from the look of him, he had not only been up late overnight,
but he had also had more wine than was good for him.

"Who can eat rubbish like this?" he growled. "The stuff isn't fit to feed
a dog with. Look at this bacon."

"You can expect nothing else," Vera said, coldly. "If you choose to try
and run a large house like this with practically no servants beyond a
caretaker and his wife, you must put up with the consequences. You are an
exceedingly clever man, but you seem to have overlooked one fact, and
that is the amount of gossip you are providing for the neighbors. It
isn't as if we were still in town, where the man next door knows nothing
of you and cares less. Here people are interested in their neighbors. It
will cause quite a scandal when it becomes known that you are occupying
Lord Merton's house with nothing more than a number of questionable men.
As far as I can see, you are far worse off here than if you had stayed in
London. I may be wrong, of course."

"I begin to think you are quite right," Fenwick grunted. "I must see to
this. It will never do for all these chattering magpies to pry into my
business. You had better go into Canterbury this morning and see if you
can't arrange for a proper staff of servants to come. Well, what's the
matter now?"

One of the men had come into the room with a telegram in his hand. He
pitched it in a contemptuous way upon the table and withdrew, whistling
unconcernedly. The man's manner was so flippant and familiar that Vera
flushed with annoyance.

"I wish you would keep your subordinates a little more under your
control," she said. "One hardly expects a man of your wealth to be
treated in this way by his clerks."

But Fenwick was not listening. His brows were knotted in a sullen frown
over the telegram that he held in his hand. He clutched the flimsy paper
and threw it with a passionate gesture into the fire. Vera could see that
his yellow face had grown strangely white, and that his coarse lips were
trembling. He rose from the table, pushing his plate away from him.

"I've got to go to town at once," he said. "How strange it is that
everything seems to have gone wrong of late! I shall be back again in
time for dinner, and I shall be glad if you are good enough to see that I
have something fit to eat. Perhaps you had better telephone to town for
some servants. It doesn't much matter what you pay them as long as they
are good."

Fenwick walked rapidly from the room, and a few moments later Vera could
see his car moving swiftly down the drive. On the whole, she was not
sorry to have Fenwick out of the house. She was pleased, also, to know
that he had made up his mind over the servant question. Already the house
was beginning to look shabby and neglected; in the strong morning
sunshine Vera could see the dust lying everywhere. Her womanly instincts
rebelled against this condition of things; she was not satisfied until
she had set the telephone in motion and settled the matter as far as the
domestic staff was concerned.

Then a sudden thought flashed into her mind. Here was the opportunity
for examining the little room where Fenwick and his satellites had
been busy the previous evening. Vera had not failed to notice the fact
that three of the men had gone off with Fenwick in his car, so that,
in all probability, they meant to accompany him to town. If this
turned out to be correct, then there was only one man to be accounted
for. Possibly with the assistance of Gerald, the fourth man might be
got out of the way.

It was nearly three o'clock in the afternoon before Vera managed to see
her husband. Eagerly and rapidly she told him all that had taken place
the previous evening, though she was rather surprised to find him
manifesting less astonishment than she had expected. Venner smiled when
Vera mentioned this.

"Oh, that's no new thing to me," he said. "I saw all that going on in
your suite of rooms at the Great Empire Hotel, though I haven't the least
notion what it all means. I should have thought that your interesting
guardian was manufacturing counterfeit coins. But we managed to get hold
of one of them, and a jeweller pronounced at once that it was a genuine
sovereign. Still, there is no question of the fact that some underhand
business is going on, and I am quite ready to assist you in finding out
what it is. The point is whether the coast is clear or not."

"There is only one man left behind." Vera explained. "All the rest have
gone to London with Mr. Fenwick, who received a most disturbing telegram
at breakfast this morning. Of course, the old caretaker and his wife
count for nothing; they are quite innocent parties, and merely regard
their stay here as temporary, pending the arrival of our staff of
servants."

"In that case, I don't see why it shouldn't be managed," Venner said.
"You had better go back to the house, and I will call and see you. There
is not the slightest reason why I shouldn't give my own name, nor is
there the slightest reason why you should not show me over the house when
I come. I daresay all this sounds a bit cheap, but one cannot be too
careful in dealing with these people."

It was all arranged exactly as Venner had suggested, and a little later
Vera was shaking hands with her own husband as if he were a perfect
stranger. They proceeded presently to walk up the grand staircase and
along the corridor, Vera doing the honors of the place and speaking in a
manner calculated to deceive anybody who was listening. She stopped
presently and clutched Venner's arm excitedly. She pointed to a doorway
leading to a little room down the steps at the end of the corridor.

"There," she whispered, "that is the room, and, as far as I can see, it
is absolutely empty. What do you say to going in there now? The coast
seems to be quite clear."

Venner hesitated for a moment; it would be just as well, he thought,
to err on the side of caution. A casual glance from the corridor
disclosed nothing, except that on the table there stood a bottle
apparently containing wine, for a glass of some dark ruby liquid stood
beside it. Very rapidly Venner ran down the flight of stairs and
looked into the room.

"There is nobody there for the moment," he said, "but that bulldog of
Fenwick's can't be far off, for there is a half-smoked cigarette on the
end of the table which has not yet gone out. I think I can see my way now
to working this thing without any trouble or danger. Do you happen to
know if that rheumatic old caretaker uses snuff?"

"Really, I don't," Vera said with a smile. "But what possible connection
is there between the caretaker and his snuff--?"

"Never mind about that at present. Go down and ask the old man for his
snuff box. By the look of him, I am quite sure he indulges in the habit.
Tell him you want to kill some insects in the conservatory. Tell him
anything, so long as you get possession of the box for a few minutes."

Vera flew off on her errand. She was some moments before she could make
the old man understand what she needed; then, with the air of one who
parts with some treasure, he handed over to her a little tortoiseshell
box, remarking, at the same time, that he had had it for the last sixty
years and would not part with it for anything. A moment later, Vera was
back again at the end of the corridor. Venner had not moved, a sure sign
that no one had approached in the meantime. Taking the box from Vera's
hand, and leaving her to guard the corridor, he stepped into the little
room, where he proceeded to stir a little pellet of snuff into the glass
of wine. This done, he immediately hurried Vera away to the other end of
the corridor.

"I think that will be all right now," he said. "We have only got to wait
till our man comes back and give him a quarter of an hour. Snuff is a
very strong drug, and within a few minutes of his finishing his wine he
will be sound asleep on the floor."

It all fell out exactly as Venner had prophesied. The man came back
presently, passing Vera and her companion without the slightest suspicion
of anything being wrong. Then he turned into the little room and closed
the door behind him. Half an hour passed before Vera knocked at the door
on some frivolous pretext, but no answer came from the other side. She
knocked again and again, after which she ventured to open the door. The
wine-glass was empty, a half-finished cigarette smouldered on the floor,
and, by the side of it, lay the man in a deep and comatose sleep. Venner
fairly turned him over with his foot, but the slumbering form gave no
sign. The thing was safe now.

"We needn't worry ourselves for an hour or so," Venner said. "And now we
have to see if we can discover the secrets of the prison house. Evidently
nothing is going on at present. I should like to know what the table is
for. It is not unlike a modern gas stove--I mean a gas stove used for
cooking purposes, and here is a parcel on the table, just the same sort
of parcel that the mysterious new sovereigns were wrapped up in."

"Oh, let me see," Vera said eagerly as she pulled the lid off the box.
"See, this stuff inside is just like asbestos, and sure enough here is a
layer of sovereigns on the top. How bright and new they look. I have
never seen gold so attractive before. I--"

Vera suddenly ceased to speak, and a sharp cry of pain escaped her as she
dropped to the floor one of the coins which she had taken in her hand.
She was regarding her thumb and forefinger now with some dismay, for they
were scorched and swollen.

"Those coins are red hot," she said. "You try--but look out you don't
get burned."

Surely enough, the coins were almost at white heat; so much so, that a
wax match placed on the edge of one flared instantly. Venner looked
puzzled; he could not make it out. There was no fire in the room, and
apparently no furnace or oven in which the metal could have been heated.
Then he suddenly recollected that Vera must be in pain.

"My poor child," he said. "I am so sorry. You must go down to the old
housekeeper at once and get her to put something on your hand. Meanwhile,
I will stay here and investigate, though I don't expect for a moment that
I shall make any further discoveries."

Vera's hand was dressed at length, and the pain of the burn had somewhat
abated when Venner came down the stairs again. He shook his head in
response to the questioning glance in Vera's eyes.

"Absolutely nothing," he said. "I found a safe there let into the wall,
but then, you see, the safe has been built for years, and no doubt has
been used by Lord Merton to store his plate and other valuables of that
kind. It is just possible, of course, that Fenwick has the key of it, and
that the safe had been cleared out for his use. I am afraid we shall
never solve this little puzzle until Fenwick is in the hands of those
detectives who gave me such a fright last night."

"But there must have been some means of heating those coins," Vera
protested. "They must have come straight from a furnace."

"Of course," Venner said. "The trouble is where to find the furnace. I
am perfectly sure, too, that the sovereigns were genuine. Now what on
earth can a man gain by taking current coins of the realm and making
them red hot? The only chance of a solution is for me to find Egan and
Grady and tell them of my discovery. I shall be at the same spot
to-morrow afternoon at the same time, and if I find anything out I will
let you know."

There was nothing more for it than this, whereupon Venner went away and
Vera returned thoughtfully to the dining-room. She was just a little bit
in doubt as to whether the man upstairs would guess the trick played upon
him, but that she had to risk.


CHAPTER XX

THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN


Money can do most things, even in the matter of furnishing a large house
with competent servants, and by six o'clock Vera had contrived for the
domestic machine to run a little more smoothly. At any rate, she was in a
position now to provide Fenwick with something in the shape of a
respectable dinner on his return from town.

It was about a quarter to eight when he put in an appearance, and for the
first time for some days he changed into evening dress for the chief meal
of the day. He appeared to be as morose and savage as he had been in the
morning, in fact even more so if that were possible. He answered Vera's
questions curtly, so that she fell back upon herself and ate her soup in
silence. And yet, though Fenwick was so quiet, it seemed to Vera that he
was regarding her with a deep distrust, so that she found herself
flushing under his gaze. He put his spoon down presently, and pointed
with his hand to Vera's swollen fingers.

"What have you got there?" he demanded. "How did you do that?"

"I burnt it," Vera stammered. "It was an accident."

"Well, I don't suppose you burnt it on purpose," Fenwick growled. "I
don't suppose you put your hand into the fire to see if it was hot. What
I asked you was how you did it. Please answer my question."

"I repeat it was an accident," Vera said, coldly. "I burnt my fingers in
such a way--"

"Yes, and you are not the first woman who has burnt her fingers
interfering with things that don't concern her. I insist upon knowing
exactly how that accident happened."

Vera turned a cold, contemptuous face to her companion; she began to
understand now that his suspicions were aroused. It came back to her
vividly enough that she had dropped the hot sovereign on the floor, and
that, owing to the shock and sudden surprise, she had not replaced it. It
was just possible that Fenwick had gone into the little room and had
missed the sovereign from the neat layer of coins on the top of the box.
And then another dreadful thought came to Vera--supposing that the
drugged man had not recovered from the effects of his dose by the time
that Fenwick had returned? It was a point which both she and Venner had
overlooked. There was nothing for it but to take refuge behind an assumed
indignation, and decline to answer offensive questions put in that tone
of voice. Vera was still debating as to the most contemptuous reply when
the dining-room door opened and one of the newly-arrived servants
announced Mr. Blossett.

Fenwick rose to his feet and an unmistakable oath escaped his lips. All
the same, he forced a kind of sickly smile to his face, as a big man,
with an exceedingly red face and an exceedingly offensive swaggering
manner, came into the dining-room. The stranger was quite well dressed,
nothing about his garments offended the eye or outraged good taste, yet,
all the same, the man had "bounder" written all over him in large
letters. His impudent red face, his aggressively waxed moustache, and the
easy familiarity of his manner, caused Vera to shrink within herself,
though she could have been grateful to the fellow for the diversion which
his appearance had created.

"Well, Fenwick, my buck!" he cried. "You didn't expect that I should
accept your invitation quite so promptly, but I happen to be knocking
around here, and I thought I'd drop in and join you in your chop. This is
your daughter, I suppose? Glad to make your acquaintance, miss. I was
told there were many beauties at Merton Grange, but I find that there is
one more than I expected."

Vera merely bowed in reply. The man was so frankly, hopelessly, utterly
vulgar that her uppermost feeling was one of amusement. She could see
that Fenwick was terribly annoyed, though for some reason he had to keep
himself in hand and be agreeable to Blossett.

"Sit down," he said. "Ring the bell, and we will get another cover laid.
I don't suppose you mind missing the soup."

"I have been in the soup too often to care about it," Blossett laughed.
"To tell the truth, we had such a warm time last night that solid food
and myself are not on speaking terms just now. Here, waiter, fill me a
tumbler of champagne. I daresay when I have got that down my neck I shall
be able to pay my proper attentions to this young lady."

Fenwick made no reply; he cut savagely at his fish as if he were passing
the knife over the throat of the intruder. Meanwhile the stranger rattled
on, doubtless under the impression that he was making himself exceedingly
agreeable. Vera sat there watching the scene with a certain sense of
amusement. She was still a little pale and unsteady, still doubtful as to
the amount of information that Fenwick had gleaned as to her movements
that afternoon. She would be glad to get away presently and try to
ascertain for herself whether the drugged man had recovered or not.
Meanwhile, there was no occasion for her to talk, as the intruder was
quite able to carry on all the necessary conversation.

"This is mighty fine tipple," he said. "Waiter, give me another tumbler
of champagne. In my chequered career I don't often run up against this
class of lotion. The worst of it is, it makes one talk too fast, and
seeing that I have got to run the gauntlet with the next little parcel of
sparklers--"

"Fool!" Fenwick burst out. His face was livid with rage, his eyes were
shot with passionate anger. "Fool! can't you be silent? Don't you see
that there is one here who is outside--"

"Beg pardon," Blossett said, unsteadily. "I thought the young woman knew
all about it. Lord, with her dainty face and her aristocratic air, what a
bonnet she'd make. Wouldn't she look nice passing off as the daughter of
the old military swell with a fondness for a little game of cards? You
know what I mean--the same game that old Jim and his wife used to play."

"Be silent," Fenwick thundered in a tone that at last seemed to
penetrate the thick skull of his companion. "My--my daughter knows
nothing of these things."

Blossett stammered something incoherent, his manner became more sullen,
and long before dinner was completed it was evident that he had had far
more wine than was good for him.

"If you will excuse me, I will leave you," Vera said coldly. "I do not
care for any dessert or coffee to-night."

"Perhaps you had better go," Fenwick said with an air of relief. "I will
take care that this thing does not happen again."

But Vera had already left the room; she was still consumed with anxiety,
and desired to know more of what had happened to the man whom Venner had
drugged. She did not dare venture as far as the little room, for fear
that suspicious eyes should be watching her. It was just possible that
Fenwick had given his satellites a hint to note her movements. Therefore,
all she could do was to sit in the drawing-room with the door open. Some
of the men began to pass presently, and after a little time, with a sigh
of relief, Vera caught sight of the one upon whom the trick of the snuff
was played. He seemed all right, as far as she could judge, and the girl
began to breathe a little more freely.

As she sat there in the silence watching and waiting, she saw Fenwick and
his companion emerge from the dining-room and cross the hall in the
direction of the billiard room. Blossett was still talking lightly and
incoherently; he leant on the arm of his host, and obviously the support
was necessary. Vera had never before seen a drunken man under the same
roof as herself, and her soul revolted at the sight. How much longer was
this going on, she wondered? How much more would she be called upon to
endure? For the present, she had only to possess herself in patience and
hope for the best. She was longing now for something like action. The
silence and stillness of the house oppressed her; she would have liked to
be up and doing something. Anything better than sitting there.

The silence was broken presently by the sound of angry voices proceeding
from the billiard-room. Half-a-dozen men seemed to be talking at the same
time--words floated to Vera's ears; then suddenly the noise ceased, as if
somebody had clapped down a lid upon the meeting. Vera guessed exactly
what had happened. The billiard-room door had been closed for fear of the
servants hearing what was going on. It was just possible that behind
those closed doors the mystery that had so puzzled Vera was being
unfolded. She recollected now that between the dining-and the
billiard-room was a fairly large conservatory opening on either side into
the apartments in question. It was just possible that Fenwick and his
companions might have overlooked the conservatory. At any rate, Vera
determined to take advantage of the chance. The conservatory was full of
palms and plants and flowers, behind which it was possible for the girl
to hide and listen to all that was going on.

Vera fully understood the danger she was running, she quite appreciated
the fact that discovery might be visited with unpleasant consequences.
But this did not deter her for a moment. She was in the conservatory a
little later, and was not displeased to find that the door leading to
the billiard-room was open. Behind a thick mask of ferns she took her
stand. Between the feathery fronds she could see into the billiard-room
without being seen. Fenwick was standing by the side of the table laying
down the law about something, while the rest of his men were scattered
about the room.

"Why should I do it?" Fenwick was saying. "Why should I trust a man
like you? You come down to-night on the most important errand, well
knowing the risks you are running, and you start by getting drunk at
the dinner table."

"I wasn't drunk," Blossett said sullenly. "As to the girl, why, I
naturally expected--"

"Who gave you the right to expect?" Fenwick demanded. "Couldn't you see
at a glance that she knew nothing about it. Another word and you would
have betrayed the whole thing. You can stay here all night and talk if
you like, but you are not going to have that parcel to take away to
London with you. In your present condition you would be in the hands of
the police before morning."

"But I haven't got a cent," Blossett said. "I hadn't enough money in my
pocket to pay my cab fare from Canterbury; and don't you try on any of
your games with me, because I am not the sort of man to stand them. You
are a fine lot of workmen I know, but there isn't one of you who has the
pluck and ability to take two thousand pound's worth of that stuff and
turn it into cash in a week. Now look at the last parcel I had, I got
rid of it in such a manner that no one could possibly discover that I
ever handled the metal at all. Who among you could say the same thing?"

"Oh, you are right enough so long as you keep sober," Fenwick said. "But,
all the same, I shall not trust you with the parcel that is waiting
upstairs."

Vera listened, comprehending but little of what was going on. After all,
she seemed to be having only her trouble for her pains. Beyond doubt
these men were doing something illicit with the coinage of the country,
though Vera could not bring herself to believe that they were passing off
counterfeit money, seeing that the sovereigns were absolutely genuine.

"Well, something has got to be done," another of the gang remarked. "We
are bound to have a few thousand during the next few days, and, as
Blossett says, there is nobody that can work the oracle as well as he
can. The best thing I can do is to go to town with him and keep a close
eye on him till he has pulled round once more. He can keep sober enough
on occasions if he likes, and once the drinking fit has passed he may be
right for weeks."

"I am going to have no one with me," Blossett roared. "Do you think I am
going to be treated like a blooming kid? I tell you, I am the best man of
the lot of you. There isn't one of you can hold a candle to me. Fenwick,
with all his cunning, is a child compared with Ned Blossett. Ask any of
the old gang in New York, ask the blistering police if you like; and as
to the rest of you, who are you? A set of whitefaced mechanics, without
pluck enough to rob a hen-roost. Take that, you cur!"

The speaker rose suddenly to his feet and lurched across the room in
Fenwick's direction. He aimed an unexpected blow at the latter which sent
him headlong to the floor, and immediately the whole room was a scene of
angry violence.

Vera shrank back in her shelter, hardly knowing what to do next. She
saw that Blossett had disentangled himself from the mob about him and
was making his way headlong into the conservatory. There was nothing
for it but instant retreat. On the opposite side was a doorway leading
to the garden, and through this Vera hastily slipped and darted across
the grass, conscious of the noise and struggle going on behind. She
paused with a little cry of vexation as she came close to a man who was
standing on the edge of the lawn looking at the house. It was only for
a moment that she stood there in doubt; then a glad little cry broke
from her lips.

"Charles," she said. "Mr. Evors, what are you doing here?"

"We will come to that presently," Evors replied. "Meanwhile, you can be
observed from where you are, and those rioters yonder may make it awkward
for you. When they have patched up their quarrel, I will return to the
house with you and explain. We can get in by the little green door behind
the gunroom."

Vera suffered herself to be led away, feeling now utterly unable to be
astonished at anything. They came at length to the secluded side of the
house, where the girl paused and looked at her companion for an
explanation.

"You seem to be strangely familiar with this place," she said. "You walk
about here in the dark as if you had known this house all your lifetime,
Have you been here before?"

"Many a time," Evors replied sadly. "Up to the time I was twenty my
happiest years were spent here. But I see you are still in the dark.
Cannot you guess who I really am, Vera? No? Then I will enlighten you. My
name is Charles Evors, and I am the only son of Lord Merton. I was born
here, and, if the Fates are good to me, some day I hope to die here."


CHAPTER XXI

THE THIRD FINGER


Vera ought to have experienced a feeling of deepest surprise; but she was
long post any emotion of that kind. On the contrary, it seemed quite
natural that Evors should be there telling her this extraordinary thing.
The sounds of strife and tumult in the house had now died away;
apparently the men in the billiard-room had patched up their quarrel, for
nothing more could be heard save a sudden pop which sounded like the
withdrawal of a cork. With a gesture of contempt, Evors pointed to the
billiard-room window.

"I don't think you need worry about them," he said. "As far as I can
judge, they were bound to come to some truce."

"But do you know what they were doing?" Vera asked.

"I haven't the remotest idea," Evors replied. "Some rascality, beyond
question. There always is rascality where Fenwick is concerned. Is it not
a strange thing that I should come down here and find that fellow settled
in the home of my ancestors?"

"Then you did not come down on purpose to see him?"

"No, I came here entirely on my own responsibility. If you have
half-an-hour to spare, and you think it quite safe, I will tell you
everything. But there is one thing first, one assurance you must give me,
or I am bound to remain silent. The death of your poor father in that
mysterious fashion--"

"Stop," Vera said gently. "I know exactly what you are going to say. You
want me to believe that you had no hand whatever in my father's murder.
My dear Charles, I know it perfectly well. The only thing that puzzles
me is why you acted in that strange weak fashion after the discovery of
the crime."

"That is exactly what I am going to tell you," Evors went on. "It is a
strange story, and one which, if you read it in the pages of a book, you
would be inclined to discredit entirely. And yet stranger and more
remarkable things happen every day."

Evors led the way to a secluded path beside the terrace.

"You need not worry about getting to the house," he said. "I can show you
how to manage that at any time of the day or night without disturbing
anybody. I am afraid that on many occasions I put my intimate knowledge
of the premises to an improper use, and that was the beginning of my
downfall. What will you say to me when I confess to you that when I came
out to Mexico I was driven out of the old country, more or less, like a
criminal?"

"I understood you to be a little wild," Vera said.

"A little wild!" Evors echoed bitterly. "I behaved in a perfectly
disgraceful fashion. I degraded the old name, I made it a byword in the
district. As sure as I am standing here at the present moment, I am more
or less answerable for my mother's death. It is a strange thing with us
Evors that all the men begin in this way. I suppose it is some taint in
our blood. Up to the age of five-and-twenty, we have always been more
like devils than men, and then, for the most part, we have settled down
to wipe out the past and become respectable members of society. I think
my father recognised that, though he was exceedingly hard and stern with
me. Finally, after one more unusually disgraceful episode, he turned me
out of the house, and said he hoped never to look upon my face again. I
was deeply in debt, I had not a penny that I could call my own, and,
finally, I drifted out to Mexico with the assistance of a boon
companion. On the way out I took a solemn oath that I would do my best
to redeem the past. I felt heartily ashamed of my evil ways; and for six
months no one could possibly have led a purer and better life than
myself. It was about this time that I became acquainted with your father
and your sister Beth."

Evors paused a moment and paced up and down the avenue with Vera by his
side. She saw that he was disturbed about something, so that she deemed
it best not to interrupt him.

"It was like getting back to a better world again," Evors went on. "I
believed that I had conquered myself; I felt pretty sure of it, or I
would have never encouraged the friendship with your sister, which she
offered me from the first. I don't know how it was or why it was that I
did not see much of you about that time, but you were not in the
mountains with the others."

"I was down in the city," Vera explained. "There was a friend of mine who
had had a long serious illness, and I was engaged in nursing her. That is
the reason."

"But it doesn't much matter," Evors went on. "You were not there to watch
my friendship for Beth ripening into a warmer and deeper feeling. Mind
you, she had not the remotest idea who I really was, nor had your father.
They were quite content to take me on trust, they had no vulgar curiosity
as to my past. And then the time came when Beth discovered what my
feelings were, and I knew that she had given her heart to me. I had not
intended to speak, I had sternly schooled myself to hold my tongue until
I had completed my probation; but one never knows how these things come
about. It was all so spontaneous, so unexpected--and before I knew what
had really happened, we were engaged. It was the happiest time of my
life. I had rid myself of all my bad habits. I was in the full flush and
vigor of my manhood. I did not say anything to Beth about the past,
because I felt that she would not understand, but I told your father
pretty nearly everything except who I really was, for I had made up my
mind not to take the old name again until I had really earned the right
to do so. Of course, the name of Evors conveyed no impression to anybody.
It did not imply that I was heir to Lord Merton. Your father was
intensely friendly and sympathetic, he seemed to understand exactly. We
became more than friends, and this is how it came about that I
accompanied him finally on one of his secret visits to the Four Finger
Mine. Your father's regular journeys to the mine had resulted in his
becoming a rich man, and, as you know, he always kept the secret to
himself, taking nobody with him as a rule, with the exception of Felix
Zary. I will speak of Zary again presently. You know how faithful he was
to your father, and how he would have laid down his life for him."

"Zary was an incomprehensible character," Vera said. "He was one of the
surviving, or, rather, the only surviving member of the tribe who placed
the Four Finger Mine in my father's hands. That was done solely out of
gratitude, and Zary steadfastly declined to benefit one penny from the
gold of the mine. He had a curious contempt for money, and he always
said that the gold from the Four Finger Mine had brought a curse on his
tribe. I really never got to the bottom of it, and I don't suppose I ever
shall; but I am interrupting you, Charles. Will you please go on with
your story."

"Where was I?" Evors asked. "Oh, yes, I was just leading up to the time
when I accompanied your father on his last fatal journey to the mine. At
one time I understand it was his intention to take with him the
Dutchman, Van Fort, or your mother's brother, Mark Fenwick. However,
your father decided against this plan, and I went with him instead. To a
great extent it was my doing so that kept Van Fort and Fenwick out of
it, for I distrusted both those men, and I believed that they would have
been guilty of any crime to learn the secret of the mine. Your father,
always trustful and confiding, laughed at my fears, and we started on
that fateful journey. I don't want to harrow your feelings
unnecessarily, or describe in detail how your father died; but he was
foully murdered, and, as sure as I am in the presence of my Maker, the
murder was accomplished either by the Dutchman or Fenwick, or between
the two of them. Zary mysteriously vanished about the same time, and
there was no one to back me up in my story. You may judge of my horror
and surprise a little later when Van Fort and Fenwick entered into a
deliberate conspiracy to prove that I was responsible for your father's
death. They laid their plans with such a diabolical ingenuity that, had
I been placed upon my trial at that time, I should have been hanged to a
certainty. They even went so far as to tell Beth what had happened, with
what result upon her mind you know. At this time Van Fort disappeared,
and was never heard of again. Of the strange weird vengeance which
followed him I will talk another time. I suppose I lost my nerve
utterly, for I became as clay in the hands of Mark Fenwick. Badly as he
was treating me, he professed to be my friend, and assured me he had
found a way by which I could escape from the death which threatened me.
Goodness only knows what he had in his mind; perhaps he wanted to part
Beth and myself and get all your father's money into his hands. I
suppose he reckoned without your brother, though the latter did not
count for much just then, seeing that he was in the hospital at Vera
Cranz, hovering between life and death, as the result of his accident.
For my own part, I never believed it was an accident at all. I believed
that Fenwick engineered the whole business. But that is all by the way.
Like the weak fool that I was, I fell in with Fenwick's suggestion and
allowed myself to become a veritable tool in his hands, but I did not go
till I heard that you had come back again to look after Beth."

Vera recollected the time perfectly well; she was following Evors'
narrative with breathless interest. How well she recollected the day
of her own marriage and the receipt of that dreadful letter, which
parted Gerald and herself on the very steps of the altar, and
transformed her life from one of happiness into one of absolute
self-sacrifice. She was beginning to see daylight now, she was
beginning to discern a way at length, whereby she would be able to defy
Fenwick and part with him for all time.

"It is getting quite plain now," she said. "But please go on. You cannot
think how deeply interested I am in all you are saying. Presently I will
tell you my side of the story. How I came to part with Beth, how I placed
her in my brother's hands, how I elected to remain with Mark Fenwick, and
my reasons for so doing. I may say that one of my principal reasons for
staying with my uncle was to discover the real cause of my father's
death. That you had anything to do with it I never really believed,
though appearances were terribly against you, and you deliberately
elected to make them look worse. But we need not go into that now. What
happened to you after you fled from Mexico?"

"I am very much afraid that I dropped back into the old habits," Evors
said, contritely. "I was reckless and desperate, and cared nothing for
anybody. I had honestly done my best to atone for the past, and it seemed
to me that Fate was dealing with me with a cruelty which I did not
deserve. One or two of Fenwick's parasites accompanied me everywhere;
there seemed to be no lack of money, and I had pretty well all I wanted.
There were times, of course, when I tried to break the spell, but they
used to drug me then, until my mind began to give way under the strain.
Sometimes we were in Paris, sometimes we were in London, but I have not
the slightest recollection of how I got from one place to another. I was
like a man who is constantly on the verge of delirium. How long this had
been going on I can't tell you, but finally I came to my senses in the
house in London, and there for two days I was practically all right. All
through this time I had the deepest horror of the drink with which they
plied me, and on this occasion the horror had grown no less. For some
reason or another, no doubt it was an oversight, they neglected me for
two days, and I began to get rapidly better. Then, by the purest chance
in the world, I discovered that I was actually under the same roof as
Beth and your brother, and the knowledge was like medicine to me. I
refused everything those men offered me, I demanded to be allowed to go
out on business. They refused, and a strange new strength filled my
veins. I contrived to get the better of the two men, and half an hour
afterward I left the house in company with your brother."

All this was news indeed to Vera, but she asked no questions--she was
quite content to stand there and listen to all that Evors had to say.

"I would not stay with your brother," he went on. "I went off
immediately to an old friend of mine, to whom I told a portion of my
story. He supplied me with money and clothing, and advised me that the
best thing I could do was to go quietly away into the country and give
myself an entire rest. I followed his advice, and I drifted down here, I
suppose, in the same way that an animal finds his way home. I did not
know my father was away, and you can imagine my surprise when I
discovered to whom he had left the house. I feel pretty much myself now;
there is no danger of my showing the white feather again. If you are in
any trouble or distress, a line to the address on this card will bring me
to you at any time. In this house there are certain hiding-places where I
could secrete myself without anybody being the wiser; but we need not go
into that. Now perhaps you had better return to the house, or you may be
missed. Good-night, Vera. You cannot tell how wonderfully helpful your
sympathy has been to me."

He was gone a moment later, and Vera returned slowly and thoughtfully to
the house. The place was perfectly quiet now; the billiard-room door was
open, and Vera could see that the apartment was deserted. Apparently the
household had retired to rest, though it seemed to be nobody's business
to fasten up the doors. Most of the lights were out, for it was getting
very late now, so that there was nothing for it but for Vera to go up
the stairs to her own room. She had hardly reached the landing when a
door halfway down burst open, and Fenwick stood there shouting at the top
of his voice for such of his men as he mentioned by name. He seemed to be
almost beside himself with passion, though at the same time his face was
pallid with a terrible fear. He held a small object in his hand, which he
appeared to regard with disgust and loathing.

"Why don't some of you come out?" he yelled. "You drunken dogs, where
have you all gone to? Let the man come out who has played this trick on
me, and I'll break every bone in his body."

One or two heads emerged, and presently a little group stood around the
enraged and affrighted Fenwick. Standing in a doorway, Vera could hear
every word that passed.

"I locked my door after dinner," Fenwick said. "It is a patent lock, no
key but mine will fit it. When I go to bed I find this thing lying on the
dressing table."

"Another of the fingers," a voice cried. "The third finger. Are you quite
sure that you locked your door?"

"I'll swear it," Fenwick yelled. "And if one of you--but, of course, it
can't be one of you. There is no getting rid of this accursed thing. And
when the last one comes--"

Fenwick stopped as if something choked him.


CHAPTER XXII

"THE TIME WILL COME"


The startled group on the stairs stood gazing at Fenwick as if they were
stricken dumb. There was not one of them who had the slightest advice to
offer, not one of them but felt that Fenwick's time was close at hand.
Every man there knew by heart the strange story of the Four Finger Mine,
and of the vengeance which had overtaken the Dutchman. The same unseen
vengeance was very near Fenwick now; he had had his three warnings, and
there was but one more to come before the final note of tragedy was
struck. Most of them looked with dazed fascination at the mutilated left
hand of their chief.

"How did you lose yours?" somebody whispered.

"Don't ask me," Fenwick said hoarsely. "I break into a cold sweat
whenever I think of it. But why don't you do what I tell you? Why don't
you find Zary? Find him out and bring him down here, and then I can laugh
at the vengeance of the Four Fingers. But I have my plans laid, and I
shall know how to act when the times comes. Now you all get off to bed
again and forget all my foolishness. I suppose I was startled by seeing
that accursed thing lying on my table, and lost my nerve."

The little group melted away, and once more the house became silent. When
morning came there was no sign or suggestion of the events of the night
before. For the first time for many months, Vera felt comparatively
happy. She felt, too, that at last she was reaping the reward of all her
self-sacrifice, and was approaching the time when she would be able to
throw off the yoke and take up her life at the point where she had
dropped it. She could afford to wait on events now; she could afford to
possess her soul in patience till the hour and the man came together.

Somewhat to her relief, Fenwick did not appear at breakfast, so that, for
once, she could partake of the meal in comparative comfort. Swaggering up
and down the terrace outside, with a large cigar in his mouth, was the
man who called himself Blossett. He had the air of one who is waiting for
something; possibly he was waiting for the parcel which had been the
means of breeding last night's disturbance in the billiard-room. Anyway,
Vera noticed that Fenwick was very busy up and downstairs, and that all
his parasites had gathered in the little room at the end of the corridor.
For the present, at any rate, Vera's curiosity was satisfied. She had no
intention of running any more risks, and as soon as she had finished her
breakfast she went out into the grounds, with no intention of returning
before lunch. She made her way across the wood which led to the high
road, on the possible chance of meeting Gerald. It was not Gerald,
however, who advanced from the deepest part of the copse to meet her, but
the thin, cadaverous form of Felix Zary. He advanced towards the girl,
and, in a grave, respectful way, he lifted her hand to his lips.

"You had not expected me, dear lady," he said.

"Well no, Felix," Vera said. "Though I am not in the least surprised. I
suppose Mr. Venner has been to see you and has explained to you the
meaning of that sheet of blank paper which reached you in an envelope
bearing my handwriting."

"I have seen Mr. Venner," Zary replied in his smooth, respectful, even
voice, "and he explained to me. I did not suspect--if I had received your
letter I should have come to you at once--I believe I would come beyond
the grave at the call of one bearing the beloved name of Le Fenu. There
is nothing I would not do for you. At this moment I owe my life to your
resourcefulness and courage. Had I come in response to your letter, I
should never have left the house alive. Fenwick would have murdered me,
and the vengeance of the Four Fingers would have been lost."

"Why should it not be?" Vera said with a shudder. "Why extract blood for
blood in this fashion? Can all your revenge bring my dear father back to
life again? And yet the vengeance draws nearer and nearer, as I know. I
saw Mark Fenwick last night after he had received the third of those
dreadful messages, and he was frightened to the depths of his soul. Let
me implore you not to go any further--"

"It is not for me to say yes or no," Zary responded in the same quiet,
silky manner. It seemed almost impossible to identify this man with
murder and outrage. "I am but an instrument. I can only follow the
dictates of my instinct. I cannot get away from the traditions of the
tribe to which I belong. For two years now I have been a wanderer on the
face of the earth; I have been in many strange cities and seen many
strange things; with the occult science that I inherited from my
ancestors, the Aztecs, I have earned my daily bread. I am what some call
a medium, some call a conjurer, some call a charlatan and a quack. It is
all the same what they call me, so long as I have the knowledge. For
generations the vengeance of the Four Fingers has descended upon those
who violate the secret of the mine, and so it must be to the end of time.
If I did not obey the voice within me, if I refused to recognise the
forms of my ancestors as they come to me in dreams, I should for ever and
ever be a spirit wandering through space. Ah, dear lady, there are things
you do not know, things, thank God, beyond your comprehension, so,
therefore, do not interfere. Rest assured that this thing is absolute and
inevitable."

Zary spoke with a certain gentle inspiration, as if all this was part of
some ritual that he was repeating by heart. Quiet, almost timid as he
looked, Vera knew from past experience that no efforts of hers could turn
him from his intention. That he would do anything for a Le Fenu she knew
full well, and all this in return for some little kindness which her
father had afforded one or two of the now almost extinct tribe from which
had come the secret of the Four Finger Mine. And Zary was absolutely the
last of his race. There would be none to follow him.

"Very well," she said, "I see that anything I could say would be wasted
on you, nor would I ask you what you are going to do next, because I am
absolutely convinced that you would not tell me if I did. Still, I have a
right to know--"

"You have a right to know nothing," Zary said, in a tone of deep
humility. "But do not be afraid--the vengeance will not fall yet, for are
not the warnings still incomplete? I will ask you to leave me here and go
your way."

There was nothing for it but to obey, and Vera passed slowly through the
wood in the direction of the high road. A strange weird smile flickered
about the corner of Zary's mouth, as he stood there still and motionless,
like some black statue. His lips moved, but no words came from them. He
appeared to be uttering something that might have passed for a silent
prayer. He took a battered gold watch from his pocket and consulted it
with an air of grim satisfaction. Then, suddenly, he drew behind a
thicket of undergrowth, for his quick ears detected the sound of
approaching footsteps. Almost immediately the big form of Fenwick loomed
in the opening, and a hoarse voice asked if somebody were there. Zary
stepped out again and confronted Fenwick, who started back as if the slim
black apparition had been a ghost.

"You here!" he stammered. "I did not expect to see you--I came here
prepared to find somebody quite different."

"It matters little whom you came to find," Zary said. "The message sent
to bring you here was merely a ruse of mine. Murderer and treacherous dog
that you are, so you thought to get me here in the house among your hired
assassins by means of the letter which you compelled my dear mistress to
write? Are you mad that you should pit your paltry wits against mine?"

"I am as good as you," Fenwick said.

"Oh, you rave," Zary went on. "I am the heir of the ages. A thousand
years of culture, of research, of peeps behind the veil, have gone to
make me what I am. Your scientists and your occult researchers think they
have discovered much, but, compared with me, they are but as children
arguing with sages. Before the letter was written, the spirits that float
on the air had told me of its coming. I have only to raise my hand and
you wither up like a drop of dew in the eye of the sunshine. I have only
to say the word and you die a thousand lingering deaths in one--but for
such cattle as you the vengeance of the Four Fingers is enough. You shall
die even as the Dutchman died, you shall perish miserably with your
reason gone and your nerves shattered. If you could see yourself now as I
can see you, with that dreadful look of fear haunting your eyes, you
would know that the dread poison had already begun its work. The third
warning came to you last night, the message that you should get your
affairs in order and be prepared for the inevitable. The Dutchman is no
more, his foul wretch of a wife died, a poor wreck of a woman, bereft of
sense and reason."

"This is fine talk," Fenwick stammered. "What have you against me that
you should threaten me like this?"

Zary raised his hand aloft with a dramatic gesture; his great round black
eyes were filled with a luminous fire.

"Listen," he said. "Listen and heed. I am the last of my race, a race
which has been persecuted by the alien and interloper for the last three
centuries. Time was when we were a great and powerful people, educated
and enlightened beyond the dreams of to-day. Our great curse was the
possession of large tracts of land which contained the gold for which
you Eastern people are prepared to barter honor and integrity and
everything that the honest man holds dear. For it you are prepared to
sacrifice your wives and children, you are prepared to cut the throat of
your best friend. When you found your heart's desire in my country, you
came in your thousands, and by degrees murders and assassination worked
havoc with my tribe. It was not till quite recently that there came
another man from the East, a different class of creature altogether. I
am alluding to your late brother-in-law, George Le Fenu. He sought no
gold or treasure; he came to us, he healed us of diseases of which we
knew no cure. And in return for that we gave him the secret of the Four
Finger Mine. It was because he had the secret of the mine and because he
refused to share it with you that you and the Dutchman, with the aid of
his foul wife, killed him."

"It's a lie," Fenwick stammered. "George Le Fenu suffered nothing at my
hands. It was the young man Evors."

"It is false," Zary thundered. His eyes were dark, and in a sudden flood
of fury he reached out a long thin hand and clutched Fenwick by the
collar. "Why tell me this when I know so well how the whole thing
happened? I can give it you now chapter and verse, only it would merely
be a waste of breath. I declare as I stand here with my hand almost
touching your flesh that I can scarcely wait for the vengeance, so eager
am I to extract the debt that you owe to George Le Fenu and his
children."

By way of reply, Fenwick dashed his fist full into the face of Zary. The
latter drew back just in time to avoid a crushing blow; then his long
thin arms twisted about the form of his bulky antagonist as a snake winds
about his prey. So close and tenacious, so wonderfully tense was the
grip, that Fenwick fairly gasped for breath. He had not expected a virile
force like this in one so slender. A bony leg was pressed into the small
of his back--he tottered backward and lay upon the mossy turf with Zary
with one bony hand at his throat, on the top of him. It was all so sudden
and so utterly unexpected that Fenwick could only gasp in astonishment.
Then he became conscious of the fact that Zary's great luminous eyes were
bent, full of hate, upon his face. A long curved knife gleamed in the
sunshine. Very slowly the words came from Zary.

"I could finish you now," he whispered. "I could end it once and for all.
It is only for me to put in action the forces that I know of, and you
would utterly vanish from here, leaving no trace behind. One swift blow
of this knife--"

"What are you doing?" a voice asked eagerly. "Zary, have you taken leave
of your senses? Release him at once, I say."

Very slowly Zary replaced the knife in his pocket and rose to his feet.
There was not the least trace of his recent passion--he was perfectly
calm and collected, his breathing was as even and regular as it had been
before the onslaught.

"You are quite right, master," he said. "I had almost forgotten myself. I
am humiliated and ashamed. The mere touch of that man is pollution. We
shall meet again, Mr. Evors."

Zary went calmly away and vanished in the thick undergrowth as quickly
and mysteriously as if he had been spirited from the spot. Fenwick rose
to his feet and wiped the stains from his clothing.

"I certainly owe you one for that," he growled. "That fellow would most
assuredly have murdered me if you had not come up just at the right
moment. It is fortunate, too, that you should have turned up here just
now. Come as far as the house. I should like to say a few words to you
in private."

It was well, perhaps, that Evors could not see the expression of his
companion's face, that he did not note the look of mingled triumph and
malice that distorted it. It never for a moment occurred to him as
possible that black treachery could follow so closely upon the heels of
his own magnanimity. Without the slightest demur he followed Fenwick to
the house. The latter led the way upstairs into a room overlooking the
ancient part of the house, murmuring something to the effect that here
was the thing that he wished to show Evors. They were inside the room at
length, then, with a muttered excuse, Fenwick hastened from the room.
The key clicked in the door outside, and Evors knew that he was once
more a prisoner.

"You stay there till I want you," Fenwick cried. "I'll teach you to play
these tricks on me after all I have done for you."

"You rascal," Evors responded. "And so you think that you have me a
prisoner once more. Walk to the end of the corridor and back, then come
in here again and I will have a pleasant surprise for you. You need not
be afraid--I am not armed."

Perhaps some sudden apprehension possessed Fenwick, for he turned rapidly
as he was walking away and once more opened the door. Evors had been as
good as his word--the surprise which he had promised Fenwick was complete
and absolute.

"Vanished," Fenwick cried. "Gone! Curse him, what can have become of
him?"


CHAPTER XXIII

SMOKED OUT


A feeling of helpless exasperation gripped Fenwick to the exclusion of
all other emotions. Everything seemed to be going wrong just now; turn
in any direction he pleased some obstacle blocked his path. Like most
cunning criminals he could never quite dispossess himself of the idea
that honesty and cleverness never went together. All honest men were
fools of necessity, and therefore the legitimate prey of rogues like
himself. And yet, though he was more or less confronted now with men of
integrity, he was as helpless in their hands as if he had been a child.
The maddening part of the whole thing was his inability to find anything
to strike. He was like a general leading an army into the dark in a
strange country, and knowing all the time that he had cunning unseen
foes to fight.

Thoughts like these were uppermost in Fenwick's mind as he gazed in
consternation about the little room from which Evors had vanished. So far
as Fenwick knew, Evors had saved his life from Zary, but that had not
prevented Fenwick from behaving in a dastardly fashion. It seemed to him
as if Fate were playing into his hands by bringing Evors here at this
moment. Hitherto he had found Evors such plastic material that he had
never seriously considered him in the light of a foe. Now, for the first
time, he saw how greatly he had been mistaken.

"Where can the fellow have gone to?" he muttered. "And whence comes his
intimate knowledge of the house?"

He tapped the walls, he examined the floor, but there was no sign
whatever of the means by which Evors had made good his escape.

Fenwick furiously rang the bell and demanded that the old caretaker
should be sent to him at once. The man came to him, shambling unsteadily
along and breathing fast as if he had been running. His aged features
were quivering with some strange excitement, as Fenwick did not fail to
notice, despite his own perturbation.

"What on earth is the matter with you?" he exclaimed. "You look as if you
had seen a ghost! What is it? Speak up, man!"

"It isn't that, sir," the old man said in trembling tones. "It is a sight
that I never expected to see again. A bit wild he was--aye, a rare
handful at times, though we were all precious fond of him. And to see him
back here again like this--"

"What the devil are you talking about?" Fenwick burst out furiously. "The
old fool is in his second childhood."

"It was the young master," the caretaker babbled on. "Why, you could
have knocked me down with a feather when he came in the house with you.
As soon as I set eyes on Mr. Charles--"

"Mr. what?" Fenwick asked. "Oh, I see what you mean. You are speaking of
Mr. Evors, who came in with me."

"That's it, sir, that's it," the old man said. "Mr. Evors, only we used
to call him Mr. Charles."

Fenwick began to understand.

"Let's have it out," he said. "Mr. Evors, whom you saw with me just now,
is Lord Merton's only son?"

"That he be, sir, that he be. And to think that he should come home like
this. It'll be a good day for the old house when he returns to settle
down altogether."

Fenwick dismissed the old man with a contemptuous gesture. He had found
out all he wanted to know, though his information had come to him as an
unpleasant surprise. It was a strange coincidence that Fenwick should
have settled upon Merton Grange for a dwelling-place, and thus had picked
out the actual home of the young man who had suffered so much at his
hands. But there was something beyond this that troubled Fenwick. It was
a disturbing thought to know that Charles Evors could find his way about
the house in this mysterious fashion. It was a still more disturbing
thought to feel that Evors might be in league with those who were
engaged in tracking down the so-called millionaire. There were certain
things going on which it was imperative to keep a profound secret.
Doubtless there were secret passages and panels in this ancient house,
and Fenwick turned cold at the thought that perhaps prying eyes had
already solved the problem of the little room at the end of the corridor.
He lost no time in calling his parasites about him. In a few words he
told them what had happened.

"Don't you see what it means?" he said. "Charles Evors is here, he has
come back to his old home, and what is more he has come back to keep an
eye on us. I feel pretty certain that someone is behind him. Very likely
it is that devil Zary. If the police were to walk in now, guided by
Evors, we should be caught like rats in a trap. I didn't want to trust
that stuff to Blossett, but he must get away with it now without delay.
There is a train about twelve o'clock to London, and he must get one of
the servants to drive him over in a dogcart. Now don't stand gazing at me
with your mouths open like that, for goodness knows how close the danger
is. Get the stuff away at once."

The man Blossett came into the garden, a big cigar between his lips. He
laughed in his insolent fashion when he was told of his errand. The hot
blood was in Fenwick's face, but he had not time to quarrel with the
swaggering Blossett.

"I thought you would come to your senses," the latter said. "Nobody
like me to do a little thing of that sort. Now let me have the case and
I'll be off without delay. Better put it in a Gladstone bag. If I have
any luck I shall be back here to-night, and then we can share the
bank-notes and there will be an end of the matter. You had better sink
all the materials in the moat. Not that I am afraid of anything
happening, myself."

Half an hour later Blossett was being bowled down the drive behind a
fleet horse. A little later still, as the train pulled out of the
station, Egan and Grady stood there watching it with rueful faces. Venner
was with them, and smiled to himself, despite the unfortunate nature of
the situation.

"I thought we had cut it a bit too fine," Grady said. "It is all the
fault of that confounded watch of mine. Now what's the best thing to be
done? Shall we telegraph to Scotland Yard and ask to have Blossett
detained when he reaches Victoria?"

"I don't quite like the idea," Egan said. "If we were English detectives
it wouldn't much matter, but I guess I don't want Scotland Yard to have
the laugh of me like this. It may cost a deal of money, and I shall
probably have to pay it out of my own pocket, but I am going to have a
special train."

"My good man," Venner said, "it is absurd to think that you can get a
special train at a roadside station like this. Probably they do things
differently in America, but if you suggest a special to the
station-master here, he will take you for an amiable lunatic. I have an
idea that may work out all right, though it all depends upon whether the
train that has gone out of the station is a fast or a slow one."

The inquiry proved the fact that the train was a slow one, stopping at
every station. It would be quite two hours in reaching Victoria. Venner
smiled with the air of a man who is well pleased with himself. He turned
eagerly to his companions.

"I think I've got it," he said. "We will wound Fenwick with one of his
own weapons. It will be the easiest thing in the world to got from here
to Victoria well under two hours in a motor."

"I guess that's about true," Grady said, drily. "But what applies to
the special equally applies to the motor. Where are we to get the
machine from?"

"Borrow Fenwick's," Venner said. "I understand the working of a Mercedes,
and, I know where the car is kept. If I go about this thing boldly, our
success is assured. Then you can wait for me at the cross roads and I can
pick you up."

"Well, you can try it on, sir," Egan said doubtfully. "If you fail we
must telegraph to Scotland Yard."

But Venner had not the slightest intention of failing. There were no
horses in the stable at Merton Grange, and consequently no helpers
loafing about the yard. There stood the big car, and on a shelf all the
necessaries for setting the machine in motion. In an incredibly short
space of time Venner had backed the Mercedes into the yard; he turned her
dexterously, and a moment later was speeding down a side avenue which led
to the Park. The good old saying that fortune favors the brave was not
belied in this instance, for Venner succeeded in reaching the high road
without mishap. It was very long odds against his theft being discovered,
at any rate, for some considerable time; and even if the car were
missing, no one could possibly identify its loss with the chase after
Blossett. It was consequently in high spirits that the trio set out on
their journey. Naturally enough Venner was curious to know what the
criminal charge would be.

"Though I have found out a good deal," he said, "I am still utterly at a
loss to know what these fellows have been up to. Of course, I quite
understand that there is some underhand business with regard to certain
coins--but then those coins are real gold, and it would not pay anybody
to counterfeit sovereigns worth twenty shillings apiece."

"You don't think so," Egan said, drily. "We shall be able to prove the
contrary presently. But hadn't you better wait, sir, till the critical
moment comes?"

"Very well," Venner laughed good-naturedly. "I'll wait and see what
dramatic surprise you have in store for me."

The powerful car sped over the roads heedless of police traps or other
troubles of that kind, and some time before the appointed hour for the
arrival of Blossett's train in London they had reached Victoria. It was
an easy matter to store the car in a neighboring hotel, and presently
they had the satisfaction of seeing Blossett swagger from a first-class
carriage with a heavy Gladstone bag in his hand. He called a cab and was
rapidly driven off in the direction of the city. Egan in his turn called
another cab, giving the driver strict injunctions to keep the first
vehicle in sight. It was a long chase, but it came to an end presently
outside an office in Walbrook. Blossett paid his man and walked slowly up
a flight of steps, carrying his bag. He paused at length before a door
which was marked "Private," and also placarded the information that here
was the business place of one Drummond, commission agent. Scarcely had
the door closed on Blossett than Egan followed without ceremony. He
motioned the other two to remain behind; he had some glib story to tell
the solitary clerk in the outer office, from whom he gleaned the
information that Mr. Drummond was engaged on some particular business and
could not see him for some time.

"Very well," he said; "I'll wait and read the paper."

He sat there patiently for some five minutes, his quick ears strained to
catch the faintest sound of what was taking place in the inner office.
There came presently the chink of metal, whereupon the watcher whistled
gently and his comrade and Venner entered the room. Very coolly Egan
crossed over and locked the door.

"Now, my young friend," he said to the astonished clerk, "you will oblige
me by not making a single sound. I don't suppose for a moment you have
had anything to do with this; in fact, from your bewildered expression, I
am certain that you haven't. Now tell me how long have you been in your
present situation."

"About three months," the clerk replied. "If you gentlemen happen to be
police officers--"

"That is exactly what we are," Grady smiled. "Do you find business
brisk--plenty of clients about?"

The clerk shook his head. He was understood to say that business was
inclined to be slack. He was so frightened and uneasy that it was
somewhat difficult to discern what he was talking about. From time to
time there came sounds of tinkling metal from the inner office. Then
Grady crossed the floor and opened the door. He stepped inside
nimbly, there was a sudden cry, and then the voice of the detective
broke out harshly.

"Now drop it," he said. "Keep your hands out of your pocket--there are
three of us here altogether, and the more fuss you make the worse it will
be for both of you. You know perfectly well who I am, Blossett; and we
are old friends, too, Mr. Drummond, though I don't know you by that name.
You will come with me--"

"But what's the charge?" Blossett blustered. "I am doing business with my
friend here quite in a legitimate way."

"Counterfeit coining," Grady said crisply. "Oh, we know all about it, so
you need not try to bluff it out in that way. I'll call a cab, and we can
drive off comfortably to Bow Street."

All the swaggering impudence vanished from Blossett. As for his
companion, he had not said a word from start to finish. It was about an
hour later that Venner and his companions were seated at lunch at a hotel
in Covent Garden, and Venner was impatiently waiting to hear what was the
charge which had laid Blossett and his companion by the heels. Grady
smiled as he drew from his pocket what appeared to be a brand new
sovereign.

"This is it," he said. "A counterfeit. You wouldn't think so to look at
it, would you? It appears to be perfectly genuine. If you will balance it
on your finger you will find that it is perfect weight, and as to the
finish it leaves nothing to be desired. And yet that coin is false,
though it contains as much gold as any coin that you have in your purse."

"Now I begin to understand," Venner exclaimed. "I have already told you
all about my discovery at the Empire Hotel, also what happened quite
recently at Merton Grange. I could not for the life of me understand what
those fellows had to gain by making sovereigns red-hot. Of course, I took
them to be real sovereigns--"

"Well, so they are practically," Egan said. "They contain absolutely as
much gold as an English coin of equal value. They are made from the metal
Fenwick managed to loot from the Four Finger Mine."

"What, do you know all about that?" Venner cried.

"We know all about everything," Grady said gravely. "We have been
tracking Fenwick for years, and it is a terrible indictment we shall have
to lay against him when the proper time comes. We shall prove beyond the
shadow of a doubt that he was one of the murderers of Mr. George Le Fenu
--but we need not go into that now, for I see you are anxious to know all
about the trick of the sovereigns. After Fenwick was compelled to abandon
the Four Finger Mine, he found himself with a great deal less gold than
he had expected. Then he hit upon the ingenious scheme which we are here
to expose. His plan was to make sovereigns and half-sovereigns, and put
them on the market as genuine coins. Now do you see what he had to gain
by this ingenious programme?"


CHAPTER XXIV

THE MOUTH OF THE NET


"I am afraid I am very dense," Venner said, "but I quite fail to see how
a man could make a fortune by selling for a sovereign an article that
cost him twenty shillings, to say nothing of the trouble and cost of
labor and the risk of being discovered--"

"As a matter of fact, the risk is comparatively small," Grady said. "It
was only by a pure accident that we got on the inside track of this
matter. You see, the coins are of actual face value, they are most
beautifully made, and, indeed, would pass anywhere. Let me tell you that
every sovereign contains a certain amount of alloy which reduces its
actual value to about eighteen and threepence. Now you can see where the
profit comes in. Supposing these men turn out a couple of thousand
sovereigns a day--no very difficult matter with a plant like theirs; and,
of course, the money can be disposed of with the greatest possible ease.
This leaves a profit of a hundred and seventy-five pounds a day. When I
have said so much, I think I have told you everything. Don't you admire
the ingenuity of an idea like this?"

It was all perfectly plain now--indeed, the mystery appeared to be
ridiculously simple now that it was explained.

"And what are you going to do now?" Venner asked.

Grady explained that the next step would be the arrest of Fenwick and his
gang at Merton Grange. For that purpose it would be necessary to enlist
the assistance of the local authorities. And in no case did the American
detectives purpose to effect the arrest before night. So far as Venner
was concerned, he was quite at liberty to accompany the Americans on
their errand; at the same time they let him infer that here was a
situation in which they preferred his room to his company.

"As you will," Venner smiled. "So far as I am concerned, I am going to
get back to Canterbury as soon as I can. With all your preparations you
have an exceedingly clever man to deal with, and it is just possible that
by this time Fenwick already knows that you have laid the messenger by
the heels. Men of that sort never trust one another, and it is
exceedingly probable that Blossett has been watched."

Grady and Egan admitted this possibility cheerfully enough. Doubtless
they had made plans which they did not care to communicate to Venner. He
left them presently, only to discover to his annoyance that he had just
missed a train to Canterbury, and that there was not another one till
nearly six o'clock. It was quite dark when he stepped out of the carriage
at Canterbury Station and stood debating whether he should walk as far as
the lodgings he had taken near Merton Grange, or call a cab. As he was
idly making up his mind, he saw to his surprise the figure of the
handsome cripple descending from the next carriage. He noted, too, that
the cripple did not seem anything like as feeble as before, though he
appeared to be glad enough to lean on the arm of a servant. At the same
moment Le Fenu was joined by Evors, who came eagerly forward and shook
him warmly by the hand. What these two were doing here, and what they had
in their minds, it was not for Venner to say. He wondered what they would
think if they knew how close he was, and how deeply interested he was in
their movements. He hung back in the shadow, for just then he did not
want to be recognised by Le Fenu.

"What a queer tangle it all is," he said to himself. "If I spoke to Le
Fenu, he would recognise me in a moment as an old friend of his father's.
I wonder what he would say to me if he knew I was his brother-in-law
--and Evors, too. Imagine their astonishment if I walked up to them at
this moment. Still, on the whole, I think I prefer to watch their
movements. If they are going to thrust their heads into the lion's mouth,
perhaps I may be able to stand by and render some assistance."

It was as Venner had anticipated, for presently Le Fenu and Evors
entered a cab and gave the driver directions to take them as far as
Merton Grange. Venner made up his mind that he could do no better than
follow their example.

The cab stopped at length outside the lodge gates, where Evors and Le
Fenu alighted, and walked slowly up the drive. It was rather a painful
effort for Le Fenu, but he managed it a great deal better than Venner had
anticipated. They did not enter the house by the front door--on the
contrary, they crept round a small side entrance, beyond which they
vanished, leaving Venner standing on the grass wondering what he had
better do next.

Meanwhile, Evors led the way down a flight of stairs till he emerged
presently in a corridor. With his companion on his arm he walked to the
little room at the end and boldly flung open the door.

The room was empty, a thing which both of them seemed to expect, for they
smiled at one another in a significant manner, and nodded with the air of
men who are quite pleased with themselves.

"You had better sit down," Evors said. "That walk must have tired you
terribly. I should be exceedingly sorry--"

"You need not worry about me," Le Fenu said in a clear, hard voice. "I am
a little tired, perhaps, but I have a duty to fulfil, and the knowledge
of it has braced me wonderfully. Besides, I am so much better of late,
and I am looking eagerly forward to the time when I shall be as other
men. Now go and fetch him, and let us get the thing done. But for the
fact that he is my mother's brother I would have had no mercy on the
scoundrel. Still, the same blood flows in our veins, and I am in a
merciful mood to-night."

Evors walked boldly out of the room and down the stairs into the
hall--then in a loud voice he called out the name of Mark Fenwick. The
dining-room door burst open and Fenwick strode out, his yellow face
blazing with passion in the light.

"So you are back again," he said hoarsely. "You are a bold man to thrust
your head into the lion's mouth like this."

"There are others equally bold," Evors said, coolly. "I am strong enough
and able enough to take you by that fat throat of yours and choke the
life out of you. You have a different man to deal with now--but there are
others to be considered, so I will trouble you to come along with me. The
interview had best take place in the little room at the end of the
corridor. You know the room I mean. Ah, I see you do."

Fenwick started. It was quite plain that Evors' hint was not lost on
him. Without another word he led the way up the staircase into the
little room. He started again and half turned when he caught sight of
the white, handsome face of Le Fenu. In all probability he would have
disappeared altogether, but for the fact that Evors closed the door and
turned the key.

Fenwick stood there, his yellow face scared and terrified. Cold as it
was, a bead of perspiration stood on his bulging forehead. He looked from
one to the other as if he anticipated violence. Le Fenu sat up in his
chair and laughed aloud.

"You are but a sorry coward after all," he said. "You have no need to
fear us in the slightest. We shall leave the vengeance to come in the
hands of others. And now sit down--though you are not fit to take a chair
in the company of any honest men."

"In my own house," Fenwick began feebly, "you are--"

"We will overlook that," Le Fenu went on. "It is our turn now, and I
don't think you will find our conditions too harsh. It is not so long
ago since my friend here was a prisoner in your hands, and since you
reduced him to such a condition of mind that he had abandoned hope and
lost all desire to live. It is not so long ago, either, since you dared
to make me a prisoner in my own house for your own ends. It was
fortunate for you that I chose to live more or less alone in London and
under an assumed name. But all the time I was looking for you, all the
time I was working out my plans for your destruction. Then you found me
out--you began to see how I could be useful to you, how I could become
your miserable tool, as Mr. Evors here did. You dared not stay at your
hotel--things were not quite ripe for you to come down here. Therefore
you hit upon the ingenious idea of making me a prisoner under my own
roof. But Fate, which has been waiting for you a long time, intervened,
and I became a free man again just at the very moment when Mr. Evors
also regained his liberty. Since then we have met more than once, and
the whole tale of your villainy is now plain before me. You might have
been content with the murder of my father and the blood money you
extracted from the Four Finger Mine, but that was not enough for
you--nothing less than the extermination of our race sufficed. It was no
fault of yours that I was not killed in the so-called accident that has
made me the cripple that I am. That was all arranged by you, as I shall
be able to prove when the proper time comes. I escaped death by a
miracle, and good friends of mine hid me away beyond the reach of your
arm. Even then you had no sort of mercy, even then you were not content
with the mischief you had wrought. You must do your best to pin your
crime to Mr. Evors, though that conspiracy cost my sister Beth her
reason. Of course, you would deny all these things, and I see you are
prepared to deny them now. But it is absolutely useless to add one lie
to another, because we know full well--"

"Stop," Fenwick cried. "What are you here for? Why do you tell me this?
A desperate man like myself--"

"No threats," Le Fenu said, sternly. "I am simply here to warn you. God
knows what an effort it is on my part not to hand you over to your
punishment, but I cannot forget that you are a blood relation of
mine--and, therefore, I am disposed to spare you. Still, there is another
Nemesis awaiting you, which Nemesis I need not mention by name. When I
look at your left hand I feel sorry for you. Bad as you are, the terrible
fate which is yours moves me to a kind of pity."

Le Fenu paused and glanced significantly at Fenwick's maimed hand.
The latter had nothing more to say; all his swaggering assurance had
left him--he sat huddled up in his chair, a picture of abject terror
and misery.

"You can help me if you will," he said hoarsely. "You are speaking of
Zary. That man is no human being at all, he is no more than a
cold-blooded tiger, and yet he would do anything for you and yours. If
you asked him to spare me--"

Fenwick broke off and covered his face with his hands. His shoulders
were heaving with convulsive sobs now, tears of self-pity ran through
his fingers. For the time being, at any rate, the man's nerve was
utterly gone. He was prepared to make any conditions to save his skin.
Agitated and broken as he was, his cunning mind was yet moving swiftly.
A little time ago, these two men would not have dared to intrude
themselves upon his presence, he had held them like prisoners in the
hollow of his hand; and now it seemed to him that they must feel their
position to be impregnable, or they would never have intruded upon him
in this bold fashion.

"I am not the man I was," he gasped. "It is only lately that my nerve
seems to have utterly deserted me. You do not know what it is to be
fighting in the dark against a foe so cold and relentless as Felix Zary.
When the first warning came I was alarmed. The second warning frightened
me till I woke in the night with a suffocating feeling at my heart as if
I were going to die. Against the third warning I took the most elaborate
precautions; but it came all the same, and since then I have been
drinking to drown my terror. But what is the good of that?--how little
does it serve me in my sober moments? As I said just now, Zary would do
anything for your family, and if you would induce him to forego that
dreaded vengeance which hangs over me--"

"Impossible," Le Fenu said coldly. "Zary is a fanatic, a dreamer of
dreams; he has a religion of his own which no one else in the world
understands but himself. He firmly and honestly believes that some divine
power is impelling him on, that he is merely an instrument in the hands
of the Maker of the universe. There have been other beings of the same
class in a way. Charlotte Corday believed herself to be the chosen
champion of Heaven when she stabbed the French monster in his bath.
Nothing I could say or do would turn Zary from what he believes to be his
duty. The only thing you can do is to go away and lose yourself in some
foreign country where Zary cannot follow you."

"Impossible," Fenwick said hoarsely. "I could not get away. If the man
possesses the powers he claims he would know where to find me, even if I
hid myself in the depths of a Brazilian forest. I tell you I am doomed. I
cannot get away from the inevitable."

Fenwick slipped from his chair and fairly grovelled in his anguish on
the floor. It was a pitiable sight, but one that moved the watchers with
contempt. They waited patiently enough for the paroxysm of terror to
pass and for Fenwick to resume something like the outer semblance of
manhood. He drew himself up at length, and wiped the tears from his
sickly yellow face.

"I cannot think," he said. "My mind seems to have ceased to act. If
either of you have any plan I shall be grateful to hear it. It seems
almost impossible--"

The speaker suddenly paused, for there came from below the unmistakable
sounds of high voices raised in expostulation. It occurred to Fenwick for
a moment that his subordinates were quarrelling among themselves; then
his quick ears discerned the sound of strange voices. He rose to his feet
and made in the direction of the door. A minute later a stealthy tap was
heard on the door, and a voice whispered, asking to be admitted. Evors
glanced at Le Fenu in an interrogative kind of way, as if asking for
instructions. The latter nodded, and the door opened. The man in the list
slippers staggered into the room, his red face white and quivering, his
whole aspect eloquent of fear.

"What is it?" Fenwick whispered. "What's the trouble? Why don't you speak
out, man, instead of standing there like that?"

The man found his voice at last, his words came thickly.

"They are here," he said. "The men from America. You know who I mean. Get
away at once. Wait for nothing. Those two devils Egan and Grady are
downstairs in the hall."


CHAPTER XXV

AN ACT OF CHARITY


Fenwick looked at the speaker as if he did not exactly comprehend what he
had said. The man's mind was apparently dazed, as if the accumulation of
his troubles had been too much for him. He passed his hand across his
forehead, striving to collect his thoughts and to find some way of facing
this new and unexpected peril.

"Say that again," he faltered. "I don't quite understand. Surely Egan and
Grady are in New York."

"They are both down in the hall," the man said, vehemently. "And, what's
more, they know that you are here. If you don't want to spend the night
in gaol, get away without any further delay."

Fenwick could only look about him helplessly. It seemed to him futile to
make further effort. Turn which way he would, there was no avenue open to
him. He looked imploringly in the direction of Charles Evors.

"I think I can manage it," the latter said. "Now, you fellow, whatever
your name is, leave the room at once and go downstairs and close the
door behind you."

The man slunk away, and, at a sign from Le Fenu, Evors closed the door.
Evors jumped to his feet and crossed the room to where a picture was let
into the panelling. He pushed this aside and disclosed a dark opening
beyond to Fenwick's astonished gaze. The latter stared about him.

"Now get through there," Evors said. "It is a good thing for you that I
know all the secrets of the old house. There are many panels and passages
here, for this used to be a favorite hiding-place for the fugitive
cavaliers in the time of Cromwell."

"But where does it go to?" Fenwick stammered.

Evors explained that the passage terminated in a bedroom a little
distance away. He went on to say that Fenwick would only have to press
his hand upon the wall and that the corresponding panel of the bedroom
would yield to his touch.

"It is the Blue Room," he said, "in which you will find yourself
presently. Wait there and I'll see what I can do for you. I fancy that I
shall be able to convey you outside the walls of the house without
anybody being the wiser."

Fenwick crept through the hole, and Evors pulled the panel across,
leaving the room exactly as it had been a few minutes before. He had
hardly done so when there was a sound of footsteps outside, and without
ceremony the American detectives came in. The occupants of the room had
had ample time to recover their self-possession, so that they could look
coolly at the intruders and demand to know what this outrage meant. The
Americans were clearly puzzled.

"I am sure I beg your pardon," Egan said, "but I understand that Mr.
Fenwick is the tenant of the house."

"That is so," Evors said. "Do you generally come into a gentleman's house
in this unceremonious fashion?"

"Perhaps I had better explain my errand," Egan said. "We are down here
with a warrant for the apprehension of Mark Fenwick, and we know that a
little time ago he was in the house. He is wanted on a charge of stealing
certain valuables in New York, and also for manufacturing counterfeit
coins. We quite expected to find him here."

"In that case, of course, you have perfect liberty to do as you please,"
Evors said. "I may explain that I am the only son of Lord Merton, and
that I shall be pleased to do anything to help you that lies in my power.
By all means search the house."

Grady appeared as if about to say something, but Egan checked him. It was
no time for the Americans to disclose the fact that they knew all about
the murder of Mr. George Le Fenu, and how Evors had been more or less
dragged into the business. Their main object now was to get hold of
Fenwick without delay, and take him back with them to London.

"Very well, sir," Egan said. "We need not trouble you any further. If
our man is anywhere about the house, we are bound to find him. Come
along, Grady."

They bustled out of the room, and presently they could be heard ranging
about the house. As the two friends discussed the situation in whispers
the door was flung open and Vera came in. Her face was aflame with
indignation--she was quivering with a strange unaccustomed passion.

"Charles," she cried. "I hardly expected to see you here."

"Perhaps you are equally surprised to see Evors," Le Fenu said. "We have
had an explanation--"

"I have already met Charles," Vera said. "But he did not tell me you were
coming down here. Still, all that is beside the point. There will be
plenty of time for full explanation later on. What I have to complain of
now is an intolerable outrage on the part of Mark Fenwick. He has
actually dared to intrude himself on the privacy of my bedroom, and
despite all I can say--"

"By Jove, this is a piece of bad luck," Evors exclaimed. "My dear Vera, I
had not the slightest idea that you were occupying the Blue Room. In
fact, I did not know that it was being used at all. I managed to send
Fenwick that way for the simple reason that there are two American
detectives downstairs with a warrant for his arrest. It was your
brother's idea to get him away--"

"What for?" Vera asked, passionately.

"Why should we trouble ourselves for the safety of an abandoned wretch
like that? He is the cause of all our troubles and sorrows. For the last
three years he has blighted the lives of all of us, and there is worse
than that--for, as sure as I am speaking to you now, the blood of our
dear father is upon his head."

"Yes, and mine might have been also, but for a mere miracle," Le Fenu
said. "He tried to do away with me--he would have done away with all of
us if he had only dared. But one thing do not forget--he is our mother's
only brother."

Vera started and bit her lips. It was easy to see that the appeal was not
lost upon her, and that she was ready now to fall in with her brother's
idea. She waited quite humbly for him to speak.

"I am glad you understand," he said. "It would never do for us to hand
that man over to justice, richly as he deserves his sentence. And you can
help us if you will. Those men will search every room in the house,
including yours. If you are in there when they come and show a certain
amount of indignation--"

"Oh, I quite understand," Vera responded.

"And I will do what I can for that wretched creature."

"What is he doing now?" Le Fenu asked.

"He has huddled himself up in a wardrobe," Vera explained. "He seems so
paralysed with fear that I could not get anything like a coherent account
of what had happened. Anyway, I will go back to my room now. You need not
be afraid for me."

As matters turned out, Vera had no time to spare, for she was hardly back
in her room before the detectives were at the door. She came out to them,
coldly indignant, and demanded to know what this conduct meant. As was
only natural, the Americans were profoundly regretful and almost abjectly
polite, but they had their duty to perform, and they would be glad to
know if Vera had seen anything of Mark Fenwick, for whose apprehension
they held a warrant.

"Well," Vera said, loftily, "you don't expect to find him in here, I
suppose? Of course, if your duty carries you so far as to ransack a
lady's room, I will not prevent you."

The absolute iciness of the whole thing profoundly impressed the
listeners. Astute as they were, it never occurred to them that the girl
was acting a part; furthermore, with their intimate knowledge of
Fenwick's past, they knew well enough that Vera had no cause to shield
the man of whom they were in search.

"We will not trouble you," Egan stammered. "It is a mere matter of form,
and it would be absurd to suppose that our man is concealed in your room.
In all probability he received news of our coming and got away without
warning his companions. It is just the sort of thing that a man of his
type would do. We have the rest of the gang all safe, but we shall
certainly have to look elsewhere for their chief. Will you please accept
our apologies?"

Vera waved the men aside haughtily. She was glad to turn her back upon
them, so that they could not see the expression of her face. She was
trembling violently now, for her courage had suddenly deserted her. For
some long time she stood there in the corridor, until, presently, she
heard the noise of wheels as two vehicles drove away. Then, with a great
sigh of relief, she recognised the fact that the detectives had left the
house. She opened the door of her room and called aloud to Fenwick. She
called again and again without response.

"You can come out," she said, contemptuously. "There is no cause to fear,
for those men have gone."

A moment later the yellow, fear-distorted face of Mark Fenwick peeped out
into the corridor. He came shambling along on tottering limbs, and his
coarse mouth twitched horribly. It seemed to Vera as if she were looking
at a mere travesty of the man who so short a time ago had been so strong
and masterful and courageous.

"They gave me a rare fright," Fenwick said in a senile way. He seemed to
have aged twenty years in the last few minutes. "That--that--was very
cool and courageous of you, my dear. I couldn't have done any better
myself. You dear, kind girl. He advanced now and would have taken Vera's
hands in his, but she turned from him with loathing. She was wondering
which she disliked most--the cold, cruel, determined criminal, or this
miserable wreck of a man glad to lean on anyone for support.

"Don't touch me," she said, with a shudder. "Don't thank me for anything
for I should have handed you over to those men gladly, I was ready and
willing to do so, only my brother recalled to me the fact that the same
blood runs in the veins of both of us. It was the remembrance of this
that made me lie just now, that caused me to run the risk of a criminal
charge myself. For I understand that anybody who harbors a thief for
whose arrest a warrant has been issued, runs the risk of going to gaol.
And to think that Le Fenu should do a thing of that kind for such a
creature as yourself--it is too amazing."

"I suppose it is, my dear," Fenwick said in the same carneying voice. "I
never expected to find myself shielded behind a woman. But I have lost
all my nerve lately, and the more I drink to drown my troubles, the worse
I get. But you must not think too badly of me, for I am not so black as
I am painted."

"Could you be any blacker?" Vera asked. "Could any human being have
descended lower than you have descended? I think not. You imagine because
I threw in my lot with you three years ago that I knew nothing of your
crimes. As a matter of fact, I knew everything. I knew how you had
shifted the responsibility of that dastardly murder on to the shoulders
of the man who is in love with my sister Beth. It was for her sake that I
pretended ignorance, for her sake that I came with you to try to get to
the bottom of your designs. What I have endured in the time nobody but
myself can know. But it has all come out now, and here am I to-day trying
to shield you from the very vengeance that I have been plotting for you
all this time. Oh, don't say anything, don't deny it, don't add more
useless lies to the catalogue of your vices. Go now. Let us see the last
of you, and never intrude upon us again."

All this outburst of indignation had apparently been wasted on Fenwick
for he did not appear to be listening at all. He had enough troubles of
his own, and, despite the fact that his nerve had failed him, it was no
feeling of remorse that left him stricken and trembling and broken down
before Vera's scornful eyes. He could only whine and protest that he was
absolutely helpless.

"But what can I do?" he murmured, with tears in his eyes. "I am not so
young as I was, indeed I am much older than people take me for. I have no
money and no friends, there is not a place I can go to. Don't turn me
out--let me stay here, where I shall be safe."

"It is impossible," Vera said, coldly. "We have done enough, and more
than enough for you. Now come this way, and I will hand you over to
my brother and Mr. Evors. They are cleverer than I am, and may be
able to devise some means for getting you out of the country. Why
don't you come?"

"I can't," Fenwick almost sobbed. "There is something in my limbs that
renders them powerless. If you will give me your arm, I daresay I shall
be able to get as far as the little room."

The touch of the man was pollution, yet Vera bravely endured it. She
could hear the excited servants talking in whispers downstairs, and one
of them might appear at any moment. It would be far better for the
domestic staff to assume that the culprit had vanished, otherwise their
gossip would assuredly bring the detectives back again without delay.
Vera was glad enough when her task was finished and the trembling form of
Mark Fenwick was lowered into a seat. The cunning look was still in his
eyes; the born criminal would never get rid of that expression, though
for the rest he was an object now more for pity than fear.

"It is very good of you," he said. "It is far better than I deserve. You
will say I can't stay here--"

"That is absolutely certain," Le Fenu said, coldly. "Most assuredly you
can't remain here. You may remain for the night, and Mr. Evors and myself
will try and think of a plan between us."

"And Zary," Fenwick whispered. The mention of that dreaded name set him
trembling again. "Keep me away from Zary. I am afraid of a good many
things, but the mere mention of that man's name stops my heart beating
and suffocates me."

"You had better go away," Le Fenu said to Vera, "and leave the wretched
creature to us. There will be no trouble in hiding him here for a bit.
There are two rooms here that nobody knows anything about except Evors
and his father."

Vera was only too glad to get away into the open air, glad to feel that
at last this nerve-destroying mystery was coming to an end. She wanted to
see Venner, too, and tell him all that had happened. In all probability
he was waiting at the accustomed spot. With a light heart and a feeling
of youthfulness upon her that she had not felt for some time, she set out
on her journey.


CHAPTER XXVI

THE LAST FINGER


In the ordinary course of things, and but for the dramatic events of the
evening, it would have been about the time of night when dinner was
finished and the house-party had gathered in the drawing-room. It had
been somewhere about seven when the Americans reached Merton Grange, and
now it was getting towards nine. It was not exactly the temperature at
which one enjoys an evening stroll, but the recent events had been so
exciting that Vera felt how impossible it would be to settle down to
anything within the limits of the house. There was a moon, too, which
made all the difference in the world. As Vera walked along, she almost
smiled to herself to think how strange her conduct might look in the
eyes of those formal people whose lives run in conventional channels.
She told herself more than once that it would be absurd to hope to see
Gerald at this time of night, but all the same she continued her journey
across the park.

She had not so far to go as she expected, for presently she could see the
glow of a cigar in the distance, and Venner came up. A little joyful cry
came from Vera.

"This is very fortunate," she said. "How lucky it is that I should run
against you in this fashion."

"Well, I was flattering myself that you came on purpose," Venner said.
"And, after all, it is not so very lucky, seeing that I have been hanging
about this house on the chance of seeing you since it became dark. But
you look rather more disturbed and anxious than usual. My dear girl, I do
hope and trust that there are no new complications. I shall really have
to take you by force and carry you out of the country. Why should we have
to go on living this miserable kind of existence when we can take our
happiness in both hands and enjoy it? Now don't tell me that something
fresh has occurred which will keep us apart, for another year or two? By
the way, have you had any visitors to-night?"

"What do you know about them?" Vera asked. "Have you found out anything
about Mr. Fenwick?"

"Well, I should say so," Venner said, drily. "I have absolutely got to
the bottom of that mysterious coin business. In fact, I accompanied Egan
and Grady to London, and I was with them when they arrested that awful
creature, Blossett. Egan and Grady are old friends of mine, and I told
them all about the strange coins and how you literally burnt your fingers
over them. They were coming down here to arrest Fenwick, and I offered to
accompany them; but they declined my offer, so I returned here alone, and
have been hanging about the house, curious to know what had taken place.
Have they bagged our friend Fenwick yet?"

"It is about Mr. Fenwick that I wish to speak to you," Vera replied. "Mr.
Evors is down here. By the way, I don't know whether you are aware of the
fact that he is the son of Lord Merton."

"Perhaps you had better tell me the story," Venner said.

"I am coming to that presently. Mr. Evors is down here; he is the man who
is engaged to my sister Beth."

Venner whistled softly to himself. At any rate, he knew all about that,
for his mind went swiftly back to the series of dramatic events which had
taken place some time previously in the house in Portsmouth Square. He
recollected now the white-faced young man who had broken away from his
captors and joined Le Fenu, otherwise Bates, in the drawing-room. He
recollected the joy and delight of the girl, and how she had clung to the
stranger as if he had come back to her from the other side of the grave.

"There will be a great many things to be explained between us,
presently," he said, gravely. "But for the present, I want to know all
about Fenwick. Where is he now?"

"He is hiding up at the house. I believe they have put him into a secret
room, the whereabouts of which is known only to Charles Evors. Of course,
he will not stay."

"But why shield such a blackguard at all?" Venner asked. "Surely, after
all the trouble he has caused you--"

"You must not forget that he is our own flesh and blood," Vera said,
quietly. "I had almost ignored the fact--I am afraid I should have
ignored it altogether had not my brother taken a strong view of the
matter. At any rate, there he is, and we are in a conspiracy to get him
safely out of the country. For the present the man is utterly broken down
and absolutely incapable of taking care of himself. I want you to do me a
favor, Gerald. I want you to take a hand in this business. While the
police are still hot upon the track it would not be prudent for Mr. Evors
or my brother to be too much in evidence just now."

"My dearest girl, I would do anything in the world for you," Venner
cried. "And if I am to take that sorry old rascal out of the country and
get rid of him altogether, I will do so with pleasure and never count the
cost. If I could see your brother--"

"Then why not come and see him now?" Vera said. "You will have to meet
sooner or later, and there could be no better opportunity for an
explanation."

To Le Fenu and Evors smoking in the dining-room came Vera and Venner. Le
Fenu looked up with a sort of mild surprise and perhaps just a suspicion
of mistrust in his eyes.

"Whom have we here, Vera?" he said.

"This is Mr. Gerald Venner," Vera said. "You know him perfectly well by
name--he was with us, on and off, for a considerable time before our poor
father died. Father had a great regard for him, and I hope you will have
the same, for a reason which I am just going to mention."

"I am sure I am very pleased to meet you," Le Fenu said, politely. "This
is my friend, Mr. Charles Evors, the only son of the owner of the house.
When I come to look at you, Mr. Venner, I confess that your appearance
pleases me, but I have had to deal with so many suspicious characters
lately that really--"

"Don't apologise," Venner laughed. "You will have to make the best of
me. I came here to-night with Vera to have a thorough explanation of
certain matters."

"Oh, indeed," Le Fenu responded with uplifted brows. "My sister and you
appear to be on very familiar terms--"

"It is only natural," Vera laughed. A vivid blush flooded her face.
"Charles, Mr. Venner is my husband."

"I am not in the least surprised to hear it," Le Fenu said. "In fact, I
am not surprised at anything. I have quite outgrown all emotions of that
kind, but perhaps you will be good enough to tell me how this came
about, and why I have not heard it before. As your brother, I am
entitled to know."

"Of course, you are. It was just after our father died that I promised
myself to Gerald. I had my own ideas why the marriage should be kept a
secret. You see, I had more or less thrown in my lot with my uncle, Mark
Fenwick, because I had determined to get to the bottom of the business of
our father's death. I felt certain that Charles here had nothing to do
with it; though, owing to his folly and weakness, he played directly into
the hands of the man who was really responsible for the crime."

"We all know who is responsible for the crime," Le Fenu said. "There is
no necessity to mention his name."

"Oh, I know that," Vera went on. "The explanation I am making now is more
to my husband than either of you. He has been goodness and kindness
itself, and he is entitled to know everything. It was within a few
minutes of my being married that I learned something of the dreadful
truth. I learned that Fenwick had conspired to throw the blame of the
tragedy upon Charles Evors. I found out what an effect this conspiracy
had had on our poor Beth. There and then I came to a great resolution. I
wrote to my husband and told him that in all probability I could never
see him again--at any rate, I could not see him for a long space of time.
I implored him to trust me in spite of all appearances, and he did so.
Now he knows the reason why I acted so strangely. I can see that he has a
thousand questions to ask me, but I hope that he will refrain from doing
so at present. The thing that troubles me now is what has become of poor
little Beth."

"Oh, she is all right enough," Le Fenu said. "I thought of that before I
came down. I have left her in the safe hands of the very clever doctor
who has my case under his charge, and Beth is with his family. We can
have her down here to-morrow if you like."

"Nothing would please me better," Vera said, fervently. "And now, I want
to know if you have done anything or formed any plan for getting rid of
Mark Fenwick. I shall not be able to breathe here until he is gone."

Le Fenu explained that they had come to no conclusion at present. He was
quite alive to the fact that delay was dangerous, seeing that Lord
Merton's agents would have to communicate with him by telegram, and that
the owner of the house might be back again at any moment. Therefore, it
was absolutely necessary that something should be done in the matter of
Mark Fenwick without loss of time. Vera indicated her companion.

"That is why I brought Gerald here," she said.

"I thought he might he able to help us. He knows all sorts and
conditions of people, and it is probable that he may be able to find an
asylum in London where the wretched man upstairs can hide till it is
quite safe to get him out of the way."

"I think I can manage that part of the programme," Venner said. "There is
an old servant of mine living down Poplar way with his wife who will do
anything I ask him. The man has accompanied me all over the world, and he
is exceedingly handy in every way. Those people would take a lodger to
oblige me, and when you come to think of it, Poplar is not at all a bad
place for anybody who wants to get out of the country without being
observed. It is close to the river, and all sorts of craft are constantly
going up and down. What do you think of the idea?"

"Excellent," Evors cried. "Couldn't be better. Do you think those people
would mind if you looked them up very late to-night?"

"Not in the least," Venner said. "There is only one drawback, and that is
the danger of traveling."

Le Fenu suggested that the difficulty could be easily overcome by the use
of Fenwick's motor, which, fortunately, the detectives had brought back
with them when they came in search of the culprit. It was an easy matter
to rig Fenwick up in something suggestive of a feminine garb and smuggle
him out into the grounds, and thence to the stable, where the motor was
waiting. Fenwick came downstairs presently, a pitiable object. His mind
still seemed wandering; but he braced himself up and became a little more
like his old self when the plan of action was explained to him. Vera drew
a deep breath of relief when once the man was outside the house.

"Thank God, we shall never see him again," she said, fervently. "And now,
I believe I could eat something. It is the first time that the idea of
food has been pleasant to me for days."

Meanwhile, Venner and Fenwick were speeding along in the car towards
London. Perhaps it was the knowledge that safety lay before him, perhaps
it was the exhilaration caused by the swift motion of the car, but
Fenwick became more and more like himself as they began to near the
Metropolis.

"This is very kind of you," he said, "considering you are a stranger to
me. If you only knew my unfortunate story--"

"I know your story perfectly," Venner said, coldly. "You see, I had the
pleasure of the friendship of the late Mr. George Le Fenu, and Mr. Evors
and the younger Mr. Le Fenu are also known to me. Not to be behindhand in
exchanging confidence for confidence, I may also say that your niece,
Vera, is my wife."

Fenwick said no more, for which Venner was profoundly grateful. They came
at length to the little house in Poplar, where Fenwick was smuggled in,
and a certain part of the story confided to a seafaring man and his
comfortable, motherly wife, who professed themselves ready and willing to
do anything that Venner asked them.

"Give him a sitting-room and a bedroom," Venner said; "and take this
ten-pound note and buy him a rough workman's wardrobe in the morning as
if you were purchasing it for yourself. Let him lie low here for a day or
two, and I will write you instructions. As to myself, I must get back to
Canterbury without delay."

Trembling with a sort of fearful joy, Fenwick found himself presently in
a comfortable sitting-room at the back of the house. He noted the
cleanliness of the place, and his heart lightened within him. Something
of his own stern self-reliant courage was coming back to him; his busy
mind began to plan for the future. Presently he was conscious of a
healthy desire to eat and drink. In response to his ring, the landlady
informed him that she had some cold meat in the house, and that it was
not yet too late to send out for some wine if he desired it.

"Very well," Fenwick said in high good-humor. "Give me the cold meat, and
ask your husband to get me a bottle of brandy. I shall feel all the
better for a thorough wash, and don't be long, my good woman, for I have
never been so hungry in my life as I am now."

Fenwick returned to the sitting-room a few minutes later to find a decent
meal spread out for him. There was cheese and butter and some cold meat
under a metal cover. A bottle of brandy stood by the side of Fenwick's
plate, with a syphon of soda-water. He took a hearty pull of the mixture.
The generous spirit glowed in his veins. He would cheat the world yet.

"And now for the food," he said. "I trust it is beef. Nothing like beef
on occasions like this. Also--"

He raised the cover from a dish. Then he jumped to his feet with a
snarling oath. He could only stand there trembling in every limb, with a
fascinated gaze on the dish before him.

"God help me," he whispered. "There is no getting away from it. The last
warning--the fourth finger!"


CHAPTER XXVII

NEMESIS


For a long space of time Fenwick stood there, his head buried in his
hands. All the way through, he had never been able to disguise from
himself the feeling that, sooner or later, this dread thing must happen.
Years ago he had taken his life in his hands in exploring the recesses of
the Four Finger Mine; he had more or less known what he had to expect,
for the mine had been a sacred thing, almost a part of the religion of
the diminishing tribe which had imparted the secret to Le Fenu, and any
intruder was bound to suffer. So far as Fenwick knew, the last survivor
of this tribe was Felix Zary. Leaving out of account altogether the
latter's religious fanaticism, he had been deeply and sincerely attached
to the family of Le Fenu, and now he was playing the part of the avenging
genius. All these things came back to Fenwick as he sat there.

He knew full well the character of the man he had to deal with; he knew
how clever and resourceful Felix Zary was. Hitherto, he had scorned the
suggestion that there was some mysterious magic behind Zary's movements,
but now he did not know what to think. All he knew was that he was
doomed, and that all the police in the Metropolis could not shield him
from the reach of Zary's long arm.

And here, indeed, was proof positive of the fact. Two hours before,
nobody, not even Fenwick himself, knew that he would spend the night at
the little house in Poplar. And here was Zary already upon his track,
almost before he had started on the long journey which was intended to
lead to the path of safety. Fenwick never troubled to think what had
become of the meal prepared for him, or how the extraordinary change had
been brought about. Gradually, as he sat there, something like strength
and courage came back to him. Come what might, he would not yield, he
would not surrender himself into the hands of the foe without a struggle.
He replaced the cover on the dish, and rang the bell for his landlady.
She came in a moment later, comfortable and smiling, the very picture of
respectable middle-age. As Fenwick glanced at her, he at once acquitted
her of any connection with his final warning.

"I am sorry to trouble you," he said, "but I should like to know if you
have any other lodgers. You see, I am rather a bad sleeper, suffering a
great deal from nightmare, and I should not like to alarm your other
lodgers in the middle of the night."

"Lord bless you, sir," the woman said, "we haven't any lodgers at all. We
don't need to take them, seeing that my man is comfortably fixed. Of
course, we are pleased to do anything we can for you, but we shouldn't
have had you here at all if it hadn't been to please Mr. Venner. We'd do
anything for him."

"No doubt," Fenwick said, hastily. "I suppose your husband sees a good
many of his old friends occasionally?"

"No, he doesn't," the woman replied. "I don't suppose we have had anybody
in the house except yourself for the last two months. I hope you have
enjoyed your supper, sir?"

"Oh, yes," Fenwick stammered. "I finished all the meat. There is one
thing more I should like to ask you. I may have to go out presently, late
as it is. Do you happen to have such a thing as a latchkey? If you
haven't, the key of the front door will do."

The latchkey was forthcoming, and presently Fenwick heard his landlord
and his wife going upstairs to bed. He did not feel comfortable until he
had crept all over the house and seen that everything was made secure.
Then he sat down to think the matter out. Twice he helped himself
liberally to brandy, a third time his hand went mechanically to the
bottle--then he drew back.

"I mustn't have any more of that," he said. "It would be simply playing
into the hands of the fiend who is pursuing me."

With a resolution that cost him an effort, Fenwick locked the brandy
away in a cupboard and threw the key out of the window. In his present
state of mind he dared not trust himself too far. Partially divesting
himself of his clothing he drew from about his waist a soft leather belt
containing pockets, and from these pockets he produced a large amount of
gold coins and a packet of banknotes. Altogether there were some hundreds
of pounds, and Fenwick congratulated himself on the foresight which had
led him to adopt this plan in case necessity demanded it. He had enough
and more than enough to take him to the other side of the world, if only
he could manage to get rid of Felix Zary.

His mind was made up at length; he would creep out of the house in the
dead of the night and make his way down to the Docks. At every hour ships
of various size and tonnage put out of the port of London, and, no doubt,
the skipper of one of these for a consideration would take him wherever
he wanted to go; and Fenwick knew, moreover, that there were scores of
public-houses along the side of the river which are practically never
closed, and which are run entirely for the benefit of seafaring men. It
would be easy to make inquiries at some of these and discover what
vessels were leaving by the next tide, and a bargain could be struck
immediately, go far as Fen wick was concerned, he inclined towards a
sailing ship bound for the Argentine. His spirits rose slightly at the
prospect before him; his step was fairly light and buoyant as he
proceeded in the direction of his bedroom. There was no light in the
room, so that he had to fumble about in his pockets for a box of matches
which fell from his fingers and dropped on to the floor.

"Confound it," Fenwick muttered. "Where are they?"

"Don't trouble," a calm, quiet voice said out of the darkness. "I have
matches, with which I will proceed to light the gas."

Fenwick could have cried aloud, had he been physically able to do so.
There was no reason for a light to be struck or the gas to be lighted so
that he might see the face of the speaker. Indeed, he recognised the
voice far too well for that. A moment later, he was gazing at the
impassive face of Felix Zary.

"You did not expect to see me," the latter said. "You were under the
impression that you were going to get away from me. Never did man make a
greater mistake. It matters little what you do, it will matter nothing to
you or anybody else in twelve hours from now. Do you realise the fact
that you have but that time to live? Do you understand that?"

"You would murder me?" Fenwick said hoarsely.

"You may calm yourself on that score. You are unarmed, and I have not so
much as a pocket knife in my possession. I shall not lay a hand upon
you--I shall not peril my soul for the sake of a creature like you. There
are other ways and other methods of which you know nothing."

"How did you get here?" Fenwick asked hoarsely. "How did you put that
dreadful thing on my table?"

Zary smiled in a strange, bland fashion. He could have told Fenwick
prosaically what a man with a grasp like his could do in connection with
a water pipe. He could have told, also, how he had dogged and watched his
victim within the last few hours, with the pertinacity of a bloodhound.
But Zary could see how Fenwick was shaken and dazed by some terrible
thing which he could not understand. It was no cue of Zary's to enlighten
the miserable man opposite.

"There are things utterly beyond your comprehension," he said, calmly.
"If you look back to the past you will remember how we laid our mark upon
the man who stole the Four Finger Mine. That man, I need not say, was
yourself. To gain your ends you did not scruple to take the life of your
greatest friend, the greatest benefactor you ever had. You thought the
thing out carefully. You devised a cunning scheme whereby you might
become rich and powerful at the expense of George Le Fenu, and scarcely
was the earth dry upon his coffin before your warnings came. You knew
the legend of the Four Finger Mine, and you elected to defy it. A week
went by, a week during which you took the gold from the mine, and all
seemed well with you. Then you woke one morning to find that in the night
you had lost your forefinger without the slightest pain and with very
little loss of blood. That was the first sign of the vengeance of the
genius of the mine. Shaken and frightened as you were, you hardened your
heart, like Pharaoh of old, and determined to continue. Another week
passed, and yet another finger vanished in the same mysterious fashion.
Still, you decided to stand the test, and your third warning came. With
the fourth warning, your nerves utterly gave way, and you fled from the
mine with less ill-gotten gain than you had expected. It matters nothing
to me what followed afterwards, but you will admit that at the present
moment you have not benefitted much by your crime. I have nothing more to
say to you. I only came here tonight just to prove to you how impossible
it is for you to hide from the vengeance of the mine. In your last bitter
moments I want you to think of my words and realise--"

As Zary spoke he moved across the room in the direction of the gas
bracket; he laid his hand upon the tap, and a moment later the room was
in darkness. There was a sound like the sliding of a window, followed by
a sudden rush of cold air, and by the time that Fenwick had found his
matches and lighted the gas again there was not so much as a trace of
Zary to be seen.

"I wish I hadn't thrown away the key of that cupboard," Fenwick said,
hoarsely. "I would give half I possess for one drop of brandy now. Still,
I won't give in, I won't be beaten by that fellow. At any rate, he can't
possibly know what I intend to do. He could not know that I shall be on
board a vessel before morning."

Half an hour later, Fenwick left the house and made his way straight to
the Docks. At a public-house in the vicinity he obtained the brandy that
he needed so badly, and felt a little stiffened and braced up by the
spirit. He found presently the thing he wanted, in the shape of a large
barque bound for the River Plate. The skipper, a burly-looking man with
an enormous black beard, was uproariously drunk, but not quite so
intoxicated that he could not see the business side of a bargain.

"Oh, you want to go out with me, mister?" he said. "Well, that's
easily enough managed. We've got no passengers on board, and you'll
have to rough it with the rest of us. I don't mind taking you on for
fifty pounds."

"That's a lot of money," Fenwick protested.

The black-bearded skipper winked solemnly at the speaker.

"There's always a risk in dealing with stolen goods," he said. "Besides
fifty pounds isn't much for a man who wants to get out of the country as
badly as I see you do, and once I have passed my word to do it, I'll see
you safe through, and so will my crew, or I'll know the reason why. Now,
my yellow pal, fork out that money, and in half an hour you'll be as safe
as if you were on the other side of the herring-pond and not a policeman
in London will know where to find you. Now, is it a bargain or not?"

Fenwick made no further demur; he accepted the conditions there and then.
There was nothing to be gained by affecting to pose as an honest man, and
he was a little frightened to find how easily this drunken ruffian had
spotted him for a fugitive from justice.

"I can't give you the money just now," he whispered. "I've got it
concealed about me, and to produce a lot of cash in a mixed company like
this would be too dangerous."

The skipper nodded, and proposed further refreshment. Fenwick agreed
eagerly enough; he was feeling desperate now, and he did not seem to care
much what happened to him. He could afford to place himself entirely in
the hands of the black-bearded skipper, who would look after him closely
for his own sake. After all said and done, he had no cause to doubt the
honesty of the seaman, who appeared to be fairly popular with his
companions and well-known in the neighborhood. It was the best part of an
hour before the commander of the barque staggered to his feet and
announced in an incoherent voice that it was time to get aboard.
Presently they were straggling down to the dock, Fenwick propping up his
companion and wondering if the latter was sober enough to find his way to
his ship. It was very dark; a thin rain had begun to fall, and the waters
of the river were ruffled by an easterly breeze. The skipper stumbled
down a flight of steps and into a roomy boat, which was prevented from
capsizing by something like a miracle. Presently they came alongside the
black hull of a vessel, and Fenwick found himself climbing up a greasy
ladder on to a dirty deck, where two seamen were passing the time playing
a game of cards. Down below, the skipper indicated a stuffy little bunk
leading out of his own cabin, which he informed Fenwick would be placed
at his disposal for the voyage.

"If you don't mind I'll turn in now," the latter said. "I'm dead tired
and worn out. My nerves are all jumping like red hot wires. Do you think
I shall be safe here?"

"Safe as houses!" the skipper said. "And, besides, we shall be dropping
down the river in about an hour."

Just as he was, Fenwick rolled into the bunk, and in a moment was fast
asleep. When he came to himself again, the vessel was pitching and
rolling; he could hear the rattling creak of blocks and rigging; there
was a sweeter and fresher atmosphere in the little cabin. A sense of
elation possessed the fugitive. It seemed to him that he was absolutely
safe at last. The skipper had evidently gone on deck after having
finished his breakfast, for the plates lay about the table and some tepid
coffee in a tin had apparently been left for the use of the passenger.

"I don't think much of this," Fenwick muttered. "Still I daresay I can
better it if I pay for it. I'll go on deck presently and see what the
black-bearded pirate has to say. At any rate, I am absolutely safe now,
and can afford to laugh at the threats of Felix Zary. If that man
thinks--"

Fenwick paused, and the knife and fork he was holding over the cold bacon
fell from his hands. It was too cruel, the irony of Fate too bitter, for
there, just in front of him, propped up by the sugar basin, was a cabinet
photograph of the very man who was uppermost in his thoughts. It was
Felix Zary to the life; the same calm, philosophic features, the same
great round eyes like those of a Persian cat. It all came back to Fenwick
now, the whole horror of the situation. His head whirled, and spots
seemed to dance before his eyes; a string snapped somewhere in his brain.
Zary was behind him, he thought, close behind him like an avenging fury.

With a horrid scream, Fenwick tumbled up the stairs on to the slippery
deck. All round him was a wild waste of white waters. The ship heeled
over as Fenwick darted to the side....


CHAPTER XXVIII

EXPLANATIONS


Night was beginning to fight with morning by the time that Venner
returned to Merton Grange. There was no one to be seen; the house was in
total darkness, so that Venner placed the motor in the stable and
returned to his own rooms. On the whole, he was disposed to congratulate
himself upon the result of his night's work. It mattered very little to
himself or anybody else what became of Fenwick, now he was once out of
the way. He was never likely to trouble them again, and as far as Venner
could see, he was now in a position openly to claim his wife before all
the world.

Despite his feeling of happiness, Venner slept but badly, and a little
after ten o'clock the next morning found him back at Merton Grange. Evors
greeted him cordially, with the information that he alone was up as yet,
and that the others had doubtless taken advantage of the opportunity to
get a good night's rest.

"And you will see, my dear fellow," he said, "how necessary such a thing
is. Goodness knows how long it is since I went to bed with my mind
absolutely at rest. The same remark applies with equal force to Miss Le
Fenu--I mean your wife."

"I can quite understand that," Venner said. "It has been much the same
with me, though I must confess that I was so happy last night that I
could not sleep at all. By the way, have you any information as to your
father's movements? He probably knows by this time that his house has
been given over to a gang of swindlers."

"He does," Evors said. "I have had a telegram from him this morning to
say that he will be home some time in the course of the day; and, to tell
the truth, I am looking forward with some dread to meeting my father. But
I think I shall be able to convince him now that I am in earnest and that
I am anxious to settle down in the old place and take my share in the
working of the estate. When my father sees Beth and knows her story, I am
sanguine that he will give us a welcome, and that my adventures will be
over. I want him to meet Beth down here, and last night after you had
gone, and we were talking matters over, Vera promised to go up to town
to-day and fetch her sister. By the way, what has become of your
friend--Gurdon, I think his name is? I mean the fellow who very nearly
lost his life the night he fell down the cellar trap and found himself
landed in the house in Portsmouth Square."

"Oh, Gurdon's all right," Venner laughed.

"I hope you will have the chance of making his acquaintance in the
course of the day. You seem to have been in Charles Le Fenu's
confidence for some time--tell me, why all that mystery about the house
in Portsmouth Square? Of course, I don't mean Le Fenu's reason for
calling himself Bates, and all that kind of thing, because that was
perfectly obvious. Under the name of Bates he was lying low and
maturing his plans for crushing Fenwick. As a matter of fact, Fenwick
was almost too much for him. Indeed, he would have been if Gurdon and
myself had not interfered and given both of you a chance to escape. It
was a very neat idea of Fenwick's to kidnap a man and keep him a
prisoner in his own house."

"Yes," Evors said. "And he used his own house for illegal purposes. But
before I answer your question, let me ask you one. Why was Gurdon
prowling about Portsmouth Square that night?"

"That is quite easily explained," Venner replied. "I sent him. To go back
to the beginning of things, I have to revert to the night when I first
saw Mark Fenwick at the Great Empire Hotel, posing as a millionaire, and
having for company a girl who passed as his daughter. Seeing that this
pseudo Miss Fenwick was my own wife, you can imagine how interested I
was. She has already told in your hearing the reason why she left me on
our wedding day, and if I am satisfied with those reasons it is nothing
to do with anybody. As a matter of fact, I am satisfied with them, and
there is no more to be said; but when I ran against Vera again at the
hotel I knew nothing of past events, and I made an effort to find out the
cause of her apparently strange conduct. In a way, she was fighting
against me; she would tell me nothing, and I had to find out everything
for myself. On the night in question I sent Gurdon to Portsmouth Square,
and he had the misfortune to betray himself."

"It nearly ended in his death," Evors said, soberly. "Charles Le Fenu
was very bitter just about that time. You can quite understand how it
was that he mistook Gurdon for one of Fenwick's spies. But why did he
go there?"

"He followed my wife, and there you have the simple explanation of the
whole thing. But you have not yet told me why those two or three rooms
were furnished in the empty house."

"Who told you about that?" Evors asked.

"What a chap you are to ask questions! We got into the empty house after
the so-called Bates was supposed to have been kidnapped, and to our
surprise we found that all that fine furniture had vanished. There was no
litter of straw or sign of removal outside, so we came to the conclusion
that it had been conveyed from one house to the other. After a good deal
of trouble, we lit upon a moveable panel, and by means of it entered the
house where you and Le Fenu were practically prisoners. We were on the
premises when you managed to get the better of that man in the carpet
slippers and his companion; we heard all that took place in the
drawing-room between Fenwick and Beth and Le Fenu. In fact, we aided and
abetted in getting the police into the house. You will recollect how
cleverly Le Fenu managed the rest, and how he and you got away from the
house without causing any scandal. That was very smartly done. But come,
are you going to tell me the story of the empty house, and why it was
partly furnished?"

"I think I can come to that now," Evors said. "The whole thing was born
in the ingenious brain of Felix Zary. He was going to lay some sort of
trap for Fenwick, but we shall never know what it was now, because Fate
has disposed of Fenwick in some other way. Now, won't you sit down and
have some breakfast with me?"

At the same moment Vera came in. Familiar as her features were and well
as Venner knew her, there was a brightness and sweetness about her now
that he had never noticed before. The cloud seemed to have lifted from
her face; her eyes were no longer sad and sombre--they were beaming with
happiness.

"I am so glad you have come," she said. "We want you to know all that
happened last night after you had gone."

Venner explained that he knew pretty well all that had taken place, as
he had been having it all out with Evors. What he wanted now was to get
Vera to himself, and presently he had his way.

"We are going for a long walk," he said, "where I have something serious
to say to you. Now that you have no longer any troubles on your
shoulders, I can be very firm with you--"

"Not just yet," Vera laughed. "Later on you can be as firm as you like,
and we are not going for a long walk either. We shall just have time to
get to the station and catch the 11.15 to Victoria. I am going up to
London to-day to bring Beth down here. I think the change will do her
good. Of course, we can't remain in the house, so I have taken rooms for
the three of us at a farm close by. When Beth has had everything
explained to her and knows that the man she loves is free, you will see a
change for the better in the poor child. There is nothing really the
matter with her mind, and when she realises her happiness she will soon
be as well as any of us. You will come with me to London, Gerald?"

"My dearest girl, of course I will," Venner said. "I will do anything you
like. Let us get these things pushed through as speedily as possible, so
that we can start on our honeymoon, which has been delayed for a trifling
matter of three years, and you cannot say that I have been unduly
impatient."

Vera raised herself on her toes and threw her arms round her husband's
neck. She kissed him twice. There were tears in her eyes, but there was
nothing but happiness behind the tears, as Venner did not fail to notice.

