THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS

by

ROGER T. FINLAY

A new series of books, each complete in itself, relating the remarkable
experiences of two boys and a man, who are cast upon an island in the
South Seas with absolutely nothing but the clothing they wore. By the
exercise of their ingenuity they succeed in fashioning clothing, tools
and weapons and not only do they train nature's forces to work for them
but they subdue and finally civilize neighboring savage tribes. The
books contain two thousand items of interest that every boy ought to
know.

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
                  The Castaways

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
               Exploring the Island

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
            The Mysteries of the Caverns

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
                  The Tribesmen

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
              The Capture and Pursuit

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
            The Conquest of the Savages

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
          Adventures on Strange Islands

              THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS
             Treasures of the Islands

       _Large 12mo, cloth. Many illustrations._
           _60 cents per vol., postpaid._

                    PUBLISHED BY
             THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY
           147 FOURTH AVENUE    NEW YORK


ADVENTURES ON STRANGE ISLANDS


THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS

ADVENTURES ON STRANGE ISLANDS

by

ROGER T. FINLAY

Illustrated


[Illustration: NYBC]


The New York Book Company
New York

Copyright, 1915, by
The New York Book Company


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I. THE STRANGE OARS AND ROPES                         Page 15

       The charted island. Previous history of the boys. The professor.
       Mysteries. The strange oars and ropes. Experiments. The various
       trips through the Island. Meeting the natives. The caves.
       Finding metals and ores. A strange village.

II. A MYSTERIOUS MESSAGE                              Page 26

       The Town of Unity. Enterprises on the island. Building a ship.
       Homesick. Considering the question of other islands. Treasure
       hunting. The Krishnos. Their beliefs and practices. The
       comparison of customs with the white people. Preparing to launch
       the vessel. The professor decides to remain. Angel. The message.
       Blakely. A scrap of paper with illegible words. The V-shaped
       tracing. Guessing the contents of the note.

III. THE ARROW ON THE SHEET                           Page 38

       Deciphering the discolored paper. The arrow on the sheet. The
       first Walter letter. The comparison. Dimensions of the vessel.
       The engine. The professor and John's error. Pointing to an
       island. Convinced of the correctness of the boys' views.
       Launching of the vessel. The feast day. Putting up the rigging.
       Selecting a crew. Preliminary trials. The day for departure. The
       trip to Valparaiso. Reshipping to New York. Telegrams home after
       three years. Angels and the wonders of New York. The great
       change in the boys. The return to Wonder Island. Reaching
       Valparaiso. Meeting Blakely. The new steamer. Installation of a
       line to Wonder Island. The return trip.

IV. THE SKULL WITH THE CRYPTIC WRITING                Page 51

       Steaming up Enterprise River. Unity in sight. The natives at the
       wharf. The enthusiasm. The chiefs witness the arrival. A "Grand
       Homecoming." The boys visit the natives. Contemplating voyages
       to discover other islands. Native sailors. Sutoto captain of the
       _Pioneer_. Rumors about the boys. Plans for the proposed trips.
       The force for the expedition. A cargo of copper. The trip to the
       copper treasure cave. Tides. Fireflies. Explanation of the
       light. Light without heat The problem of light. Advantages of
       light which generates no heat. Color of daylight. Phosphorescent
       glow. Catching fireflies. Scaling the heights. The spot where
       the Walter note was found. A skull with mysterious characters on
       it. The mark on the skull and the mark in the message. The star.
       Cryptic signs.

V. THE TRIP TO THE NEW ISLAND                         Page 63

       Sutoto at the top of the peak. The telescope. The view of Unity.
       The Illyas' village. The visit to the last captured village. The
       reception. The kindness of the chief. The great change in the
       village. The feast of John and the boys. Happiness of the
       people. The Illyas at work. Return of the _Wonder_ to Unity. The
       _Pioneer_ on its way to other Islands. Seasickness of the crew.
       Trying the new cure. Atrophine, and how administered. Explaining
       its origin, and how it acts. The effect on the crew. Driven out
       of their course. A light in the dense darkness. Land ahead.
       Awaiting the morning. Fifty leagues from Wonder Island. The cove
       in the shore line. Anchoring. The two boats sent ashore. Signs
       to indicate that people lived on the island. Reminiscences of
       the Yaks and bears. The discovery of coffee trees. The wild
       variety. Identity of vegetation in widely-separated countries.

VI. DISCOVERY OF THE ISLAND AND EXPLORATIONS          Page 75

       Return to the landing. John's advice. Surveying the island. The
       cardinal points of the compass. Laying out the coast line by
       triangulation. What measurement of angles means. Transferring
       the angles to paper. Making plans by means of a scale.
       Proportionate lengths of the different limbs of the angles. The
       shore line to the south. Instructions to Sutoto. The party to
       explore the interior. Starting on their mission. The equipment
       of the party. The spears, and bolos. The camera and field
       glasses. Amazing tropical vegetation and fruit. Stone hatchet
       found. Independent exploits of the boys. Temporary separation.
       Disappearance of George. A pistol shot in the distance. The
       search. Evidences of a scuffle. George's tracks found. The
       footprints of natives. Muro scouting in the direction of the
       natives. The runner to the ship. The _Pioneer_ sailing away. The
       new landing place. Uraso advised of the capture.

VII. CAPTURE OF GEORGE BY THE NATIVES                 Page 89

       George's capture. Hearing John's whistle. Firing the gun. The
       surprise of the natives. Rendered unconscious. He recovers. Sees
       his gun and glasses in the hands of the natives. Discovers that
       his revolver is still in his pocket. The natives see him trying
       to discover the time by his watch. The fight of the savages for
       the watch. George's determination to escape. The natives
       discover the revolver. He surprises the natives by explaining
       the knife and glasses. While explaining the glasses accidentally
       discovers the ocean in the distance. The matchsafe. Discovers
       the village. Tries to escape before reaching there. Planning the
       details. Surprised at the appearance of another party. All hope
       lost. A powerful Chief. George and the Chief. Investigating
       George's belongings. How George unwittingly told the Chief about
       the gun and glasses. The Chief arrests the captors. George
       explains the weapons. Returns the revolver to George. Invites
       him to the village. In the home of the Chieftain. Description of
       the "Palace."

VIII. FIGHT OF THE NATIVES FOR THE TRINKETS          Page 102

       Scouting. Muro's work. The first traces. Arrival of Uraso. His
       grief at the news. The conference. John and party march to the
       east. Finding George's chain. Evidences of a struggle.
       Determining the number of enemies by the footprints. Reading
       characters by feet. How people are distinguished. Observing
       peculiarities of actions. Estimating the number of natives in
       the party which captured George. Discovering the Chief's
       footmarks. Judging of the safety of George by the marks of the
       feet. Uraso discovers the tree where George exhibited the power
       of the bullet to the Chief. Inferences as to the characters of
       the natives who captured George. The trinkets and buttons of
       more importance to the savages than the person of the captive.
       Power as the great factor with savages. Why right is might.

IX. THE GIANT CHIEF AND HIS "PALACE"                 Page 113

       The Chief interested in George's belongings. Discovery of a
       ship's chair. The matchsafe in the Chief's hands. The imitative
       quality. The first meal. The peculiar knives and forks. The
       Chief's capacity for food. The character of the meal. The siesta
       after the meal. George's opportunity. Stealing from the Chief's
       house. The daughter of the Chief. Wandering from the Chief's
       house. His midnight sleep from exhaustion. The watchers at his
       bedside. Finding the soap plant. Breakfast. Absence of the
       Chief. George's suspicions. Follows the Chief. The appearance of
       John and Harry. The meeting. George introduces the party to the
       Chief. Uraso and Muro able to converse with the Chief. George's
       story. "The Palace." The village. The feast.

X. PECULIARITIES OF THE NATIVE TRIBE                 Page 125

       How the feast was served. John relates the story of the boys to
       the Chief. The Chief interested in the wonderful ship. The story
       of the island. The runner to the ship. No Krishnos on the
       islands. Sutoto sees the runners. Sails for the village. The
       Chief does not believe in a great spirit. His philosophy.
       Strength is the only right. No caves on the island.
       Disappointment of the boys. Bad people to the north. Their own
       kin, but convicts. Stealing and lying the only crimes. No crime
       to steal from each other, only from the Chief. The sun as a
       great Chief. The coming of the ship. The natives on the
       seashore. Casting of the anchor. Sutoto sees the Chief's
       daughter. George's captors on the way to the convict colony.
       Intercession on the part of the boys. The food at the banquet.
       The natives' aversion to fish. Snake worshippers. Witch doctors.
       The bad god Baigona. Peculiar ideas of right and wrong among the
       natives. The survey of the southern part of the island.
       Triangulation from the mast of a ship.

XI. SUTOTO AND THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER                  Page 137

       Sutoto's love affair. Cinda, the Chief's daughter. The Chief is
       told of the wonders of Wonder Island. About the activities of
       the natives on that island. His curiosity. John tells him how
       the white people live. The acute questionings of the Chief.
       Teaching him how trade and commerce is carried on. Money and its
       uses. How it gets its value. Why it is a measure only. The trip
       to the north in charge of the Chief's son. Gruesome tales of the
       ferocity of the convicts. John still anxious to find some
       particular cave. His chart. The unsolved mystery of the boat.
       The clothing of the natives. Bracelets. Glitter to attract
       natives. Weaving, the only industry. The aptness of native women
       to adopt fancy articles of dress and ornament. John's scheme,
       anticipating the wedding of Sutoto and Cinda. A "State affair."
       The mission to the Professor. Sending the _Pioneer_ to Wonder
       Island. Stut captain of the ship. Sutoto's secret mission
       through Stut.

XII. THE SKELETON BENEATH THE BOAT                   Page 148

       How the present journey reminded the boys of their first
       adventure on Wonder Island. Peculiar animals. The kagu. The
       fashionable millinery styles. Singular habit of the bird. The
       benne plant. Its remarkable properties. Lard from trees. The
       coffee trees. A tree with sandpaper leaves. The indicus.
       Analyzing soils. How plants digest food. Larvæ. The early forms
       of many animals. Kinds of food in the earth. The bruang. The
       sun-bear of Malay. The bear and the honey pot. How it was tamed.
       The sport. The ocean. George and Harry at the beach. Bathing in
       the surf. The discovery of the wreck of an upturned boat.
       Finding the compartments belonging to their lost boat on Wonder
       Island. Sending for John. The skeleton beneath the upturned
       boat. The bound skeleton. The startling discovery of the same
       kinds of ropes found in their lost boat. Evidence of a crime.

XIII. A CONVICT COLONY OF NATIVES                    Page 161

       Describing the skeleton. A soldier or an adventurer. Their first
       hatchet. The narrow neck of land. The Rose of Jericho. The
       resurrection plant. The Australian kangaroo. The exiled people.
       The Chief's son tells about them. Explains they do not believe
       in killing except in self-defense. The upas tree. Its flowering
       branch. Valuable mineral in the hills. Description of the
       convict's home. Banishment one of the most serious forms of
       punishment for crimes. The survey of the mountains. Hunting for
       caves. How the parties, were organized. The influence of odors
       on human actions. Tests of odors on patients. How they affect
       dreams. Calcareous formations. Where the real caves are found.
       Erosive action of water on limestone.

XIV. A WHITE PARALYTIC IN THE CONVICT COLONY         Page 174

       The wide search for the caves. George finds a cave entrance.
       Preparing to explore the cave. The lamps. A blind lead. A
       fissure, not an erosion. The joke on George. The first sight of
       the location of the dreaded criminal colony. The magnificent
       wild fruits. The beautiful flowers. The first criminals. The
       industry of the people. Cultivating fruit and vegetables.
       Hutoton. Peculiarity in names. Well-dressed natives. The
       distinguished head of the village. His dignity. The welcome to
       the village. The well-kept huts. The garden plots and bowers of
       flowers. The criminals preparing a feast of welcome. The boys
       discover a white man. A paralytic patient. How the convicts
       cared for him. Surprised to learn that the convicts rewarded the
       men who rescued the paralytic. How the savages calculated time.
       The movement of the sun, and how it gave them the time.

XV. SAVAGE MARRIAGE CUSTOMS                          Page 185

       Criminal Colonies. The effects on the people. Its advantages.
       The principles of punishment. Protecting society. Isolating
       patients who have contagious or infectious diseases. Trying to
       ascertain the identity of the paralytic. John's promise to
       reward the people for the care bestowed on the white man.
       Refusing to be paid, for taking care of him. Contrasting Hutoton
       with Sasite, the home of the Chief. Returning to Sasite. The
       first glimpse of the returning _Pioneer_. The interesting party
       aboard. The Chief and the entire village at the seashore. The
       Professor. Muro's wife. Blakely. The Chief meets the Professor.
       The Chief knows why the Professor is a wise man. The double
       eyes, spectacles. The Chief with the spectacles. Muro's wife
       meets the Chief's wife. They confer about Cinda and Sutoto. The
       savage customs in marriage. The ceremonies. Stut tells the boys
       about Sutoto's mission to procure his wedding outfit. The
       surprising news that Sutoto and Cinda were to be secretly
       married that night. The plot. Muro's wife informed.

XVI. SUTOTO AND CINDA'S MARRIAGE; AND THE SURPRISE   Page 193

       The Chief's wife gets the news. The Chief brought into the
       conference. His will the only law on the matter of marriage. He
       consents to their plan. The two requirements in the ceremony of
       marriage according to their rites. The gift of fruit, of fowl,
       and of game. The blindfolding of the bridegroom. The absolute
       silence when eating. Preparation for the banquet that night.
       Sutoto and Cinda arrange to be married that night while the
       people are at the banquet. Decide to conform strictly to the
       rites of the tribe. The boys learn of the stealthy plans.
       Witness the ceremony in Cinda's home. The Chief arrests the
       bridal couple and takes them aboard the ship. The criminals
       before the Chief. The Chief upbraids Sutoto. The reconciliation.
       The presents brought over from Wonder Island. Grief of the boys
       because they had forgotten a present. The surprise of the
       natives at the beautiful silver forks. Spices. Coffee. Cream and
       sugar. Curiosity about the cows. The great surprise to Sutoto.
       He is made Chief of his tribe. Monuments. The presents. The
       great mirror, the present of the boys. The crowns. The final
       ceremony. The dance. Originally a religious ceremony. The
       encircling wreath.

XVII. HUTOTON; THE PLACE OF DEATH                    Page 207

       Preparations for further explorations. Consulting the charts.
       Determine to sail northward, on way to Wonder Island. Reasons
       from shape of the island why an island might be to the north.
       Geological formations. Upheavals. Islands mere ridges. Sutoto to
       return to Wonder Island. The Chief agrees to go to Wonder
       Island. His family to accompany him. Proposed visit to Hutoton.
       Boarding the ship. The welcome of the convicts. Taking the
       paralytic to the ship. Stores from the ships for the convict
       colony. The _Pioneer_ sails to the north. Discovery of a new
       island. Taking observations from the sun. The calendar. Summer
       and winter. Taking the angle of the sun, and what it means.
       Triangulation. The nautical chart. Greenwich or Standard time.
       The island which they had left named _Venture_. The new island
       and its magnificent vegetation. John, with the boys and two
       boatloads, land. The exploring parties formed. The boys and Muro
       at the head of one party. Traces of savages. Appearances that
       cannibals were there. A shower of arrows their first surprise.
       The volley and the disappearance of the natives. Reappearance of
       the savages. Surrounded. Preparing for defense. The second
       attack. The fight. The natives apparently preparing to rush
       them.

XVIII. DISCOVERY OF A NEW ISLAND, AND A SAVAGE TRIBE Page 222

       The effect of the second volley. The determination of the
       attacking party. The fire on all sides. The ammunition getting
       low. The relief party under John. Hearing the sounds of firing.
       The surprise of the natives. The savages repulsed. Muro and the
       men follow the fleeing natives. Recalled by John. Aiding the
       wounded. Taking along a wounded Chief. The litter. The decoy.
       Returning to the ship. Observing the enemy from a tree-top.
       Following up the party. A rear guard. The runner reports the
       determination of the natives to follow. The signal shots to the
       ship. Reinforcements. The determination to explore the island
       and meet the natives. John with the boys and a strong party
       remain. The _Pioneer_ sails for Wonder Island. Holding a
       council.

XIX. FIGHT WITH NATIVES AND RETURN TO WONDER ISLAND  Page 231

       Arrangements for the _Pioneer_ to return. Ammunition needed. The
       arrangement of the men for scouting and picketing. Leaving
       security harbor. A plant which devours insects. Venus's
       fly-trap. How plants absorb food. Irritability. How the leaf
       digests the fly. Food absorbed by leaves as well as by roots. A
       cache of human skulls. Head hunters. The vele. A hoodoo. The
       rattle. The vele and the bamboo box. How it is worked to produce
       the charm. Evidences of extreme superstitions. Witch doctors.
       Peculiar noises. Doleful sounds. Speculating on the mysteries of
       the island.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
                                                                 PAGE
  He turned it over and examined every portion                     75
  The rites were progressing very satisfactorily                  195
  She ... found herself standing in front of a tall oval mirror   218

  Fig.  1. The Mysterious Message.                                 28
  Fig.  2. The Walter Letter.                                      40
  Fig.  3. The Fire-fly.                                           57
  Fig.  4. Inscription on the Skull.                               60
  Fig.  5. Measuring by Triangulation.                             76
  Fig.  6. The Second Limb                                         78
  Fig.  7. Triangulation from a Vessel.                            80
  Fig.  8. The Kagu.                                              149
  Fig.  9. Sesame Oil Plant. The Benne.                           119
  Fig. 10. Flower of Indica Tree.                                 152
  Fig. 11. Bruang. The Malayan Bear.                              155
  Fig. 12. Rose of Jericho.                                       163
  Fig. 13. The Koala.                                             164
  Fig. 14. The Flower of the Upas Tree.                           167
  Fig. 15. Getting Angle from Position of the Sun.                212
  Fig. 16. Venus' Fly-Trap.                                       234


ADVENTURES ON STRANGE ISLANDS


CHAPTER I

THE STRANGE OARS AND ROPES


"I am awfully anxious to know where the charted islands can be that John
spoke about," remarked George, as Harry was consulting the plans of the
boat they were building.

"They must be in this section of the southern seas, or his party
wouldn't have sailed in this direction," answered Harry, after a pause.

"Do you think he would be offended if we spoke to him about it!"

"No;" answered Harry, after some reflection. "He has spoken to me about
it several times. But why do you ask!"

"For the reason that I think it would be a grand thing to hunt them up."

Harry laughed, and then slowly said: "That would be a big thing to
undertake. But what about going home?"

"I hadn't forgotten that. I meant that when we came back it would be
proper for us to undertake."

"Well, haven't you had enough trouble during the past two years?" And
Harry laughed, just as though they hadn't gone through sufficient trials
to last a life time.

"I wouldn't mind going through the same experiences, when I remember
what we have learned and what all of us have accomplished," responded
George, as he looked through the window, reflectively, and watched the
natives at work.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be difficult to understand the force of the above conversation,
unless the reader knows the situation in which the boys were placed at
the time it took place, and the locality of the scene where the
conversation was held.

Over two years previously two boys, George Mayfield and Harry Crandall,
were members of a school training ship which left the Harbor of New
York, for a cruise in southern waters, the object being to instruct the
crew of seventy boys in the art of seamanship, as well as to give them a
foundation knowledge in the arts and sciences.

On board they became intimate with a gray-haired Professor, who became
very ill. They were particularly attracted to him, and waited upon him,
until they reached the Pacific Ocean, where, for some reason the ship
met a catastrophe, and the crew were compelled to take to open boats.

The two boys, with several companions, and the Professor, were together
in one of the life boats, and after leaving the sinking ship a terrific
gale, one of the great monsoons, separated them from the companion
boats, and for six days they were driven about in the vast ocean,
absolutely helpless. During this time all their young companions were
washed overboard, and they were driven to the point of despair, when
they were cast ashore on an island.

They were thus placed on an unknown land, with nothing but their scanty
clothing, and devoid even of a knife. There is no indication that the
land was inhabited, and for the first three months, while recuperating,
they had no opportunity to go far from the spot where they landed.

After the Professor had regained his health, they began to make a few
necessary things, and hunt for the food which was necessary to preserve
life. As they grew bolder, however, they fashioned crude implements,
like bows and arrows, and primitive articles of utility.

They made a few trips into the interior, and then saw the first
indications which pointed to the presence of inhabitants. From some of
the traces it was evident that the people must be savages, and then they
saw the necessity of preparing themselves to meet hostile neighbors.

Then began the most remarkable series of adventures on the part of the
boys, under the instruction of the Professor, to provide not only the
necessaries of life, but many of the luxuries. While engaged in the
different enterprises they undertook numerous excursions, all of which
confirmed them in the first intimations that they had landed on an
island, and that it contained one or more savage tribes.

To recount all that the boys did, even in the briefest space, would be
impossible in this book, and it is not necessary, in order to relate the
happenings from this time on; but some things are necessary, because we
shall have to deal with incidents which took place during their
adventures, and this volume also brings into the scene several
characters, in addition to the three which have been named, as the
principal participants.

The incidents referred to were called by the boys "the mysteries." When
they landed on the island they erected a flag pole, and improvised a
flag which was kept at half mast, and mounted on a high point, so that
it would attract passing ships, if their island chanced to be in the
path of vessels. During one of their excursions the flag pole and staff
disappeared.

For the purpose of making one of the trips by water a boat was built,
and they sailed it up a large stream, only to find that within ten miles
of their home was an immense cataract, or falls, around which they could
not porter the vessel. It was left below the falls in a secure position,
and ten days later, when they went for it, were surprised at its
disappearance.

Later on it was found miles away, but the little closets which they had
built in to hold their food and clothing, had disappeared, and they were
still more startled to find a pair of oars, which they could not have
made, attached to the boat.

In repairing the boat a note was discovered, written by some one who
could not have been a member of their ill-fated vessel. This added to
their perplexities, for it indicated that white people had been on the
island, as well as savages.

Then they found strange ropes, evidently fashioned by a crude hand; a
skull of a well-developed man was picked up on the shore not far from
their home; part of the wreckage of a vessel was discovered; a herd of
yaks was captured and a mysterious brand deciphered on one of them.

But in their wanderings they found the entrance to a cavern, and this
was explored, resulting in finding that it was formerly a pirates' lair,
and they were astounded at finding immense wealth in its hidden
recesses.

They industriously searched the island, and found numerous ores which
were dug out and smelted and from which they were able to build many
things that added to their comfort; and finally, firearms were
constructed, and powder made.

They spent much of the time in chemical experiments, in hunting for and
gathering the different vegetables, and fibres, and from the latter
learned how to weave cloth, to make felt, and to turn skins into leather
from the animals which they hunted.

Their adventures were not wholly devoid of the amusing things of life.
In one of the expeditions they captured a young Orang-outang. This was
carefully taught to do many things, and it became not only a valuable
assistant, and a wonderful scout in their wanderings, but it afforded
them immense amusement, which was appreciated by the boys.

And now, having been provided with suitable weapons, they determined to
go on voyages of discovery, being prompted in this course, because they
found in the wreckage along one of the rivers, and far in the interior,
a life boat which was a companion to their own which had been lost when
they were stranded in the great tempest.

It was evident to them that some of their companions were on the island,
and probably, captives. This made the quest a most exciting one, so
every energy was bent toward the end of helping the unfortunates.

On the initial expedition, after the completion of the first weapons,
they came into contact with several tribes of savages, one of whom was
captured, after being wounded. It developed that he was a chief of one
of the tribes which at that time were at war with each other.

Returning from this trip they discovered at their home a distinguished
looking white man in rags, totally devoid of intellect, and unable to
speak. It was evident that he had met with some accident, but he was
entirely harmless, and obediently took up and performed every sort of
manual labor,--in fact, was an expert in any sort of mechanical
operation required of him.

In hunting, or in scouting, he was a perfect specimen of the hunter, or
the soldier. It seemed to be an instinct with him to render every kind
of service that might be needed, with the gun, or the tools which were
all about him. In the absence of a better name they christened him John.

On the second trip into the unknown portions of the island they met
three of the savage tribes, with whom they had several battles, and one
of the natives was wounded and captured. While wandering through the
forests, in their efforts to return to their home, they ran into a
savage village, where they were successful in rescuing two boys who had
been shipmates on the _Investigator_ which went down months before.

While this was a source of joy it was clouded by the information that
they were not the ones who came to the island in the life boat that the
boys had found in the river. This was evidence that others must still be
in the island, and probably held as captives.

Some months after the silent John came to them, his reason and the
ability to speak returned to him, and he told a wonderful tale of his
wanderings, and that which impressed the boys most was the information
that he had shipped in a vessel which was designed to search out the
treasures hidden in the islands of the South seas.

From hints which he dropped from time to time, the islands containing
the treasure were charted, and later on, one of the caves so charted was
found on the island they now occupied, although they also found several
which were not alluded to and could not be recognized by the
description, according to the story told by John.

John was an educated man, an archæologist, and, next to the Professor,
had the most varied knowledge of any one the boys ever met, and it can
be understood, that their association with men of that class made them
remarkably active in seeking out and understanding the wonderful things
that nature presents in every field of human activity.

In order to be as brief as possible with this part of the story, it is
necessary to add that the rescue of the two boys, and the restoration of
John's faculties, made a strong party, and new weapons were made, and
the real expeditions through the island begun.

During the first extended trip, the Professor was captured. Out of this
misadventure grew some of the most remarkable series of events, but
finally, they were successful in rescuing four more of their former
companions, and two of John's shipwrecked companions.

The capture of the Chief, formerly alluded to, and the subsequent rescue
of a chief who was about to be offered up as a sacrifice, served as a
means to bring two of the tribes to the rescue of those in the
expedition, and the Professor, by his wisdom, was able to enlist the
services of the tribe which had captured him.

The events which lead directly up to the beginning of this volume were
brought about by the enmity of two of the most bitter and vindictive
tribes, which compelled the Professor and the boys to form an expedition
against those hostiles, in which four other tribes assisted.

They captured the Chief, and rescued two of their former companions, and
then built a town called Unity, where the advantages of civilization
were taught the natives, and to which place many of the families of the
natives emigrated.

All the chiefs formed an alliance of peace, and the Professor was made
the chief magistrate. After peace and order had been restored, the boys
again began to long for home. Prior to this they had determined to build
a ship large enough to take them to the nearest shipping point, and they
were now feverishly engaged in the work with the aid of the natives, who
were eager to learn how the white men built the wonderful things which
they saw all about them.

It will, therefore, be understood, that the remarks of George, at the
opening of this chapter, had reference to the fact that the most
important of the islands, or the ones having the most of the treasures
could not be the one on which they resided, but pertained to some other
localities.

"Well, if there is anything I am interested in, it is to know why the
wonderful buildings we found at the Illyas' village were put up at that
place, and what caused all trace of them to be lost," said Harry, after
George had expressed his last opinion.

"Do you remember what John said, after we came out of the cave below the
village?"

"No; what was it!"

"He said the copper in the cave might explain it."

After the capture of the last tribe, John demanded that the Chief inform
them of the location of the Hoodoo, or Medicine Men of the tribe, and
he reluctantly consented, but the Chief warned them, that to attempt to
enter the cave would mean Death.

John knew that the Chief and the people believed the death tales told by
the Medicine Men, as it was tales of this kind which enabled them to
maintain such a hold on the people. In order to destroy the power of
those people, who really had been the cause of much of their troubles,
John announced that he would take the Chief and his followers to the
cave, and that he would then go into the cave alone, and come out again,
to prove that the Medicine Men had lied to him.

John entered the cave, and single-handed captured the Krishnos, as they
were called, and brought them out, thus verifying his statement that
those men had deceived the people. Soon thereafter John and the boys
entered the cave, which, from the description he had, contained an
immense amount of treasure, but they were unable to discover any trace
of it if it existed.

By accident the calcareous deposit was broken off at one part in their
search, and below was found a dark material, which, after examination,
was found to be copper. It was not in its native state, but was a
product produced by smelting the ore, and they uncovered an immense
quantity of it, sufficient to show that the portion of the cave in which
it was found was really a storehouse.

Not more than a mile away was the Native village, where they held the
tribe captive. The village was absolutely unlike anything else in the
form of habitations found in the island. Three of the buildings were
large structures, built in three of the well-known types of
architecture, and the other parts of the village were laid off
regularly.

Surrounding the village was a strong embankment, as though originally
used as a fortification, and the village itself was located on the side
of a hill, betokening sanitary considerations.

"But I do not see," observed George, "what the copper in the cave had to
do with the town?"

"Nor do I," responded Harry. "Suppose we see John at the first
opportunity. There are other things besides the copper I would like to
know. John has asked every one that he has come into contact with about
the different wrecks that have come ashore within the past two years,
and no one seems to have any idea that more than two of the
_Investigator's_ boats came ashore."

"Well, if they did it isn't at all likely that they could come to the
southern shore, when the wrecked vessel was to the north of the island."

"It is just for that reason," responded George, "that I believe we shall
find other islands in the vicinity, and who knows but some of the boats
reached those islands?"

"I am with you," said Harry. "Shall we talk to John about it?"

"By all means. But stop! Why not have a talk with the Professor first?"

"Good idea. We owe everything to him."


CHAPTER II

A MYSTERIOUS MESSAGE


The town of Unity was located about ten miles from the sea, on a little
stream, which had a waterfall, from which they derived the power for
turning the machinery which had been put up. This consisted of a saw
mill, a small foundry, a machine shop, as well as grist mill and other
mechanism suitable for a town.

All these enterprises were now being operated by the natives. The
leading commercial genius of the town was Blakely, who was one of the
owners of the vessel on which John had sailed from San Francisco, and
which was also wrecked by the same monsoon which sent the schoolship
_Investigator_ to the bottom.

It was Blakely's idea that the work of the natives could be profitably
turned to raising coffee, cocoa, and the different fibres which
naturally grew all over the island, and in order to take advantage of
the crops which could be grown there it would be necessary to open
communication with the outside world.

To do this meant that they must build a ship, and thus reach
civilization, and vessels could then bring such things to the islands as
the natives could use, and take away the produce that the natives could
turn out.

Such a plan was one which was heartily seconded by all the boys, who,
although they had been engaged in the most wonderful experiences, were
homesick, and longed to see their parents in the States, and thus
relieve them of their anxiety, after an absence of more than two years.

It was with a will that all took a hand in the work, and the ship was
nearing completion. They had no facilities for making a large engine, so
the vessel was a sailer, with a small propeller, and the largest size
engine they could turn out was to be used as an auxiliary.

The next evening while the Professor, John and the boys were together,
Harry brought up the subject of the talk of the previous evening.

"George and I have been talking about making a voyage of discovery."

The Professor looked at Harry with that genial smile which the boys had
learned to love. Without answering for the moment, the old man turned to
John, as the latter's face lit up.

"I thought you boys were homesick?" he said.

"Well, yes," answered George. "But only for a little while."

"Only homesick for a little while?" and the Professor's hearty laugh
followed.

"I mean we are homesick,--that is, we can be cured of it in a little
while."

Without relaxing that broad smile, the Professor continued: "I suppose
you want to be cured before you go on the voyage of discovery? Is that
it?"

"Yes."

"But what do you expect to discover!" asked John, gravely.

"Just what you suggested on one occasion," said Harry.

"We want to know where the treasures are on the islands," remarked
George.

"Then, there is another thing," ventured Harry. "I don't think all the
boats of our ship were lost, and it is likely that they found refuge on
some other island."

"But how do you know there are other islands near here?" asked the
Professor.

"Well, I don't know, only from what John has said."

John looked at Harry for a moment quizzically, and then said: "When did
I say so?" he asked with a smile.

"When you told about the charts of the treasure caves."

"But we have found them, haven't we?"

"Yes; but not all of them."

"That is true; and your argument is correct. Unquestionably, there are
other islands, probably not in the immediate vicinity, but near enough
that they could have caught some of the boats. I quite agree with you
that we ought to make the attempt. The Professor and I have just been
talking of taking up the matter in order to relieve any who might have
been so unfortunate as to be east away."

"I am surprised," said the Professor, "that you are not through with
treasure hunting, and want some more of it."

"But you know, Professor, that some of the most interesting times we had
were during the investigations we made at the big cave at the Cataract
on Wonder Island!"

"Quite true; but think of the immense riches you now have. In the vault
beneath the floor of the main shop you have the combined treasure of the
two caves," continued the Professor.

"Yes; and that shall be taken back by you to your homes in the States,
and you will want to enjoy it," and John said this with a most sincere
air, as he looked at the boys.

"That would be nice," said Harry reflectively. "But if we are there the
only thing we can do is to spend it, and there is no particular fun in
doing that."

"What? No fun in spending the money?" exclaimed the Professor.

"Why, we haven't spent a cent since we have been here, and we have
enjoyed every hour of the time, except--except--" and George hung his
head for a moment.

"I know," said the dear old Professor; "I know what you mean. Home still
has a warm place in your heart. That is right. You must see your home,
and then,--"

"Then we want to come back," broke in Harry.

"It makes me happy to see that the lessons of the past while we have
been together has impressed on your minds one thing; that it is not
riches which give happiness."

"I know that," said Harry. "When I go out and see these poor people
here, and I meet smiles on every face, and a welcome everywhere, the
thought that we have tried to make them feel and know that wars were
wrong, and that true happiness consists in trying to make others happy,
it gives me more pleasure than all the gold which we took from the caves
of the Buccaneers."

"Yes, and there is another thing, that I have been thinking about," said
George. "I really don't think the people here are so bad, and never have
thought so."

"Well, they have been doing some pretty bad things," remarked John. "I
would like to know what makes you think as you do."

"I mean, that if it wasn't for certain classes, like the Krishnos, say,
the people would not be trying to sacrifice each other. Those fellows
are the ones who lie to the people, just as the fellows at the last cave
told the people and the Chiefs that if they went into the cave the Great
Spirit would destroy them."

John and the Professor both laughed, while the boys looked on. There did
not seem to be anything amusing about that, and they wondered why they
should laugh at George's remark.

"Did it ever occur to you how like that is to the white man's way of
doing things?" asked John.

"I never thought of that!" said Harry.

"Do the white people act that way, too?" inquired George. "I never knew
that we had people who tried to deceive others so they could give them
up as a sacrifice?"

"What do you think the Krishnos deceive the people for?" asked the
Professor.

"So as to give them the power," answered George.

"Quite true. But what is the object of that power?"

"So they can rule?"

"Yes; but what gives them the power to rule?"

"Oh, I see now! They get paid for it! And that is why the Krishnos have
all the best things, and are better cared for than even the chiefs are?"

"You have given the right answer. The Krishnos don't want to sacrifice
human life because they love to do it, but because in the doing of it
they inspire fear, and through fear they can get what they want."

"But, Professor, you haven't yet told us how that is like the white
people do it."

"In exactly the same way. The Krishnos own the big gun factories, and
they tell the chiefs that the people across the river, or on the other
side of the mountain are going to rise up against them, and they must
arm the people and attack them. You see the white man's Krishnos have a
great cave, called a gun factory, and while he does not want to offer up
any sacrifices for the love of it, he does so because it is his business
to make guns, and ammunition, and shells which explode with terrific
force, and destroy hundreds at every shot."

"Well, after all, we are not much better than the savages here, are
we?" said Harry, as he looked around, with a sad expression.

"We have advanced a little beyond them," interpolated John. "We have
tried to systematize the killing. The savage goes at it without regard.
But the white man has set rules to conduct the slaughter. Of course, the
rules do not say that they shall not kill but it does point out the
impolite ways of killing."

The Professor smiled at this homely way of putting it, but the boys
looked doubtfully at John's exposition, and then George ventured to
remark: "I can see the force of it, and it is my opinion that the savage
way is, after all, the most reasonable."

"If it is not the most reasonable," answered the Professor, "it is
certainly the most logical. But we are getting away from our subject. I
understand from what John says that within the next week we shall be
able to launch the vessel!"

"Yes," answered Harry. "Everything is now so far ahead that in two weeks
more we can be ready to sail."

"That is well. I hear there is considerable rivalry among the men to go
with you?"

"But aren't you going with us?" asked George in a voice of alarm.

"No; my place is here. I have no desire to go back. I have induced John,
much against his will, I know, to go with you, but I cannot leave my
people here. I will welcome you only the more gladly when you return."

Harry was almost in tears, as he said: "But we wanted you to go back
with us so we could take you to our homes and let our people see you.
They would be so happy to see you and to hear you talk."

"Thank you so much for the kind invitation. Sometime in the future, when
everything is properly settled here, and I can see my way clear, I will
consider it an honor to visit your homes, and enjoy the friendship of
your dear ones; but not now."

The door opened quietly, and Angel stepped in, Angel being the
Orang-outang to which we have alluded. He was now nearly as tall as
George. He gravely shambled over to the Professor, and placed an
envelope in his hand.

Angel was the most wonderful character in that community. He was the pet
and the playmate of all the children. No one dared to harm him or offer
an insult. Such a thing would have caused an insurrection in that town.

While he could not speak, he could understand practically everything
that was told him. Daily he performed many extraordinary tasks, thanks
to the training and care that George had bestowed upon him from the day
he had become a captive.

The Professor opened the envelope, and adjusted his glasses. As he read
his eyes opened wider and wider, while John and the boys drew closer.
While reading one of the sheets the Professor was slowly unfolding a
scrap of dark colored material, smaller than the sheet he was reading.

"What is it?" asked Harry.

"The letter is from Blakely," he said as he passed the papers to John.
"And what do you think it is about?"

All eagerly peered at the letter and then at the brown missive, whatever
it was.

"Read it aloud," said the Professor.

John handed it to George, and this is Blakely's letter:

                                                   "SOUTH MOUNTAIN,
                                                        Below Illya.

  "My Dear Professor:

    "I felt sure that my view as to the character of the mountain range
  below the town was correct. Copper outcroppings were found as far
  south as the range can be seen, and there is also silver in abundance.
  This will surely be a profitable field for the natives. Yesterday,
  while prospecting on the southeastern side of the main ridge, I was
  surprised to find a part of a metal pot, evidently of cast iron. Quite
  a number of articles, of no particular value were lying near, but
  within the fragment of the pot, and protected by a shale of rock, was
  the enclosed scrap, which I thought might interest you, as you have a
  leaning in the direction of finding out hidden and abstruse things.
  Probably, you can decipher what it says. All the men are well, and are
  feeling jolly. We may be ready to return in a week. I hope the old
  ship is coming along all right.

                                              "Hurriedly, as ever,

                                                        "BLAKELY."

"That is satisfactory. Blakely is the right man for his job," remarked
John.

"Now, let us see what the scrap has to say," said the Professor.

John held the scrap up to the light, and all peered at it. "I think
there are cross lines on it, although I am not quite sure," he said, as
he again held it up so the light could flash through it.

"What difference would that make whether it had or it hadn't cross
lines?" asked Harry.

"Simply this: I wanted to satisfy myself whether or not it was taken
from a ship's pad, which is generally ruled both ways."

"What is the object of having paper ruled both ways?"

"It is a convenient way of making calculations where measurements are
necessary, as is the case in figuring out and placing the different
celestial marks which guide the sailors. I think this is a marine pad.
Now, let us see what it contains, before we go further."

"See the name signed at the bottom," cried out George. "W-a-l-t. That
must be a 't'. But the rest is blurred."

"I wonder if that isn't Walter?" said Harry.

"Who is Walter?" asked John.

"Walter? Why he is the man who signed the note we found on the
_Investigator's_ life boat No. 3 and from whom we have never heard."

"I remember now," said John, reflectively. "He mentioned Wright who was
one of my companions. But I did not know Walter,--but what is this?" All
craned forward now. "Here is a line; it looks like a large V, pointing
to the south;--that is if the upper part of the paper is the north."

"There is some sort of tracing on it," said George.

"Your eyesight is good, George, see if you can see any figures on the
sheet that will explain the V, and the reason for the name below."

"There is the slightest sign of a figure, or a word just below the point
of the V. It looks like '30'. This seems to be an arrow, which points to
the right diagonally."

"Now you boys have something to occupy your minds. Yon have been
interested in the Walter note for a year; now is the time to do some
investigating."

"I have an idea," said Harry, jumping up. "Where can we find the
original Walter's note? We can compare the signature, and that will tell
whether it is Walter or not."

The Professor smiled as he noticed the eagerness of the boys. They
rushed out of the room and went over to the shop to reclaim the note
that had given them so much concern fourteen months before.

When they had gone John said: "I presume you have already guessed what
the note contains?"

"Unquestionably it has reference to the location of the main ledge of
copper or other ore which is measured from some point in that vicinity,
and which may be determined later on by noting the place where the
missive was found, or from some natural landmark."

"That is my view, but I felt it would be better for the boys to dig it
out for themselves," replied John.

The wonderful nature of the instruction which the boys had obtained
during their stay on the island, was characterized by this little
incident. Everything learned by one's own exertions is not only more
valuable because of that fact, but the facts thus gleaned will leave a
stronger impress upon the mind.

The boys thus learned by doing things themselves, that they became
strong and self reliant, and it made them happy to think that they were
able to pick up the threads, however tangled, and weave them into a
harmonious whole. It is the secret of doing things well.


CHAPTER III

THE ARROW ON THE SHEET


When the boys reached their rooms they set to work to decipher the
colored paper. It was about four by six inches in size, and had been
folded twice, as the creases plainly showed. Assuring themselves that it
was paper which had been crossruled, as suggested by John, they tried to
decipher the straggling letters and form them into some coherent form.

The paper had the following appearance when they received it:

[Illustration: _Fig. 1. The Mysterious Message._]

The words, or parts of words "dire," in the first line, and "30 gues" in
the second line, together with the letters "Walt" are the only
absolutely clear things to be noticed.

"The writing is right across the V-shaped marks, and the arrow is plain
enough. It may be though, that the arrow has nothing to do with the
V-shaped mark." And George held the paper away from his eyes to get the
proper effect at a distance.

"I wonder how close the mountain is to the sea?" ventured Harry.

"I don't see what difference that would make," replied George. "That
_30_ must mean some measurement. It is either feet, or miles, or yards,
or,--"

"Why can't you see that 'gues' is a part of the word 'leagues.'"

Harry jumped up as though shot. "Well, that was stupid of us, sure
enough."

"With that key before us, we can make some headway. I believe the
V-shape is the lower end of the mountain, probably a headland, and the
arrow points to a place 30 leagues to the,--see here, in the last line
is a W. and there is a blur before it and after it. That may be SWE,
EWS, SWW, SWS, and,--"

"Don't go so fast," shrieked Harry. "What do you suppose the capital I
stands for at the beginning of the third line?"

"I--I--, why,--_Island_, of course," said George, with an air of
superiority. "But it cannot be west."

"Well, the arrow points southeast."

"How do you know?" asked George, dubiously.

"Why, that word at the extreme top must be 'north,' and if so then the
arrow is pointing south, and the 'W' belongs to something in that
direction."

"There, in the second line is a word that looks like 'land.' Can it be a
part of the word 'Island'?"

"It doesn't seem so, as there is too much space before the letters. It
seems to me though, that it reads 'land 30 leagues' but what does 'se'
mean?"

The boys were up late that night, and they went to bed with the missive
still unsolved. Before retiring Harry said: "Let us wait until daylight.
The sun may help us out."

When they awoke the first thing that occurred to George was the original
Walter letter, so that the writing could be compared. It was found, and
George came in with an exultant bound.

"I am sure now that it was Walter. Here it is." The original letter was
as follows:

[Illustration: _Fig. 2. Walter Letter._
  Go directly south from the large river which flows to the east,
  west of the mountains. We are too closely watched to escape. The
  tribe at war with our captors are to the west of. If I escape I
  will follow the river to the sea so you will understand where I am.
                                             Walter. ]

"Compare the two and you will see they look alike," said George.

"What shall we tell the Professor!" asked Harry.

"Well but I am not yet through with the paper. Suppose we moisten it,
and that may bring out something we didn't see before."

This was done, but it made the entire document worse than before.

"Too bad we have spoiled it," remarked Harry, "but I think we are safe
in telling the Professor and John what we have found out."

For the time being, however, the boys had other urgent work to do. The
day for launching had been set, and every working hour was valuable, so
they were over at the ship yard early, and the boys did not see either
John or the Professor during the day.

The vessel as designed by Harry, and supervised by John, was ninety feet
long, and had a beam of eighteen feet, with a very deep keel, and high
bulwarks. It was constructed of a species of oak, found in abundance in
the forest west of the town, and was cut up into boards, and dried in
specially-prepared kilns which were put up for the purpose.

While lumber dried in this way is not the best for ordinary uses, it
will serve for shipping purposes, because there is always more or less
moisture present in the hull of the vessel, and the object was to enable
them to get the material in the speediest way.

The saw mill was one of their first experiments in building machinery,
and it was in constant service from the day it was first erected,
getting out lumber for building purposes.

The engine was designed only for auxiliary purposes, and the boiler was
intended to use coal, of which they found an ample supply in the
northern portion of the island, as explained in a previous book.

When the boys returned to their rooms late that afternoon, the first
thing that interested them was the message. When it was brought in it
was dry, and a slight change was noticed in its appearance. Now, what
appeared to be the first word of the message, was discernible, the word
"Take," and the word "Head" could be made out before and as a part of
"land," in the second line.

"We have it," cried Harry, as he jumped up. "Now let them know about
it."

They were across the open space, without any ceremony, and without
taking trouble to announce themselves, were in the Professor's room.

"We have it,--we have made it out," was the announcement, as Harry held
up the message.

"Does it tell you where the Copper mine is located?" asked the
Professor.

"Copper mine!" exclaimed George. "What has a copper mine to do with it?"

"John and I concluded, from certain markings on the paper, that it
contained a diagram of the mine!"

"Well, you were mistaken," said Harry with a chuckle. "It is something
about an island, thirty leagues to the southeast, somewhere."

"Is that so?" exclaimed the Professor in surprise. "Get John. He will be
surprised."

John came hurriedly at the announcement, and the contents of the missive
pointed out. "This is certainly good news," he said. "That was fine work
on your part."

"You see the arrow, and the part of the word 'leagues.' That couldn't
mean feet or yards, or miles."

"Quite evident," said John, as he mused for a while. "This confirms, in
a measure, the information that we have as to the proximity of these
islands, but the charts show them farther away."

"Undoubtedly, if Walter knew what he was talking about, we have an
interesting problem to decipher, and the determination to make the
voyage is a wise and timely one," interposed the Professor.

"Now for the ship," said Harry. "Every day is a hundred, in my mind."

As may be imagined, the boys now worked with feverish haste. Other
islands here, and waiting for them! Sometimes they were almost tempted
to give up the trip home, but the Professor would not hear of it.

"Do not change your plans, if you have any good conclusions when you
start out. Don't oscillate from one thing to another. Always make up
your minds and then take a wise, persistent course. It is that which
always serves you best."

"No; we will go home first, and _then_ for the islands," said Harry, who
felt relieved that the impetuous nature of George could be brought to
their way of thinking, although George was by far the most homesick of
the entire lot.

All the boys were on hand when the vessel was launched. It rode the
water beautifully, and the natives were the most enthusiastic helpers.
They felt proud of their work. Uraso and Muro, the two chiefs, who were
the most prominent men in the community, and particularly Sutoto, the
intelligent Beree, and Stut, the brother-in-law of Muro, were on hand.

It was a great feast day for the people. Tears actually flowed from the
Professor's eyes, as he saw the women and children crowd about him. He
was almost a God to them. They were accustomed to receive visits from
him in his weekly rounds, and how at such times he loved to tell them
how to make and arrange things about the house, which contributed to
their comfort.

Everybody was at work; all were happy, and no one appreciated this more
than the women, who had been lifted out of the bonds of slavery and
elevated through the wise administration of the Professor.

Angel, too, was in evidence. He was the first to climb the mast, as the
ship floated in the stream.

"I wonder whether Angel remembers the first trip he took with us on boat
No. 1?" asked Harry.

Angel bestowed a knowing look on Harry. "I believe he knows what you
said," remarked George.

In another week the rigging had been put up, and the boiler and engine
were installed before the launching, so that the necessary work
required to enable the ship to sail, was the provisioning. John
suggested that what was of far more importance would be the work of
training a crew to handle the ship, so they turned their minds toward
the solution of this question.

The selection of a crew was a most difficult task, because all the men
were willing to volunteer. It was decided, however, that only the
unmarried men should be taken, and this at once eliminated many who
might otherwise have been selected.

For three days the ship was taken out to sea, under sail only, and John
found no trouble in maneuvering the vessel with his new crew. John was a
sailor, and had once been owner of a vessel, so that they were in
competent hands.

But the final day came, when they must go. It was a most trying time for
the poor boys. Almost at the last moment, Harry and George walked back
to the Professor's room, and broke out into tears.

"Everybody is leaving you," said Harry, "and I cannot bear to go and
leave you in this way."

All the rescued boys were on board, as well as Blakely, since the
Professor had insisted that the latter should go, for business reasons,
so that the Professor was left alone, the only white man on Wonder
Island, when the ship sailed down the river.

True, there was no reason to fear for his safety. The natives loved him
too devotedly, but the boys felt that he must often be lonely in his new
surroundings, with no one but the natives about him. They little knew
that the solace and comfort of the grand old man was the knowledge that
he had helped his fellow man, though the color of the skin was darker
than his own.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their voyage was accompanied by favoring winds and perfect weather.
Valparaiso, Chile, was the first port at which they landed, and as a
trip around the Horn, or even through the Straits of Magellan, and up
along the Atlantic coast, would mean several months, with their own
vessel, they shipped in one of the line steamers, and within seven weeks
they saw Sandy Hook lightship, and then the forts which lined the
opposite shore at the Narrows.

Telegrams to their parents created paroxysms of joy in many homes which
had been robbed when the _Investigator_ went down. There were no happier
homes than the ones Harry and George were welcomed to.

The papers told the stories of the boys in pages and pages of
descriptions, and they showed the photos, and told what the boys had
done in their temporary home. The hero of all this wonderful home-coming
was Angel.

The people, the houses, the wonderful automobiles which he saw on every
hand, at first alarmed him, but when he saw that George did not seem a
bit afraid, he reconciled himself to the situation.

His first automobile ride was a revelation to him. He held on tightly to
George, at first, but soon the sensation became one of joy, and he could
not get enough of it. The boys were certainly fêted, but when they told
their parents that they must go back, the proposition met with strong
opposition.

The parents forgot that the boys were now over two years older than when
they went away, and it seemed singular that the surroundings did not
seem the same to them as before the happy boyhood days before they left
home.

For business reasons the parents knew that it would be prudent to permit
them to return and they were influenced by the remarkable change they
saw in the manners and actions of the boys. They saw the youths were
strong and self reliant, ever ready to act and to carry out their
resolutions. These boys had been transformed into men.

They spent many days going over old scenes and visiting friends. They
enjoyed to the utmost the reunion with their families, but they could
not cease talking about the Professor. They now realized in full what he
had been to them, and what his example and teaching meant to them. There
was really a feeling amounting almost to jealousy on the part of the
people at home against the Professor, but it was not one of bitterness.

One who could exert such a healthy influence on the lives of the young,
as he possessed, was worthy of the adulation that the boys bestowed. But
John was not forgotten in these periods of happiness.

They were never happy when telling the tales of their adventures except
when John was present, and the latter was the most sought-for
individual, because when he once began to tell some of his vivid tales
the people would not let him stop.

Finally the time for departure came. A merry party gathered upon the
dock when the explorers were about to depart. They would write at least
once a month, as Blakely had assured them that he would arrange to have
a steamer run a round trip each four weeks, to take care of the
commodities which would be made up by the natives.

The steamship _Panama_ slowly moved out into the bay, and the boys
remembered the memorable event which took place at that same dock thirty
months before. Then they left with a sort of half joy in their hearts,
and now they were going away to finish up the great adventures which
they had started when they reached the island of Wonder.

All hearts were anxious as the ship neared Valparaiso, because there
they would leave the liner from New York, and again ship in the boat
they had built. They keenly scanned the pier as the vessel was being
warped in.

"Ah! there is Blakely on the dock," said Harry.

"But I don't see the _Pioneer_ here!" responded George.

_Pioneer_ was the name of the vessel they had built, and which brought
them to that port from their island home.

The moment the vessel came alongside the dock, George called to Blakely:
"Where is our boat?"

"At Wonder Island," was the reply.

"At Wonder Island?" said Harry, and the boys looked at each other in
amazement. And now they must wait several weeks, probably, until it
returns. This was disappointing, indeed.

The boys rushed off. "And where shall we go now?" asked Harry.

"Over to our ship," replied Blakely.

They followed his gaze to a dock beyond, where lay a beautiful vessel, a
steamer, all decked out with flags.

"Is that our vessel!"

"Yes, and I have been to Wonder Island on her since you left. We just
arrived two days ago. We are ready to steam out within two hours."

"Then don't let us waste a moment's time," said Harry.

"I thought you might want to take a look over the town," said Blakely.

"I have no wish to do so, as long as we have the islands in view,"
remarked George. "And how is the Professor," he continued in an eager
tone.

"He is well and happy. But I have no doubt he longs for you, as he
frequently goes over to your rooms, and wanders around the shop, a thing
which he never did while you were there."

This was joyful news to the boys. How they longed to sail up Enterprise
River. The steamer which Blakely had bought, and which was destined to
ply between Wonder Island and the nearest trans-shipping point, was
called the _Wonder_, a thing which the boys had not noticed until they
were nearing the vessel.

It was a saucy little steamer, and as they drew near Blakely said: "What
speed do you think she will make?"

"Fifteen miles at least," remarked Harry.

"I am guaranteed eighteen miles an hour at the least."

"Isn't that fine," said George. "What does she burn?"

"Either wood, coal or petroleum."

"Now would be the time to look up the oil deposits on the island,"
remarked Harry.

Within an hour the ship was under way, greatly to the delight of the
boys.

Notwithstanding the ship was sent forward under full steam, the speed
was far too slow for the impatient boys. They were on the bridge most of
the time with the Captain who had been employed to run the vessel. He
proved to be a jolly, red-faced tar, who loved the antics of the boys.


CHAPTER IV

THE SKULL WITH THE CRYPTIC WRITING


It was at the latter part of May when the _Wonder_ steamed up the broad
river which led to the town of Unity. When they were within two miles of
the town, where they could begin to see the beautiful white houses in
the distance, Blakely came up to the bridge, and suggested that it would
be time to give the town a salute.

The Captain gave the order and the great whistle began to make a
horrible din, and kept it up for a full half mile. Long before the boat
came into sight of the dock itself the boys could see the people of the
town hurrying down to the wharf.

When they saw the boys on the bridge pandemonium was let loose.

"This looks and acts just like a real American town," said Harry.

"See the Professor," said Harry, as he rushed to the end of the bridge,
and frantically waved his hat.

The plank was swung and fastened, and the crew of natives rushed off and
met their friends, but George and Harry were not permitted to walk down
the gang plank. The joy at seeing them again was so intense that the
people took them on their shoulders, and the Professor had a hard time
to get near enough to grasp them and bid a welcome.

The people marveled at the boys. They were dressed up in regulation
American style, and the Professor asked them if they had brought the
"latest" cuts to put in the show windows.

Everybody followed, and the bantering and cheering made a continuous
performance for them until they reached their home. All the chiefs were
there, dressed up for the occasion, and what delighted them more than
anything else was the fact that the Krishnos, the former witch doctors
of the tribes, and who were now the teachers for the children, were the
first to offer congratulations on their return.

There was no work in the town that day. Everybody determined to
celebrate, and it was with hearts full of joy that the boys witnessed
the demonstrations in their behalf.

"Isn't this a glorious home-coming?" said George. "It was worth the trip
here to witness it."

"It does seem strange to call it a 'home-coming,' but that is just what
it is," answered Harry. "How happy the people are. They seem to
appreciate everything that has been done for them, and it is such a
pleasure to do things for those who appreciate it."

The stories which John brought to the Professor were so beguiling that
he promised the boys that he would probably be able during the next year
to make a visit with them to their homes, and this delighted them beyond
measure.

Although they had been absent four months, they noted many improvements
made during their absence. The boys, on their own initiative, visited
many of the homes, and talked to the people, and told them of the visit
home. And how those simple people enjoyed this kindly act, and cherished
it for months afterwards.

But it was now time to think seriously of the contemplated voyage of
discovery, which was ever uppermost in the minds of the boys. While
conversing on the subject a few evenings after their return, Harry
remarked: "I suppose we must use the _Pioneer_ for our trip, as the
_Wonder_ will have to make the regular trips?"

"John and I think that would be the wisest plan. The native sailors are
now well adapted to handle her, and do you know that Sutoto sailed her
around the island?"

This was pleasing to the boys, who liked Sutoto.

"And who are the others that went with him?"

"Why Lolo was one of them, and Stut and Chump. Oh, they had a jolly
time; so they said, and I can believe it, because they are simply crazy
to make another trip." And the Professor beamed as he related many of
the incidents which they told him of their experiences.

While they were talking, Sutoto appeared, and was immediately admitted.
After some talk, Sutoto said: "The Professor said that when you returned
you would have some work for me with the _Pioneer_."

"Yes, and you shall command her," said Harry.

Sutoto could not but show his pleasure. "I knew you would come back, but
so many here said you would not."

At this point Professor explained that there were many rumors among the
people to the effect that the boys would never again come back, and all
showed grief at the news. I assured them that you were just as anxious
to return as they were to have you and I then told Sutoto that I knew
you had plans which would require his services, but I thought it would
be more agreeable if you imparted the nature of it to him.

The boys were not slow to outline the plans to him, but advised him to
keep the information to himself, which he promised to do. It was enough
for him to know that he would command the ship. It was this that induced
Sutoto to take out the ship, and finally to circumnavigate the island,
so as to try out the sailors and properly to fit them for the work when
the boys returned.

"Now that being settled, Sutoto, we are going to leave the work of
provisioning the _Pioneer_ to you. We must take a supply of guns and
ammunition, as well, and probably it would be wise to have a small troop
of the best soldiers," was Harry's instruction.

"Uraso wants to go. I am sure he would be the best one to take.

"What will Muro say to that?" asked the Professor.

"Oh, take him along, by all means," said George, "because I want Lolo to
go with us."

It was then settled that they were to take a small force, sufficient for
immediate purposes, and if it was found that the islands discovered were
too well settled with hostiles it would be an easy matter to remain
aloof, or return for reinforcements.

While arrangements were being made for the departure of the expedition
Blakely informed the Professor that it would be good policy to make up
part of the cargo of the _Wonder_ with copper, and that both vessels
could proceed to the southeastern part of the island, and the men aboard
could be used to transport the copper to the sea.

In this way the expedition would serve a double purpose. No one
attempted to go contrary to the wishes of Blakely on matters which
touched upon the commercial ventures in which they were engaged.

John was only too glad that Blakely had hit upon that idea, as he was
anxious to visit that part of the coast, contiguous to the copper
deposit, and what was more, he wanted to see the place where Blakely
found the missive which the boys had translated.

As there was still a week before the _Wonder_ would sail for its
northern port of call, both of the ships wended their way to the east,
skirting the coast as closely as possible, John on the _Pioneer_ with
the boys.

They now had an opportunity to see the Great South Mountains from the
sea. They remembered when they last saw them on land, during the
campaign against the Illyas, and also the wonderful village on the
western side of the mountains. What would their present wanderings bring
forth?

That evening they landed within a cove, both vessels being brought as
near the shore as possible.

"We can safely go in close this evening, because the tide is now out,"
said John.

Sutoto, while he had navigated the vessel, and had shown remarkable
skill, was, nevertheless, not well versed in tides and the action of the
moon.

Quick to learn, he asked John why the tides thus changed. John explained
the reason that the tides flowed in and out twice during each
twenty-four hours, or a little less than that time, so that high water,
or low water would always be at a time a little later each day, and then
stated that it would be an easy matter to so make the calculations that
they would be able to tell ahead for a whole year just when during each
day the highest or lowest water would be.

While waiting on the ship during the hours of the evening they were
interested in the magnificent fire flies which they saw on the shore and
along the mountain side. This was not an unfamiliar sight to them as
they had witnessed such scenes many times before.

But now they saw such sights as they had never before observed. They
must have been giant glow birds, because some of the lights flew at
least hundreds of feet emitting continuous streams of light, and this
was not all, many of the lights were colored, particularly red and blue
or simply faint tinges of those tints.

"I have often thought that there is nothing more wonderful than the fire
fly," said George.

"But what do you think makes it so wonderful?" asked John.

"Well, I suppose the wonderful part is that it has strength enough to
make a light," answered Harry.

"No, the remarkable thing is that the light which it emits is absolutely
cool. Experiments which have been made go to show that there is no heat.
In every form of light which man has been able to produce thus far
artificially, a great heat is evolved, and it would be a most valuable
discovery to find out why these insects are able to do it without
raising the temperature."

[Illustration: _Fig. 3. The Fire-fly._]

"But what difference does it make if heat is produced?" asked Harry.

"The production of heat means the loss of power. The heat generated
takes up more of the power than the light which is produced, so that it
would be a great economy if the heat could be dispensed with."

"But if there was no heat in the light produced would it make any
difference in the lamps themselves?"

"Unquestionably. The lamps would last much longer."

"What are the things which must be learned in order to get the secret of
cold light?"

"Well, there are number of questions which must be determined. While it
is known that the fire fly and the glow worm emit what is called a
phosphorescent light, this fact is a mere prelude to the knowledge of
what is the exact color of daylight."

"Color of Daylight? Why, I supposed it was white."

"But the light of the glow worm and fire fly are not white."

They watched them, and soon appreciated that John's statement was true.

"You asked what were some of the things to be solved? Well, to find out
the secret of the phosphorescent glow. That is one thing. What is the
best artificial light, is the next. Then, what substance will have the
most intense glow when a current passes through it, and give out the
least heat."

"Well, has no one attempted to explain any of these things?"

"Yes; many explanations have been offered, but all of them leave the
subject dark somewhere." And John laughed as he saw that the boys
appreciated his little attempt at witticism.

"But the time will come when man will find out this, as everything in
his way. When you think of it, that electricians, chemists,
metallurgists, physiologists, engineers, physicists and microscopists,
are all working on the problem, we should be able to extract the secret
sooner or later."

"I am going to have some of those fellows," shouted George, and when the
natives on board heard the request of George there was a scramble for
the boats, and John was delighted to give them instructions for
capturing the insects.

Early the next day the entire party landed, and Blakely, together with
John and the boys, started for the high peak, the one visible for miles
from the west, and which John and the boys often wished to visit.

One of the things which the boys brought with them from the States, was
a pair of strong glasses, and these were constantly in use.

"What do you say to scaling that point?" said Harry.

"Just what I have been thinking about," said George.

Sutoto, who was with the party, showed by his glowing eyes that he
wanted to be of the party. "Certainly you shall go," said Harry.

"Before going we must visit the place where the Walter note was found,"
called out John.

The boys had forgotten this. "Most assuredly," answered George, "I had
almost forgotten that."

Blakely led the way up alongside the rugged cliff. "See that bluish
green outcropping," he said as they were pulling themselves up.

John stopped and chipped off some specimens. "Wonderful!" he exclaimed.
"Better than anything I have ever found in Mexico. These hills remind me
of the formation all along western Chihuahua, and through northeastern
Sonora."

The ledge on which they finally emerged was fully six hundred feet above
sea level. When they turned around and viewed the sea below them, and
saw the ships at anchor, they were delirious with joy. How Sutoto
enjoyed the scene. He had never seen anything like it before and he was
amazed and stupefied. He turned and grasped George by the hand. He was
too full to speak.

"But wait, Sutoto, until we get to the top," said Harry, as he saw his
countenance. As they looked up at the top they wondered what they might
see from the elevation.

"Here is the spot," cried out Blakely. "This is the pot in which the
message was found. And here is something that I dug up afterwards."

[Illustration: _Fig. 4. Inscription on the Skull._]

The boys crowded around. It was a skull on which was engraved the
characters ABCC, followed by a star.

All looked at John, thinking he might offer some solution. He turned it
over, and examined every portion. Not a word was spoken. "Tell me the
exact position in which this was found," he asked, as he looked at
Blakely.

"The first thing I found was the pot, which was simply turned upside
down, in exactly this way. This is the place. It rested on this flat
stone. The skull was behind it on this upper shelf."

"And was there nothing else on the shelf?"

"Nothing whatever."

John stooped down and carefully examined the shelf. All followed his
motions. "Do you see that mark?" he said, pointing to a heavy scratch,
which was now plain. "That mark is associated with the skull, if not
with the message. I am unable at this time fully to decipher the marks
on the skull, but I have an idea of the meaning."

"I wonder if the scratch across that is in the same direction as the
arrow in the letter?" asked George.

"Unquestionably: let me see your glasses," and George unslung them as
John took them and gazed long in the direction of the line on the shelf.

He lowered the glasses and slowly shook his head. Something was forming
itself in his mind, this was evident. He walked around the ledge and
back again. Finally, he said: "I wish it were night, it might help to
solve the riddle."

"And why?" asked Harry.

"Those letters have reference to the star which follows."

"It seems to me to be a singular thing that anyone should leave this
here in the hope or expectation that it could be a guide for any one,"
remarked George.

"There is certainly one explanation of that," answered John. "It is
evident that the articles were placed there as a form of note to others,
and it is a sort of cryptic sign, intelligible only to those who have
the key. The fact that these signs are here denote several things, one
of which is that something important, such, for instance, as treasures,
or the location of hidden wealth, or the directions necessary to find
mining lodes, or even to point out the direction and distances of other
islands in the distance."

"But," said Harry, "the fact that we have found these things here looks
as though there were other parties besides Walter and that he was
associated with them in some sort of enterprise."

"Quite true; but I am not at all satisfied that the Walter note has
anything to do with the skull. In fact there is every evidence to me
that they are entirely disconnected with each other."

This announcement was the most surprising to Blakely, who now added a
few points of information. "I should have said that the skull was not
exposed as you now see it on the shelf. After I went up the side of the
hill, I returned and landed on the ledge, and then I noticed the skull
through the apertures formed by the stones now lying at the side."

"That is evidence to my mind, that Walter knew nothing of the existence
of the skull at the time he left the message, and yet, singular as it
may seem, both the skull and Walter's message point to the same thing."

This announcement was certainly curious and interesting, and keyed up
the listeners to a high pitch of expectation.


CHAPTER V

THE TRIP TO THE NEW ISLAND


Exciting as were the events alluded to in the last chapter, the boys
insisted on taking Sutoto to the top of the peak. John and Blakely
gathered up the fragments, and when the boys left they were busily
engaged in making careful measurements of the stone and ledges.

It was not an easy task to gain the summit, but when they reached it,
there was spread before them the most remarkable panorama. To the north
they could see South River, the first stream they discovered when they
came to the island.

They looked on it almost lovingly. "If it were not for the mountain
range to the north we could see clear to Cataract," said Harry.

"The dear old place!" exclaimed George. Sutoto smiled. He had been
there, and he shared the views of the boys.

"Let me have the glasses," shouted Harry, as he adjusted them and turned
to the west. "Unity," was the only thing he said, as he handed the
glasses to Sutoto. The latter looked, and stepped back in surprise.
George kept his eyes on Sutoto, as the latter bent forward in his
eagerness to see the town which was now so plain to him, although more
than fifty miles away.

George leisurely took the glasses, as Sutoto said slowly, and with
proper emphasis, "Wonderful! wonderful!"

He turned the glasses to the southeast, hoping to catch a glimpse of the
land of treasures, but they saw nothing but the wide open sea, calm and
peaceful, and he wondered that it could ever be so angry and tempestuous
as they had known it to be on two momentous occasions.

They remained there for a long time, and viewed every portion of the
island. When they descended they took a route leading to the west, and
when nearly at the bottom, heard the unmistakable sounds of voices below
them. For a moment the boys were alarmed, but Sutoto set up a shout, his
quick ears having detected the voices of their friends. It was the first
caravan load of copper which they were taking from the great cave near
the Illyas' village.

"Glory! we are near the Illyas' village," said Harry, as he stumbled
down the mountain side, and saw the train of men with the loads.

They would now do some more visiting. They must surely go over to the
village where they captured the last of the hostile tribes. As they
neared the village they were surprised to see Oma coming toward them. He
greeted them like a monarch, and led them into the village.

"I am glad to welcome you," he said. The boys were astounded at the
words. This man, the most vindictive and bitter of all the tribesmen,
had learned to speak, and showed by his actions that he was glad to
welcome them.

But when they came to the village, the surprise of the boys was so great
that they could hardly speak. Instead of filth and uncleanliness
everywhere, they saw carefully attended lawns, and houses, instead of
huts. The people came out and greeted them with laughter.

And then the boys recognized many of the men who had lived in Unity, and
who had worked for them in the shops, and in the fields. The Chief then
escorted them to the large building, the same one in which the Chief was
captured by the boys, the year before.

What a change! Formerly the furniture in the room was one jumbled mass
of débris, and the household arrangements were only such as savage
conditions warranted. Now, the large interior had been cut up into
rooms, and they were furnished with comfortable belongings.

The Chief saw the curiosity of the boys, and he read their thoughts.
"You wonder at the difference? Yes; it is a difference. We owe it to
that wonderful Chief, and to you, and to John."

"Yes; John will be here soon," said George.

"I have seen him. He will be here. We are preparing a great feast for
him," and the boys opened their eyes and smiled as they heard this
announcement.

The people flocked about them, and the men who knew the boys were only
too proud to be recognized by them. Thus they visited every nook and
corner of the town, surprised and glad to see that the Chief had
insisted on his people going to Unity and learning the ways of the white
people.

There was a further reason why the coming of John and of Blake was a
joyous event. Oma had been informed that the great copper mines were to
be opened in the mountains, which would insure work for every one, and
that they would be able to buy every sort of luxury and enjoy all the
comforts of the white people.

Late that evening John and Blakely came accompanied by two hundred of
the Illyas who had actually been engaged during the day in transporting
copper from the cave to the hold of the _Wonder_.

The feast and the celebration that night in a village which, only a few
months before, was of the most savage character, was, indeed, a marvel.
Oma could scarcely express himself with enough earnestness, and the
women were following the boys with their eyes, and actually caressing
them, in their eagerness to show appreciation.

When the time came for them to leave, the Chief accompanied the men to
the shore below South Mountain to witness their departure. Before they
left the village, the things which had been brought there by the ships
for the Illyas were placed in the Chief's storehouse, and Blakely paid
the members of the party who had assisted them. This, also, was the
occasion for much rejoicing.

Blakely, on board the _Wonder_, waved an adieu to the boys and John as
the boats separated, and Sutoto gave the order to sail directly
southeast.

During the afternoon the sea was calm and afforded a beautiful sail, but
during the night a strong breeze came up and its intensity varied during
the night. The next day, however, the sea became choppy, and over
two-thirds of the natives were rolling around on the deck in the agonies
of sea-sickness.

"This will give us an opportunity to try the new cure for the malady,"
said John.

"What is that?" asked George.

"Simply atrophine."

"How is it administered?"

"By injecting it."

"What is atrophine?" asked Harry.

"It is a crystalline, bitter and poisonous alkaloid, taken from the
deadly nightshade, and the same principle is also found in the thorn
apple."

"Isn't it the same as belladonna?" remarked George.

"No; but belladonna is also an extract of nightshade."

"Have you any of it here?"

"Yes; I brought some, together with the other drugs that the Professor
ordered, and I am anxious to try it. The remedy was discovered by Prof.
Fischer, of Munich, and also simultaneously by Dr. Reginald Pollard, of
South Kensington, England."

Accompanied by the boys John went among the sufferers, and administered
the medicine, giving at each injection about 1-64th of a grain. It was
remarkable in its effects. Within a half hour the sickening feeling in
the stomach disappeared, the eyes began to grow bright again, the pulse
full, and the patient became strong and vigorous.

None of them objected to John's ministrations. Their confidence in his
ability was sufficient for them and the results justified their faith.

When the boys came on deck in the morning, they strained their eyes
looking toward the horizon for land but there was no land in sight. John
was already on deck and he smiled as he saw them ascend the ladder. "And
where is your island?" he asked.

"How far have we gone?"

"We have been driven somewhat out of our course, it is true; but we are
more than a hundred miles from Wonder Island, and have sailed past the
place where the other island ought to be, according to Walter's letter."
And John chuckled somewhat, at the crestfallen looks of the boys.

"Where are we going now?"

"I told Sutoto we would better tack to the southwest. We can use up a
day at that course, and then double back, probably thirty or forty miles
to the south, and in that way we can cover a wide area."

While sailing in that direction they had to go pretty much into the face
of the wind, but it was considered wise to explore that region to the
south of the islands first, and then take another section to the east or
to the west.

Night came on without any indications of land, and the course was
altered directly to the east. The boys remained up until nearly twelve
that night, but no light or evidence of land came in sight. Tired with
the exertions of the day, they retired, and were soon asleep.

How long they slept was immaterial to them. Sutoto came into their
cabin, and awakened them, saying, "We can see some lights in the east."
They heard the voice, and its earnest expression, and without waiting to
dress scrambled out. Far off to the southeast was a faint glimmer, then
it died away.

After a moment or two it appeared again, somewhat brighter than before.
The night was intensely dark, and the wind was blowing a steady gale, so
that the boat not only rocked but it moved forward into the lines of
waves across their path.

John was above, and they hurriedly rushed to see him. He was smiling, as
they approached, and he greeted them by saying "We have reached your
island, probably."

"How long have you seen the light?" asked George.

"A half hour, or more," he answered.

The boys were not in the mood now to return to bed, so they went back to
dress, and then returned, meanwhile watching the light with eager eyes.
The course of the ship was directed toward it, and every one on board
had now heard the news.

Soon the watch on the port side sang out: "Land ahead," and every one
sprang to the left side. There, plainly in the darkness, was a headland,
or a spur, which they were passing at almost right angles. The most
intense excitement prevailed.

Still the light was directly ahead, and, apparently, a long distance
from them. John told Sutoto to haul in the sails, and to take a course
directly to the south. He explained that it would be wise to stand off
the shore as long as possible, as the ship's clock showed that it was
now past four o'clock so that within the next hour they might be able to
view the land clearly enough to determine their future course.

Impatiently they awaited that period of gloom which is said to be the
darkest time,--just before the dawn. This seemed to be so to the
watchers, but shortly after five the curtain lifted. A slight haze was
over the land, but they had found an island, at least.

"Do you know our position?" asked Harry, as John approached. "Yes; I
have just figured it out. We are fifty leagues (one hundred and fifty
miles) southeast of Wonder Island."

The boys looked at each other. Evidently Walter was wrong, or they had
read his letter incorrectly. But they saw land, and John assured them
that there was no land between that place and their own island.

Anxiously they awaited daylight, and when it came they gazed out on a
barren waste,--a rocky and uninviting shore.

"Steer for the little cove beyond the great rock," said John.

The sails were hoisted, and the vessel slowly moved south, and rounded
into the waters bounded by the circular shore line. The anchor was soon
cast, and then began the launching of the boats.

John called the men before him, and gave a few words of advice. "We have
no knowledge of the character of the land, or of the people who may live
there. Two boats will be manned, and ten will take their places in each.
Uraso will have charge of one, and Muro of the other. When we reach the
shore Muro will remain with the men under his command, while Uraso will
follow me. It will be understood that so long as no shots are heard by
Muro and his party that our expedition is safe, but should any firing be
heard, then the ship must be signaled and those in the vessel here must
come to shore, and Muro with his soldiers will at once come to our
relief. I hope we shall have no occasion for calling on you, but we must
be prepared for any emergency."

The two boats pulled for the shore. After landing John, with Uraso's men
the boys quickly scrambled up the rough cliffs beyond. When the heights
were gained they looked over a beautifully wooded landscape, but it was
still, except for the birds and the small animals which looked at them
in a startled manner, and then scurried for cover.

"I doubt whether there are any people living here," remarked Harry.
"There is not a sign of living beings."

"You are quite mistaken there," said John.

The boys looked at John. "Have you seen any signs?" asked George.

"Yes; did you notice how the animals fled at our approach?"

They had noticed it, but neglected to draw any inference from it.

"That is one of the surest signs. Do you now remember how differently
the animals acted in the region around Cataract from those in the
southwest portion of Wonder Island?"

"I now remember that is so. Don't you remember, George, when we came
across the first herd of yaks, that they hardly noticed us? I am sure
that the animals out at West River didn't wait to interview us."

"Well, I remember the big bear was very anxious to make our
acquaintance," said George, and Harry smiled, as he remembered how the
big fellow took his revenge by tearing up their baggage.

John directed the men to the right, and in the direction of an elevation
which seemed to be clear of timber. From that point they searched the
intervening wooded area, and caught sight of a still higher tableland
miles beyond.

"Your glasses would be serviceable here," said John. George handed them
to John, and he gazed through them long and earnestly. "I am unable to
find any traces of human beings, and I cannot account for the light
which we saw during the night, and which must have been nearly ahead of
us."

He walked forward, the men following. They marched for more than a mile,
every object being examined. Fallen trees were particularly
investigated, and clumps of trees were searched, even the bark of trees
being minutely gone over by John.

The natives, generally so keen to discover evidences of their kind,
walked along, and shook their heads, to indicate the absence of all
signs. The land in the interior was elevated, but it was not rough or
broken, the only place where an upheaval had taken place appearing to be
the west coast.

"This seems to look bad for our purposes," said John, as he turned to
the boys.

"What do you mean?" asked Harry.

"I don't think there are any caves in this section," he answered. "But
we might as well investigate farther to the right, and see what the land
looks like."

"Aren't those coffee trees?" said George, in great eagerness, as he
bounded forwardly.

There, not a hundred feet away, were the beautiful trees with white
clusters all over them. Thousands of these trees were in sight.

"I believe we have struck a coffee plantation," exclaimed Harry.

John did not answer, but went up to one of the trees and carefully
examined it. "No, these trees have grown wild, and no one has ever
gathered the berries."

"But what an opportunity there would be here for gathering coffee! Too
bad Blakely isn't here," said George.

"We never saw anything like it on Wonder Island," suggested Harry. "Now,
why is it that cocoa will grow in wonderful profusion on one island,
and none on the next, and the other island will have bananas and the
other not?"

"The explanation of that has been the means of bringing out a wonderful
study, that is explained by the nature of the soil itself. In every
country certain sections will spontaneously produce product alike, in
almost every essential quality. Thus, flax, for instance, is found,
identical in its character, in Kamscatska, and in Minnesota; in the
Siberian wilds and in Central America; on the heights of the Himalayas,
and in the lowest plains of South America."

"But how do you explain the similarity? They must have come from seed,
and how did the seeds get from place to place, when there were no ships
to carry them?"

"There can be only one explanation. The soil itself, if identical in its
character, will, eventually, produce the same vegetables and vegetation.
Thus, it has been found that the localities where this wild flax was
found, had soil which was the same in its nature, and calculated to
produce the same in kind."

For four hours the little band marched to the south, and came back along
a track nearer the sea, without discovering the slightest indication of
human habitations, except the frightened looks and actions of the
animals in their path.

[Illustration: "_He turned it over and examined every portion_"
                                                   [See p. 60]]


CHAPTER VI

DISCOVERY OF THE ISLAND AND EXPLORATIONS


Weary, they dragged themselves over the cliffs and down to the waiting
natives. Muro was surprised to learn that they had found no signs of
people, so they rowed back to the ship, and after a hearty meal, retired
for the night.

In the morning when they asked John for his opinion, he said, "The only
course is to sail south, and circumnavigate the island. In doing so we
shall effect a landing every ten miles or so, and then go into the
interior. This will thus enable us to learn all about the land. At the
same time we must survey the island, so as to learn its extent, as well
as its general shape and outline."

"But how can we survey it without the instruments?"

"That is readily done, by observing the headlands, or some special coast
line marks, and then taking the angles from those points."

"Well, that will be interesting, at least. How shall we start?"

"Do you see that point to the south which may be five or ten miles
away?"

"Yes."

"Now, examine the compass, and turn it so that the cardinal points are
directly north and south. Now sight across the face of the compass so
that you get the exact line between this point and yonder object. What
do you make it to be?"

"Why I make it out to be S. E."

[Illustration: _Fig. 5. Measuring by Triangulation._]

"That is correct. The line 1 is south by east."

"But how can we find out how long line 1 is?" asked Harry.

"Why by triangulation," said George, quickly.

"I know that, but how can we do it on sea?"

"It can be done on sea, as well as on land, but we had better go and
make the first measurement by triangulation correctly, and do this in
our subsequent measurements, unless it should be necessary to make the
measurements at sea. The plan followed on shipboard will be found
similar to the plan followed on land."

The boat was manned and the boys with a crew of the men and John made
for the shore, and together they went inland to a point marked B (Fig.
5), and sighted across to the same object C that was noted of the ship.
This, then, gave three lines, 1, 2 and 3, forming a triangle.

"If these angles are placed on a paper the distance from A to C can be
determined on the principles of proportion," remarked John.

"How is that done?"

"We will assume that the lines 1, 2, are at right angles to each other.
This is not necessary, but it happens to be so in this case. Let us
first measure the distance along the line 2, which may be any number of
inches, or feet. Suppose we call the line one inch long. Then draw the
line 1, so that it will be sufficiently long to be sure and meet the
line 3."

"Yes; I now see how it is done," remarked George, with enthusiasm. "If
the line 3 is drawn at the angle we got, when we looked at C, from B,
the line will cross line 1 at C."

"That is correct. Now, if it is one inch from A to B, we may use that
inch as a measurement to get the distance along the line."

"Let me step it off," said Harry. "I find it is just two and
three-quarters inches."

"What was the distance, in feet from A to B?" asked John.

"I have the figures here," said George. "We found it was six hundred and
ninety feet."

"If, now, you will multiply 690 by 2-3/4, we shall have the distance
from this point A, and yonder point, or headland C."

[Illustration: _Fig. 6. The Second Limb._]

"I make it out to be just 1897.5," was Harry's conclusion.

The boys, together with John and a half dozen of the natives, went along
the shore, and mounted the point C, and from that place selected another
point in a southerly direction, and again made the same calculations.

The vessel in the meantime was put under sail and anchored a mile
below, giving the surveying party time to make several triangulations,
and late in the afternoon the party came on board, tired and ready to
take a rest.

From the position taken up by the ship they could see a long stretch of
shore line, practically straight, trending toward the southeast, and
with their glass could see, miles away, a headland which afforded a
pronounced point for observation.

The next morning the same parties rowed to the shore, and Uraso was left
with the party to guard the shore boat, while Muro accompanied John and
the boys. On this occasion John issued the following instruction:

"The long point which you see in the distance is, probably, 15 miles
beyond. It is not more than that, but this clear atmosphere is liable to
deceive. I have instructed Sutoto to wait until one o'clock today, and
if by that time there is no word from us Uraso will return to the ship,
and you will take up anchor and steer for the headland beyond."

"So that you may understand our movements, we will strike into the
interior, taking a course due east, for ten miles, or thereabout, and
then turn to the south, and reach the sea near the place where the
vessel will be located."

"I understand, now, how the distance can be measured by triangulation on
land; but how to get the distances, on shipboard, is what puzzles me,"
said Harry.

John smiled as he replied: "I knew you would come to that sooner or
later, so I prepared a little sketch (Fig. 7), which shows the bow of a
vessel, and the tall mast. The lines from A to B give an angle with the
vertical line of the mast, which will enable you to determine how far
the ship is from any point."

"But I am still in the dark as to how, even if we have that distance, we
can thereby tell by triangulation, on the vessel, how far one point is
from another on the land."

[Illustration: _Fig. 7. Triangulation from a Vessel._]

"After the distance from the vessel to the point is determined, as I
have shown, then the length of the ship itself is used as the two points
to sight from, and the two lines thus projected, from the opposite ends
of the vessel, together with the line lengthwise along the ship, form a
triangle, the same as the triangle lines 1, 2, 3, in the sketch (Fig.
5)."

It might be well at this place to describe the equipment of the party as
it left the boat. The natives carried a plentiful supply of provisions.
Each had a gun, the best kind of breech loaders, and also a spear.

The natives love to handle spears better than anything else in the way
of a weapon, and each also had a knife, and some carried the inevitable
bolo, that primitive form of hatchet which is known all over the world
where steel or iron is available, and the people have arrived at such a
state that they are able to make metal articles.

John and the boys also carried guns, but the boys had revolvers, seven
shooters, not of large bore, but very convenient weapons, in close
quarters. Each carried also a knife, and belt to contain the cartridges
for the guns.

Harry carried a camera, which he had brought from the States, and George
had the field glass strapped across the shoulders. John felt that they
had a force large enough to make a fairly effective stand against a
pretty strong force of natives, the entire party counting, in this
instance, sixteen.

As they advanced into the interior, it was evident that they were
gradually ascending, so that at about six miles from the landing place
they reached the crest of the rising ground. Beyond, where the nature of
the ground permitted they saw clearly that the distance beyond had a
lower altitude than the place where they stood.

During this trip there was no evidence that the island was occupied, but
they saw the most amazing evidences of tropical fruits and trees.
Magnificent trees were in evidence everywhere, and the woods, besides
mahogany, and ebony, were of the most valuable character.

John noted all these things, but the boys were most interested in the
birds and animals which roamed about. The latter were not large or
vicious looking, but it was not permitted to shoot any of them lest it
might alarm Uraso, who was at the landing.

Ahead could be seen several ridges, one of them heavily wooded. Reaching
the summit they beheld a beautiful valley below, and opposite on a
shelving rock, stood a type of mountain deer like a sentinel, while a
dozen or more were feeding on the green slope beneath.

Frequently on the march the boys would take side trips, in the attempt
to run down some of the curious animals, but they were careful to keep
the main force in sight.

Thus they tramped on fully five miles beyond the crest of the ridge, and
occasionally John would stop to examine some suspicious-looking
indication of habitation.

"It would surprise me very much to find that the island is not
inhabited," he said, as he examined what appeared to be a path.

At this juncture one of the native scouts came up and showed John a
curious stone formation. John took it, and turned it over several times.
"That is part of a stone hatchet." The scout nodded assent with a
smile.

All now became intent on searching. This finally resulted in bringing to
light a well-formed spear, not unlike those originally used on Wonder
Island among the native tribes.

Surely they were getting evidence pretty fast now. Then, while crossing
a little rivulet, one of the scouts plainly saw the print of a native
foot, which was unmistakable. True, it had been made days before,
probably a month, but there it was, and now it was incumbent on them to
find out where the people were.

The entire party scattered along the little stream, and searched both
banks for a considerable distance, the boys taking an active part in the
work. Usually the boys kept together, and entertained each other, but on
this occasion all were so intent on discovering where, and in what
direction the footprints would lead, that they quite forgot to watch
each other.

John gave a customary whistle, as he was in the habit of doing, when it
was desired to call the party together, and all of the scouts promptly
returned, as well as Harry. George was nowhere to be seen. John
questioned Harry. He had first missed him at the bend in the stream not
two hundred feet to the north.

He rushed back in that direction, while John gave another blast on the
whistle, and then listened intently for a reply. Harry came back without
any intelligence, and almost frantic. John and the scouts then broke
into a run, and Harry turned with them.

That instant a shot rang out. "That must be George," exclaimed John.
"Forward as quickly as possible."

The party turned the bend of the river. All along this part of the
stream the banks were cut up by ridges and diminutive cliffs, and in
many places were large shelving rocks which came up close to the stream.

Immediately after the shot John stopped, and listened for some sound,
and the natives, usually so alert to recognize noises, did likewise.

"That shot means that George is in some danger," said John.

"But why does he not answer the whistle? Why should he shoot, and then
not call to us, if there is any danger," said Harry in despair.

They turned the bend, and searched to and fro. The shot could not have
been more than eight hundred feet away. The searchers spread out into a
fan-shaped formation. One of the scouts ran up hurriedly and called to
John, who went forward, and there, alongside of a huge rock, where there
was little grass, he saw unmistakable evidence of a scuffle.

"These are the footprints of George's shoes," remarked Harry.

"Yes, and here are the prints of the native feet," said John, as one of
the scouts distinctly pointed out two or three well defined marks.

"They are, undoubtedly, near at hand. We must now be on our guard," said
John, as he pondered on the situation.

"I wonder why they didn't attack us?" asked Harry.

"The reason, no doubt, is that it is a small party. A larger body would
not have attempted to capture one of us by stealth."

John turned to Hasmo, one of the fleetest runners, and instructed him to
go back to the landing place at once, and advise Uraso to bring his men
and provisions, as well as additional ammunition, and to hold the ship
until additional word should be sent.

Hasmo was off in an instant, and then John issued additional
instructions. "It is evident," he said, "that we must look for the
people to the east or, more likely, toward the southeast. That is the
reason why I had the boat held at the place where we have just landed.
There is also another reason why I think the tribes, if there are any,
are to the south, and that is, in this latitude they are much less
exposed to the effects of the great winds that occur at certain portions
of the year."

Harry wandered about, not knowing what to do, at this terrible
catastrophe. George in the hands of the savages! He could hardly believe
it.

"Don't worry about George too much," said John consolingly. "I am
inclined to think he has had enough experience within the past two years
to help him out of immediate trouble, and we will then be able to take a
hand."

This somewhat relieved Harry. It is possible that George might be able
to take care of himself. "But suppose they kill him?" This was his great
fear.

"It is not at all likely they will do that," remarked Muro. "Those who
captured him form only a small party, and it is not at all likely that
there was a chief with them. Under the circumstances they would not dare
kill him until the Chief ordered it."

John smiled as he nodded at the explanation given by Muro. After all, it
was not as bad as it might be. Now to the rescue. Muro begged permission
to do scouting work until Uraso arrived, and selecting Stut as his
companion, they glided through the forest directly to the east.

They were now fully twelve miles from the boat, and the runner could be
depended on to reach Uraso within an hour, if not hindered on the
journey. It would then take, possibly, two hours more for the party to
return, so that it was safe to assume that they would have to remain in
the vicinity for the next three hours.

John decided that the time should be spent in exploring the directions
to the southeast and to the northeast as well, so they might be well
informed when the reinforcements arrived.

Hasmo glided through the forest like a deer. He knew that it was
imperative to reach the shore before one o'clock, because at that time
the vessel would leave for the southeastern point. To get there too late
would mean a trip for fifteen miles or more along the shore to reach the
next landing.

The dense forest near the shore prevented him from seeing the vessel
until he crossed the last ridge, and when he finally came within view
of the harbor the ship had disappeared. He stopped and glanced to the
south, but no ship was in sight. This was a situation which had been
considered, from the point of view of the departure of the vessel; but
where had it gone?

He went to the shore, where Uraso's party had been, and then,
laboriously ascended the point beyond, and from which he could get a
clear view of the sea. There, far beyond, was the _Pioneer_, sailing to
the southeast under a strong breeze.

He tore off his jacket, and seizing a branch, began to wave it back and
forth. The ship went on, and there was no indication that they noticed
him. He remained thus for nearly a quarter of an hour, and then knew
that he must follow the ship until he reached the next landing place.

The trip along the shore was a most difficult one, as he could not
follow the beach. Many of the rocks along the shore were licked by the
waves, so that he had to take a course beyond the cliffs, and the land
was not only rough, but numerous gulleys, or draws, as they are called,
were washed out, making speed impossible.

It required more than two hours to make the trip, and it was
considerably after three when he hailed the boat from the shore, and
hurriedly told the story of George's capture.

Uraso was not slow in gathering the men needed for the expedition, and
when the guns and ammunition were brought out all of the men actually
begged to go along, but he knew that John would not sanction leaving the
vessel without a crew.

       *       *       *       *       *

John and his scouts impatiently awaited the return of the men and during
this time received the reports from the scouts as they came in. It was
evident from the slight traces found that the band which captured George
had gone east. It was no doubt from some indication to this effect
obtained by Muro, that induced him to take his course in that direction,
also.

All had departed but Muro: Four o'clock came, and then five, but neither
Muro nor Uraso appeared. This did, indeed, look strange to John, who
could, in a measure, account for Muro's non-appearance; but he could not
understand why Uraso did not come. It then occurred that after all Hasmo
might not have been able to reach the landing before sailing time, and
with this theory he consoled Harry, who was constantly on the alert,
waiting for tidings.


CHAPTER VII

CAPTURE OF GEORGE BY THE NATIVES


Let us now follow George. He went along the stream on its westerly side,
while Harry was examining the eastern shore. Coming to a little rivulet,
which flowed into the main stream at this point, he passed alongside the
projecting ledges of rock, that for the moment hid him from the view of
Harry.

Here he saw some peculiar rocks, and outcroppings, which reminded him so
forcibly of the early days on Wonder Island, when the Professor so
strongly impressed on them the value of investigation. The gun was stood
up, leaning against the rocks, when he was seized by two strong arms,
and a hand placed over his mouth.

In the struggle his hand touched the gun, and as his captor drew him
back, he took the gun with him, and no effort was made to dispossess him
of the weapon. He was carried along, one hand pinioned to his side,
while the other hand carrying the gun was free, but he was unable to use
it.

He could not have been carried more than a hundred feet, before he heard
John's whistle. This startled his captors, for he now saw that there
were two burly specimens, almost wholly naked, and for the moment the
hold on the imprisoned arm was relaxed.

Quick as a flash he drew up the gun and fired. This was the shot heard
by John and Harry. The shot was such a surprise that the savages were
almost paralyzed, and dropped their hold, but it was only for an
instant. Realizing that the noise was made by George's weapon, and not
caused by any of the boy's companions, the nearest savage swung around
viciously, and poor George was knocked unconscious by the blow.

How long he remained in this state he did not know. When consciousness
returned he was lying, on some tufted grass, and a half dozen vicious
looking savages stood around him. Then he remembered the circumstances
of his capture.

He eyed them for a time, and then slowly sat up. One of the party had
George's field glasses slung around him, just as he himself had them on
when captured. One of them was fondling the gun, but it was evident from
the manner in which he held it that he had no knowledge of its uses.

His cartridge belt graced the form of one of the other savages, and it
was evident that they considered the things thus taken more in the
nature of ornaments than as weapons. He slowly felt his pockets and was
surprised that they had removed nothing.

While he was rising to a sitting posture he could feel his revolver, and
wondered why he had not been disarmed. A glimmer of joy shot through
him. His hands were free, and he had no pain, except the sore feeling
that was keen on the side of his head, and which was, no doubt, caused
by the blow.

Not a word was spoken by either. He hoped something would be said and
probably he would be able to recognize the language, as his two years'
experience in Wonder Island gave him a fairly good understanding of the
native tongues.

He pronounced some words, in the Saboro and also in the Illya dialect,
but they stared at each other, and answered in some words that were
utterly unlike anything known on their own island.

Soon, after a conversation among themselves, he was raised up and urged
forward. The first thing that George did was to note the position of the
sun, and he then stealthily drew out his watch.

When the savages, who were closely watching him, saw the watch two of
them pounced upon him, and in the struggle, one of them tore it from the
chain. The holder of the chain threw it away, and attacked the one who
had the watch.

This was certainly an interesting struggle for George to witness. He had
his thoughts, however. Now was the time to make a strike for liberty, so
he quietly moved his hand toward the revolver. George was not aware that
a pair of eyes was intently watching him while the struggle was going
on.

Before the hand reached the revolver, the savage leaped forward. His
heart sank. The opportunity was lost. He dove down into the pocket and
brought forth a knife, and it was hardly out of his pocket until the
prying native had it in his hand.

George gave a forced smile. The native saw it, and looked admiringly at
the beautiful handle. He turned it around and viewed it from every
side, and then deftly drew a strand of material from his clout and,
winding it around the knife, threw the loop of the strand over his head.

This, too, then, was an ornament! They did not know the uses of the
knife. George kept up the smile, and soon the savage smiled in return.
This was a good beginning, surely! But what surprised him most of all
was the perfectly natural manner in which the defeated party in the
contest after the watch took his loss.

The victor fashioned it as a pendant, and the other looked calmly on
while his opponent admired it. There was not a particle of resentment in
the loser.

George did not show any alarm to the savages, although it would be too
much to say that he was entirely at ease. The instructions received from
John, the experiences of Tom and Ralph when they were captured, were
lessons for him, so, when the savages smiled back at him he pointed to
the knife, and made motions as though he intended to open the blade.

All savages are curious. Many of them have this trait developed to a
remarkable degree. George's motions attracted the man. Then he leaned
forward, and removed the knife from the loop. He held it up, exactly
like a magician would exhibit some article that he intended should
disappear.

Then, as the savage's mouth was now open, he inserted his thumb nail
into the crease of the large knife, and opened the blade. Then he
extended out his hand, and offered the open knife to the savage.

To say that he was merely surprised is putting it mildly. He could not
possibly open his eyes wider, and instead of taking it, drew back. Then
George quickly closed the blade again, and offered it in that way, and
he was induced to slowly take it back, while he glanced at George
suspiciously.

The burly individual who carried the field glass was then approached by
George. The latter took the glasses and put them to his eyes. At this
act the savages set up a whoop, and the glass was snatched from him.
Evidently they thought it was something like the gun.

George smiled, and again made the motion, as though he desired to take
the glass. The savage took the loop from his neck, and handed the
instrument to George. The latter put it to his eyes and pointed them to
the east, carefully adjusting them to get the proper focus.

To his surprise he saw the evidences of a village in the far distant
landscape, and, beyond it, the sea. What a discovery this was, indeed!

The glasses were then presented to the burly savage, who now claimed its
ownership, and tried to induce him to look through it. In this George
finally succeeded, and after he saw the effect of the distant landscape,
the attitude of the man changed, and he looked on George with a species
of admiration and wonderment.

George walked about them, in the most careless manner imaginable, but
they never took their eyes from him. He smiled at them, again took the
knife and performed the feat over and over again, and then instructed
the savage how to do it.

Suddenly he thought of the match safe. What a jolly trick that would be
to spring on them. But it would be more effective at night, he
reflected, and so he refrained from taking it out. It was evident,
however, that he was making a hit of some kind. Whether it would aid him
in escaping he did not know, but he tried every means possible to
ingratiate himself, and to show that he had no fear. The view of the
village which he had accidentally discovered impressed itself on him
with startling force. If he once reached the village escape would be
difficult, and consequently he viewed the searching eyes of his captors
with great uneasiness.

This was evident by the cat-like action of the one who got the knife. If
he made the slightest move of his hands, he could see the eyes following
them. Once he stumbled as they were marching along. This was purposely
done, in the hope that during the time he was recovering his erect
position he could draw the revolver.

He had his course of action all planned out. He had no desire to kill,
and he made up his mind that he would first cover them and then by
motions wave them away, but it would be necessary to depend upon mimicry
for this.

He had learned from John that savages are naturally the most expert
pantomimists, and are able to express many things by gestures, this
faculty having been made the more acute because the different tribes
are frequently brought into contact without any connecting link in the
dialects or languages.

If they refused, or made any attempt to seize him, he would then shoot
the leader, and thus strike terror into the others. But while he was
thus arranging all the details in his mind, he was startled at seeing a
whole group of savages leap from the side of the ill-defined path, which
they were now traveling, and they speedily surrounded the captor and
captive.

Then began a bedlam of explanations as they crowded around George. Some
came up and felt his arms, and other portions of his body. He smiled
meanwhile. It was the only thing he could do, and he knew it would be
useless to look troubled.

The next moment the visitors were examining the glass, the cartridge
belt, the knife and the watch, and George was, temporarily forgotten,
although surrounded so that he could not possibly force his way through.

He thought it a remarkable thing that they should thus hold and watch
him with such tenacity. While thus discussing him, a new party appeared,
and now for the first time there was an attempt to show deference.

The leader of the party was the most powerful savage George had ever
seen. Uraso was a powerful warrior, and Chum was also noted for his
strength, but it seemed that the man now coming up must be a giant. Some
of the immediate party rushed up to him, and after making a respectful
bow, told him of the capture.

He approached with dignity, and those around George moved away.

Without a moment's hesitation George moved toward the Chief, and when
ten feet away, he stopped, straightened himself erect, and with a most
courtly bow smiled as he recovered his position.

The strong and resolute manner in which this was done was really a cause
for marvel in the savage. He looked at his people, and spoke a few
words, and those who had been his guards came forward most
deferentially, and, so far as George could understand, told of the
circumstances surrounding his capture.

But there was one thing which struck George as a peculiar thing. The
three men who had participated in the loot of his valuables did not
exhibit them while talking to the Chief.

There was a long palaver, and many gestures indulged in. The question
occurred to him: What had become of the articles which they had taken?
Did they purposely hide them?

At the close of the conversation two of the Chief's immediate associates
came forward, and began to investigate his belongings. The first thing
they brought out was the revolver, and at this George was almost on the
point of breaking down. Then he grew bitter.

The silver match box was the next to attract the attention of the
searchers; and so they went through from one pocket to the other in the
most approved style.

These were laid before the Chief who grunted his approval at the
different things, and his admiration, judging from the character of his
remarks, was unbounded at the silver-plated revolver.

From the curious way in which he handled it George was alarmed. It was
an automatic, and if the Chief once pulled the trigger there would be
trouble for some one. George held up a warning hand, and the Chief
looked up from the weapon.

The only thing he could do was to point to the revolver, and vigorously
shake his head. The Chief looked around as though inquiring the meaning
of such a sign. He was not interfered with as he walked up to the
savage, and held out his hand. The Chief handed him the weapon.

Then, picking up a leaf, he motioned to one near him to place it on the
side of a tree. At a word from the Chief the man did so, but George
motioned to him to carry it still further away. He took deliberate aim,
and thanks to his long and regular practice, the leaf received the
impress of the bullet, while the savages jumped in all directions at the
report.

Only the Chief remained impassive. He never moved, but when the leaf was
brought to him, he looked on the youth with a kindly smile. George was
quick to notice this. He again walked over to the Chief, and placed the
weapon in his hand, and guided his finger to the trigger, while at the
same time holding up his hand so as to sight it.

This time the shot was directed to the nearest tree. The savages
scurried to give them room. When the Chief pulled the trigger and the
discharge followed, George caught him by the arm, and took him to the
tree, pointing out the hole made by the bullet.

There was a wondering look on the Chief's face. He looked at the weapon,
and then at the hole. There was a question in the peculiar guttural
sounds of his language, which slowly came from his lips. Evidently the
Chief wanted to know something.

Ah! he knew what it was. What made the hole? George took the weapon, and
extracted one of the bullets, and then pointed to the hole in the tree.
It was plain that even this did not satisfy him. Better still; why not
dig out the bullet; and as he thought of it he instinctively reached in
his pocket for the knife.

Then he remembered. One of his captors had it. Without any ceremony he
walked over to the man who had it, and by motions indicated that he
wanted the knife. The savage was mute. He boldly searched the folds of
the rude clout, and without a protest on the part of the savage he
brought forth the coveted knife.

This action was indeed a surprise to the Chief. A frown gathered on the
Chief's face. George saw it, and really trembled for the first time, as
he saw the eyes of the Giant riveted on the knife, and then turned to
the culprit. The latter fell to the ground, and muttered something, and
instantly the two others were also seized, as they uncovered the other
belongings and laid them before the Chief.

George looked on the scene with genuine regret. The culprits were led
away, and he speculated on their fate. But the Chief's eyes immediately
returned to the hole in the tree, while the gaze of the others rested on
the cartridges, the watch and the field glasses. The knife was in
George's hand, and he slowly opened it whereat the appearance of the
blade startled the Chief. He was all eagerness now, so George closed the
blade and opened it again, and then cut a circle around the bullet hole
and chipped the wood away.

There was the bullet, and he slowly drew it forth, a shapeless bit of
lead. When he had deposited it in the Chief's hand, he laid one of the
cartridges alongside, and also showed the empty shell. Then he quietly
laid the closed knife in the Chief's hand and stood back with his arms
folded, as though he owned the entire Island.

If the action of the Chief counted for anything the boy did have
everything in sight. The Chief returned the revolver to George, and then
began to examine the articles before him. The most interesting appeared
to be the cartridge belt. He looked at the revolver and cartridges, and
then turned over the revolver bullet and shell which George had
exhibited.

It was now plain that the Chief could not understand the use of the
large cartridges. George's mind was working by this time. He did not
recall that the gun was in evidence at any time after they met the first
crowd on the road.

The Chief pointed to the cartridges, and George looked toward the group
which had captured him. This was enough for the wily savage. A stern
command was issued, and in an incredible short space of time the gun
appeared. Where it could have been hidden was a marvel. Certainly these
people must be adepts in the art of concealment.

The Chief handled the gun in a most awkward fashion and George politely
took it from his hand, and after glancing about for a moment, saw a bird
on a branch. This he brought down, upon which one of the men ran
forward, picked it up and brought it to the Chief. After this the weapon
was turned over to him, and the peculiar chuckle that followed was,
undoubtedly, the savage's way of expressing delight.

One of the attendants then came forward at the order of the Chief, who,
after the articles were gathered up, indicated to George that he should
follow, and turned toward the village. George did not regard the
prerogatives of royalty, but he took up a most democratic position by
the side of the Chief, to which the latter did not object.

It required nearly an hour before they reached the village. Women and
children, and boys his own age were in evidence everywhere. They came
out of the huts and followed the procession, on the way to the Chief's
quarters.

Singularly George did not now feel the slightest bit of fear. On the
other hand, there was confidence, a sort of assurance that he could not
express. This feeling came to him, not so much from the general demeanor
of the Chief, as on account of the one act, namely, the return to him of
the revolver.

The Chief's home was an entirely different sort of affair from the other
dwellings. It was noted that, the homes of the ordinary people were made
singularly like those of the tribes on Wonder Island, usually of twigs
braided and brought together at the upper end so as to form cone-like
enclosures, and all were covered with clay, so as to keep out the rains.

Outside of these houses appeared to be the sleeping quarters, and a
glance at some of them impressed George as being exceedingly filthy. The
houses were intended only for the rainy season, apparently, as was the
custom in many places on their own island.

But the Chief's dwelling was a most pretentious affair, judged by the
surrounding homes. It had a large interior court, without a roof, but
the immediate dwelling had four or more rooms. The Chief walked through
one room, and entered the court, where George was embarrassed to see two
girls, and several boys, together with three women, all of whom stared
at him, the girls giggling exactly as he had seen them do at home.

The articles taken from him were then deposited upon the floor, and the
Chief reclined on a sort of raised couch. George glanced around and the
first thing that his eyes met was a chair, in one corner of the room,
and then some articles that he knew could not have been made on the
island.

This was his introduction to the home of the Chief. He then fell to
wondering how it would be possible to talk and tell him about his
friends.


CHAPTER VIII

FIGHT OF THE NATIVES FOR THE TRINKETS


Scouting in an unknown country, with assurances that foes may be in
ambush at every turn, is not a rapid way of marching. Ordinarily, in the
open road, a man will walk three or four miles an hour. But in a forest,
where every tree may conceal a foe, it is quite different.

Muro was an expert in scouting work. He had had years of experience in
this sort of life, and, moreover, was a chief of one of the most
powerful tribes on the island.

He and his companion went directly east, in the most stealthy fashion,
and, a half mile beyond they circled to the south, next swinging around
to the north, so as to take in as wide a sweep as possible.

Before dark they obtained the first real traces of the tramp of feet,
and as it was now too late to enable them to follow up the trail they
went back toward the scene of the capture, so that they might thus be
able to follow the trail easily the next morning.

It was very dark when they crept in and were halted by the sentries
which John had posted. Harry was the first to greet Muro. "Have you
found anything?"

"Yes," answered Muro. "We know the direction they have gone. In the
morning we can go on from the place where we discovered the trail."

"How far is it from here?"

"More than ten miles."

The distance mentioned was in itself sufficient evidence that Muro had
not wasted time.

They spent the remaining hours of the evening awaiting further news and
it was fully ten o'clock before the sentry to the south reported the
probable approach of Uraso. Harry leaped out from the circle, and
followed the sentry. It was, indeed, Uraso who had been reporter.

"Tell me all about it," he requested, and Harry, with a voice full of
pathos, told him how it happened. When he had finished, Uraso said:

"I was told by my father that somewhere here in the seas was an island
where were found most terrible people, who killed every one they
captured. I hope this is not the place." And Uraso did not say this to
excite Harry's fears, but, like many natives, he was frank, and open in
his speech.

"I hope there will be no trouble," was Harry's response.

"We need not worry about George," added Uraso. "The way that he was
taken shows that they are taking him to the Chief. A boy like George
would be likely to interest the Chief, at first for a time, and time is
all we want."

"I am glad you have the same opinion as John," answered Harry.

John, Muro and Uraso held a conference that night. As a result Harry was
comforted to know and feel that George was safe, and that within a day
or two at most, they would be able to come up with the tribe.

The entire party now numbered thirty-five, all well armed. In the
morning, as soon as it was light enough to see they were up, and after a
quick breakfast Muro directed them along the trail made the night
before, and the spot where Muro found the trace was reached about nine
o'clock.

John and his party now spread out so as to take in a wide expanse, and
they marched toward the east for fully two hours. Sometimes all traces
would be lost, and then there would be a halt and a search, and the
native wit of the scouts was generally acute enough to recover the
trail.

During these periodical searches, one of the men bounded forward with a
cry, as he held up a hand in which something was swinging.

As usual Harry was there like a shot. "That is George's chain," he cried
out.

"Where did you find this?" asked John.

The scout rushed over to the place, and all followed. The ground about
plainly showed the evidences of the struggle where George's captors
fought for the possession of the watch.

The trail was beginning to get warm. It was readily followed for several
miles, and then disappeared, but after patient hunting it came to light,
and shortly after noon the spot was reached where the Chief came on the
scene, and the appearance of the ground indicated that there must have
been a large number in the party.

Here was an occasion where one great quality of many savage tribes
stands out so prominently, and that is in determining the number of
their enemies by the foot prints. Hundreds of imprints on the soil,
crossing and recrossing each other, will to the untrained seem a
hopeless riddle.

On one occasion on Wonder Island, John stated that one of a party they
were trailing, was wounded in one of his legs. The explanation was
simple: The pressure of the foot in the soil was less on the lame than
on the sound leg, and the stride was uneven.

But the scouts had to decipher the peculiar imprint of each foot, and
then compare it with all the others, in turn.

"I could tell the difference in the shape of a shoe from another," said
Harry, "but I do not see how it is possible to tell one foot print from
another."

"How do you distinguish people?" asked John.

"Well, usually, by their faces."

"Quite true. Now feet are just as different as faces are. But there are
other ways by which we recognize people."

"Yes," was the response. "I can tell who many people are at distances so
great that I cannot see their faces."

"How do you do that?"

"By the way they walk, by their size, or by some action that seems to be
peculiar to them."

"The observations are correct," answered John. "At the same time, if all
the men you knew happened to be in a crowd, and moving around among each
other, you would be able to recognize and place each without any
difficulty; is not that true!"

"Yes; and I think I understand the trend of your remark now."

"And what is that?"

"You mean to say that if the scouts are able to read, or to become
acquainted with the foot prints, they can read them as readily as I
would read the faces of my friends."

"That is the exact inference I wish to draw."

"Well, I want to see that done," and Harry followed up Uraso, and
watched Muro, and the most intelligent of the scouts, while they
carefully stepped over the ground, each being careful while doing so to
step in the foot marks of the preceding scout.

"That is a curious thing to do," he remarked, as he turned to John.

"What is that?" the latter asked.

"Stepping in the tracks made by the leader."

"That is for the purpose of keeping the surface of the ground absolutely
the same as the tribe left it."

"Well the boys seem to understand detective work pretty well."

All of them laughed at this complimentary allusion, as it must be
understood that all the scouts taken from the island had learned to
speak the English language, and some of them, like Uraso, were
exceptionally skilled.

When the different ones had gone over the ground thoroughly, John asked
the opinion of the searchers.

"From my count there must have been twenty-four," remarked Uraso.

Muro smiled, as he said: "Uraso is mistaken, there are twenty-five."
Uraso was not at all perturbed, but walked over to the surveyed plot and
said: "The most prominent one is the fellow with the spreading toes.
See! here is his left foot. See that broad foot is all around the place.
This broad foot with a toe missing, is another fellow; and here are two
with rather long feet, you can see them all about, and they are, no
doubt, active fellows."

"Well, that is picking them out plainly enough," remarked Harry.

"But," continued Uraso, "I want you to look at this foot. It is the
largest I ever saw."

"I am satisfied that fellow is the Chief," remarked Muro.

"There is evidence of that here too," said Uraso, as Muro nodded his
head.

Harry looked on in bewilderment. "Assuredly that is something new. How
do you know _that_?" he asked.

"The best indication is," said Uraso, "that the fellow with the big feet
does very little walking, and all the other fellows have danced about
him."

Harry laughed, and was satisfied. "That was certainly clever," he
remarked. "But why shouldn't they be clever. These boys are the finest
and bravest in the world," and Uraso and Muro smiled and were happy at
this encomium of the boy they all loved so much.

"The last foot I have counted is that little sawed-off sample that has
danced all around the edge; see it here, and here!"

Muro walked forward, and, stooping down, pointed to the imprint of a
shoe, said: "That is our boy's shoe."

Uraso laughed, as he admitted neglecting George's presence in the crowd
of prints. "But I have found something else. George has had an interview
with the Chief. He has been making some explanations to the Chief about
his revolver."

John smiled, and kept his eye on a tree to the right.

"And how do you know that?" asked Harry.

Uraso walked over to the tree, after picking up something, and pointed
to a cut-out in the side of the tree. It was the mark of the bullet, and
the circular cut which George had made that John had observed, and which
had been noticed by Uraso and Muro.

"The scene here looks very promising to me," said John.

"Yes, it is better and better," remarked Muro.

"But you haven't told us yet, how you know that George was interviewing
the Chief."

"Come here and I will show you. Now look closely at the foot prints of
George. Then observe the indications as to the attitude of the Chief.
George goes up to the Chief. They turn around. Here is a shell. Beyond
is the tree where they had the mark, and here are the tracks of the
Chief and George as they go up to the tree."

Harry was now convinced. It must be said, however, that many of the
marks made were so illy-defined, that it required extraordinary vision
to observe them, and this is what Harry marveled at.

"What you say only proves the value of minute observation," remarked
John. "Those who are not accustomed to see these things, can not detect
what are very plain markings. Sometimes a slightly torn leaf, under
certain conditions, will tell a story in itself,--just such a
commonplace and ordinary thing as a ruptured leaf."

The consensus of opinion was that there were fully twenty-five in the
party counting George, and it is remarkable that when the matter was
afterwards investigated it was found that Uraso's count was right.

There were six in the party which took George, twelve who surrounded the
party before the Chief arrived, and five more were with him when he came
up.

Another consultation was held. John remarked: "I am of the opinion that
the people who have captured George are not at all bad, or vindictive.
Therefore we must exercise care and not needlessly injure any of them. I
need not say that it is our purpose here to aid the people, to make
friends of them, and not enemies."

"That is in accordance with our wish," said Uraso, with the approval of
all present.

"It is perfectly evident that these people, in taking George, did what
most people in a savage condition would do. The great and overshadowing
trait in humanity is to acquire something. It is just possible that the
cartridge belt, or the field glasses, or the buttons on his coat were of
more importance to them than George himself."

"Then you mean they had to get George to get the buttons," said Harry,
laughing in his relief.

"Of course," answered John, and Muro laughed aloud, as he recalled his
first experiences with the boys.

"John has hit upon the very thing which is at the bottom of the whole
business. All we wanted was to get the trinket, and the prisoner
belonged to the Chief."

"Or to the Krishnos," remarked Muro.

"Well we might as well go on if we can find the trail," remarked John.

"Yes, it is plain enough now," answered one of them.

"But let us exercise caution," remarked John. "Move along slowly and
keep a sharp lookout on our flanks."

Harry was walking by the side of Uraso. There had always been a warm
friendship between the two. Lolo, Uraso's favorite son, was Harry's age,
and the two were companions, and this was a source of great joy to the
Chief, for Uraso was the head man of the Osagas, and one of the most
progressive of all the prominent men.

Harry was dangling the chain which had been found in the morning. "I
have been wondering why he dropped this!" he asked.

"I have an idea that it was lost in the fight for the possession of the
watch."

"The fight? Why did they have a fight?"

"Well, the ground where the chain was found looked very much like it."

"I don't see why the fellows don't agree to divide up things properly
when they get them, instead of scrambling for them in that way!"

"You can see it is perfectly natural for them to fight for it under the
circumstances. They do not understand anything but power."

"I should think the loser would be resentful, and try to even it up on
the other fellow," remarked Harry.

"On the other hand, the moment the stronger fellow wins, that is the end
of the dispute. The best one won. In his creed there is no other
argument. That is the savage's religion. You people have told us
differently. The Professor has often said: 'There is only this
difference between us, with you, might is right; with us right is
might.'"

"Well, what do you really think about it now?" asked Harry.

Uraso did not smile, as he remarked somewhat sadly: "It took me a long
time to understand that. How could right be might? At first it looked
foolish, and Muro and I talked it over many times. Then Oma, and Tastoa
and Oroto, the other Chiefs, spoke to me about it. But while I did not
understand it I had faith in the Professor.

"Then we went to Unity, and built the town, and the people began to go
there, and when we saw the Professor, and the way he treated every one,
never doing a wrong to anybody, we could not believe that he was sane.
But everywhere we went we heard people talking about him, and the way he
acted, and we saw all the white people do the same as the Professor did,
we noticed that no one would dare say a word against the Professor, or
John.

"We marveled at that. The Professor went out among the people of all the
tribes, and never carried a weapon of any kind. But no one would have
dared to injure him. If a man had even attempted to injure him the
people would have torn him to pieces. Then I understood. Right was and
is _Might_, but it takes a savage a long time to understand it, and he
must learn it from something practical that comes to him in every day
life; he will never know it in any other way."

Harry walked on in silence.


CHAPTER IX

THE GIANT CHIEF AND HIS "PALACE"


We must now return to George and see how he fared during the first night
of his captivity. After the Chief had seated himself, and had begun to
examine the articles taken from George, the latter had an opportunity to
examine the surroundings more closely.

The Chief made no remarks to him, nor did he ask him to be seated. At
the moment he entered the room he noticed the chair. As the Chief did
not pay any attention to him after they entered, George walked over and
deliberately sat down on it.

The two attendants who carried in the articles, stared at him, and the
women and children, particularly the latter, seemed to be paralyzed at
his attitude seated in the chair. It was covered with dust, an evidence
that it was never used for the purposes of a seat. On reflection, he
thought that must be the reason they looked at him so queerly.

The Chief, however, gave no indication that his act was a rude or
questionable one. He tried on the cartridge belt, but it was far too
short for his corpulent body, and George could hardly repress a laugh,
as he noticed the attempt to adjust it.

The field glasses came in for a share of attention, then the silver
match box, and the women craned their heads forward, as it glittered.
The Chief held it off from his eyes, so he could properly view it; just
as George had often seen women do in trying to match articles.

All the while the Chief was emitting grunts betokening pleasure and
satisfaction. The adjusting screw on the field glass next attracted his
attention. The turning moved the barrels in and out, and this was, in
all probability, the most remarkable thing he ever saw.

George could stand it no longer. He left his seat, the younger children
shrinking back as he arose, and quietly walked to the Chief, and sat
down in front of him. As he did so he pointed to the match safe which
the Chief held in his left hand.

The latter did not resist the attempt to take it, but looked on
wonderingly as George pressed the point, and the lid flew open. Then,
taking one of the matches from the receptacle, he held the box in one
hand, exhibited the match in the other, for a moment, and then drew the
match across the box, and ignited it.

The Chief actually drew in a breath that was audible everywhere in that
neighborhood. He nodded with approval. Harry closed the box and handed
it back; he then directed the Chief's attention to the little point, and
pressed it, when the lid again flew open.

This time the Chief closed it, and he pressed the point. The success of
the experiment was so great that he eventually called his wife to
witness it, for she came over, while he performed the miraculous thing.

He took out a match. Its use was just as great a mystery. He was taught
just what to do, and the primitive man sat there and struck the matches,
one after the other, in the greatest delight. What amused George more
than anything else was, that every time a match was struck, he closed
the box, and then opened it before extracting another.

George noted the imitative quality so marked in all savages. It did not,
apparently, occur to him that he could strike two matches without the
lid flying open in the period intervening the two operations.

It was now growing dark, and soon an attendant came in with several
curiously-arranged lights, made from some sort of weed or vegetation,
the smoke of which appeared to be most agreeable. From an adjoining
room, an appetizing odor reached George and, staring in that direction,
the Chief noticed the boy's expectant attitude.

The Chief arose, his mighty frame towering above the rest, and a command
was given. Almost immediately two servitors came through the opening,
one of them carrying a large bowl of the most savory stew. The bowl was
not of native manufacture, and George, observing this, suddenly
remembered what John had said, that the Chief was always sure to get the
best and most valuable parts of the wreckages along the shore, and he
felt sure that this was salvage from some shipwreck.

The Chief smiled, as the bowl was set before him. It was smoking hot,
and George smiled back as he noticed the friendly look, and saw that the
Chief's wife graciously arranged the accompanying vegetables, although
he had no idea what the latter were.

A second attendant brought pointed sticks, and two paddle-shaped blades.
The Chief without ceremony dived into the mess and speared a piece of
the meat, and waved it to and fro, to cool it. Here was an opportunity
to follow the example thus set, and George was glad to take the hint.

He didn't look around to inquire for a plate, nor did he ask for a
napkin. The meat was good, the vegetables appetizing, and the
conversation lagged so much that there was no chance for unseasonable
interruptions during the meal.

If George had never before that hour witnessed a savage eat, he would
have been mortified at the small amount he himself was capable of
putting away, when he compared the relative amounts consumed. He was of
the opinion, before they began, that the bowl was intended for the whole
family, but the Chief ate all of it, except the small part that George
disposed of in the meantime.

But he was perfectly content. He ate until he could eat no more, and
then to his extreme disgust, a wooden platter of fruit was set before
them. Bananas were the only things he recognized. A small pear-shaped
fruit attracted him, and then an egg-shaped, brown-colored fruit, with a
sweet, strong perfume, was among the varieties.

The Chief was graciousness itself, exhibiting not one trait of
selfishness, as he forced the fruit on George. When the Chief had
finished the fruit George was relieved, but uncomfortable. He had eaten
beyond his capacity. The articles containing the food were removed, and
the Chief, who, during this time, was in a reclining position, slowly
sank down, and was soon asleep.

The family sat around for a time, and then all slowly disappeared and he
could hear the jumble of voices in the adjoining apartment, as they were
undoubtedly engaged in their meal.

What a peculiar position to be placed in. Alone with the sleeping
savage! Still, he did not seem to be so very savage. There was no one in
sight. He arose and walked toward the opening. Not even a guard
prevented him from leaving.

He stepped out. He still had his revolver, but that was all. Now was the
time to effect his escape. He turned the corner of the main structure,
and there stood one of the Chief's girls, the one who had attracted
George's attention when he was first ushered into the palace, as George
named the place in his mind.

As this girl will have an important place in reciting this history, it
may be well to describe her. She was about the height of George, with a
much lighter skin than the majority of those whom he had seen thus far.
Her eyes were large and beautiful, and while her hair, intensely black
and very profuse, was not at all kinky. It should be said that the
savages on the island, like those on Wonder Island, while dark, did not
have curly hair of the Ethiopian, so that they were not of the negroid
type but more nearly allied to the Malay family.

She smiled, and George, abashed for the moment, went up to her, and she
did not at all shrink from him. Now that he had made the advance he was
at a loss what to do. The only thing that both perfectly understood, was
to smile, and smile they did.

But why not say something. He tried it, and those great eyes appeared to
open still wider. George turned and waved his hand, and affrighted,
apparently, she darted into the side entrance. The darkness prevented
him from seeing what was there, and he dared not enter. The moon was
shining brightly.

The desire to escape again took possession of him. But why try to
escape? He felt sure the Chief meant no harm, and then he wandered to
the other side of the building, and there lay the great ocean, the shore
of which was not a thousand feet away.

He sat down on a log, and pondered and, feeling fatigued from the
unusual efforts of the day, he lay down for a nap. How long he remained
there it was impossible to tell, for when he awoke, he found himself by
the side of the trunk, and near him two of the body guard who
accompanied the Chief the day before.

He sat up, rubbed his eyes, arose, and without any suggestion or command
on the part of the watchers, marched back to the Chief's palace, and
entered the room to see the latter awake and reclining at his place on
the floor.

He offered a salutation to George, and the latter smiled and bowed
graciously. One of the attendants touched him on the arm, and he was led
to a room, adjoining the court; but there was no door, by means of which
he could close the room, nor did he discover a window, or anything
suggesting an opening at the other side of the apartment.

A delightful odor came from some kind of grass which was piled in one
corner. He examined it, and concluded that it had been placed there for
his particular benefit. This was indeed a thoughtful thing on the
Chief's part. They were making a home for him, that was evident.

But he was too tired to reflect long on these things. Without removing
his clothes he threw himself down on the sweet, clean grass, and he knew
no more until, when the morning sun flooded the court, he could peer
out, and see the family moving to and fro, but the Chief was nowhere in
sight.

While they had not ventured to tell him what was just the correct thing
to do, he walked out, and then wandered to the open portal at the front.
No one seemed to heed him. He walked down toward the ocean, and saw some
women carrying water in curiously-shaped gourds.

He followed the path, which led to a spring; delicious, cool and
refreshing. Then he bathed his face, and washed his hands. But he missed
the soap. He had not, however, forgotten the early days on Wonder
Island, when the Professor found the soap tree.

He glanced around. There, sure enough, was the identical bush, and
breaking off several twigs, the small branches were crushed up together
with the leaves, and with these he returned to the brook and had a good
soap wash.

This peculiar action was witnessed by some of the women, and the tale
was quickly told, and became current in the village. When George visited
the same spot, the bush had entirely disappeared.

The Chief had not returned when he went back, but his breakfast was
ready, and the maiden with the great round eyes, and the mother,
evidently, waited on him.

George looked toward the Chief's place. She understood, and pointed to
the west. He mused awhile. What could she mean! It must not be supposed
that during all this time George was not thinking of Harry, and John,
and the boys who came over with them on this trip.

They always called each other "boys." All the natives on Wonder Island
were boys to them, and it was amusing to hear them say the word in
return. They were all boys, Uraso, and Muro, as well; all but the
Professor, John and Blakely.

When George went out after breakfast he was surprised to note the
absence of the men. No one but women and children were about. Then the
truth flashed on him. The Chief had gone out, on hearing of the approach
of John and his party.

He rushed out toward the western path that led from the village, and he
had not gone three hundred yards before the men, all armed with spears,
came back, with the Chief at their head. All were in consternation.

George knew what this meant now. He held up his hand as they hurriedly
moved toward him, and pointed to the west. He did this smiling to assure
him of the friendly character of the visit. The Chief stopped. George
moved through the group and beckoned the Chief to follow.

He hesitated but a moment, and then gave the necessary command. Coming
through the forest beyond were John and the "Boys." When they were still
too far for hailing distance George raised his hat and waved it.

When John and his party were still a hundred yards away, they stopped at
the unusual sight. Meanwhile George and the Chief moved on. Harry could
not restrain himself, and broke from the party, in his mad rush to
welcome George.

"Bow, Harry; bow; he is a dandy Chief."

Harry obediently made a gracious bow, and the Chief acknowledged the
salute.

All that Harry could say, was: "Oh, George!"

John and the company came up, and George rushed to John, as he said: "I
have had the nicest time in the world, but I am afraid the Chief does
not know whether you are friends or enemies."

John turned to the men, and quietly said: "This man is a friend, and we
must treat him as a Chief. All give him a respectful greeting." The
Chief stood still, as all the warriors ranged themselves in front and
all bowed low, to the obvious relief of the savage.

Then John brought Uraso and Muro forward, and by well timed gestures
indicated to the Chief that they were also Chiefs, and he instantly
showed that he recognized the pantomimic language, and deferentially
bowed, as he had seen George do.

Uraso stepped forward and went up to the burly form, and pressed his
nose against his nose. Then, he spoke a few words. The Chief looked at
him for a moment, and then answered. Muro was not slow to follow the
example, and he also addressed the Chief.

When Uraso turned and took John's hand and in a dialect, which both
seemed to understand, he told about John and the boys, the Chief turned
to his men and said a dozen words, which were instantly recognized by
Uraso and Muro. They smiled.

"What did he say?" asked George.

"He told them to go to the village and prepare food."

All but a half dozen of the immediate followers of the Chief turned and
darted back to the village.

"Do you know the Chief's language?" asked Harry, as Uraso gave way to
Muro.

"We can understand each other pretty well. There are many words which
are the same, but he uses some which are new to me."

"Do you suppose they are the same people as are on our island?"

"I do not know that. We have heard that all the people in the different
islands came from the same place, but where we do not know."

Then the boys crowded around George, and insisted on having him tell his
story. Did you ever hear a boy tell a thrilling story of his own
adventures? Well George was in his heaven of delight as he told of his
treatment, and how he had dined with the Chief, and slept in his palace.

"His palace?" queried Harry.

"Yes, palace! It isn't a common house!" And George dilated on it to such
an extent that Harry actually grew envious at the big time that George
had at their expense.

The party wended its way down the hill, and when the village was reached
the sight there astounded George. He had left it a sleepy place. Now all
was bustle. Fires were being built; the men and women were busy
preparing food. A species of hog, well known on Wonder Island, was being
prepared and spitted, and hung over the heated coals.

They saw the favorite native vegetable, the Taro root, and also, to
their surprise, an abundance of Uraso's poison bulb, the Amarylla, which
he had tried to prepare in stealth after he had been captured, and the
telling of which was the occasion of many jokes at the expense of George
and Harry.

John, the two boys, together with Uraso and Muro, were ushered into the
Chief's house.

"And this is what you call a 'palace'?" remarked Harry.

"Why not?"

"From your description I thought it might be on top of a big hill with
graded steps leading up between rows of flowers, and the rooms filled
with statuary, with a large fountain playing in the center of a fine
banquet hall."

George laughed at the joke. "The trouble with you is that you are not a
philosopher, Harry. If you had been as well treated as I have been you
would think the same as I do."

John overheard the conversation, and remarked: "I must say that there is
more philosophy in that view than even you, George, appreciate."

"Have I said anything unusual?" he asked with a sort of mock gravity.

"Quite so; have you ever heard the saying 'Handsome is, as handsome
does'? Well, that is the root of all true actions in life. From the
noble manner in which this Chief treated George, giving him the best
that he had, and installing him in the finest room in the house, is
doing all that any one can do."

"That is the way I really felt about it at the time. I was tired and
hungry, and instead of meeting an enemy, I met a friend."

"Do you see, Harry? George did right in calling this a palace. If it so
appears in his heart, and he feels that impulse, isn't that just as real
as though you see it with your eyes?"

"I didn't think of it in that way," said Harry, apologetically. "I like
the old fellow. He is good enough to be a white man."


CHAPTER X

PECULIARITIES OF THE NATIVE TRIBE


Within an hour the feast was ready, and the men in the open were already
making merry with the maidens who prepared the meal. George and Harry
frequently nudged each other, as they caught the eyes of some of the
native boys who were very attentive to the gentler sex.

Within the Chief's dwelling there was the most animated conversation
indulged in by the Chief, Uraso and John, and to this number were added
the Chief's brother, and a handsome man who was probably one of the
Chief's principal advisors. Muro and Uraso were the interpreters.

The latter, by turns, told the Chief where they sailed from, and what
their history had been for the past three years. They told about the
wonderful Professor, and all concerning John, and what part the two boys
had taken in the transformation of the island.

"But where is this wonderful ship?" asked the Chief.

"On the other side of the island," answered Uraso.

"Then why do you not bring it here?"

"We should have done so, but we did not know we had a friend here."

"I want to see the wonderful place you have told me about,--your home,
and how you make people happy," said the Chief.

John's face lit up when this was interpreted to him.

"What do your people work at?" the Chief abruptly asked Muro.

"We make many curious things, like the articles you have here," and he
pointed to George's belongings, which were still lying about.

The Chief hurriedly gathered them up and handed them to George. The
latter, after turning to John, refused to take them, and addressing
Uraso, said: "Tell him that I want him to take them, and my gun, as
well."

The Chief could not understand this, and at first refused, but John, as
well as Uraso, insisted, and the latter said:

"These boys can make these things, and they do not feel that they are
sacrificing anything, beyond what it is their duty to do."

The Chief looked doubtfully at the boys, as he remarked: "Do you tell me
that these _memees_, (Boys) made these things?"

Uraso and Muro both assured them that such was the case, and added: "And
still more wonderful things."

After some conversation Uraso turned to John and said: "The Chief wishes
to send a runner to bring the ship to the harbor here. Hasmo may
accompany him."

This arrangement had John's approval, and when Hasmo was advised of the
mission, he jumped up with delight, and, together with the Chief's
fleetest messenger, speeded off to make the intervening twenty-five
miles.

It was not much of a task for the two men. In less than four hours,
Sutoto saw two men on the shore, one of them waving a signal that he
understood. A boat was put off, and when the runners came aboard, and
the news imparted, all on board sprang to their places, the anchor was
hurriedly taken up, and the _Pioneer_ soon rounded the point, while they
all eagerly scanned the shore.

The Chief and his visitors remained in the "palace" for three hours,
while the latter told and retold the stories which so much interested
the chieftain. Then John began to question him upon matters that more
nearly concerned their visit.

"Ask him," he said, "if they have any Krishnos here?"

"He does not know what they are," answered Muro.

"Does he believe in a Great Spirit?"

"No he has never heard anything of that kind."

"Ask him if he knows who makes the rain and the sunshine, and the
clouds."

"He says that the questions are surprising to him."

"Has he never thought of those things?"

"No; all he knows is that he lives and that he is a Chief and is the one
who must govern the people."

"Does he know why he is the Chief?"

"Yes; because he is stronger than any one else."

"That would certainly make him a Chief," remarked Harry. "I never saw
such a big man."

"Do they have any big holes in the ground!"

When the question was asked he waited a moment, and then slowly shook
his head.

"They have nothing of that kind to his knowledge."

The countenances of Harry and George fell. John noticed it, and smiled
at the disappointment.

"There are no caves around here," said George.

"Are there any mountains on the island?"

"There are high hills."

"Have they any neighbors, or different tribes?"

"Yes; to the north, (pointing in that direction) are some bad people,
but they belong to him."

"Why do they not live near to the village!"

"Because they would make the people bad."

"What did they do that was so bad?"

"They stole and lied."

"From whom did they steal?"

"From the Chief."

"Did they steal from each other?"

"No; they could not steal from each other."

At this remark the boys laughed. John began to be interested now in his
questionings.

"Do you mean it is not wrong to steal from each other, but only from the
Chief?"

He nodded an assent. This was a curious bit of reasoning. It needed
some explanation. John continued:

"Why is it wrong to steal from the Chief and not from each other?"

At this question the Chief did not answer as promptly as usual. He
weighed the question in his mind. He smiled as though to say: How can it
be wrong for people to take things from each other? They do not own
anything. No one but the Chief owns things.

His answer, when finally given, was not at all clear, at least so the
boys thought.

"The Chief in his wisdom gives to all alike; and when he gives it the
property still belongs to him and not the people; but if they take it
from the Chief then they are robbers."

"Ask him," said John, "whether, if when he gives anything to one of his
people, and it still belongs to him, after he gives it, why it is not
stealing from him, if some one takes it away from the one he gave it
to?"

The Chief was not at all taken aback at this question. Pointing to the
sun, he said:

"That is a great Chief. He gives seed to the people, and they plant it.
But the great Chief does not forget it. The seed comes up to see its
father. It still belongs to him. When he gives that seed to the people
it is for their use. Every one has a right to take it and use it, and it
is no crime. But if he takes it away from the Chief, he destroys what
belongs to him, and he then does a wrong which must be punished."

"This may not be very clear to you," said John, "but it means that
whoever takes it away and destroys it wilfully, is guilty of a crime.
Whatever the Great Chief gives willingly, like the fruits of the earth,
is intended for all alike, and men should not be called criminals for
taking what they need, if they do not wilfully destroy it."

"That is a wonderful idea, when I come to think of it," remarked George.
"And to think that a savage could work that out in his mind."

"But there is one thing that looks a little queer to me. He said he did
not know or believe in a Great Spirit, and yet he talks of the sun as a
Great Spirit," remarked Harry.

"I will put the question to him," said John. "You said that you did not
believe in a Great Spirit, but now you speak about the sun as a Great
Chief. Do you not believe in him?"

"No; I only know that he is there; I do not believe in him any more than
in the carago (moon)."

A great noise was heard outside; the Chief looked up, as an attendant
entered. He spoke to Uraso, and the latter turned to John and said:

"Our ship is coming."

This announcement broke up the interview. It was exciting and
interesting from first to last, and when they emerged from the dwelling
the host and visitors were friends that the future never could sever. It
gave a new inspiration to the boys, and it showed them that even a low
state of man was capable of expressing things that were worthy of
consideration.

The entire village went to the seashore. The inhabitants wondered at the
great vessel, and were impressed at the manner in which it was handled.

"I am anxious to see the man who can row such a vessel," said the Chief.

"He is one of the men from our island," answered Muro.

This seemed to be an astonishing thing to him. He had seen vessels
before, but in the distance. At long intervals parts of ships had come
ashore; but this was the first time that a vessel had ever landed,
within his recollection.

As it drew near he marveled at its size. He could see the man at the
bow-sprit who was constantly throwing something attached to a line
overboard, and then drawing it in again.

He questioned the reason for such a strange action, and was told that
the man was trying the depth of the water, so that they might not come
too close to the shore, and strike the bottom. Then some of the sailors
dropped something overboard, with a great splash, and a huge sail fell
down like magic, and the ship still moved toward the shore and turned
around.

The Chief was inquisitive concerning every action. Why did the ship act
like a human and turn around? He could hardly believe the statement when
told that the anchor was a giant claw, and that when it reached the
bottom it took hold and had sufficient strength to stop the ship and
make it swing around, as he had witnessed.

A boat was lowered, and the last one to descend was Sutoto. Uraso
pointed out his figure, and the Chief kept his eyes on him. The first
man to leave the boat was Sutoto, and both boys rushed down to meet him.
It was the course they always pursued, to be in the lead to welcome
anyone.

They led him to the Chief, and he put his great arms about Sutoto, to
the latter's great embarrassment. But what affected Sutoto more than
anything else, were the eyes of the Chief's daughter, who had acted so
shyly to George the night before. From that moment Sutoto saw no one
else, and she,--well, Harry and George laughed, and slyly caressed
Sutoto, as they saw her admiring glances.

Sutoto was the handsomest native on Wonder Island. He was the brave and
fleet runner who undertook the mission to pass through the three savage
tribes to carry a message, written on a plaintain leaf by the Professor,
to John and the boys while they were surrounded by the hostiles.

The friendship between him and the boys grew stronger and better from
that day on. The tribute to him was one which the boys enjoyed for his
sake, and because he deserved it.

There was a feast that night, unparalleled in the knowledge of the boys.
It was like going to a new world, and meeting new people. Only one
little thing seemed to mar the joyous occasion for the boys for a time.
When they were returning from the beach, they saw three of the natives,
together with their wives and children, with their hands bound, and in
charge of a half dozen warriors.

George recognized the three as his captors. Then was impressed upon him
the fact that they were about to pay the penalty for stealing his things
and hiding the theft from the Chief. They were to be exiled to the place
where the bad people lived.

George hurriedly told Uraso the story of the theft, and begged him to
intercede with the Chief. Instantly, when he learned that George
requested it, he turned to Uraso, and said: "He may release them."

He rushed up to the now bewildered culprits, in order to sever the
bonds, and then recalling that he had given his knife to the Chief, he
called to Harry, and together they freed the limbs of the captives and
the Chief, with a few words of admonition, dismissed them. The boys
never forgot the grateful looks that came from the men and their wives.

When they had departed Muro said: "Under their law the women and
children of the culprits are criminals also, and so they were doomed to
go together."

It would be a difficult matter to describe the food prepared and eaten
at this banquet. Several varieties of fowl, all wild types, and the wild
boar, as well as the 'possum, provided the meats. Of course taro and
amarylla were the chief vegetables; and of nuts, the well known Brazil
species was found everywhere, and to be seen in all dwellings.

The outer portion of the shell of the Brazil nut formed bowls and cups,
which the boys early learned to utilize. There were bananas, a species
of fig, and loquats.

"What surprises me is that they have no fish, or sea food of any kind,"
observed Harry.

John mused for a while, and then said: "It is likely that the people
here have the same aversion to fish as some natives along the Australian
continent, and in the islands near there."

"What is that?" asked George.

"The natives of New Guinea, for instance, worship snakes, lizards,
sharks and crocodiles, and there is a strict law among them not to
injure anything, of that kind. As a result, they are afraid to eat
anything that approaches the shape of these animals."

"Well, if they worship the snakes they must have some kind of religion,"
ventured Harry.

"Yes; and with them go the witch doctors who practice on the people and
charge fees just the same as the physicians do in our country."

"Do they claim there is a Great Spirit, like some of the people here!"

"No; they have a God called Baigona, who lives in the mountains, and
instead of being a good God, is a bad one; he has the power to speak
without being heard, to strike without being seen, and he loves and
hates, just like human beings. He gives the witch doctor the power to do
anything, without being wrong, and without being liable to punishment."

"Well, that is a pretty convenient God to have," said Harry, as he mused
at the idea.

The peculiar thing about the absence of sea food at the banquet could
not be understood, particularly as the natives on Wonder Island were
great fish eaters, and were also the bitter enemies of snakes.

"We must consult the Chief about that," said John.

At the first opportunity the subject was brought up, and it was
discovered that the people were afraid to eat anything that came from
the sea. And then another thing was learned. There were no rivers of any
consequence on the island; only a few streams, that were dry most of the
year.

"I can understand," said John, "that in such a case you do not have
fresh water fish."

The Chief was, in many respects, a remarkable character. Most natives
are extremely superstitious, and it is particularly true of those who
have a belief in some form of God. While he would marvel at new things
they did not occur to him as being the result of some new occult force.

In this respect he differed from the natives of Wonder Island, all of
whom believed, more or less, in the tales of the Medicine Men, and of
the witch doctors. Old Suros, of the Berees tribe, was the only one who
did not believe in the existence of a being who could rule him.

But the Chief had other qualities which were remarkable in a savage, if
such he was. He governed according to some law, and yet he did not know
what law was. The only thing in that community was the will of that one
man.

If he said something, in adjusting any matter, it was always remembered
by the people, and that ruling became a guide for them in the future.
Take, for instance, the theft of the articles from George. The three who
participated in it, knew that it was not wrong, according to the light
they had, to take it from George.

Indeed, the Chief had distinctly said that they could not steal from
each other, but only from him, hence the theft of the articles which
George owned was not a crime. On what ground, then, were they guilty?

George thought he had solved the problem, when discussing the matter
with John. "The Chief found them guilty of trying to hide what they had
done, and they were caught at it."

"But the Chief was not covetous. He admitted he did not care for the
things, and one of the men told Muro that the Chief never took things
from his people without paying for them."

"Well, then, he punished them for trying to deceive him."

"There, that is one of the crimes which the Chief referred to. I think
he is a wonderful character, and I hope we shall be able to unite him
with us."


CHAPTER XI

SUTOTO AND THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER


It was plain that Sutoto was not the same being. During the three days
they remained at the port, and formed the exploring expeditions into the
interior, with the co-operation of the Chief, Sutoto did not take a
part.

He begged to be allowed to remain near the ship. That was a sly
suggestion which John understood. Even though he might have been blind
he would have known the true reason, for the boys were continuously
joking Sutoto all of which he took good-naturedly, and John often burst
out in fits of laughter, as he witnessed Sutoto's discomfiture.

The Chief's name was Beralsee, and the big-eyed maiden was known as
Cinda, the meaning of which was, as explained by Beralsee, the Beautiful
Star. The Chief had four other children, one a man of twenty-one, and
the others younger than Cinda.

The eldest, Calmo, was tall and lithe, like Sutoto. Like his father he
was original in his ways, and to him the Chief entrusted the care of the
expeditions which were made at the suggestion of John. The latter
explained that they had seen the wonderful products growing on the
island, coffee, cocoa, spices, and particularly the various fibres.

The recital of the tales, of how the white man used these things to
make the various needed articles, and how the great ships were employed
to carry the goods to and fro, and how the different things were
exchanged, interested him.

Many of the subjects were not within his comprehension. Why were all
these things done? What was the object of having so many products?

John told him that when men had everything they really needed to keep
them alive and in comfort, they still wanted something more, and those
things were called luxuries; then, after they and their children used
these luxuries for a while, they found them to be absolutely essential
and they then became necessaries. In that way men learned the use of so
many, many things, that the whole world was being searched to find
products which would serve to make the needed things.

"Do you mean," said the Chief, "that your people are trying to find
things they do not need, so they can buy them, and try to make some use
of them?"

John could not help but smile at the acuteness of the question. "That,
in effect, is just what they do. It is not so considered, however, by
our people. It is difficult to say just where necessity ends and luxury
begins. But each year, yes every month, new things are brought out, and
people begin to buy them, because the traders and the people who sell
are shrewd and know how to cultivate taste and the desire for new and
startling things."

"But how do the people get the articles to exchange for these things?"

"The people do not accumulate articles to buy other articles with.
Instead, they work to get money, and with this money they buy the
things."

"I do not know what you mean by that. What is 'money'?"

"It is an article which tells what everything else is worth."

"Then it must be wonderful. I would like to see that remarkable thing
which can tell what everything else is worth."

John took some of the coins from his pocket. "Here is some of it, which
we use on Wonder Island."

The Chief smiled. He held them in his hand. He knew the meaning of the
hole in the center. They were intended, as he thought, to be threaded on
a string, and used as an ornament.

They fascinated him. He had never seen anything so attractive. He looked
at John, while he thought, but did not speak. Then John said: "This is
worth one cent, and this larger one five cents."

He compared the two. Finally, he said: "What makes this worth so much
more than the other, and why are they worth anything?"

"Because there is so much metal,--so much copper, in each."

"But copper is of no use. I cannot eat it, and it will not clothe me."

"No, but if you have this money then you can get the clothes, and the
size of them will tell just how much clothing you can get."

"I do not understand it. Where can I go and get clothing with these
round pieces!"

"You must go where the clothing is, or the goods must be brought to
you."

"Well, if we are here, at a place where there should be no clothing, or
no food, this _money_, as you call it, would not enable me to clothe or
feed myself?"

"Assuredly not."

"Then it has no value?"

"No; it merely measures the value of something which I can eat or wear,
or use."

"Then why not use a taro root, or a fowl, or wisps of fibre?"

"That would be all right, if we could have a common understanding
between us of how much a taro bulb was worth by the side of a bundle of
fibre, and how large the bundle should be to exchange fairly with an
armful of Amarylla tubers."

On the third day the boys, together with John, a party of the boys, and
three natives under the lead of Calmo, started for the northern end of
the island. John had now learned that the island was entirely unlike the
Wonder Island formation.

The latter was fairly circular in form, whereas the one they were now
about to explore was narrow and long. That part of the southern portion
which they had carefully examined, in order to learn its agricultural
possibilities, was rolling, and in many places had level plateaus, not
anywhere at a greater altitude than three or four hundred feet above sea
level.

There was higher ground to the north, where the climate was uninviting,
so Beralsee said, and it was for that reason they made it a convict
colony.

John was anxious to see the people who were exiled from their homes on
account of their crimes. Furthermore, he was impressed with the idea
that the upper end showed volcanic upheavals, which would be likely to
expose mineral formations.

Gruesome tales were current of the ferocity of the convicts. It was no
wonder that the poor victims, whom George had prevented from being
expelled several days before, regarded their deliverance as such a great
blessing.

No one, once condemned, was ever permitted to come back. The
condemnation was for all time. Furthermore, it was part of the Chief's
unwritten code, that no one who transgressed the law could ever make
atonement, or recover his rights.

To be able to meet people so condemned, and to talk with them and get
their views, was worth an exertion, surely, and Harry and George were
just as enthusiastic at the prospects of the journey.

"That may be some recompense for not finding any caves," said George.

Harry laughed, as he looked at George. "To hear you talk people might
think you had caves on the brain."

"Well the caves are the only thing that we have had in the way of sport.
And then the treasures!"

"I know that; but I shall not be disappointed if there isn't a cave
within five hundred miles."

"Nor I; but John is very anxious, for some reason, to find some
particular cave. I'll bet anything that skull we found on the southeast
peak of Wonder Island has something to do with it, judging by the way he
is caring for the skull, and spending hours in examining it."

"I had forgotten about that," responded Harry. "That brings back my
interest, now. But John does not think there are any caves on this
island, but he believes that there is another island farther south."

"Is that so!"

"I am sure of it."

"How sure?"

"Well, the chart which John made has this island on it, and a mark which
shows something like it directly to the south. I saw that several days
ago."

"When did he make the drawing?"

"Since he has been on this island."

Harry emitted a low whistle. "I thought John had something in his mind
all along. What do you suppose he expects to find in that particular
cave?"

"Well, not money; that's sure. It might be a good idea to do some
thinking and searching on our own account."

"I have often wondered, since we have been on Wonder Island, and more
particularly, since we landed here, whether it would not be possible to
trace some of the unsolved mysteries of Wonder Island to this, or some
other island."

"Yes, I have often thought of that. We have gone over every part of that
island, and found no trace of the other boat load, that is of the boys
who came ashore on the _Investigator's_ No. 3. None of the tribes ever
knew or heard of that boat, nor was there ever a trace of the members of
that crew.

"That is the mystery. Some one brought the boat to the island. Some one
took it inland. Some one, a man by the name of Walter, wrote a note
addressed to Wright, who was one of the companions of John when he was
shipwrecked, but Wright knew nothing of Walter. If the solution of this
matter does not lie in some other island, we might as well give it up."

Before describing the events of the journey it is necessary to make a
digression, so that we may be able to recount some things which had a
bearing on the adventures and experiences of the two boys after they
returned.

The natives on Wonder Island, as well as on the island where they now
were, wore the most primitive kinds of clothing. The men had the
simplest clothing, merely a breech clout, worn about the loins, and the
Chiefs usually wore some distinguishing clothing about their shoulders,
and usually on their arms.

The women, however, had short skirts, and like their white sisters,
abounded in ornaments. Some of them had jackets, to which the trinkets
were attached. All delighted in bracelets. These were usually formed
like bands around their arms and limbs, and the wealth and importance of
the dame was judged from the number so employed.

As a result, when they became great and wealthy, more and more clothing
had to be used, to enable them to attach the ornaments. It might be
said, that clothing was worn, not for the purpose of covering the body,
or for comfort, but in order to serve as a vehicle to attach the much
desired trinkets, and the dangling character of these articles seemed to
be the great attraction.

For this reason bright and sparkling bits of jewelry were the most
sought. It mattered not what they were made of, but the glistening
surface had its value to them. Singularly enough, the women on the new
island strove to decorate themselves in like manner, and presumably, for
the same purpose.

When the savages in Wonder Island were brought out of their crude state,
the Professor and George knew that they could not change that
fundamental law of nature, nor did they attempt to work a revolution in
the minds and characters of the people in this respect.

Within certain limitations such a desire to ornament and render
themselves attractive is most laudable. They knew that among the few
peoples in the world, where that quality is entirely lacking, they are
of the lowest type, and possessed of the least intellect, and that all
such are the hardest to cultivate.

Here, as on Wonder Island, the natives understood weaving, the fabrics
being of the coarsest character, both in the matter of quality and
appearance. The work was necessarily slow and tedious, and the principal
work of the women was to weave these articles of wear with the simple
tools they had.

When the boys built the looms, and the natives saw the wonderful goods
produced, and the dyes prepared to give the fabrics the different hues,
the women became most expert weavers, and the natural result was that
they vied with each other to make the best articles, and to form them
into the most fashionable garments.

When the _Pioneer_, and later their new steamer, _Wonder_, which was now
regularly running to one of the great seaports, began to bring in such
products as they could not make in the islands, a new impetus was given
to the dress designed for women.

Before the boys left for Wonder Island, that place attracted immigrants
from the north; they brought their families, and began to engage in the
business of exporting the fruits and the fibres, as well as the ores and
the dyes from the island. From the white women the native women learned
the new art of dressing, and of adornment.

Their coming was not needed to give them the desire, but they were not
slow to recognize that their fair-skinned sisters could teach them the
refining process.

Muro's wife was the sister of Uraso, the latter a man of naturally
strong intellect, and his sister was not behind him in her particular
domain. She was at all times the leading spirit in the development of
her people, and to her the Professor imparted many of the great secrets,
that might be of service.

Stut, the brother of Muro, was second in command of the vessel, and
before they left on the mission into the interior, John called in Stut,
and in presence of the boys imparted a scheme that met with hearty
approval.

It was now an open secret that Sutoto and Cinda were in love. If the
Chief knew of it he did not exhibit any alarm, or offer any objections.
John knew that courtships on the islands were not usually of long
duration. He thought it would be a fine thing to make the wedding a
"state affair."

"Now, Stut, I want to entrust you with a mission to the Professor and
Muro's wife, to whom you can explain the situation. She must prepare a
suitable outfit for the bride, and tell her I think she and the other
women that she might choose should also come over. They must not forget
to bring the proper costumes for Cinda's mother and for all the
attendants.

"The Professor will know what is suitable to send over for the Chief.
All this will take some time to arrange, and it must be done without
letting Sutoto know. I will arrange the matter with him so that he will
not suspect your real mission.

"Our work at the northern part of the island will take about ten days,
and probably less. If you have no trouble, and this time of the year is
not a stormy one, you can easily make the trip there in a day and a
half, and return in the same time, thus giving you a full week to
prepare the articles."

Stut was in raptures at the announcement. John knew that he was capable,
and trusted him. Shortly afterwards Sutoto was sent for, and John said:
"It is necessary for the _Pioneer_ to return to Wonder Island to get
some things of importance for us. It would please me better to have you
remain, and Stut can take your place for the trip; but if you prefer to
go, it will be satisfactory."

Sutoto hesitated for a moment. He eyed John for a moment, and the boys
begged him to remain. They knew, as did John, that their entreaties were
not necessary. Finally, with a most suspicious glance, he consented to
stay. Stut was notified, and he came in.

"Stut, I have some very valuable papers which must be delivered to the
Professor, who will send some things back, and I have arranged with
Sutoto that he shall remain and help us in our investigations here,
while you sail the _Pioneer_ to Unity."

Stut looked at Sutoto for a moment, as though taken by surprise, and
announced his willingness to go. "Then start at once," remarked John,
"and return as soon as possible."

Sutoto called Stut aside, after they left John. "Will you get some
things for me?" he asked.

"Certainly, what can I do for you?"

Then Sutoto imparted the secret of his coming marriage to Stut, and the
latter with well concealed surprise, promised secrecy, and assured him
that he would get the clothing necessary and the particular presents
that seemed to be of more importance to him than his garments.

Within two hours the ship was ready, and as they were leaving the vessel
Stut told the boys of the commission which he had undertaken at Sutoto's
request.


CHAPTER XII

THE SKELETON BENEATH THE BOAT


The present journey reminded the boys of the time when they began their
wanderings in the unknown wilds of their own island. Then they were
inexperienced, lacking the most ordinary knowledge of life in the open,
afraid of slightest noise when in unknown places, and constantly fearing
attack by wild men or beasts.

What a difference now! They had been successful, and had abundant
treasures at their command. Something told them that they were to find
still greater treasures, and the zest was one beyond expression.

The course was directed due north. The boys knew that they were to
investigate the mountains, the hills and the streams. They were to learn
what fruits and vegetation might be found in their native state on the
island; the kinds and varieties of animals, and the qualities of the
minerals, if the geological formations offered them for inspection.

From the first day that they landed, the boys had heard a peculiar
guttural sound, impossible to describe. The sound was almost annoying
after they had heard it for a time. Passing the limb of a tree during
the first hour of the march they heard the same cry.

"I see what it is," remarked George. "It is a bird. See it on that
limb?"

John looked, and then turned to George. "Why certainly, that is the
Kagu."

"Why its bill and feet are red, while the rest of the body is gray. What
a funny feather it has running back from its head!"

Harry laughed, as he remarked: "I wonder if our women took their hat
fashions from the Kagu?"

[Illustration: _Fig. 8. The Kagu._]

"You have made a correct observation. Some species of the hornbill have
feathers which project up into the air like sentinels, and the same
feathers are used in exactly the same fashion by makers of millinery.
Now, I am not an authority on the fashions, but I have often thought
that if the leaders in styles would build those wonderful head
decorations something like the patterns furnished by nature they would
be more beautiful and becoming."

"I wonder if it has only one leg?"

John laughed. "I imagine it has two. It is the custom of many birds of
this species to stand for hours on one leg. It is of the same family as
the stork, the heron and the ibis."

"Why don't we see more animals?"

"The island is not, probably, large enough. These small islands have
only the smallest kinds. Besides, the larger animals are found where the
nature of the country permits them to conceal themselves."

George stopped before a large bush which had rows of yellow flowers
growing up all along the stems, and at each flower was a seed.

"Ah! you have found a most valuable plant," said John, as he broke off
one of the stems. "Feel the crushed leaves."

"It is just like grease."

"It is an oil. It is one of the products largely used in the United
States, as a substitute for olive oil, and for soap making."

"What is it called?"

"The plant is known as Benne. The product is Sesame oil. The peculiarity
of the plant is that nearly one-half of the leaf is a pure oil, and it
can remain exposed a long time before it turns rancid."

"I wonder if that is what they use in their cooking!"

"Yes; it is absolutely inodorous, and is better than lard for table
uses. Look at the seeds. They are classed with the most nutritious in
the world."

"The Chief had them, and I tried some of them the first night I dined
with him."

The route led to an upper plateau, well wooded, many of the trees being
of the palm variety, with plenty of silver-leafed families so common
everywhere.

"Do look at the Coffee trees?" exclaimed Harry.

The Chief's son was consulted. He had no knowledge of the use of the
berry. "We must take a lot of the berries back with us. This will be a
treat at the celebration." John stopped short, and the boys commenced to
laugh. He had almost given away the scheme for the wedding feast. Sutoto
did not catch the force of the allusion.

George and Harry were now on the quest for new things in every
direction, and the natives aided them in carrying out their every wish.
After they had reached a small stream flowing to the north it became
evident that they had passed the highest point of the plateau, and were
now descending.

[Illustration: _Fig. 9. Sesame Oil Plant. The Benne._]

One of the natives pointed out a peculiarly-shaped tree, tall, with
immense leaves, and at each leaf cluster there was an immense white
flower.

"Here is a tree with yellow flowers. We must have some of these as
specimens," said Harry.

The trees were exceedingly tall. "The men are asking if you want some of
the flowers," said Sutoto.

"By all means," answered George. Without a moment's hesitation a young
athlete made his way to the top, and gathered a dozen branches, which he
dropped to the ground.

The beauty of these flowers is difficult to describe. The tree body is
perfectly straight, and the limbs grow out uniformly on three sides, the
leaves being very rough.

"This is a species which belongs to the Indicus family," remarked John,
as he cut off one of the leaves. "It would be a good tree for carpenters
to raise."

[Illustration: _Fig. 10. Flower of Indica Tree._]

"Why so?" asked George.

"You see it is just like sand-paper."

"Well, that is something to know. But will it really smooth down wood?"

"It is frequently used for that purpose, and you might take some along
and try it."

At intervals John was observed taking up bits of soil, which he
carefully wrapped up and deposited in one of the receptacles.

"I am curious to know what you are taking dirt for?" said Harry.

"I should have told you that a knowledge of the nature of the soil is
one of the things that is very important to the agriculturist. Many men
have made failures because they planted things which the earth was not
adapted to grow."

"It has always been a wonder to me why things really do grow up out of
the dirt," said Harry.

"That is not difficult to understand, if you will consider that the
ground contains food, and that a plant can grow only where it can get
the right kind. Then, there may be plenty of food but not the kind it
can digest."

"Well, that is news to me. Do plants digest food?"

"Yes, just the same as what we call living animals. The tree is somewhat
different from animals, in the particular that it digests its food first
and then consumes it afterwards. In this particular certain larvæ act
the same as trees, that is digest it before they consume it."

"What do you mean by larva?"

"The early form of certain living organisms, before they are fully
developed. Thus, the tadpole is the larva of the frog. A great many
insects are bred from what are called grubs, or caterpillars. All these
are called larva."

"What kind of food is found in the earth?"

"Many, many kinds. Carbon, nitrogen, the various salts, such as lime,
magnesia, strontia, and the like, and when the little feelers shoot out
from the roots, they are in search of something to eat."

At this point they were interrupted by shouting and laughter from one
section of the searching party, and the boys ran out across the open to
learn its cause. Two of the natives were carrying a dark brown object,
about half the size of an ordinary hog.

It was kicking vigorously, but did not appear to be at all vicious.

"Why, it looks just like a little bear," said George as he danced about.
"Let us keep it for a pet."

"It is a bear," said John. "It is the Bruang, or the sun-bear of the
Malayan peninsula."

"But doesn't it grow any bigger?"

"No; that is a full size specimen; in fact, it is a pretty large
specimen, I should judge."

"What beautiful fur, and so soft! Will it bite?"

"I am of the opinion they can bite, but they are easily tamed and make
great pets. Hasn't it a fine white spot on its breast?"

The men stood about and allowed it to move about within the circle. It
cast its eyes around, as much as to say: "Well, what are you going to do
about it?"

George cried out: "Hold it for a minute," and he pounced on one of the
provision bags, and brought out a pot of honey. He forced his way in
among the watchers, and with a stick dipped into the honey held it up
before the animal.

It smelled the honey, and began to lick the stick, and then it darted
for the pot. "What a tongue," exclaimed Harry.

"That is what they are noted for. The tongue is made for the very
purpose of going into deep holes, and the greatest use is to rob the
hives of the wild honey bee."

[Illustration: _Fig. 11. Bruang. The Malayan Bear._]

The antics of George and the bear were most amusing to the watchers, and
occasioned roars of laughter. When the pot was emptied he wanted more,
and nosed around George until the latter could hardly keep his feet.

"He is getting to be a mighty close friend," said John, when he could
find time to stop laughing for a moment.

"Well, don't let him get away," cried George, as he saw the cordon
around the animal broken up, leaving plenty of opening for it to get
away.

But, of course, the natives didn't understand him, and soon Mr. Bear had
all the opportunity in the world to go home. But he didn't. He walked
alongside of George, and the latter liked to stroke his soft fur, to
which no objection was offered.

The bear followed and was by his side every minute of the time for the
next hour, and while they sat down to lunch little Sunny, as George
named him, was at the feast. He had samples of everything in sight, and
the menu tasted good, from honey at the beginning of the repast, to
honey at the end of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The progress was necessarily slow, because there were so many things to
examine and to make notes of. They went out of the way from the direct
route, so as to cover as wide an area as possible. Before camping for
the night they had ascended a slight elevation, and there, to the right
and to the left they saw the wide stretches of the great ocean.

Directly ahead was a narrow tongue of land, leading to a broadening
area, and off in the dim distance was a high point. The Chief's son
pointed there and said:

"On the other side of that high place is where the bad people live."

"That must be a long way off," said John. When this was interpreted he
answered: "Another day's march."

The gentle breeze from the eastern shore was a great relief.

They had marched during the day mostly through forests, and everywhere
the atmosphere was close and still, so that the open space was
appreciated.

All slept soundly that night, and morning came only too soon for the
wearied boys, but they enjoyed the trip too much to delay moving at the
earliest opportunity. While breakfast was being prepared the boys
sauntered over to the sloping shore to the west, which was not more than
a half mile away.

They enjoyed walking along the pure white sand, and after disrobing had
a jolly time in the mildly moving surf. It was not often that they had
opportunities to take a sea bath.

The bathing place was a deeply-indented bay, with a long sloping
beach,--an ideal spot, with the camp plainly visible to the east. "Why
not take a stroll to the southern end of the bay?" remarked Harry, after
they were ready to return. "We might be able to see the headland to the
south where we first sighted land."

"Well, then, here goes it," and George started on a strong sprint to the
south.

Harry was by far the fleeter, and reached the tufted grass ahead of
George, and then turned to the right, to gain the elevation. It was
while thus moving through the brush and débris, which was far above the
normal level of the sea, that they were attracted by an unusual deposit
of brush, and other accumulations.

"Stop, Harry; here is something we ought to investigate."

Harry turned and came back. In the early days of their investigation
such a mass would have meant diligent search. It was more from a
recurrence of the old habit that dictated the idea to George.

It was well they did so, for not far from the top, and covered over with
seaweed and leaves, was a boxlike structure, evidently some part of a
wreckage. They worked feverishly at the surrounding mass, and uncovered
it.

Harry started back. "Do you know what this is?" he asked. George stooped
over, and stared.

"It is part of the boat which was taken from South River."

When that boat disappeared, only to be found miles away from its
original location, the two boxlike compartments which they had made in
it, and the oars used by them, had been taken away, and instead they
found entirely different oars, and a rope, of which they knew nothing.

Here was one of the boxes. "Let's open it," said George in the most
intense tone. That was easily done, and there they found, to their
surprise, one of their original shell hatchets, part of a coarsely-woven
cloth, which they recognized as one of their early productions on the
first loom, and a dozen or more gourds, in which food had been placed,
and all exactly as it had been stored away by them. The food had
disappeared, of course, but it had been lost by the action of the sea,
and decomposition, as it was evident that the contents had not been
disturbed by any one.

"Let us call John," said Harry, and he bounded up the beach, and ran
over the crest, waving his arms as he did so. He had not gone half the
distance before those at the camp saw Harry running, and John, and most
of those in sight started on a run, George meanwhile industriously
dragging away the débris.

"We have found it," cried Harry, as John came within hailing distance,
and without waiting for them to come up he bolted back.

"Now what have you discovered?" asked John as he came up breathless.

"Part of our old boat."

"We thought George had met with some accident."

"We got this by accident," answered George. "See, here are some more
things. This is the oar we had. How can you explain that?"

It was certainly a poser. Why the exchange of oars? John shook his head.
For once he had no theory even to offer. "Come, boys, let us take away
all this stuff."

All gave a hand, Sutoto wondering why there should be so much ado about
a bit of wreckage. George explained the affair, as well as he could.

"What is that board?" exclaimed John. "No, not a board; that is part of
a boat," he added as more of the accumulation was torn away.

"It's a boat; it's a boat!" almost shrieked George.

"Come to this end and take away this lot of seaweed," called out Harry.

They soon uncovered a boat with one end embedded in the sand so it was
difficult to turn it over, owing to the rotten condition of the wood.
Only here and there was any paint visible. The action of the elements
had done its work.

"What kind of a boat was this?" asked Harry.

John did not answer, but peered down on the sand where the prow had
rested. "Take away the sand carefully here," he said, and when he
pointed the boys saw something white protruding an inch or two.

As the sand was scraped away they first saw the thigh bone of a
skeleton, and soon the whole frame was laid bare, the interstices filled
with sand. A peculiar rope was around the frame, and John grasped it.

The boys eagerly looked at it as John intently examined it. "It is the
same," he said.

"The same as what?" asked Harry.

"The same as the rope found on the boat when you discovered it on the
beach."

That was the first time that the boys knew that John had any idea about
the loss of the boat, or of the strange rope. It was possible, however,
that the Professor had told John about it, as they were accustomed to
talk over these strange things.

"But the boat?" asked George. "What do you think of the boat?"

"It is the exact counterpart of the _Investigator's_ Life boat No. 3."


CHAPTER XIII

A CONVICT COLONY OF NATIVES


The Chief's son was present. "Did you ever know of a boat load of
castaways on the island?" asked John.

"We never knew of anything like that," was his reply.

Every scrap in that mass of wreckage was gone over. There was nothing
else visible by which they could gain the slightest clue. The skeleton
was minutely examined. It was that of a strong, well-developed man, but
from all appearances one leg was shorter than the other.

The bones of the shortened leg were closely investigated. "The bones
show that this man met with an accident in early life, or before he was
fully grown, or, he may have had some disease before he attained full
growth, so that his right leg is shorter because not fully developed,"
said John, as he continued the examination.

"He must have been a soldier or an adventurer, as he has three bullet
marks, one here in the right shoulder, one in the ankle, and the other
on the cheek bone. All of the wounds were healed before he met his
death."

"But there is one thing which is still more remarkable. This man was a
captive. He was tied in the boat and it was set adrift, and was likely
on the open sea and washed ashore during one of the monsoons."

"Why do you think so?" asked Harry, as soon as he could recover breath
after this announcement.

"This rope tells the story."

"But how does it happen that he and the boat were together. It seems to
me that if the waves were high enough to bring the boat clear up to this
point, he would be freed from the boat long before it reached this
place."

"He was tied to the boat."

One mystery was solved, and another more terrible in its aspect came
upon its heels. There was but one thing to do, and that was to bury the
skeleton, and John ordered this done, as soon as he had taken the
complete measurements of the remains.

"We don't want the box or the things in it now," said Harry.

"Indeed, I want the hatchet," answered George.

"Yes, and the rope," added John.

The boys went back to the camp with thoughtful expressions on their
faces.

"This seems to be a Wonder Island, too," said George, more to himself
than to any one else.

They descended the incline, and crossed the narrow neck of land that
joined the two parts of the island. Beyond, as they advanced the ground
grew more uneven and rugged. Occasionally rocks appeared, the first that
they had noticed except around the place where George was captured.

Nevertheless, vegetation grew in even greater profusion than on the
other branch of the island. There were more berries upon which all the
natives feasted, and the boys were not slow to pick them as they passed.

In traveling alongside of a hill Harry was the first to call attention
to a peculiar leaf on a plant, which bore rose-shaped flowers. "This is
something new to me. There is nothing like it on Wonder Island. Did you
notice it, John?"

The latter took a branch, and gazed at it for a long time. "I am
surprised to find this growing here. It is a plant well known in
Palestine, and is called the Rose of Jericho."

"What a delightful perfume it has," said Harry.

[Illustration: _Fig. 12. Rose of Jericho._]

"It is not noted on that account, however. It is the _resurrection_
plant."

"How singular; and in what way did it get that name?"

"It may be dried up entirely, and if placed in water it will again
appear to revive and raise itself up. This is, of course, due to its
power to absorb a vast amount of water. It is found near the shores of
the Dead Sea, and I recall that when I was in Jerusalem it was a common
thing to see the plant in its dried-up state, sold to pilgrims who were
instructed how to resurrect it."

Here was caught the second and only other animal on the trip. It was
somewhat smaller than Sunny, and the latter danced about the dead
animal, as the "boys" brought it in.

"And what is this big-eared fellow?" asked George.

John laughed as he recognized the apt description. "It is a kind of
Australian kangaroo. It inhabits trees, but is very clumsy in appearance
and in action. It is a kind of sloth, or wombat."

[Illustration: _Fig. 13. The Koala._]

"Isn't that a dandy fur?"

"The fur is not so valuable as its skin. There is nothing to compare
with the softness of the hide when tanned. It feels like the finest
velvet, and is very strong and durable."

They were now ascending a series of hills, each more difficult than the
last, and the ground became extremely rough and broken. There was a lone
path, in many places nearly obliterated. It was the uninviting road to
the land of sorrow.

The Chief's son tried to be in the company of the boys at all times, and
while he could not understand their chatter, Sutoto was a willing
interpreter. He enjoyed the jolly freedom of the two chums, and their
uniform good nature.

George and Harry were ever on the alert to make him feel at ease and so
they talked with him, and told of the things which John explained, and
it was plainly seen that he marveled at things which were described.

Referring to the exiled people, George asked: "Do those people never
return after they are once condemned?"

"They are never permitted to come back."

"Do they stay there of their own free will?"

"No; I am told that they long to be at home again."

"Well, what would you do if they tried to come back?"

"We would drive them away. One time they tried to come back, all of
them, and we had to kill some of them," and he said it in a tone of
regret.

"Don't you believe in killing?"

He looked at George for a moment, and then looked up into Sutoto's eyes,
as he said: "No; it would do no good. Would that be the right way?" he
asked with a sort of innocence that brought a blush to George's cheeks.

"No; we do not believe in killing, except when we must to protect
ourselves."

"But do you have to make such wonderful things as those (pointing to
the guns) to protect yourselves?"

John threw back his head and tried to prevent a loud laugh, at this
perfectly obvious question, while he looked at the boys to see what sort
of an answer would be given.

George was non-plussed for a minute. John had no business to disconcert
him in that way. He turned and expected Harry to answer, but it seemed
as though he had imperfectly understood it. There was no way out of it,
and George tried to get his body into a proper position to answer it
with dignity.

"Well, you see, the guns were not made for the purpose of killing
people, but for sporting purposes."

"Do you have many wild animals in your country?" he asked naïvely.

"Not many now."

John laughed a little so as not to be too undignified, and George saw
the humor of the situation. He did not want to pursue the subject any
further, and John graciously turned the conversation by announcing the
discovery of the Upas tree.

"I didn't know the Upas tree was of such immense size," said Harry. "Is
it really true that it kills everything that comes near it?"

"No, that is greatly exaggerated. The only time when it gives forth any
harmful exudations, is when it is cut down, or when the bark is torn
away, or it is wounded in such a way that the sap comes into contact
with the body."

The illustration shows a flowering branch of the tree, and gives an idea
of the silk-like leaves.

[Illustration: _Fig. 14. The Flower of the Upas Tree._]

They were still going upwardly. On both sides, to the east and to the
west could be seen the rolling sea. Ahead was the mountain, if such it
might be called. Rocks began to appear everywhere. John stopped long at
some of those dark gray walls, and chipped off many specimens.

There were now fewer birds and animals, except very small species, such
as squirrels, and a variety of weasel, quick in its movements and
reddish in color.

"This begins to look promising," remarked John, as he crawled around the
ledges.

"Do you think we shall find any caves here?" asked George.

"I shall be very much surprised if we do not," he answered.

"Isn't it singular that the natives never knew about them, if there are
any here?"

"No; I do not think that is strange; they do not believe in the witch
doctors, and they have no Krishnos here, so that the caves are of no
value to them."

"But do you find much that is valuable in the way of ores?"

"The hills here are full of the most valuable minerals. The little
prospecting I have done is sufficient to satisfy me on that point. I am
trying to make a fair estimate so I can give an accurate report when we
return."

It was late in the afternoon when they reached the summit of the
mountain which they had viewed from the south. It was green to the very
summit, and from the elevation where they stood they could see a long
and narrow stretch to the north, the distance in that direction being
much farther than they had traveled from the little bight of land on the
south.

"It does look inviting in that part of the island," said Harry. "Were
you ever there, in the bad place?" asked Harry as the Chief's son came
up.

"No; but I have heard much about it."

One of the natives who heard the conversation said: "It is a beautiful
place."

"Have you ever been there?" he was asked.

"I was a guard on two occasions when we took prisoners there," he
answered.

"Tell us about it," said George.

"I have never been in the village, but within an hour's march of it. The
Chief warned us never to go into the place itself."

Aside from the village the place which interested John and the boys most
was the mountain on which they were now standing. This must be explored.
It was now late in the afternoon, and at John's suggestion they
encamped, and only short excursions were made by the boys in the quest
for something new.

It was a delightful night. The elevation gave them the advantage of a
beautiful breeze, and the odors wafted to them, from some unknown
source, on the mild trade wind from the north, was almost like a
narcotic, so soothing and restful.

"Did you ever visit a more delightful spot?" asked Harry, as he inhaled
the beautiful perfume.

"It does not seem to me that the criminal colony is in a very bad place,
if this is any indication of it. Isn't that way of dealing with crime a
strange thing?" remarked George.

"Why so?" asked John. "Is it anything peculiar for the wrongdoers to be
banished from a community?"

"No; but it seems wrong to condemn the innocent women and children. Why
should they be punished along with the guilty?"

"Probably, in the majority of cases, the women and children would prefer
to accompany their husband and father. That does not seem to be so
cruel, when it is considered that they are left free to live as much so
as in their own community."

"That is what I cannot understand. What is the use of sending them away,
if they are not locked up?"

"Do you not know that among the ancients, banishment from a country was
the greatest punishment; greater even than death, in the opinion of
many; and there are many cases where suicide was preferable. The odium
of banishment was so great in those days that only the strongest and the
greatest of men could live it down."

"It makes me feel, when I smell this delightful perfume, that the home
of the bad people over there must be a beautiful place," said George.

"To give such an opinion, just because of the fragrance that comes from
the north is proper for a sentimentalist," said John, as he laughed.

"Well, that is a pretty big name to give, and I suppose it means having
some notion that hasn't any sense in it, but just theory?"

"That is a fairly close description, but I didn't mean it in that way."

The boys never felt resentful at anything that John might say, as they
knew and appreciated his noble character and disposition too well not to
understand that his remarks were never born of malice.

After a restful night preparations were made for a complete survey of
the mountain, if it might be so dignified. Its greatest altitude did not
exceed eight or nine hundred feet, and the width of the island at this
point did not exceed two miles. It was quite rugged toward the east, but
on the western side of the island the descent was sloping, and offered
easy examination.

The natives were instructed what to do, and were told that they should
particularly hunt for caves, or great holes, or entrances into the
hills. Four search parties were thus organized, John being at the head
of one, and George, Harry and Sutoto, each being a leader in the others.

Sutoto was most competent for work of this kind, as he had accompanied
the boys on many expeditions, and was anxious to be of service in the
quest.

John took a direction to the northeast, and Sutoto to the southeast,
thus leaving Harry and George with their parties to explore the region
to the west, and northwest.

As they were separating George slyly remarked: "John must have had some
particular reason for taking the direction he did."

Harry smiled. "I hope we shall find the first caves."

Before separating John told them that he was desirous of finding a
cavern which had certain peculiar markings therein, and the description
showed it to be Cross-shaped. This must not be forgotten.

They entered into the undertaking with the greatest enthusiasm.

The boys simply danced, as they went down the hill, so great was the joy
and the freedom of that beautiful spot. What a wonderful sensation is
produced by beautiful odors. It is like a thought which transports you.
On the other hand, when the odors are disagreeable how it depresses and
disgusts.

A great French physician has said that in his observations, the real
happy people are those who delight in beautiful odors; and while it is
not true that criminals are devoid of the elevating influence of
delightful perfumes, still, they are less influenced thereby.

In a number of tests made some years ago, a curious fact was observed:
Sweet odors were allowed to Teach sleeping patients, which, when they
did excite dreams, made them feel that they were living in a world of
bliss, and surrounded by all the luxuries of life. On the other hand,
when exposed to evil smelling odors, they dreamed of miseries, and of
trouble and disgrace.

It was understood that the different expeditions were to report at the
camp at midday, and that in the event of any accident, or other mishap,
the firing of the guns would be sufficient warning to the party at the
camp and to those who were searching.

George had with him two of his own "boys," and two of the natives, and
Harry was also accompanied by several of his particular favorites.
Harry, with his party, was the energetic one, as he was exceedingly wiry
and a good walker. He did not intend to permit the others to encroach on
any of his territory.

Not a vestige of anything was found which even so much as pointed to a
cave or to the sign of human occupancy in that section. George, on the
other hand, was more fortunate. In his area the shelving rocks were
more numerous, and he also knew that the rocks were limestone, and that
caves were more likely to exist in limestone formation than in trap
rock, or either in granite or sandstone formations.

He was, therefore, fully prepared, when, in the early part of his
investigation, to find, what appeared to be entrances, but in all cases
they were blind leads,--that is they led in for short distances only,
many of them being mere cleavages of the rocks.

The real cave is the one where the limestone is eaten out by the erosive
action of the water attacking the calcium of the rock. Furthermore, he
felt that he must go down nearer sea level to be assured of success, and
he acted on that impulse.


CHAPTER XIV

A WHITE PARALYTIC IN THE CONVICT COLONY


It would be useless to recount the experiences of all of the parties.
They had four hours of search before them. This would, at least, give
some idea as to the nature of the mountain, and enable John to decide
whether it would be wise to give that project further consideration.

At midday the parties began to appear, first Harry, then Sutoto,
followed by John, and finally George. The latter was the only one who
was smiling. The three early parties had no news to impart.

"What have you found?" were the hailing words of George, as he
approached.

"Nothing! nothing!" were the answers.

"It takes me to bring home the goods," he remarked, and Harry laughed in
derision.

"No; but I mean it," he continued. "I have captured a modern, good-sized
cave, and it is now awaiting to be explored."

John could not believe the tale. "You are to be congratulated. Good
boy!" Needless to add, George was the happiest person in that camp.

"Let us go down to see it at once," said George in his eagerness. "It
is quite a distance, as it is not more than five hundred feet from the
seashore."

"Luncheon first," remarked John, and no one interposed an objection, as
the trip had sharpened the appetites of all.

The meal over little time was lost in making a start, and George led the
way with his boys. Truly enough, there was the open mouth, and it was
cave-like. Now for the mysteries within. "We went in only about a
hundred feet, so as to be sure we weren't fooled," said George, in
reference to his discovery.

The lamps were then prepared, and all the preparations made, the boys
being veterans in this sort of work, and John was ahead, as was
generally the custom in these expeditions.

"This is as far as we went," said George. Beyond was still a wall which
glistened from the streaming lights.

Gradually the walls came closer together; the track was a narrow one; so
they had to march in single file. John called a halt. "I am afraid this
is a blind hole," he said, but George could not believe it, so the side
walls were searched, for indications of some opening.

"This is the end of the cave. Note the side walls. If they should be
pressed against each other they would fit exactly, showing that it is an
opening caused by a fissure and not by erosion."

Harry could not help but laugh. All this time lost on a blind lead, and
the laugh was on George.

Harry could not help jesting him. "If you are a good tribe finder it is
no sign that caves are in your line."

John enjoyed the laugh on George, but the latter retorted: "I think the
joke is on you, for traveling all this distance to see a hole in the
ground."

There was not the sign of a cave on the island, aside from the one
discovered (?) by George, so the party remained that night at the
mountain top, and in the morning descended the hill, and slowly marched
to the north. Before noon they entered a beautiful stretch of woodland,
with luxurious grass growing all around in profusion.

"This is as far as the guards have been permitted to go," said one of
the natives, who had volunteered the information about the place the day
before.

Thus far not a human being was visible. An hour's march would bring them
to the village of the criminals, and the boys began to examine their
weapons, and to look apprehensive.

The wild fruits of the tropics were now seen in abundance in every
direction. Bananas, the Bread Fruit, Cocoa, and Date Palm, on every
hand.

The most astonishing thing, however, was the profusion of flowers, of
every variety, seemingly, and the air was scented as with one vast
bouquet.

Sutoto stopped and pointed ahead: "They are in the trees gathering
fruit." The party halted, and looked, and then proceeded.

They were, undoubtedly, the first of the criminals. A half mile beyond,
and in a plain road, were several of the inhabitants. Those in the
trees, two men and a boy, descended, and, together with two women,
walked across the field, to witness the newly-arrived criminals, as they
supposed.

They were astounded at the appearance of the party. The Chief's son
addressed the men, and told them who they were, and their mission. As
this was the first time that such a visit had ever been made, the man
instructed the boy to run to the village and inform the people, and he
scurried away.

Meantime the party moved on, and, as they proceeded, more and more of
the inhabitants were seen. To the right were people in the fields,
engaged in some sort of work there. This was singular. Nothing of that
kind was seen in the village where Beralsee was chief.

"What is the name of this town where the convicts live?" asked Harry.

"Hutoton," replied Calmo.

"And what is the name of your town?"

"Sasite."

"Rather queer names, I should say," exclaimed Harry.

John laughed and glanced at Harry, as he said: "I wonder how _Unity_,
and _Pioneer_, and _Mayfield_, and the queer English names sound to
them!"

"Oh, I suppose they have some good reason for having such names."

"Yes; for the same reason that we apply names to certain things. See
what a wonderful expression there is in the word 'Harsh,' and how
expressive it is compared with its opposite 'soft.' How the first word
grates, and the second comes out so smoothly. Then, compare 'swift' and
'slow'; or 'sweet' and 'sour.' Ugh! I can almost taste the last word."

John roared, as he saw the serious aspect of Harry's face. But other
sights now attracted their attention. A group of men and women appeared.
How strange the natives looked. They were well dressed, that is, judged
from the people in Sasite, and they were people of good deportment, if
those of the inhabitants that accompanied them were fair specimens.

At the head of the villagers was a man of striking appearance, tall,
with white hair, such as you would call distinguished, because he
differed from most around him. The women were well clad, and the
children plump and vigorous in their actions.

Something must be wrong! These people were not criminals! The old man
came forward, and gave a respectful bow. He looked at John and said a
few words. Calmo responded, his words when translated being: "These are
friends of my father, and they have come to visit you."

At this the man gave another bow, and John went up and held out his
hand, which the man took in a simple and unaffected manner.

"We welcome you to our village," was his reply.

The boys looked at each other and relaxed their hold on the guns. Was
this, after all, the wicked place that had been described to them? As
they marched down to the village they were enchanted at the flowers
which greeted them on all sides.

Here and there were garden spots, carefully kept, and when the first
huts appeared beyond the grove, the boys simply gasped, and could hardly
believe their senses. Hundreds of Magnolia trees were in bloom; and the
gentle breeze blowing in from the sea, moderated the rays of the sun,
and wafted the odor of the plants many miles inland.

The homes were not rudely built, and, although they were on the same
general plan of those in Sasite, they had every appearance of comfort.

The head man of the village led them to a more pretentious home,
probably his own dwelling. This was soon confirmed, as they were invited
to enter and repose themselves on slightly elevated couches, so much
like Chief Beralsee's court.

Within a short time there was a great commotion in the village. The boys
looked around startled, and the old man noticed it, for he turned to
Calmo, and said: "The villagers are preparing a feast for you. Let them
go out and mingle with the people."

The boys were happy at this opportunity of satisfying their curiosity.
Sutoto accompanied them, and with Calmo, they placed themselves under
the guidance of a young man named Anasa, who, Calmo said, was the son of
the old man.

They passed down the main street, for there was some semblance of order
in the location of the huts. Around the huts were flowers, just as they
had seen on the path leading from the mountain, and here and there
patches of growing vegetables. After passing one rather attractive
looking hut, Anasa paused for a moment, and then turned back, motioning
for them to follow. He entered, and the boys saw a villager, and two
women within.

Anasa pointed to the figure of a man seated in a chair, and upon seeing
it both boys started back in amazement.

"That is a white man," cried Harry.

Anasa nodded, his manner indicating that he felt sure that the boys
would recognize him as belonging to their race. George went up to him,
and held out his hand. In response the man gave a listless look, and
slowly raised the left hand, which was grasped by George, who said: "I
am glad to see you. Who are you? We are white, the same as you are."

The man made no sign, and his arm dropped to his side as George relaxed
his grasp. Harry touched George on the shoulder, as he said: "There is
something the matter with him. Ask Anasa about him."

Calmo put the question, and this was the reply: "We found the poor
fellow on the beach many moons ago. We brought him here, and tried to
heal him, but he does not speak, and one side of him has no life."

The man made no show of recognition, and the only motion observable was
a twitching jerk of the left arm, and a slightly swaying motion of the
head.

"John must know about this," said George.

"By all means," was the reply.

Calmo was told about the wonderful man John, and that he should be
called at once, so one of the accompanying natives was instructed to
bring John, and he speeded away on the errand.

George stood outside of the hut when John came up. "This is a remarkable
thing. Did they tell you about it?"

"No."

"There is a white man here."

"Where?" asked John in astonishment.

"In the hut, and he is paralyzed and cannot speak."

John did not wait for more, and as he went the head man followed him in.
Then they told him the story, and John stood there and gazed at the man.
To the boys who were by John's side he remarked: "I do not know him. I
do not think I ever saw him before. How long has he been in this
condition?" The old man responded: "Ever since we picked him up on the
shore, about _tuta romama_ ago."

"And how long ago was that?"

George informed him that Calmo received the information that it was over
two years prior to that time, and as John received this information he
passed his hand over his head, and, turning to Harry, said: "We shall,
probably, get at the bottom of another mystery."

"What is it? Why do you think so?" asked George in astonishment.

"Not now; not now!" answered John, wishing to defer discussion until
they were out of the stricken man's hearing.

The latter, however, did not in the least appreciate who were before
him. He was not at all perturbed by his visitors, nor when John quietly
passed his hand along the poor man's arm and body to satisfy himself of
the extent of the paralytic stroke.

He winced but slightly when the examination of the left side was made,
otherwise there was no sign of comprehension on his part.

"This is a remarkable thing," said John, as they were returning to the
old man's dwelling.

"Why, is it a peculiar case?"

"The ailment itself is not remarkable; but there is something which
passes my comprehension."

"What is it!" asked the boys in, unison.

"These people are savages."

"Yes; answered the boys."

"And they are criminals," he said as he stopped and looked at the boys,
with an earnestness that surprised them.

It did not take more words to make them understand what John meant.
These people had taken this shipwrecked man, and tenderly cared for him
during a period of more than two years. This was done without hope of
reward. John learned later on that the natives of the town had made
provision for the shipwrecked man and had compensated the people at
whose home he was then living.

After the evening meal, John walked around the village, observing the
people, and he found happiness everywhere. Everything seemed to be
arranged according to a system. The old man was not a chief, but was
looked upon as their advisor and guide; but he was a criminal, as were
all the others in that town.

That evening when all were present John had the first opportunity to
talk with the venerable chief of the town.

"How long have you been here?" he was asked.

He was silent for a moment and then answered: "Thirty years."

It must be understood that the questions and answers had to be
translated and as the natives knew nothing about the division of time in
months or years it was necessary to convert the time which was given by
nature into terms of years and months.

Thus, they understood what a day meant, and they could calculate time,
as all savages do, by the phases of the moon, and in many cases they
were able to indicate time by the position of the sun, in which they
recognized three phases only, namely, when the sun was directly above
them, and when it reached the extreme northern and southern points.

"Why were you sent here?"

"Because I committed a crime."

John was almost startled at the frankness of the confession, which the
old man made without the least perceptible show of feeling or shame.

"Would you like to go back again?"

"Go back where?"

"To your home."

He looked bewildered for a moment, and then answered: "This is my home."

"But I mean your old home at Sasite."

The old man shook his head vigorously, and answered: "No! no! There is
no place like Hutoton."

"Do you know what 'Hutoton' means?"

"Yes; it means 'the place of death.'"

The boys were startled at the reply. John turned to them, when he saw
their expression, and smiled. The old man, too, smiled.

"Do any of your people want to go back?"

He looked surprised at the question. "Do they want to go back?" he
repeated the query. "No; but you should ask them. I do not know of any
one who wishes to return. We love our Chief too much to wish for such a
thing."

"Do you know what the people in Sasite think of this place?"

"No; not altogether; I am curious to know."

"They believe it is a terrible place, and that the people who are sent
here never have another day of peace or happiness."

"And have they not changed their opinions? I used to think so too, and
we believed it of those who went before us; but we thought they might
have changed their opinions, because we felt that people were growing
better and not worse. It is a long time since they sent us real
criminals, and we thought the Chief's people were growing wiser and
happier."

"When did the last criminals come here?"

"Nearly one year ago."


CHAPTER XV

SAVAGE MARRIAGE CUSTOMS


It was impossible to describe the effect of these revelations on the
boys. It was so different from anything they had been led to expect. It
brought one thing forcibly to their minds; that because these people had
committed some crime, or some wrong against society, they were still
human beings, and were worthy of being treated as men and women.

John related to them that various governments had tried the plan of
sending convicts to some foreign lands, and placing them in situations
where they might work out their own salvation; that all such efforts
were successful, where real opportunities were bestowed.

"The idea is," remarked John, "that they are banished from the society
in which they resided, or in which they were raised, for the purpose of
helping them. The reason for inflicting punishment on criminals has been
to protect society but apparently no efforts have been made to cure the
criminals or to help them to better themselves."

"I heard the Professor say, at one of the trials at Wonder Island, that
some scientists consider crime a disease," said George.

"Exactly; now suppose we treated people suffering from smallpox, or
scarlet fever, or some other like disease, just like we treat
criminals, it would be regarded as brutal. To lock them up, and deprive
them of the pleasures of living, simply to protect society, is wrong."

"But the smallpox and scarlet fever patients are taken away so they will
not give the complaints to others," observed Harry.

"And that is right. I favor that and advocate that same thing with
criminals. But the patients are not deprived of the things they have
been accustomed to, and they are restored, when cured. It is not so with
the poor unfortunate who errs. When he does come back he is hounded and
looked upon as a tainted individual, although he may, in heart, be
better than his accusers."

During that day and the next, the natives and those who accompanied John
associated with each other, and had many conversations. What interested
them was the presence of the unfortunate paralytic who was unable to
speak for himself.

The boys did not believe that he was one of the crew of the school ship
_Investigator_. What connection, if any, did he have with the skeleton
they found the day before? was another of their queries.

On the second day they were taken to the beach where the white man was
found. There, as explained, he was found, with wreckage all about,
during one of the raging monsoons with which the boys were so well
acquainted, but aside from that there was not a vestige to show his name
or where he was from.

All the clothing worn by him originally, and of that there was scarcely
any when found, had been worn threadbare, and he was now dressed in
native garments. The chair in which he was reclining was undoubtedly
from some wrecked ship, and had been in the possession of the villagers
for years.

John spoke to the old man concerning the patient, and advised him that
they would soon call to take him away. They would thus relieve them of
the burden, and endeavor to restore him to health, if it were possible
to do so.

The old man was thankful for the kind words uttered by John, and the
latter assured him that before many moons passed he would return and
show his appreciation for their kindness to a fellow creature.

"But we do not feel that we have done anything which especially merits
praise. He is one like ourselves, who was in distress, and we helped
him."

"Yes; you have done that which is right. We intend to reward you not
that you should be paid for doing what is right, but to show that we
appreciate your noble actions," answered John.

The party, after many wishes and hearty good-byes, filed out of the
village, some of them loath to go.

Calmo was silent. He was not the same as before they marched through the
village. John noticed it, but he wisely refrained from commenting on the
sights they had witnessed. There was cleanliness and order in Hutoton;
and filth and disorder in Sasite. It was impossible to be unconscious
of the difference between the industry in one place, and the utter
shiftlessness in the other.

As it required two days to make the return journey, they were absent
from Sasite nearly seven days, and, according to the calculations, the
_Pioneer_ would be in from Unity within the next two days.

During the intervening time the boys roamed at will through the island,
and on the second day went directly south, so as to scour the sea front
below the village.

In the afternoon, as they were about to return, they saw a sail, George
being the first to catch a glimpse of it. "The _Pioneer_," he cried,
upon which they danced about in sheer joy and started for the village,
which was distant several miles.

They were almost out of breath when they rushed through the village, and
cried out the news. Everybody was expectant; all were eager to see the
vessel come in and Sutoto was the first to reach the landing.

During the visit of the boys on the island, John had a crude dock
constructed, and as the _Pioneer_ was of light draft, this was not a
difficult thing to do, so that the passengers could land from the ship
directly on the solid platform.

The Chief was among the merry villagers. "Who is that man with the white
hair!" he asked of Uraso.

The latter was just as much surprised as his questioner, when he
recognized the Professor, and he informed the Chief of the treat he
would experience in meeting him. "He is the Great Wise man," added
Uraso, "whom everybody loves."

Muro, too, was astounded as the Professor came down. But a still greater
surprise awaited the two chiefs. Muro's wife hailed him, and then
Uraso's wife waved her handkerchief. This was too much for them, and
waving aside all dignity they rushed forward to greet them.

The whole thing had been so admirably arranged, that no one knew of the
affair which had been planned by John. Sutoto joined in the merriment,
but he was too anxious to see Stut to pay much attention to the
greetings.

The visitors discreetly refrained from saying a word to Sutoto,
concerning the coming event. Besides the Chief's wives, there were
several other women, of the Tribes in Wonder Island, together with some
white men and their wives, who had been invited at the request of
Blakely.

The latter greeted John with that hearty expression so characteristic of
the true commercial man, and he was not with John a minute before he was
plying all sorts of questions about the resources of the island, the
kind and number of inhabitants the nature of the soil, and the
possibilities of mineral development.

The Professor came down and was introduced to the Chief by Uraso.

The great burly chief was fascinated. He gazed on the Professor and
almost gasped, then turning to Uraso he said: "Ah! I know why he is a
wise man."

To Uraso this remark was indeed a puzzle; to think that the Chief had
discovered the secret of the wisdom in the Professor! He was quick to
ask why he knew it.

"Because he has double eyes."

Uraso laughed, and turned to the Professor, to whom he related the
incident. Instantly the Professor removed the glasses, and courteously
handed them to the Chief, and Uraso adjusted them to the Chief's eyes.

He glanced around, through the lens, and forced out one expression of
delight after the other. He was oblivious of everything else. He forgot
that there were dozens of the visitors ready in line to be introduced to
him; but all enjoyed the great pleasure he experienced in the new sight.

But suddenly he stopped in his enthusiasm, and with an apology took off
the glasses and held them up, in the act of handing them back. The
Professor returned them, and took another pair from his pocket which he
put on.

It was not likely that the Chief could have received a more acceptable
present, as his eyesight was failing, and the glasses seemed like the
opening of a new world to him. Later on the Professor provided a pair of
glasses better adapted to his sight.

The Chief then became concerned about the comfort of his guests, so
Uraso said: "Do not feel worried about the visitors. They will sleep on
the vessel where they have comfortable rooms."

The Chief could hardly believe the statements, as he muttered: "This is,
indeed, wonderful."

It would require pages to record the incidents that came to his
attention about the wonders of these new people. The surprising thing
was, that Uraso, and the natives of Wonder Island were dressed like the
white people and acted like them, and yet he was told that all that
wonderful change had come about in a little over two years' time.

Muro's wife was quickly made acquainted with the Chief's wife, and the
day following she had a consultation with her. Mida, who was Muro's
wife, said: "I do not know whether or not you know of Sutoto's affection
for Cinda, but we learned about it, and have come over to attend the
ceremony."

Linnea, the Chief's wife, smiled as Mida spoke to her. "Yes, I know of
it, but the Chief has not yet been told."

It seems that they had very curious and at the same time different
customs among the various tribes, and Mida's object was to learn what
their etiquette called for as to betrothals. Among some of the Wonder
Island tribes, the Chief was the only one who has the right to consent
to the marriage of the females, although the males could go to other
tribes and secure wives without the consent of the Chief.

In other tribes the women, the mothers, are the sole judges, and it is
not infrequent for the parents of the bride to demand a payment,
dependent on the rank or the riches of the father.

Then the question of ceremonies is always an important one. It would be
sacrilegious to perform the rite except in exact accordance with the
prescribed rules. Sometimes those rules are so extremely different to
those of another tribe that intermarriage between members of such tribes
is impossible.

Thus, a Tuolo could never marry a Saboro, nor could an Illya warrior
take an Osaga for a bride. On all these points the women were adepts. It
is more than likely, however, that Cinda and Sutoto had all that matter
fully understood between them.

"Did Stut tell you about Sutoto?" asked George.

Harry laughed. "No; but I have a good one to tell you. What did he say?"

"Well, you know he hired Stut to get him a wedding outfit, and a
present?"

"Yes."

"When the people left the vessel Sutoto sneaked back, and hunted up
Stut. Of course Stut had the package all done up, and he is now taking
it over to his hut."

"I have something better than that. Sutoto is going to be married
to-night."

"How do you know?"

"Cinda told one of her girl friends, and it frightened her so that she
told Uraso."

"Why that would spoil all the plans."

"So it would, but Uraso told his sister."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Of course I am; I was there."

"What did she say?"

"She simply said 'I will take care of that.'"

"Of course she will; she's a brick."


CHAPTER XVI

SUTOTO AND CINDA'S MARRIAGE; AND THE SURPRISE


Mida had learned the situation. Their customs as to marriages closely
resembled that of the Saboros. In that tribe the Chief was the sole
authority. To marry without his consent meant exile for the disobedient
warrior, and for the bride as well.

Sutoto was a member of the Berees, and there the mother was the
matchmaker. She prescribed all the requirements. The first thing that
Mida did was to insist that the Chief should be informed of the desires
of the young people.

To the delight of the two women he consented to the match, and he was
then told that the people had come over from Wonder Island to take part
in the ceremony. But when he was told that they intended to marry that
night, by stealth, his brow was clouded.

His law was that no one should marry without his consent, and he could
not believe that Cinda could thus attempt to take the matter into her
own hand. It was hard to think that his own child should be the first to
break his law.

The women pleaded with him, and then Mida confided her plan to him. The
tribe's marriage ceremony was a very curious one. First, there must be a
gift of fruit, then of fowl, and next of game. This must be brought to
the door of the bride by the groom blindfolded.

He must remain blindfolded while she prepares them for the table. Not a
word must be spoken, or they must separate forever. A part of the
ceremony requires that the invited guests are to resort to every sort of
device to make them speak. The slightest sound by either is a sign that
they will quarrel, and means the end of the affair.

If they pass this test, the second comes when the bridegroom's eyes are
uncovered. They are then to converse with each other, and they must not
for a moment relax the talk. Neither has any knowledge of the time that
this test must continue. There must be no faltering, or hesitancy.

Mida conferred with John and the boys, as she told of these necessary
requirements, and the boys laughed as they listened.

"What is the object of all that?" inquired George.

John was chuckling at the idea, but it stirred up a reminiscence. "That
is a custom, in some of its features, that I learned about some tribes
in central Africa. I can see the object of that rite. The taking of the
gifts blindfolded signifies that he enters the marriage state blindly,
and that he must do so in silence, and without asking any questions."

"Of course, then, there is not any likelihood of them quarreling," said
Harry.

"That is what the Chief's wife said," replied Mida.

"But what does all the talking mean?"

[Illustration: "_The rites were progressing very satisfactorily_"
                                                    [See p. 196]]

"That is perfectly obvious. To show they can perfectly agree, even
though they do talk."

"But that is all before the real ceremony itself," said George. "How do
they get married? That is the main thing."

"Why," said Mida, "that is part of the marrying."

"But they haven't promised anything. Marrying is promising."

This occasioned another roar of merriment. "Yes; marriage is a contract
under our law, but not so with these people. The only question with them
is whether they are suited to each other."

"But suppose they should not want to marry each other, or one of them
should object," interposed Harry.

"Ah! don't you see there is where the prospective bride or groom, in
that case has a chance. If, in the first test he should speak, or in the
last trial she should fail to keep up the conversation, then it would be
all off."

Mida confided her plans to the Chief and his wife. They were assured
that Cinda would not think of overriding the well-known laws as to the
gifts, and the two tests, and so it was arranged that Sutoto should be
permitted to bring his offerings, which he would no doubt do, by
stealth, while the Chief and all the visitors were to partake of the
banquet on board of the vessel that evening.

Sutoto and Cinda knew of the arrangements for the banquet, and that
appeared to be a suitable occasion for them. When Sutoto appeared with
the gifts he and Cinda were to be arrested by the Chief's warriors and
brought aboard the vessel, charged with violating the law of the Chief
in not first obtaining his permission.

The boys remained ashore, and carefully watched the proceedings. How
Sutoto got the presents the boys did not know, but they had a suspicion
that Cinda had a hand in it. The boys laughed as they saw what a
ridiculously short distance he had to go in a blindfolded state.

Securely hidden in what was George's chamber, where he passed the first
night of his captivity, they saw Sutoto with the offerings. Cinda took
them, in silence, and disappeared, only to return instantly with the
smoking viands.

"I call that quick work," said Harry.

"Yes, that's swift cooking," suggested George.

They ate in silence. "I wonder where the bridesmaid is who intends to
make them talk?"

"Why don't you see her standing behind Cinda?"

"You mean the servant?"

"Of course."

This was almost too amusing for the boys. The rites were progressing
very satisfactorily. Then Cinda removed the bandage, and an ineffable
smile stole over Sutoto's features.

They commenced to talk. The maid said a few words, but the lovers paid
no attention. The ceremony was going along just as-a perfect one should,
when four stalwart warriors rushed in and seized Sutoto. Cinda knew who
they were, and she sprang at them, as two seized her also.

One of them addressed a word to Sutoto, and then spoke to Cinda, and
without further ceremony they were taken out through the open portal,
and hurried to the ship.

The boys followed at a respectful distance, and when the pair had
reached the deck the boys scrambled up, and hurriedly made their way to
the large room, or cabin, where the Chief and the visitors were
assembled, and which was brilliantly lighted for the occasion.

The criminals were brought before the Chief, who arose, and with a
severe countenance began to upbraid Sutoto for his crime. Cinda
meanwhile glanced around at the brilliant sight. She saw nothing to
excite fear. Both were free from the warriors and stood there side by
side, a handsome couple, as every one admitted.

Sutoto saw the boys. Just like boys are apt to be on such an occasion,
they could not repress their laughter, although it was a silent
exhibition of mirth. Then Sutoto knew, and so did Cinda, for she was not
too much abashed to look up at Sutoto, while she leaned over and rested
her head against him, and laid her hand on his arm.

Then the boys stopped laughing. There was nothing laughable about it
now. It seemed too beautiful to laugh at, and when the great Chief went
over, and rubbed his nose against Sutoto's every one knew that the
compact was sealed.

I wish it were possible to describe the delight shown in the eyes of the
bride and groom when they were led to the table containing the wedding
gifts that came to them from Wonder Island.

"Oh! I am so sorry!" said Harry.

"Sorry for what? Yes, yes, I know now. We have nothing to give Sutoto,
as our presents." And George said it with genuine grief.

Most of the articles exhibited were for the use of the bride, and
designed for the home, of the new couple; but there was a fine array of
the little trinkets which so delight the feminine heart.

The party sat down to the feast, with Sutoto and Cinda at one end of the
table, while Mida presided at the other, the Chief being at her right,
and his wife at her left.

For the first time in their lives they were to eat their food with
knives and forks. They were adepts with the sharpened stick, which
George had noted, and there was amusement at the many incidents that the
new order brought forth.

"I remember," said George, "that the Professor told us the Italians,
about the year 1700, were the first to use forks."

"Yes," replied John. "As late as the year 1800 the English did not use
the fork, but the knife, for conveying food to the mouth; but the
new-fangled idea, when once introduced, became universal, soon after
that time; and it was then the custom for travelers to carry their own
knives and forks when traveling."

The Professor said, addressing the Chief: "I am surprised that you use a
fork at the table. While we do so universally, it was not originally our
custom."

"I can remember," replied the Chief, "when it was not the habit to use
any implement, but all were required to take food from the same dish
with the hands. But at that time food was not served hot, but allowed to
cool. But we found that the eating of hot articles became a custom, and
then we had to use the pointed forks."

"I am curious to know what gives the roast such a beautiful flavor!"
asked the Chief's wife. "I am told that you do not use leaves for
flavoring."

"No," said Mida. "We now use spices, and the flavor is made more
distinct by adding salt."

"What kinds of spices are used?"

"For meats, principally pepper, of which I have no doubt you have plenty
on your island."

Of course, there was coffee, which grew in abundance in Wonder Island,
and numerous trees of which had been discovered by the boys of the
Chief's island. When this was brought out, and the natives first tasted
it, there was some doubt on their part as to its food value.

Added interest was given to it when the Chief was induced to try it with
a bountiful supply of cream and sugar. Then these articles attracted
their attention.

"Is this a fruit?" he asked as a lump of sugar was handed him.

"No, it is made from cane, or from some vegetables."

"Made from vegetables? How can it be made from them? There is part of
the flavor of fruit, but I cannot taste any vegetables in it."

Then the Professor explained that all fruit, as well as vegetables, had
the same taste, and that they took out only that part and left the
other.

"But what is this white liquid which you use in the new drink?"

"It is called 'cream,' and the cream is made from milk?"

"And what is milk made of?"

"It is taken from cows, a large animal, that people raise for that
purpose."

As there was nothing on the island that was as large as a cow, or that
resembled it in any manner, the Chief's curiosity was unbounded.

"I would like to see the animal from which this was obtained."

"But we have no animal with us."

"Then it never spoils?"

"Oh, yes, it will quickly grow sour and unpleasant if allowed to remain
in a warm place."

He looked around in bewilderment, and the Professor seeing his
embarrassment, continued: "In the ship we have a way to prevent the
cream and the milk, as well, from spoiling. We will show you that."

Thus one article after the other called for some comment, and
explanation. To the natives from Wonder Island this meal was an object
lesson of only a few of the many things which they had learned from the
white people.

But Sutoto and his bride could not be forgotten. When the meal was
finished, the Professor arose, and said: "I have some news to impart to
you. When the white people first came to Wonder Island, they found
Uraso, and Muro, and they were the first to come to our aid against
powerful tribes."

"One of their neighbors had at its head a wise Chief, Suros, known and
respected by friend and foe alike, and he readily adopted the ideas of
the white men, and offered his tribe to save us from destruction at the
hands of those who were unfriendly."

"Sutoto was the nephew of the wise Chief Suros, and I have come to tell
you that he is dead, and that we have been mourning for him."

Every one who glanced at Sutoto, saw that it greatly affected him. This
address was translated to the Chief, by Uraso, as the Professor
proceeded, the latter speaking it in such measured sentences, that it
could be quickly grasped by the interpreter.

"We have all been sad, since his death, and we shall erect a suitable
monument to his memory on our return."

The Chief looked at the Professor, and the latter instantly divined that
he wanted some enlightenment.

"What does the white Chief mean by that?"

"It is the custom of the white man to put up something that all the
people may look at, for years and years afterwards, so as to remind them
that he has lived, and to tell the people what good he has done."

"And why should the people do that?"

"So as to teach people the example, and try to make them be good as he
was."

"Do your people need to have such examples to make them do good?"

"That may not be necessary," replied the Professor, as he vainly tried
to hide the smile that was trying to manifest itself.

"But do you not find it necessary to set the people a good example?"
asked the Professor.

For a moment he looked around at the company in bewilderment, and he
slowly replied: "No, I do not think it would do any good. If the people
are bad, and they want to be bad, it will do them no good to tell them
that I have always tried to do right."

There was a respectful silence, at this avowal, and the Professor
continued: "There are many who think as you do, and we had one great
teacher, called Confucius, who said: 'Do good not for the hope of
reward, but because it is right.' Then we have also a precept which,
interpreted, means: that happiness is in the heart."

"I do not know what that means," he replied.

"It means that the desire and the wish must come from within, and not
from without." And the savage nodded an assent.

"But," continued the Professor, "I have some news to impart, that makes
us all happy again. It is something that pertains to Sutoto, and I know
you will all join in wishing him all happiness in the good fortune which
Wonder Island brings to him, while this island is vying with us to make
him happy."

What was this happy thing that the Professor portended? There was
intense eagerness in the eyes of all who had left Wonder Island when the
_Pioneer_ sailed away, three weeks before.

"I want to present to you Sutoto, the new Chief of the Berees." The
Professor could get no further. George and Harry were wild with
excitement, and they bounded over to him and actually hugged him. Poor
Cinda did not for the moment know what all this excitement meant.

She supposed that this was the white man's part of the ceremony, and
quietly submitted. But she was quickly informed, and as she glanced at
her father and mother, and the people came by and affectionately greeted
them, she was so happy that tears actually flowed.

Then John came forward with a large box, which he carefully opened, and
drew forth two packages, one of which he unwrapped, while Mida took the
strings from the other.

"We want to present you these tokens, the presents of George and Harry.
You are to wear these as an emblem of your authority." And George and
Mida placed the most beautiful crown shaped hats on the heads of the
couple.

"Is this part of the ceremony too?" asked Cinda, as she slyly glanced at
Sutoto.

It is impossible to say who were the most surprised people, the boys or
Sutoto, since these presents had been prepared without their knowledge,
and it atoned in a way for their neglect in not thinking of the gifts
before.

But there were also other agreeable surprises in store for them. The
wives of Uraso and Muro led Cinda to the table on which the presents
were exposed, and also exhibited the many beautiful garments which had
been prepared for her.

Her bewilderment was still greater when she was directed to turn, and
found herself standing in front of a tall oval mirror which the boys had
brought up, under the Professor's directions.

Her image in the mirror startled the bride beyond measure, and she
innocently asked Sutoto whether this was also a part of the wedding
ceremony.

According to the custom of the tribe, the couple had to go through the
ordeal of the tribal dance, and when the boys learned of this they
regretted that provision had not been made for the event. They were now
in for everything which belonged to this unique wedding. The entire
party broke up, and the boys regretted that the affair came to an end so
soon.

As they filed down the steps and marched along the dock to the shore
they noticed that the entire village was shining brightly with hundreds
of the native candles, and everywhere were the well-known lamps, which
the boys knew came from Wonder Island.

"What does all that mean?" asked Harry, as John came up.

"That means the dance, that is the final requirement of the wedding
ceremony."

"But where are the dancers? Are we to take part?"

"Oh, no; no one who has partaken of the feast is permitted to take
part."

"Well, that is certainly queer."

"Not more so than among many white people, where the dancers are those
who have been specially selected for the purpose, and are professionals.
In Biblical times the Jews had dancing as part of the religious
ceremony, and that which took place in the Temple was participated in
only by special ones set apart for that purpose."

No one was in sight, however, and the Chief led the entire company to a
large green space, not far from his dwelling, and after a circle had
been formed, they heard a peculiar humming sound, which seemed to be all
about them, and this increased in intensity, and when at its height, two
dozen or more of the native girls rushed in with a gliding, swaying
motion, and circled around with peculiar grace, continuously giving
forth the weird sounds that have been described.

It was intensely dramatic, and fascinated the boys. They had never seen
anything so remarkable in its character, and for once they were unable
to question its meaning, or ask for information concerning it.

For an hour this continued, until the boys thought the performers would
certainly drop dead with fatigue; then, one after the other disappeared,
and with each disappearance the sound of the humming grew less until but
one remained. In some way, unknown to the boys she made the last circle
around the green, bearing a wreath of leaves, and as she approached
Sutoto and Cinda, wheeled about, and threw it over them.

"That is the final act," said John. "See, they are both within the
wreath, and it signifies that they are bound together forever, even as
the wreath, which has no end."


CHAPTER XVII

HUTOTON; THE PLACE OF DEATH


But the boys knew that they had some important things to attend to. The
pleasures of life have an important part, but they were now engaged in
serious work. The fact that they had accomplished so much was a great
incentive to go on and investigate other things which were still
mysteries, and which might be of great value to them.

The coming of the Professor had been a great pleasure to them. The
developments of the past two weeks were ever in their minds and they
could not repress the curiosity to visit the other islands, if such
could be found.

Now that Sutoto was married they knew he would not be with them for a
time, and they had not talked over the future plans. When, the next day,
they and the Professor and John were together to consider the next step,
it was with joy that the Professor informed them of the purpose of John
to continue the investigations throughout that part of the ocean.

"It seems that your interpretation of Walter's note was entirely wrong,"
said John. "In any event it is certain that we are more than thirty
leagues from Wonder Island, and not in the direction he pointed out."

"Then it is likely that if there is an island which will fit the place,
it must be to the north," said Harry.

"That would be a natural conclusion," he answered. "It has occurred to
me that the natural place for an island would be to the north."

The boys looked at him with surprise. "What makes you think so?" asked
George.

"I judged so, merely from the conformation of this island."

"What is there in the island that makes you think so?"

"You have noticed that the island is very narrow east and west, and very
much longer north and south."

"Yes; but that still does not make it plain to me."

"The island may be like the ridge of a mountain cropping out of the
ocean. For instance, the Andes and the Sierras in the United States run
north and south. Now suppose the ocean should cover the land, those
mountains would form islands which would naturally be north and south of
each other, and the islands themselves would be longer north and south
than east and west."

"I see the idea. But we might find them to the south of this island, as
well."

"Certainly; but as the northern section brings us nearer the supposed
thirty leagues, we should, I think, make the investigation there first."

It was necessary that Sutoto should go back to Wonder Island. His
position as Chief of the Berees made this essential. Furthermore, the
age of the Professor made traveling and the hardships of investigating
on foot a hard task, and besides it was necessary to take back the
visitors.

"I have suggested to the Chief that we shall return, and have invited
him to accompany us, and I am gratified to say that he has accepted. We
shall, therefore, be ready to return within a few days," said the
Professor.

"Have you said anything to him about the contemplated visit to Hutoton?"
asked John.

"No; but I shall do so at once."

"Oh! that will give us an opportunity to take the paralytic back with
us," suggested Harry.

"Yes; that will be the reason for our stopping there."

"Wouldn't it be a good idea to sail to the north, and investigate in
that direction, on our way home?" remarked George.

"That has occurred to me."

The Chief gave careful instructions to his son, Calmo, in view of his
proposed trip, and informed the Professor that he was anxious to
accompany them at the earliest opportunity.

Two days thereafter, the entire party boarded the ship, and the course
was set for the northern part of the island. There the Chief had the
first opportunity to see the dreadful place where the criminals of his
community had been sent.

There was no resentment on the part of the convicts. On the other hand,
there was the most effusive welcome extended, and when the Chief saw the
happiness and prosperity there, which he could not help but contrast
with his own people, he was amazed.

The unfortunate patient was carefully taken to the ship, and during his
removal did not in the least indicate by any sign that he knew what was
going on about him.

John took many stores from the ship, and particularly garments, and
articles of food for the people. All participated in the division, and
the old man was delighted when he saw the gifts, the more so when John
told him that they would soon be visited and other stores provided.

When the rolling motion of the boat was felt by the stricken man, he
showed the first symptoms of consciousness. Sometimes he would look
about him, and try to grasp something. On several occasions the
Professor saw him open his eyes with a sort of questioning look.

But we cannot dwell too long on the result of the patient's progress, at
this time. John felt, as did the Professor, that from that man they
would be able to learn something, if he could ever regain his faculties.
The boys gathered that much from the conversation, so that, for the
present, he must be left to the tender care of the Professor, until
later events are recorded.

From Hutoton the ship sailed directly north, it being understood that if
no land was sighted before evening it would be useless to go farther in
that direction. The _Pioneer_ was a good sailer, and could easily, with
a fair wind, make ten miles an hour, so they would have fully seven
hours' run to test out their theory of land in that direction.

Before five o'clock John, who was constantly on the watch, came to the
Professor and remarked that he believed the haze to the north indicated
the presence of land. This was soon communicated to the boys, and there
was no more idleness from that time on.

John's theory was correct. Slowly certain fixed objects appeared and
some outlines that looked like mountains, and the boys could not repress
their anxiety at the anticipated shore.

"Then we were right, after all," said Harry.

John smiled, as he replied: "I do not know; the calculations have not
yet been made."

"I would like to know how our position can be found out from an
examination of the sun," remarked George.

"That will require a long answer to explain fully but I shall try to
answer it in a simple manner. The sailor takes an observation of the sun
in two directions, namely, north and south, and east and west. You know,
of course, that the sun moves north in the summer and south in the
winter, and that the extreme southern point is in midwinter, Dec. 20:
that in the spring, or March 20, it is directly above the equator, and
in midsummer, or, on June 20, it is as far north as it can go."

"You mean," said George, "that it would be north of the equator."

"As we have the same calendar over the entire world, it is true
everywhere. The difference is, of course, that summer and winter, and
spring and autumn are reversed, north and south of the equator. All
estimates as to locations are made by measuring angles."

[Illustration: _Fig. 15. Getting Angle from Position of the Sun._]

"Then it must be something like surveying?"

"Yes; the same principles are applied. Here is a sketch, which shows the
earth A, and B is the equatorial line. C is the position of the sun on
September 20, or on June 20."

"Why are they in the same position on both days?"

"Yes; the sun crosses the equator September 20, on its way south, and
then it again recrosses the equator coming north six months afterwards.
On either of those days, if a person should stand at D, and look at the
sun, there would be a line E, which projects out from the earth to the
sun, and that is called the equatorial line."

"It is exactly at right angles to F, which passes through the poles. Now
the drawing shows two other positions, namely G and H. These represent
the extreme points of the travel of the sun north and south, or the
positions that the sun occupy on Dec. 20, and June 20 of each year."

"I see," said Harry. "The points G and H are just 23 degrees north and
south of the equator."

"That is correct, and there is another thing which can be learned from
their positions."

"I know what it is."

"What?"

"It gives another line, or angle."

"So now we have two angles, this, and the equatorial line. Then, we know
the exact distance of the sun from the earth, and this gives the first
measurement, and with the angle formed by the line I, taken in
connection with the line E, it is easy to determine just where, or how
far the sun is to the north or to the south, and if you did not, for
instance, know the time of the year, a man could by such a measurement,
tell, by the angle thus formed, the exact date."

"I understand that now," remarked George. "The sailor, in getting the
angle, simply measures that, and if he knows where the sun is on that
day he will then have two angles, one that he knows beforehand, and the
other that he finds out by looking at the sun."

"That is correct. The Nautical Chart gives all that information, so that
it saves a large amount of work in making the calculations."

"That gives the way to determine positions north and south. But how
about east and west?"

"In the same manner exactly so far as the angle measurements are
concerned, but in this case, instead of taking the time, in days or in
months, as in reckoning north and south, we must take time in minutes,
and to do that the entire globe is laid off in minutes and degrees,
which the nautical tables give, and the mariner knows when he obtains a
certain angle just how far east or west he is located by the chart."

"But if he has no chart?"

"Then he must figure out the position for himself, which he can do if he
has what is called Greenwich, or standard time, and has, also the
correct time of the day where his ship is."

Land was beyond; there was no question of that. It rose out of the water
higher than the island they had just left, which the boys had named
_Venture_ Island.

The Chief knew nothing of the land before them. He had told John that
years before he learned that there was a land where there were many bad
people, who killed and ate each other, but he did not know the exact
direction.

The vessel was sailed along the coast, and the field glasses were used
to scan the land. It had the appearance of the other islands which they
now knew. Vegetation was magnificent, and growing everywhere, but there
was not the sign of a habitation anywhere.

After an hour's sail they rounded a point, and beyond was the first
cove, or indentation along the coast. To that John directed the course
of the vessel, and they ran in very close, since he knew from the abrupt
sloping beach that it must be a deep bay.

The men could scarcely man the boat quickly enough. A dozen of them,
together with John, Muro and Uraso, took the first boat, while a second
boat was filled with the warriors who also were accompanied by some of
the natives of Venture island.

The Professor and the others remained on board, while the party made the
preliminary examinations of the immediate neighborhood. John formed two
parties, one under command of Muro, and the other of Uraso. The boys
were with Uraso, while he was with Muro. The object was to find out as
quickly as possible what they would have to meet, and the result would
enable them to determine the future plans.

"It is understood, now," remarked John, "that the two exploring parties
shall take the two courses outlined, Muro and his men, to go directly
east, while Uraso will take a course to the northeast, and proceed in
that direction for three hours, and then the two parties are to turn
toward each other, and mutually report. This will give us an
opportunity to find out something, unless the island is a very large
one, and requires subsequent exploration to ascertain whether it is
inhabited."

John had purposely selected the route to the east, as he saw the high
elevation in that direction, and George laughed, as he said, slyly:
"John is still after the caves," and Harry laughed, as he recalled the
keenness with which John had arranged the trips.

John did make his way to the highest points, and soon learned, from the
observations, that the island was inhabited, but the trip of the boys
was more exciting, so we shall more particularly detail their
adventures.

Before they had gone two hours evidences grew thick and fast that tribes
inhabited the island. Muro, and the different men, were continually
finding traces, none of them, however, which indicated that the people
were near at hand, or that the telltale marks had been recently made.

But now signs began to be apparent to the boys also; the bones of
animals, lying around the spot where a fire had been gave them the first
real sensation. Muro glanced at the boys, and at some bones, and the
action on his part was so peculiar, that George quietly remarked:

"Muro looked so peculiarly at me when I glanced at the bones, over
there, that I wonder what he meant?"

"I saw it too," answered Harry. "Let us have another look at them;" and
acting on the suggestion they went over. Muro followed. They did not
appear to pay any attention to him; but he was quick to join them, and
as he did so he slowly nodded his head.

"Are they human remains?" said Harry, as he turned to Muro,
questioningly.

"Yes; and this is not the first we have seen," he answered. "We may find
them now at any time. I am now sure that there are several tribes here."

"What makes you believe so?"

"Because we have found different kinds of hair, which is usually the
best evidence of the differences in the tribes, as each has its own
peculiarity."

"Savages, and cannibals!" said George reflectively.

"But we must go on. We have still an hour in this direction before we
turn to the south and east," said Harry.

There was more caution now exercised, and the speed was accordingly
reduced, in view of the especial care which they took. In order to
understand what happened the reader should know something of the nature
of the country.

Some places in Wonder Island had the same sort of timber and
undergrowth, and they went through some dense forests, in which vines
and small brush made traveling difficult. They had to cut their way
through some of this vegetation.

The land was not low or flat. If it had been there would have been a
dense jungle. Sometimes they passed through half-grown forests, and
these places were the most difficult to scour, because an enemy might
be within fifty feet, and not be discovered.

It was in just such a place that they received their first surprise; a
shower of arrows, so thick that they instantly knew it could not have
been made by only a dozen or so. Some of the arrows found their marks,
and two of the men sank down, while Muro coolly drew one of the crude
missiles from his arm.

"Drop down!" cried Muro.

There was not a savage in sight; still a number of arrows fell around
them. "Remain quiet, and I will find them?" said Muro, as he crept
forward quietly through the dense grass.

George and Harry followed, although it was evident it was not Muro's
wish. Before they had gone ten feet, Muro turned, and pointed ahead.
"They are there; at least one party. Get ready for a shot."

The savages, noting the quiet in their front, now cautiously peered
through the bush, and the boys saw the most hideous countenances. "We
might give them a round," said Muro, and after carefully aiming, the
guns spoke.

The simultaneous explosion of the three guns, raised pandemonium on all
sides. They were now surrounded by at least a hundred of the savages,
but for some reason the little party of twenty awed them, and instead of
making a charge, they rushed toward the place where the three victims of
the gunshots lay.

[Illustration: "_She ... found herself standing in front of a tall oval
mirror_" [See p. 204]]

Muro's arm was bleeding profusely, and George quickly bound it up,
while the enemy were hesitating. "Do not shoot, unless they rush at us.
I will talk: to them, and try to get an understanding."

Then, in a loud voice Muro called to them, saying they were friends, and
not enemies. There was no response. Thinking that they knew nothing of
the dialect, he tried another, and the only response was the evident
determination of the savages to attack again.

The boys and Muro could plainly hear their chattering, but the latter
said that what they were saying was not intelligible to him, and that
they must now prepare for a fight.

"Get your guns ready, and be prepared for a charge. If they come so
close that you cannot use the guns, then we must be prepared to meet
them with our knives, and we must all stand together, and not become
separated."

Instead of attacking, however, there was silence, after the first
excitement. "They are trying to find, out what struck their comrades
when we fired," remarked Muro.

"Yes; I think it was a big surprise."

"I recall," continued Muro, "when we had our first brush with you that
we could not find the arrow which we supposed was made by your bullet.
That frightened us more than anything else."

There was not the slightest movement on the part of an enemy for a full
half hour. This is the most trying sort of tactics. If you can see the
enemy, or note that he is doing something, there is some relief to the
tension, but where he can neither be seen, nor heard, it tries the
nerves of the strongest man.

Muro knew that this inactivity on the part of the savages had its
purpose. Probably, they intended to remain there until night, and
overwhelm them in the rush. Muro had other plans, however.

"We cannot remain here. We must make the attack. Remain here, and permit
me to feel out their positions, and also to determine what they are
doing." He glided away from them noiselessly, and how he kept the tall
grass and weeds from swaying, the boys could not determine at that time.

It did not take Muro long to see the situation. They were surrounded by
a cordon of savages, and while spying, saw a new lot of them coming up.
The plan was plain enough, and it meant a fight now, or a night defense.

When he returned, he had his plans formed. "They are being reinforced,
and we have, probably, a hundred and fifty, or more, around us. John is,
no doubt, too far away to come to our assistance, and our only hope is
to attack them now, so we might as well take the necessary steps."

While on his investigations Muro had discovered a fallen tree, which was
not more than fifty feet to their left. "We must reach that tree, and by
digging a shallow trench at one side, can easily defend ourselves, as
well as pick them off at our leisure."

Slowly they moved, in crawling attitudes, toward the place indicated.
The tree was not a large one, but it made an admirable breastworks, and
with their knives each man dug out a shallow hole, piling up the earth
beyond the hole, so as to shelter them from the arrows, which they knew
would be rained on them.

This work required a full half hour, and when it was completed, and Muro
had satisfied himself that each one was supplied with sufficient
ammunition, he was ready for the second stage of the game.

"We must attract them, by some form of action. I will take three with
me, and crawl forward, until we can catch glimpse of some of the
watchers. Those we will attack, and then fall back, and do the same on
the other sides."

Muro indicated those who were to follow, and after going only a short
distance the boys heard the shots, then four more. This brought the
sounds of voices from every direction. Muro and his men, during the
excitement, crawled to another portion of the line, and repeated the
manoeuver.

This, for the moment threw them into consternation, but they quickly
rallied, and now it was plain that they were pressing forward to rush
the position occupied by the boys. It was now obvious that the
precaution of making the defensive position, as Muro had suggested, was
their only salvation.


CHAPTER XVIII

DISCOVERY OF A NEW ISLAND, AND A SAVAGE TRIBE


Nothing could describe the uproar that the second volley created in the
ranks of the besiegers. Yell after yell came from the hundreds of
throats that were about them. It was now war to the end. There could be
no compromise.

While the boys had been in many difficult and trying experiences before,
this was the first time that they grew pale, and had strong misgivings.
They knew, however, that the object of the shrieks and yells of savages
were for the purpose of driving terror into the hearts of their foes.

In this respect it might not thus affect them, but when they considered
the overwhelming numbers around them, we cannot blame them for feeling
alarmed.

They were coming forward, and on all sides. "Remember, what John used to
tell us: it is the shots that hit which count. Fire deliberately, and
keep together. Do not use your revolvers until they are close, and you
cannot use the guns."

Closer and closer they came, and Muro and the men were silent. "Now, get
ready! Shoot deliberately!"

The first salvo was fired. It was a staggering blow. They reloaded,
while the enemy was trying to recover, and the second volley belched
forth.

Then, when the execution was noticed, and they saw their people fall all
about them, they charged forward in one mass, and the boys looked at
each other, for a moment, and George reached over and gave Harry's hand
one pressure, and then turned away and began to fire as fast as he could
aim the weapon.

They were still coming on. The demons were nearly up to the log. For
some reason the savages did not heed those who fell. It had not struck
terror into their hearts, as the boys hoped. How would this end? The
enemy was now too close to make their guns of any use. The revolvers
were drawn, and the cracks from them became almost a continuous roar.

They were still coming. Soon the ammunition would be gone. The boys
realized this. They were determined to die fighting, and they began to
feel for their knives which must be the final act in the great tragedy.

Then they heard something louder than the cracks of their own weapons
and the shrieks of the devils around them. Some one was shooting. They
could see the startled faces of the savages, as they turned and swung
around. The attack ceased, and Muro sprang up on the log, with a yell.

Could he be mad? The boys were stupefied. "Come on!" cried Muro. "Here
is John!"

This announcement, coming at an unexpected moment, was such a reaction
to the poor boys, that they could hardly raise themselves. Another
volley; they could hear it now. There was another yell from the savages,
and then they could be seen rushing through the brush.

The men with John ran up, and John struggled forward through the weeds.
"Are you hurt?" asked John, as he sprang to the side of the boys.

"No! no!" cried George, and he fell down, overcome with the excitement,
while Harry could not speak for a moment.

"That was a close call," said John. "We heard the first shots an hour
ago, and we turned to take this direction. Then we heard nothing for a
long time, and as we were coming over the hill beyond the firing
commenced but we could see nothing, so we hurried forward and soon saw
the smoke, and then the savages coming from the bush, and directly to
the east we noticed fifty or more coming this way, but they are not here
yet."

"I wonder how many attacked us?" asked George.

"It is difficult to tell, but it is safe to say that there were at least
two hundred in the fight. Oh, no; the boys will not follow them up very
far," said John, as Harry looked apprehensively toward the direction
that John's men were going.

He blew the whistle, and gradually the men straggled in, reporting that
the savages appeared terror-stricken, as they had had no idea that there
was another force in the neighborhood, and they did not stop to consider
the possible number.

"I am sorry for these poor people," remarked John. "We must hunt up the
wounded."

Searchers were set to work, and the wounded, when found, were carried to
an open place beyond, and their hurts examined and bandaged. At first
terror showed itself on their faces, but as John and Muro, together with
the boys, washed their wounds, and wrapped bandages around the limbs,
they lay there and marveled at the actions of their enemies.

More than two dozen had been killed, and forty-two wounded, nearly all
in the legs or bodies, those having arm wounds being enabled to get
away.

On Muro's orders a watch was set on the movements of the savages, and
from time to time reports were brought in concerning them. They had
retreated eastwardly, and were now off less than a half mile, where they
were assembled, and evidently debating the situation.

John and Muro well knew that their present force, now numbering
forty-one, and all well armed, would be more than a match for the savage
force, still, it would not be advisable to prolong the explorations for
the day, as it was desirable to report the situation of affairs to the
Professor.

After making the sufferers comfortable they started on the march back to
the ship. During the period while caring for the wounded, John and Muro
tried to engage the savages in conversation but all attempts to learn
their language failed, and, as they were about to leave, John said to
Muro:

"Do you think that man is a chief?"

"I know he is; I spotted him from the first, and saw from his actions,
and the fact of his being obeyed, that he was a man of some authority."

"I agree with you," said Uraso, "that he is the one we must take with
us."

A litter was quickly improvised and the savage gently laid on, and with
this, as their only encumbrance, they started for the return march. Five
of the men had been wounded, all in the arms and body, and none of them
dangerously, so that there was no trouble in the march.

They filed out to the west, avoiding as much exposure as possible.
Muro's men had been on the observing line, and at Muro's suggestion they
occasionally showed themselves, so as to assure the natives that they
were still holding their ground.

As the two forces were starting for the ship, Muro prepared a decoy, so
that the savages could see what appeared to be two figures. Then he
hurriedly told John what he had done, and the march began, as rapidly as
possible, at first, and a rear guard was provided to watch the movements
of their enemies.

Two miles beyond the scene of the fight the party halted, and George was
assisted to climb a tree, from which point they might be seen.

"I can see them plainly," he called down. "They are now around the
wounded. I cannot see what they are doing, but there is a big crowd."

He waited for some time, and then cried out: "I believe they are coming
this way. I think it is time for us to be moving." And George slipped
down, as John gave the order to go on.

The rear guard, with John and Uraso, were now following up behind the
marchers. "Go on, without stopping," he said, as they took up their
positions.

The boys begged to be permitted to remain with the rear guard, but John
refused to have them exposed. In an hour and a half they ascended an
elevation from which the ship could be seen in the bay to the southwest.

During that time only once had the runner returned from John to notify
them of the progress of the natives. The last information, therefore,
was about a half hour before, and it was now obvious that the savages
were determined to follow them up, and this would bring them within view
of the vessel.

Before descending the last declivity that led to the beach, John and the
Chief appeared, and told the boys that all of the tribe was behind them,
and that the cause of the pursuit was, unquestionably, to recover the
Chief who had been taken along.

At the suggestion of John three shots were fired to attract the
attention of those on the boat, while several of the fleetest runners
speeded down the beach and quickly advised the Professor of the
situation.

Two boat loads of warriors were quickly sent to shore, and when John and
the party with him came up to the beach, the savages had reached the
crest of the hill, and ranged up in line, but halted to witness the
spectacle before them.

The wounded chief was taken to the vessel, and the Professor immediately
gave him the best care, but he remarked: "This man is desperately
wounded, and will require the best of attention to enable him to pull
through."

All the men were finally placed on board, and their experiences related.
An immediate consultation was held. John and the boys insisted on
remaining with a sufficient force to enable them to carry out their
explorations, but the Professor seemed to oppose it.

"I quite agree with you that, from what John has said, there are reasons
aside from the cannibals over there, why we should explore it from one
end to the other."

The boys cast a side glance at John. Did John find something that made
him so insistent to remain? They repressed their curiosity, however, for
the time. To their minds they thought the natives were the incentive,
notwithstanding the terrible fight they had just engaged in, although
they were willing to take the risk.

But it was finally settled. John was to have the force now on board, and
he, with the boys, was to explore, and, if need be, to conquer the
natives on the island. The _Pioneer_ would, in the meantime, sail to
Wonder Island, and return with food and ammunition, and reinforcements.

There was thus left at their disposal fifty-five men, with a fair supply
of ammunition. Uraso and Muro were to be of the party, as events just
related showed that there was serious work to do before they might be
able to return.

That night, while making the final arrangements on the vessel, the boys
sought John, and asked him more particularly concerning his trip.

"We have had no opportunity to speak to you, but the Professor said you
had learned enough about the island to determine you to explore it
fully," said George.

"That is true. I have found what I believe to be the identical spot
described in the charts, and I have found the solution, I think, of
Walter's note and of the skull."

This was, indeed, something of importance to them, but John informed
them that for certain reasons it might be better to defer the
explanation until they had made the final explorations.

The boys knew he must have some pretty good reason for thus explaining
and laying the matter before them, and they forebore further
questionings.

The next morning, when all the supplies and ammunition had been taken
off, and the final good-byes were said, the party stood on the shore
while the _Pioneer_ slowly moved out, and was soon racing before the
wind on its way to Wonder Island.

A council was held before they attempted to march into the interior. "I
have every reason to believe that the band which we met yesterday is in
the immediate vicinity, and that they have been watching our movements,"
remarked John.

"In that case," remarked Uraso, "I favor the route to the east, which,
while it may offer us still greater obstacles, in view of our
observations there, still it might enable us the more quickly to
overcome the tribe we have just met."

The boys looked at each other significantly. "I wonder what Uraso can be
talking about? There must be something very much out of the usual, in
the eastern part of the island."

"I am interested in knowing what he means by 'the observation' they made
there," responded Harry.


CHAPTER XIX

FIGHT WITH NATIVES AND RETURN TO WONDER ISLAND


When the _Pioneer_ sailed for Unity it was with the understanding that
she was to return within a week or ten days. At a cliff in the headland,
which jutted out on the southern side of the bay, a sort of post office
station was established, because if the ship should return while they
were in the interior, it would be well for the commander of the
_Pioneer_ to know where to go in the event that the eastern or the
northern coast should be much more convenient for John and his party.

It was nearly a hundred miles from the Island to Wonder Island, and
there would be no occasion for the Professor to hurry back a relief,
except to supply additional ammunition, because they did not for an
instant expect to meet a tribe that would give them such a fight.

There was still enough to provide, probably five rounds per man, so that
it made them a pretty respectable fighting force. The weather was such
that the force on the island did not require tents for shelter, and with
the native fruits the party could well subsist for quite a time without
assistance.

It was agreed that the party should keep together, and no straggling be
permitted, as it was evident they had a very bitter foe to deal with.
The severely wounded Chief, who was taken along, was under the personal
charge of the Professor, the understanding being that as soon as his
wounds were satisfactorily progressing, an effort would be made to open
up communication with him, and through that channel they could reach the
inhabitants of the island, and thus advise them that they did not mean
to do them an injury.

"I wonder if that isn't the real reason why John does not want to go for
the fellows who attacked us," asked George.

"That may be so. It never occurred to me before. It seems to me,
though," answered Harry, "that they will get but little out of that
fellow in a week's time. You know they are very much reserved at times."

"Or stubborn," suggested George.

One of the things that John was careful about related to the
organization of the force, so that it would at all times be ready for
action. In order to carry out this idea and make it effectual, he
divided the fighters into two squads of twenty-five men each, under the
commands of Uraso and Muro, the arrangement being such that one squad
should have charge of the patrolling and picketing for a period of two
days, and then the other should take charge for a like time.

There was always the most perfect accord between the two Chiefs, and
John wisely allowed them to arrange those matters in such a way as would
be most satisfactory to them.

Before noon the following day the force marched out from Security
Harbor, as they had named the bay, and took up the trail made by John
and his party two days before.

"We have names for the two islands, and for about all the principal
points, but we have no name for this place," said Harry, as they were
marching along.

"Quite true," answered George, reflectively. Then, with a laugh, he
said: "As they have cannibals here, according to the evidence so far
gathered, I think _Maneta_ would be a name that would tell the story
about as well as anything." And George laughed as he made the
suggestion.

He was an adept in applying names, being generally the first to make
suggestions in that direction, and he was rarely at a loss for an apt
designation.

The route was over a country which was rich in vegetation. During the
first ten miles the ascent was gradual, and the fruit and nuts were
abundant, while new species of trees and flowers attracted the boys.

"Harry and I have found a plant that has flies and other insects all
over the leaves, and I believe it actually catches and holds. Here is a
sample," said George, as he presented a branch to John.

John examined it carefully. Then he said: "This is a plant of which we
have several in the United States, but none which are as active. This is
called Venus' Fly Trap."

"That is curious," remarked Harry. "I wouldn't have paid any attention
to it but I saw a fly alight on it, and these little feelers seemed to
close around it, and hold it."

"It works on that plan exactly. It is in that way it gets its food."

"But why should the feelers be able to grasp the fly the moment it
touches the leaf?"

[Illustration: _Fig. 16. Venus' Fly-Trap._]

"Do you recall about what the Professor told you of the peculiar power
of plants to absorb food of particular kinds by a faculty called
_irritability_?"

"Yes; I remember."

"By means of that, plants are enabled to select just the kinds of
substances that they want, and can digest. If you will carefully notice
the leaf, after it has seized a fly it will be observed that the leaf
exudes a watery substance, and that has the property of digesting the
fly, or of converting the liquid part of the insect into a form of food
which is taken through the leaf, and from the leaf it goes into the
plant itself."

"I thought plants got their food from the roots only?"

"Leaves are just the same as roots. They are terminals, and moisture as
well as foods, such, for instance, as nitrogen, is absorbed and fed to
the plant through the leaves."

As they progressed they could see evidences of human occupation, and in
many places the remains of fire. It was while making a detour from the
regular route taken by John that they saw the first startling thing.

It was found at a place where a rude hut was discovered in a dilapidated
condition. Directly behind the hut was a raised sort of dais, supported
on two posts, and this was filled with human skulls, all in an advanced
stage of decay.

It was noticed only by accident, as the area around the hut was thickly
grown up by the vegetation. The boys were naturally startled at the
sight.

"What does that mean?" asked Harry.

John replied: "This is evidence that the people here are head hunters."

"What do you mean by _head hunters_?"

"Certain savages have the belief that their importance depends on the
number of heads they can capture."

"Where do they get them?"

"It is necessary for them to kill their enemies, and impale the heads,
or nail them up to their huts."

"Is it a religious ceremony?"

"In some cases that is so. In some tribes the object is merely to show
bravery and manliness. The more heads a man possesses the braver he is."

The vicinity of the hut was carefully examined, and Uraso brought to
John a very curiously arranged shell, with a handle to it. It was, in
fact, a rattle. John took the article, and after examining it for some
time, remarked:

"These people will be difficult to deal with; very difficult."

"Why do you form that conclusion from the examination of the rattle?"

"This is a vele."

"A _vele_; and what in the world is that?"

"A vele is a sort of hoodoo; it is something that many natives believe
in with such tenacity that if any one having this rattle points to him
and declares him veleed, and announces that the veleed one will die the
next day, he will lay down and actually expire as predicted."

"Do you believe such tales?" asked Harry.

"Of course those stories are hard to understand, but the missionaries on
the Melanesian Islands vouch for many things similar to that. In 1871,
Bishop Patterson, one of the missionaries, was murdered by the natives
of those islands, and many of the facts in regard to their customs were
then established."

"But how do they work the vele?"

"The place where the vele is worked to the most unlimited extent is in
the Island of Guadalcaner, one of the Solomon Islands, although it has
its counterpart in many other places. The vele rattler is carefully kept
in a bamboo box, and when the owner wishes to destroy an enemy he takes
the vele, and searches for him.

"In doing so he must not be seen by any one. If he is seen the vele will
not be effective. When he finds his enemy the vele is pointed to the
man, and the rattles shaken, and while doing so the one exorcising the
spell must turn his face away and utter curses. As soon as his enemy
hears this, he turns to see who has veleed him, and he then glances
around to see if any one has seen the vele."

"Are you sure that the rattle is for that purpose?"

"There is no question of it, and it is an evidence that the natives are
intensely superstitious, and such people are very difficult to deal
with."

"I suppose we shall have witch doctors to deal with here?" asked George.

"That is a very natural supposition."

"Did you see some of these things when you came over here yesterday?"

"Yes."

It was evident to both boys that they were going direct to the
mountains, and the general character of the surroundings reminded them
so much of the mountains on Wonder Island, that they felt assured John
would be able to find the cave for which he was searching.

That night they encamped on a small stream which was, no doubt, formed
by a spring, as its waters were deliciously cool, and refreshing.

During that night, shortly after twelve o'clock, the boys heard the most
peculiar noises, like a doleful, continuous cry, echoed and reechoed
from hill to mountain,--something indescribable, but they refrained
from saying anything to John about it.

Some of the boys who were present and heard it were singularly affected,
and it must be said that the boys themselves, notwithstanding the
experiences they had passed through, were not altogether composed in
their minds.

When Uraso and Muro appeared next morning, after a night of scouting,
they were startled by the accounts which were furnished, as to the
number and warlike character of the inhabitants, and a council was held
to decide whether it would be advisable to proceed with their limited
force.

If they knew, beyond question, that the island was occupied by another
tribe, it might enable them to make peace with one of them, and thus
pave the way for approaching these people.

It was unfortunate that the first contact with the natives brought them
into open hostilities, much as they desired to avoid it, but it was too
late now.

"From your investigations," said John, addressing the two chiefs, "can
you give any idea of the number of natives in this tribe?"

"We were unable to get near the village, but during the night we touched
three different parties, one over by the high ridge, one a mile to the
front, and the other over in the open ground not far from the place we
had the fight. If I can judge anything by that I should say they have a
number of warriors," answered Uraso.

"That does, indeed, look as though they are ready to meet us from
whatever direction we may attack them," remarked John.

"The thing which is the most singular to me," remarked Muro, "is the way
they are coming at us after the fight over there. If they were a weak
lot they would draw off, and keep away from us, and that makes me think
they have a lot of warriors, and are simply waiting until they can
collect all of them."

"We must do one of two things," ventured John, on reflection. "Either to
go on with the men we have, or to wait until the _Pioneer_ returns, and
then go back with her and fit out a force of ample size to meet them. It
is our wish to win over the people by peaceful means, but our weakness
may be the worst possible way of accomplishing that purpose."

Uraso and Muro were both in favor of returning and waiting for the
_Pioneer_, as they knew it would be likely to show up within the next
three days, and their views decided the matter.

"Under the circumstances we must leave this place before it is too late
in the day, or we may have trouble in reaching the landing, although we
can easily hold them off with our rifles, but we must avoid bloodshed,"
and on this point John was insistent.

The camp was astir and all the equipment in hand within fifteen minutes,
although they had not yet partaken of breakfast. Uraso took the first
turn, as commander of the rear guard, while the main body hurried on to
cross the valley, before the savages could get the first notice of the
retirement.

Notwithstanding the great caution displayed, several shots were heard
before the slope on the other side was reached, and they knew that Uraso
was engaged.

It is difficult, sometimes, to know just how information travels among
savage people, but in this case, the peculiar beatings of the drums
which could be heard in the dim distance, was sufficient to satisfy Muro
that they had watchers, and a signaling means from treetops and from the
crests of the great hills all around them.

An hour afterwards Uraso's men were seen in the distance, and, although
they had fired no more shots, it was evident that the natives were now
in force and pressing against him with all their might. Only the
consummate skill of Uraso prevented them from rushing the men under his
command.

But the top of the hill was reached; the landing was not much more than
a mile beyond that, and John hurriedly took a half dozen men, and George
and Harry with him, in order to select the final line of defense within
reach of the landing place, while Uraso and Muro held them in check.

The boys were ahead of the little party, swinging along and trying to
get to the elevated point which John indicated as the most available
place, when two powerful natives sprang across their path, and before
either could draw a weapon, they were pounced upon and seized by two
more who approached from the rear.

With great presence of mind Harry cocked and fired the gun which his
captors were struggling for. The shot went through the arm of the native
who had seized George, and the latter, now free, raised his rifle and
brought it down with all force on the nearest one.

John and the men with him needed no further information as to the
situation. They were practically surrounded. That was his first thought;
but, as no more natives appeared, and the two remaining savages started
on a run it began to be evident that they were only scouts who expected
an easy capture of the two boys.

There was no more straggling or running ahead after that. Uraso and the
rear guard came up with a rush on hearing the shots, but were reassured
when they saw the party intact.

The heights were gained, and before they could arrange for the defense
the natives appeared from three quarters, and held off a quarter of a
mile beyond.

During the following day John tried to establish communications with the
natives, but they rebuffed all efforts, and the arrival of the _Pioneer_
was anxiously awaited.

On the third day the natives were observed closer at various points, and
they began to grow bolder, but at noon of the fourth day the sharp eyes
of Muro discovered the glimpse of a sail to the west.

Within two hours the form of the ship could be seen. The _Pioneer_ was
making for the landing, and a cheer went up from the men at the welcome
sight.

There was not much difficulty in descending the cliffs and establishing
communications with the vessel, and within an hour they were aboard and
the natives could plainly be seen coming down the opposite slope waving
defiance to the ship.

The next day the _Pioneer_ sailed up Enterprise River. The people in
Unity were anxious to learn of the new island, and to hear of the
exploits with the savage tribe which the boys had encountered.

"The Treasures of the Islands," the next book in this series, relates
the further experiences of the boys upon their return to Rescue Island.

THE END


THE BOY GLOBE TROTTERS

By ELBERT FISHER

_12mo. Cloth. Many Illustrations. 60c. per Volume_


This is a series of four books relating the adventures of two boys, who
make a trip around the world, working their way as they go. They meet
with various peoples having strange habits and customs, and their
adventures form a medium for the introduction of much instructive matter
relative to the character and industries of the cities and countries
through which they pass. A description is given of the native sports of
boys in each of the foreign countries through which they travel. The
books are illustrated by decorative head and end pieces for each
chapter, there being 36 original drawings in each book, all by the
author, and four striking halftones.

1. FROM NEW YORK TO THE GOLDEN GATE, takes in many of the principal
points between New York and California, and contains a highly
entertaining narrative of the boys' experiences overland and not a
little useful information.

2. FROM SAN FRANCISCO TO JAPAN, relates the experiences of the two boys
at the Panama Exposition, and subsequently their journeyings to Hawaii,
Samoa and Japan. The greater portion of their time is spent at sea, and
a large amount of interesting information appears throughout the text.

3. FROM TOKIO TO BOMBAY. This book covers their interesting experiences
in Japan, followed by sea voyages to the Philippines, Hongkong and
finally to India. Their experiences with the natives cover a field
seldom touched upon in juvenile publications, as it relates to the great
Hyderabad region of South India.

4. FROM INDIA TO THE WAR ZONE, describes their trip toward the Persian
Gulf. They go by way of the River Euphrates and pass the supposed site
of the Garden of Eden, and manage to connect themselves with a caravan
through the Great Syrian Desert. After traversing the Holy Land, where
they visit the Dead Sea, they arrive at the Mediterranean port of Joppa,
and their experiences thereafter within the war zone are fully
described.

  THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY
  147 FOURTH AVENUE     NEW YORK


THE "HOW-TO-DO-IT" BOOKS

BY J. S. ZERBE


CARPENTRY FOR BOYS

A book which treats, in a most practical and fascinating manner all
subjects pertaining to the "King of Trades"; showing the care and use of
tools; drawing; designing, and the laying out of work; the principles
involved in the building of various kinds of structures, and the
rudiments of architecture. It contains over two hundred and fifty
illustrations made especially for this work, and includes also a
complete glossary of the technical terms used in the art. The most
comprehensive volume on this subject ever published for boys.


ELECTRICITY FOR BOYS

The author has adopted the unique plan of setting forth the fundamental
principles in each phase of the science, and practically applying the
work in the successive stages. It shows how the knowledge has been
developed, and the reasons for the various phenomena, without using
technical words so as to bring it within the compass of every boy. It
has a complete glossary of terms, and is illustrated with two hundred
original drawings.


PRACTICAL MECHANICS FOR BOYS

This book takes the beginner through a comprehensive series of practical
shop work, in which the uses of tools, and the structure and handling of
shop machinery are set forth; how they are utilized to perform the work,
and the manner in which all dimensional work is carried out. Every
subject is illustrated, and model building explained. It contains a
glossary which comprises a new system of cross references, a feature
that will prove a welcome departure in explaining subjects. Fully
illustrated.

_12mo, cloth.     Price 60 cents per volume_

  THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY
  147 FOURTH AVENUE     NEW YORK




The Ethel Morton Books

By MABELL S. C. SMITH


This series strikes a new note in the publication of books for girls.
Fascinating descriptions of the travels and amusing experiences of our
young friends are combined with a fund of information relating their
accomplishment of things every girl wishes to know.

In reading the books a girl becomes acquainted with many of the
entertaining features of handcraft, elements of cooking, also of
swimming, boating and similar pastimes. This information is so imparted
as to hold the interest throughout. Many of the subjects treated are
illustrated by halftones and line engravings throughout the text.

LIST OF TITLES

  ETHEL MORTON AT CHAUTAUQUA
  ETHEL MORTON AND THE CHRISTMAS SHIP
  ETHEL MORTON'S HOLIDAYS
  ETHEL MORTON AT ROSE HOUSE
  ETHEL MORTON'S ENTERPRISE
  ETHEL MORTON AT SWEET BRIER LODGE

_Price 60 cents per volume; postpaid_

  PUBLISHED BY
  The New York Book Company
  147 FOURTH AVENUE NEW YORK, N.Y.




The Mountain Boys Series


  1. PHIL BRADLEY'S MOUNTAIN BOYS
  2. PHIL BRADLEY AT THE WHEEL
  3. PHIL BRADLEY'S SHOOTING BOX
  4. PHIL BRADLEY'S SNOW-SHOE TRAIL

These books describe with interesting detail the experiences of a party
of boys among the mountain pines.

They teach the young reader how to protect himself against the elements,
what to do and what to avoid, and above all to become self-reliant and
manly.

_12mo .'. .'. .'. Cloth._

_40 cents per volume; postpaid_

  THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY
  147 FOURTH AVENUE     NEW YORK