"I'll wait about then," said Tom, seating himself on an heraldic
stone griffin which flanked the big stone steps before the house.
And in this way Mr. Tozer gained his purpose. Sowerby was still
contesting the county, and it behoved him not to let his enemies say
that he was hiding himself. It had been a part of his bargain with
Miss Dunstable that he should contest the county. She had taken it
into her head that the duke had behaved badly, and she had resolved
that he should be made to pay for it. "The duke," she said, "had
meddled long enough;" she would now see whether the Chaldicotes
interest would not suffice of itself to return a member for the
county, even in opposition to the duke. Mr. Sowerby himself was so
harassed at the time, that he would have given way on this point if
he had had the power; but Miss Dunstable was determined, and he was
obliged to yield to her. In this manner Mr. Tom Tozer succeeded and
did make his way into Mr. Sowerby's presence--of which intrusion one
effect was the following letter from Mr. Sowerby to his friend Mark
Robarts:--


   Chaldicotes, July, 185--.

   MY DEAR ROBARTS,

   I am so harassed at the present moment by an infinity
   of troubles of my own that I am almost callous to those
   of other people. They say that prosperity makes a man
   selfish. I have never tried that, but I am quite sure that
   adversity does so. Nevertheless I am anxious about those
   bills of yours--


"Bills of mine!" said Robarts to himself, as he walked up and down
the shrubbery path at the parsonage, reading this letter. This
happened a day or two after his visit to the lawyer at Barchester.


   --and would rejoice greatly if I thought that I could save
   you from any further annoyance about them. That kite, Tom
   Tozer, has just been with me, and insists that both of
   them shall be paid. He knows--no one better--that no
   consideration was given for the latter. But he knows also
   that the dealing was not with him, nor even with his
   brother, and he will be prepared to swear that he gave
   value for both. He would swear anything for five hundred
   pounds--or for half the money, for that matter. I do not
   think that the father of mischief ever let loose upon the
   world a greater rascal than Tom Tozer.

   He declares that nothing shall induce him to take one
   shilling less than the whole sum of nine hundred pounds.
   He has been brought to this by hearing that my debts are
   about to be paid. Heaven help me! The meaning of that is
   that these wretched acres, which are now mortgaged to
   one millionaire, are to change hands and be mortgaged to
   another instead. By this exchange I may possibly obtain
   the benefit of having a house to live in for the next
   twelve months, but no other. Tozer, however, is altogether
   wrong in his scent; and the worst of it is that his malice
   will fall on you rather than on me.

   What I want you to do is this: let us pay him one hundred
   pounds between us. Though I sell the last sorry jade of a
   horse I have, I will make up fifty; and I know you can, at
   any rate, do as much as that. Then do you accept a bill,
   conjointly with me, for eight hundred. It shall be done
   in Forrest's presence, and handed to him; and you shall
   receive back the two old bills into your own hands at the
   same time. This new bill should be timed to run ninety
   days; and I will move heaven and earth, during that time,
   to have it included in the general schedule of my debts
   which are to be secured on the Chaldicotes property.


The meaning of which was that Miss Dunstable was to be cozened into
paying the money under an idea that it was a part of the sum covered
by the existing mortgage.


   What you said the other day at Barchester, as to never
   executing another bill, is very well as regards future
   transactions. Nothing can be wiser than such a resolution.
   But it would be folly--worse than folly--if you were
   to allow your furniture to be seized when the means of
   preventing it are so ready to your hand. By leaving the
   new bill in Forrest's hands you may be sure that you are
   safe from the claws of such birds of prey as these Tozers.
   Even if I cannot get it settled when the three months are
   over, Forrest will enable you to make any arrangement that
   may be most convenient.

   For Heaven's sake, my dear fellow, do not refuse this.
   You can hardly conceive how it weighs upon me, this fear
   that bailiffs should make their way into your wife's
   drawing-room. I know you think ill of me, and I do not
   wonder at it. But you would be less inclined to do so if
   you knew how terribly I am punished. Pray let me hear that
   you will do as I counsel you.

   Yours always faithfully,

   N. SOWERBY.


In answer to which the parson wrote a very short reply:--


   Framley, July, 185--.

   MY DEAR SOWERBY,

   I will sign no more bills on any consideration.

   Yours truly,

   MARK ROBARTS.


And then having written this, and having shown it to his wife, he
returned to the shrubbery walk and paced it up and down, looking
every now and then to Sowerby's letter as he thought over all the
past circumstances of his friendship with that gentleman. That the
man who had written this letter should be his friend--that very fact
was a disgrace to him. Sowerby so well knew himself and his own
reputation, that he did not dare to suppose that his own word would
be taken for anything,--not even when the thing promised was an act
of the commonest honesty. "The old bills shall be given back into
your own hands," he had declared with energy, knowing that his friend
and correspondent would not feel himself secure against further fraud
under less stringent guarantee. This gentleman, this county member,
the owner of Chaldicotes, with whom Mark Robarts had been so anxious
to be on terms of intimacy, had now come to such a phase of life that
he had given over speaking of himself as an honest man. He had become
so used to suspicion that he argued of it as of a thing of course. He
knew that no one could trust either his spoken or his written word,
and he was content to speak and to write without attempt to hide this
conviction. And this was the man whom he had been so glad to call
his friend; for whose sake he had been willing to quarrel with Lady
Lufton, and at whose instance he had unconsciously abandoned so many
of the best resolutions of his life. He looked back now, as he walked
there slowly, still holding the letter in his hand, to the day when
he had stopped at the school-house and written his letter to Mr.
Sowerby, promising to join the party at Chaldicotes. He had been so
eager then to have his own way, that he would not permit himself to
go home and talk the matter over with his wife. He thought also of
the manner in which he had been tempted to the house of the Duke of
Omnium, and the conviction on his mind at the time that his giving
way to that temptation would surely bring him to evil. And then he
remembered the evening in Sowerby's bedroom, when the bill had been
brought out, and he had allowed himself to be persuaded to put his
name upon it--not because he was willing in this way to assist his
friend, but because he was unable to refuse. He had lacked the
courage to say, "No," though he knew at the time how gross was the
error which he was committing. He had lacked the courage to say,
"No," and hence had come upon him and on his household all this
misery and cause for bitter repentance.

I have written much of clergymen, but in doing so I have endeavoured
to portray them as they bear on our social life rather than to
describe the mode and working of their professional careers. Had I
done the latter I could hardly have steered clear of subjects on
which it has not been my intention to pronounce an opinion, and I
should either have laden my fiction with sermons or I should have
degraded my sermons into fiction. Therefore I have said but little
in my narrative of this man's feelings or doings as a clergyman. But
I must protest against its being on this account considered that Mr.
Robarts was indifferent to the duties of his clerical position. He
had been fond of pleasure and had given way to temptation,--as is
so customarily done by young men of six-and-twenty, who are placed
beyond control and who have means at command. Had he remained as a
curate till that age, subject in all his movements to the eye of
a superior, he would, we may say, have put his name to no bills,
have ridden after no hounds, have seen nothing of the iniquities of
Gatherum Castle. There are men of twenty-six as fit to stand alone
as ever they will be--fit to be prime ministers, heads of schools,
Judges on the Bench--almost fit to be bishops; but Mark Robarts had
not been one of them. He had within him many aptitudes for good, but
not the strengthened courage of a man to act up to them. The stuff of
which his manhood was to be formed had been slow of growth, as it is
with many men; and, consequently, when temptation was offered to him,
he had fallen. But he deeply grieved over his own stumbling, and from
time to time, as his periods of penitence came upon him, he resolved
that he would once more put his shoulder to the wheel as became one
who fights upon earth that battle for which he had put on the armour.
Over and over again did he think of those words of Mr. Crawley, and
now as he walked up and down the path, crumpling Mr. Sowerby's letter
in his hand, he thought of them again--"It is a terrible falling off;
terrible in the fall, but doubly terrible through that difficulty
of returning." Yes; that is a difficulty which multiplies itself
in a fearful ratio as one goes on pleasantly running down the
path--whitherward? Had it come to that with him that he could not
return--that he could never again hold up his head with a safe
conscience as the pastor of his parish? It was Sowerby who had led
him into this misery, who had brought on him this ruin? But then
had not Sowerby paid him? Had not that stall which he now held in
Barchester been Sowerby's gift? He was a poor man now--a distressed,
poverty-stricken man; but nevertheless he wished with all his
heart that he had never become a sharer in the good things of the
Barchester chapter. "I shall resign the stall," he said to his wife
that night. "I think I may say that I have made up my mind as to
that."

"But, Mark, will not people say that it is odd?"

"I cannot help it--they must say it. Fanny, I fear that we shall have
to bear the saying of harder words than that."

"Nobody can ever say that you have done anything that is unjust or
dishonourable. If there are such men as Mr. Sowerby--"

"The blackness of his fault will not excuse mine." And then again he
sat silent, hiding his eyes, while his wife, sitting by him, held his
hand.

"Don't make yourself wretched, Mark. Matters will all come right yet.
It cannot be that the loss of a few hundred pounds should ruin you."

"It is not the money--it is not the money!"

"But you have done nothing wrong, Mark."

"How am I to go into the church, and take my place before them all,
when every one will know that bailiffs are in the house?" And then,
dropping his head on to the table, he sobbed aloud.

Mark Robarts's mistake had been mainly this,--he had thought to
touch pitch and not to be defiled. He, looking out from his pleasant
parsonage into the pleasant upper ranks of the world around him, had
seen that men and things in those quarters were very engaging. His
own parsonage, with his sweet wife, were exceedingly dear to him, and
Lady Lufton's affectionate friendship had its value; but were not
these things rather dull for one who had lived in the best sets at
Harrow and Oxford;--unless, indeed, he could supplement them with
some occasional bursts of more lively life? Cakes and ale were as
pleasant to his palate as to the palates of those with whom he had
formerly lived at college. He had the same eye to look at a horse,
and the same heart to make him go across a country, as they. And
then, too, he found that men liked him,--men and women also; men and
women who were high in worldly standing. His ass's ears were tickled,
and he learned to fancy that he was intended by nature for the
society of high people. It seemed as though he were following his
appointed course in meeting men and women of the world at the houses
of the fashionable and the rich. He was not the first clergyman that
had so lived and had so prospered. Yes, clergymen had so lived, and
had done their duties in their sphere of life altogether to the
satisfaction of their countrymen--and of their sovereigns. Thus
Mark Robarts had determined that he would touch pitch, and escape
defilement if that were possible. With what result those who have
read so far will have perceived. Late on the following afternoon
who should drive up to the parsonage door but Mr. Forrest, the bank
manager from Barchester--Mr. Forrest, to whom Sowerby had always
pointed as the _Deus ex machina_ who, if duly invoked, could relieve
them all from their present troubles, and dismiss the whole Tozer
family--not howling into the wilderness, as one would have wished to
do with that brood of Tozers, but so gorged with prey that from them
no further annoyance need be dreaded? All this Mr. Forrest could do;
nay, more, most willingly would do! Only let Mark Robarts put himself
into the banker's hand, and blandly sign what documents the banker
might desire. "This is a very unpleasant affair," said Mr. Forrest as
soon as they were closeted together in Mark's book-room. In answer
to which observation the parson acknowledged that it was a very
unpleasant affair.

"Mr. Sowerby has managed to put you into the hands of about the worst
set of rogues now existing in their line of business in London."

"So I suppose; Curling told me the same." Curling was the Barchester
attorney whose aid he had lately invoked.

"Curling has threatened them that he will expose their whole trade;
but one of them who was down here, a man named Tozer, replied, that
you had much more to lose by exposure than he had. He went further,
and declared that he would defy any jury in England to refuse him his
money. He swore that he discounted both bills in the regular way of
business; and, though this is of course false, I fear that it will be
impossible to prove it so. He well knows that you are a clergyman,
and that, therefore, he has a stronger hold on you than on other
men."

"The disgrace shall fall on Sowerby," said Robarts, hardly actuated
at the moment by any strong feeling of Christian forgiveness.

"I fear, Mr. Robarts, that he is somewhat in the condition of the
Tozers. He will not feel it as you will do."

"I must bear it, Mr. Forrest, as best I may."

"Will you allow me, Mr. Robarts, to give you my advice? Perhaps
I ought to apologize for intruding it upon you; but as the bills
have been presented and dishonoured across my counter, I have, of
necessity, become acquainted with the circumstances."

"I am sure I am very much obliged to you," said Mark.

"You must pay this money, at any rate, the most considerable portion
of it;--the whole of it, indeed, with such deduction as a lawyer
may be able to induce these hawks to make on the sight of the ready
money. Perhaps £750 or £800 may see you clear of the whole affair."

"But I have not a quarter of that sum lying by me."

"No, I suppose not; but what I would recommend is this:
that you should borrow the money from the bank, on your own
responsibility,--with the joint security of some friend who may be
willing to assist you with his name. Lord Lufton probably would do
it."

"No, Mr. Forrest--"

"Listen to me first, before you make up your mind. If you took this
step, of course you would do so with the fixed intention of paying
the money yourself,--without any further reliance on Sowerby or on
any one else."

"I shall not rely on Mr. Sowerby again; you may be sure of that."

"What I mean is that you must teach yourself to recognize the debt as
your own. If you can do that, with your income you can surely pay it,
with interest, in two years. If Lord Lufton will assist you with his
name, I will so arrange the bills that the payments shall be made
to fall equally over that period. In that way the world will know
nothing about it, and in two years' time you will once more be a free
man. Many men, Mr. Robarts, have bought their experience much dearer
than that, I can assure you."

"Mr. Forrest, it is quite out of the question."

"You mean that Lord Lufton will not give you his name."

"I certainly shall not ask him; but that is not all. In the first
place, my income will not be what you think it, for I shall probably
give up the prebend at Barchester."

"Give up the prebend! give up six hundred a year!"

"And, beyond this, I think I may say that nothing shall tempt me to
put my name to another bill. I have learned a lesson which I hope I
may never forget."

"Then what do you intend to do?"

"Nothing!"

"Then those men will sell every stick of furniture about the place.
They know that your property here is enough to secure all that they
claim."

"If they have the power, they must sell it."

"And all the world will know the facts."

"So it must be. Of the faults which a man commits he must bear the
punishment. If it were only myself!"

"That's where it is, Mr. Robarts. Think what your wife will have to
suffer in going through such misery as that! You had better take my
advice. Lord Lufton, I am sure--" But the very name of Lord Lufton,
his sister's lover, again gave him courage. He thought, too, of the
accusations which Lord Lufton had brought against him on that night,
when he had come to him in the coffee-room of the hotel, and he felt
that it was impossible that he should apply to him for such aid. It
would be better to tell all to Lady Lufton! That she would relieve
him, let the cost to herself be what it might, he was very sure. Only
this;--that in looking to her for assistance he would be forced to
bite the dust in very deed.

"Thank you, Mr. Forrest, but I have made up my mind. Do not
think that I am the less obliged to you for your disinterested
kindness,--for I know that it is disinterested; but this I think I
may confidently say, that not even to avert so terrible a calamity
will I again put my name to any bill. Even if you could take my own
promise to pay without the addition of any second name, I would
not do it." There was nothing for Mr. Forrest to do under such
circumstances but simply to drive back to Barchester. He had done the
best for the young clergyman according to his lights, and perhaps,
in a worldly view, his advice had not been bad. But Mark dreaded the
very name of a bill. He was as a dog that had been terribly scorched,
and nothing should again induce him to go near the fire.

"Was not that the man from the bank?" said Fanny, coming into the
room when the sound of the wheels had died away.

"Yes; Mr. Forrest."

"Well, dearest?"

"We must prepare ourselves for the worst."

"You will not sign any more papers, eh, Mark?"

"No; I have just now positively refused to do so."

"Then I can bear anything. But, dearest, dearest Mark, will you not
let me tell Lady Lufton?"

Let them look at the matter in any way the punishment was very heavy.


CHAPTER XLIII

Is She Not Insignificant?


And now a month went by at Framley without any increase of comfort to
our friends there, and also without any absolute development of the
ruin which had been daily expected at the parsonage. Sundry letters
had reached Mr. Robarts from various personages acting in the Tozer
interest, all of which he referred to Mr. Curling, of Barchester.
Some of these letters contained prayers for the money, pointing out
how an innocent widow lady had been induced to invest her all on
the faith of Mr. Robarts's name, and was now starving in a garret,
with her three children, because Mr. Robarts would not make good
his own undertakings. But the majority of them were filled with
threats;--only two days longer would be allowed, and then the
sheriff's officers would be enjoined to do their work; then one day
of grace would be added, at the expiration of which the dogs of war
would be unloosed. These, as fast as they came, were sent to Mr.
Curling, who took no notice of them individually, but continued his
endeavour to prevent the evil day. The second bill Mr. Robarts would
take up--such was Mr. Curling's proposition; and would pay by two
instalments of £250 each, the first in two months, and the second
in four. If this were acceptable to the Tozer interest--well; if it
were not, the sheriff's officers must do their worst and the Tozer
interest must look for what it could get. The Tozer interest would
not declare itself satisfied with these terms, and so the matter went
on. During which the roses faded from day to day on the cheeks of
Mrs. Robarts, as under such circumstances may easily be conceived. In
the meantime Lucy still remained at Hogglestock, and had there become
absolute mistress of the house. Poor Mrs. Crawley had been at death's
door; for some days she was delirious, and afterwards remained so
weak as to be almost unconscious; but now the worst was over, and
Mr. Crawley had been informed, that as far as human judgement might
pronounce, his children would not become orphans nor would he become
a widower. During these weeks Lucy had not once been home nor had she
seen any of the Framley people. "Why should she incur the risk of
conveying infection for so small an object?" as she herself argued,
writing by letters, which were duly fumigated before they were opened
at the parsonage. So she remained at Hogglestock, and the Crawley
children, now admitted to all the honours of the nursery, were kept
at Framley. They were kept at Framley, although it was expected from
day to day that the beds on which they lay would be seized for the
payment of Mr. Sowerby's debts. Lucy, as I have said, became mistress
of the house at Hogglestock, and made herself absolutely ascendant
over Mr. Crawley. Jellies, and broth, and fruit, and even butter,
came from Lufton Court, which she displayed on the table, absolutely
on the cloth before him, and yet he bore it. I cannot say that he
partook of these delicacies with any freedom himself, but he did
drink his tea when it was given to him although it contained Framley
cream;--and, had he known it, Bohea itself from the Framley chest. In
truth, in these days, he had given himself over to the dominion of
this stranger; and he said nothing beyond, "Well, well," with two
uplifted hands, when he came upon her as she was sewing the buttons
on to his own shirts--sewing on the buttons and perhaps occasionally
applying her needle elsewhere,--not without utility. He said to her
at this period very little in the way of thanks. Some protracted
conversations they did have, now and again, during the long evenings;
but even in these he did not utter many words as to their present
state of life. It was on religion chiefly that he spoke, not
lecturing her individually, but laying down his ideas as to what the
life of a Christian should be, and especially what should be the life
of a minister. "But though I can see this, Miss Robarts," he said, "I
am bound to say that no one has fallen off so frequently as myself.
I have renounced the devil and all his works; but it is by word of
mouth only--by word of mouth only. How shall a man crucify the old
Adam that is within him, unless he throw himself prostrate in the
dust and acknowledge that all his strength is weaker than water?"
To this, often as it might be repeated, she would listen patiently,
comforting him by such words as her theology would supply; but then,
when this was over, she would again resume her command and enforce
from him a close obedience to her domestic behests.

At the end of the month Lord Lufton came back to Framley Court. His
arrival there was quite unexpected; though, as he pointed out when
his mother expressed some surprise, he had returned exactly at the
time named by him before he started.

"I need not say, Ludovic, how glad I am to have you," said she,
looking to his face and pressing his arm; "the more so, indeed,
seeing that I hardly expected it."

He said nothing to his mother about Lucy the first evening, although
there was some conversation respecting the Robarts family.

"I am afraid Mr. Robarts has embarrassed himself," said Lady Lufton,
looking very seriously. "Rumours reach me which are most distressing.
I have said nothing to anybody as yet--not even to Fanny; but I can
see in her face, and hear in the tones of her voice, that she is
suffering some great sorrow."

"I know all about it," said Lord Lufton.

"You know all about it, Ludovic?"

"Yes; it is through that precious friend of mine, Mr. Sowerby, of
Chaldicotes. He has accepted bills for Sowerby; indeed, he told me
so."

"What business had he at Chaldicotes? What had he to do with such
friends as that? I do not know how I am to forgive him."

"It was through me that he became acquainted with Sowerby. You must
remember that, mother."

"I do not see that that is any excuse. Is he to consider that
all your acquaintances must necessarily be his friends also? It
is reasonable to suppose that you in your position must live
occasionally with a great many people who are altogether unfit
companions for him as a parish clergyman. He will not remember this,
and he must be taught it. What business had he to go to Gatherum
Castle?"

"He got his stall at Barchester by going there."

"He would be much better without his stall, and Fanny has the sense
to know this. What does he want with two houses? Prebendal stalls are
for older men than he--for men who have earned them, and who at the
end of their lives want some ease. I wish with all my heart that he
had never taken it."

"Six hundred a year has its charms all the same," said Lufton,
getting up and strolling out of the room.

"If Mark really be in any difficulty," he said, later in the evening,
"we must put him on his legs."

"You mean, pay his debts?"

"Yes; he has no debts except these acceptances of Sowerby's."

"How much will it be, Ludovic?"

"A thousand pounds, perhaps, more or less. I'll find the money,
mother; only I shan't be able to pay you quite as soon as I
intended." Whereupon his mother got up, and throwing her arms round
his neck declared that she would never forgive him if he ever said
a word more about her little present to him. I suppose there is no
pleasure a mother can have more attractive than giving away her money
to an only son.

Lucy's name was first mentioned at breakfast the next morning. Lord
Lufton had made up his mind to attack his mother on the subject early
in the morning--before he went up to the parsonage; but as matters
turned out, Miss Robarts's doings were necessarily brought under
discussion without reference to Lord Lufton's special aspirations
regarding her. The fact of Mrs. Crawley's illness had been mentioned,
and Lady Lufton had stated how it had come to pass that all the
Crawleys' children were at the parsonage.

"I must say that Fanny has behaved excellently," said Lady Lufton.
"It was just what might have been expected from her. And indeed," she
added, speaking in an embarrassed tone, "so has Miss Robarts. Miss
Robarts has remained at Hogglestock and nursed Mrs. Crawley through
the whole."

"Remained at Hogglestock--through the fever!" exclaimed his lordship.

"Yes, indeed," said Lady Lufton.

"And is she there now?"

"Oh, yes; I am not aware that she thinks of leaving just yet."

"Then I say that it is a great shame--a scandalous shame!"

"But, Ludovic, it was her own doing."

"Oh, yes; I understand. But why should she be sacrificed? Were there
no nurses in the country to be hired, but that she must go and remain
there for a month at the bedside of a pestilent fever? There is no
justice in it."

"Justice, Ludovic? I don't know about justice, but there was great
Christian charity. Mrs. Crawley has probably owed her life to Miss
Robarts."

"Has she been ill? Is she ill? I insist upon knowing whether she
is ill. I shall go over to Hogglestock myself immediately after
breakfast." To this Lady Lufton made no reply. If Lord Lufton chose
to go to Hogglestock she could not prevent him. She thought, however,
that it would be much better that he should stay away. He would be
quite as open to the infection as Lucy Robarts and, moreover, Mrs.
Crawley's bedside would be as inconvenient a place as might be
selected for any interview between two lovers. Lady Lufton felt at
the present moment that she was cruelly treated by circumstances with
reference to Miss Robarts. Of course it would have been her part to
lessen, if she could do so without injustice, that high idea which
her son entertained of the beauty and worth of the young lady; but,
unfortunately, she had been compelled to praise her and to load her
name with all manner of eulogy. Lady Lufton was essentially a true
woman, and not even with the object of carrying out her own views in
so important a matter would she be guilty of such deception as she
might have practised by simply holding her tongue; but nevertheless
she could hardly reconcile herself to the necessity of singing Lucy's
praises.

After breakfast Lady Lufton got up from her chair, but hung about the
room without making any show of leaving. In accordance with her usual
custom she would have asked her son what he was going to do; but
she did not dare so to inquire now. Had he not declared, only a few
minutes since, whither he would go? "I suppose I shall see you at
lunch?" at last she said.

"At lunch? Well, I don't know. Look here, mother. What am I to say to
Miss Robarts when I see her?" and he leaned with his back against the
chimney-piece as he interrogated his mother.

"What are you to say to her, Ludovic?"

"Yes, what am I to say,--as coming from you? Am I to tell her that
you will receive her as your daughter-in-law?"

"Ludovic, I have explained all that to Miss Robarts herself."

"Explained what?"

"I have told her that I did not think that such a marriage would make
either you or her happy."

"And why have you told her so? Why have you taken upon yourself to
judge for me in such a matter, as though I were a child? Mother, you
must unsay what you have said." Lord Lufton, as he spoke, looked full
into his mother's face; and he did so, not as though he were begging
from her a favour, but issuing to her a command. She stood near him,
with one hand on the breakfast-table, gazing at him almost furtively,
not quite daring to meet the full view of his eye. There was only
one thing on earth which Lady Lufton feared, and that was her son's
displeasure. The sun of her earthly heaven shone upon her through the
medium of his existence. If she were driven to quarrel with him, as
some ladies of her acquaintance were driven to quarrel with their
sons, the world to her would be over. Not but what facts might be so
strong as to make it absolutely necessary that she should do this.
As some people resolve that, under certain circumstances, they will
commit suicide, so she could see that, under certain circumstances,
she must consent even to be separated from him. She would not do
wrong,--not that which she knew to be wrong,--even for his sake.
If it were necessary that all her happiness should collapse and be
crushed in ruin around her, she must endure it, and wait God's time
to relieve her from so dark a world. The light of the sun was very
dear to her, but even that might be purchased at too dear a cost.

"I told you before, mother, that my choice was made, and I asked you
then to give your consent; you have now had time to think about it,
and therefore I have come to ask you again. I have reason to know
that there will be no impediment to my marriage if you will frankly
hold out your hand to Lucy."

The matter was altogether in Lady Lufton's hands, but, fond as she
was of power, she absolutely wished that it were not so. Had her son
married without asking her, and then brought Lucy home as his wife,
she would undoubtedly have forgiven him; and much as she might have
disliked the match, she would, ultimately, have embraced the bride.
But now she was compelled to exercise her judgement. If he married
imprudently, it would be her doing. How was she to give her expressed
consent to that which she believed to be wrong? "Do you know anything
against her; any reason why she should not be my wife?" continued he.

"If you mean as regards her moral conduct, certainly not," said Lady
Lufton. "But I could say as much as that in favour of a great many
young ladies whom I should regard as very ill suited for such a
marriage."

"Yes; some might be vulgar, some might be ill-tempered, some might be
ugly; others might be burdened with disagreeable connexions. I can
understand that you should object to a daughter-in-law under any of
these circumstances. But none of these things can be said of Miss
Robarts. I defy you to say that she is not in all respects what a
lady should be."

But her father was a doctor of medicine, she is the sister of the
parish clergyman, she is only five feet two in height, and is so
uncommonly brown! Had Lady Lufton dared to give a catalogue of her
objections, such would have been its extent and nature. But she did
not dare to do this.

"I cannot say, Ludovic, that she is possessed of all that you should
seek in a wife." Such was her answer.

"Do you mean that she has not got money?"

"No, not that; I should be very sorry to see you making money your
chief object, or indeed any essential object. If it chanced that your
wife did have money, no doubt you would find it a convenience. But
pray understand me, Ludovic; I would not for a moment advise you to
subject your happiness to such a necessity as that. It is not because
she is without fortune--"

"Then why is it? At breakfast you were singing her praises, and
saying how excellent she is."

"If I were forced to put my objection into one word, I should say--"
and then she paused, hardly daring to encounter the frown which was
already gathering itself on her son's brow.

"You would say what?" said Lord Lufton, almost roughly.

"Don't be angry with me, Ludovic; all that I think, and all that I
say on this subject, I think and say with only one object--that of
your happiness. What other motive can I have for anything in this
world?" And then she came close to him and kissed him.

"But tell me, mother, what is this objection; what is this terrible
word that is to sum up the list of all poor Lucy's sins, and prove
that she is unfit for married life?"

"Ludovic, I did not say that. You know that I did not."

"What is the word, mother?"

And then at last Lady Lufton spoke it out. "She is--insignificant. I
believe her to be a very good girl, but she is not qualified to fill
the high position to which you would exalt her."

"Insignificant!"

"Yes, Ludovic, I think so."

"Then, mother, you do not know her. You must permit me to say that
you are talking of a girl whom you do not know. Of all the epithets
of opprobrium which the English language could give you, that would
be nearly the last which she would deserve."

"I have not intended any opprobrium."

"Insignificant!"

"Perhaps you do not quite understand me, Ludovic."

"I know what insignificant means, mother."

"I think that she would not worthily fill the position which your
wife should take in the world."

"I understand what you say."

"She would not do you honour at the head of your table."

"Ah, I understand. You want me to marry some bouncing Amazon, some
pink and white giantess of fashion who would frighten the little
people into their proprieties."

"Oh, Ludovic! you are intending to laugh at me now."

"I was never less inclined to laugh in my life--never, I can assure
you. And now I am more certain than ever that your objection to Miss
Robarts arises from your not knowing her. You will find, I think,
when you do know her, that she is as well able to hold her own as
any lady of your acquaintance--aye, and to maintain her husband's
position, too. I can assure you that I shall have no fear of her on
that score."

"I think, dearest, that perhaps you hardly--"

"I think this, mother, that in such a matter as this I must choose
for myself. I have chosen; and I now ask you, as my mother, to go to
her and bid her welcome. Dear mother, I will own this, that I should
not be happy if I thought that you did not love my wife." These last
words he said in a tone of affection that went to his mother's heart,
and then he left the room.

