In issuing from and leaving open the door of the inner room, Mr.
Crampton had bestowed upon Mr. Perkins a look so peculiarly arch, that
even he, simple as he was, began to imagine that some mystery was about
to be cleared up, or some mighty matter to be discussed. Presently
he heard the well-known voice of Lady Gorgon in conversation with his
uncle. What could their talk be about? Mr. Perkins was dying to know,
and--shall we say it?--advanced to the door on tiptoe and listened with
all his might.

Her Ladyship, that Juno of a woman, if she had not borrowed Venus's
girdle to render herself irresistible, at least had adopted a tender,
coaxing, wheedling, frisky tone, quite different from her ordinary
dignified style of conversation. She called Mr. Crampton a naughty man,
for neglecting his old friends, vowed that Sir George was quite hurt at
his not coming to dine--nor fixing a day when he would come--and added,
with a most engaging ogle, that she had three fine girls at home,
who would perhaps make an evening pass pleasantly, even to such a gay
bachelor as Mr. Crampton.

"Madam," said he, with much gravity, "the daughters of such a mother
must be charming; but I, who have seen your Ladyship, am, alas! proof
against even them."

Both parties here heaved tremendous sighs and affected to be wonderfully
unhappy about something.

"I wish," after a pause, said Lady Gorgon--"I wish, dear Mr. Crampton,
you would not use that odious title 'my Ladyship:' you know it always
makes me melancholy."

"Melancholy, my dear Lady Gorgon; and why?"

"Because it makes me think of another title that ought to have been
mine--ours (I speak for dear Sir George's and my darling boy's sake,
Heaven knows, not mine). What a sad disappointment it has been to my
husband, that after all his services, all the promises he has had, they
have never given him his peerage. As for me, you know--"

"For you, my dear madam, I know quite well that you care for no such
bauble as a coronet, except in so far as it may confer honour upon those
most dear to you--excellent wife and noble mother as you are. Heigho!
what a happy man is Sir George!"

Here there was another pause, and if Mr. Perkins could have seen what
was taking place behind the screen, he would have beheld little Mr.
Crampton looking into Lady Gorgon's face, with as love-sick a Romeo-gaze
as he could possibly counterfeit; while her Ladyship, blushing somewhat
and turning her own grey gogglers up to heaven, received all his words
for gospel, and sat fancying herself to be the best, most meritorious,
and most beautiful creature in the three kingdoms.

"You men are terrible flatterers," continued she; "but you say right:
for myself I value not these empty distinctions. I am growing old, Mr.
Crampton,--yes, indeed, I am, although you smile so incredulously,--and
let me add, that MY thoughts are fixed upon HIGHER things than earthly
crowns. But tell me, you who are all in all with Lord Bagwig, are we
never to have our peerage? His Majesty, I know, is not averse; the
services of dear Sir George to a member of His Majesty's august family,
I know, have been appreciated in the highest quarter. Ever since the
peace we have had a promise. Four hundred pounds has Sir George spent at
the Heralds' Office (I myself am of one of the most ancient families
in the kingdom, Mr. Crampton), and the poor dear man's health is really
ruined by the anxious sickening feeling of hope so long delayed."

Mr. Crampton now assumed an air of much solemnity.

"My dear Lady Gorgon," said he, "will you let me be frank with you, and
will you promise solemnly that what I am going to tell you shall never
be repeated to a single soul?"

Lady Gorgon promised.

"Well, then, since the truth you must know, you yourselves have been in
part the cause of the delay of which you complain. You gave us two votes
five years ago; you now only give us one. If Sir George were to go up
to the Peers, we should lose even that one vote; and would it be common
sense in us to incur such a loss? Mr. Scully, the Liberal, would return
another Member of his own way of thinking; and as for the Lords, we
have, you know, a majority there."

"Oh, that horrid man!" said Lady Gorgon, cursing Mr. Scully in her
heart, and beginning to play a rapid tattoo with her feet, "that
miscreant, that traitor, that--that attorney has been our ruin."

"Horrid man, if you please, but give me leave to tell you that the
horrid man is not the sole cause of your ruin--if ruin you will call it.
I am sorry to say that I do candidly think Ministers believe that Sir
George Gorgon has lost his influence in Oldborough as much through his
own fault as through Mr. Scully's cleverness."

"Our own fault! Good heavens! Have we not done everything--everything
that persons of our station in the county could do, to keep those
misguided men? Have we not remonstrated, threatened, taken away our
custom from the Mayor, established a Conservative apothecary--in
fact, done all that gentlemen could do? But these are such times, Mr.
Crampton: the spirit of revolution is abroad, and the great families of
England are menaced by democratic insolence."

This was Sir George Gorgon's speech always after dinner, and was
delivered by his lady with a great deal of stateliness. Somewhat,
perhaps, to her annoyance, Mr. Crampton only smiled, shook his head, and
said--

"Nonsense, my dear Lady Gorgon--pardon the phrase, but I am a plain old
man, and call things by their names. Now, will you let me whisper in
your ear one word of truth? You have tried all sorts of remonstrances,
and exerted yourself to maintain your influence in every way, except the
right one, and that is--"

"What, in Heaven's name?"

"Conciliation. We know your situation in the borough. Mr. Scully's
whole history, and, pardon me for saying so (but we men in office know
everything), yours--"

Lady Gorgon's ears and cheeks now assumed the hottest hue of crimson.
She thought of her former passages with Scully, and of the days
when--but never mind when: for she suffered her veil to fall, and buried
her head in the folds of her handkerchief. Vain folds! The wily
little Mr. Crampton could see all that passed behind the cambric, and
continued--

"Yes, madam, we know the absurd hopes that were formed by a certain
attorney twenty years since. We know how, up to this moment, he boasts
of certain walks--"

"With the governess--we were always with the governess!" shrieked out
Lady Gorgon, clasping her hands. "She was not the wisest of women."

"With the governess, of course," said Mr. Crampton, firmly. "Do you
suppose that any man dare breathe a syllable against your spotless
reputation? Never, my dear madam; but what I would urge is this--you
have treated your disappointed admirer too cruelly."

"What! the traitor who has robbed us of our rights?"

"He never would have robbed you of your rights if you had been more kind
to him. You should be gentle, madam; you should forgive him--you should
be friends with him."

"With a traitor, never!"

"Think what made him a traitor, Lady Gorgon; look in your glass, and say
if there be not some excuse for him? Think of the feelings of the man
who saw beauty such as yours--I am a plain man and must speak--virtue
such as yours, in the possession of a rival. By heavens, madam, I think
he was RIGHT to hate Sir George Gorgon! Would you have him allow such a
prize to be ravished from him without a pang on his part?"

"He was, I believe, very much attached to me," said Lady Gorgon, quite
delighted; "but you must be aware that a young man of his station in
life could not look up to a person of my rank."

