Her father remained still a moment--then he rose up and went out of the
room, and she heard his steps going up to the unused attic. Nettie
crossed her hands upon her breast, and smiled. She was too much
exhausted to pray, otherwise than with a thought.

Her mother soon came in, and startled by her flushed look, asked how she
did. "Well," Nettie said. Mrs. Mathieson was uneasy, and brought her
something to take, which Nettie couldn't eat; and insisted on her lying
still and trying to go to sleep. Nettie thought she could not sleep; and
she did not for some time; then slumber stole over her, and she slept
sweetly and quietly while the hours of the summer afternoon rolled away.
Her mother watched beside her for a long while before she awoke; and
during that time read surely in Nettie's delicate cheek and too delicate
colour, what was the sentence of separation. She read it, and smothered
the cry of her heart, for Nettie's sake.

The sun was descending toward the western hilly country, and long level
rays of light were playing in the tree-tops, when Nettie awoke.

"Are you there, mother?" she said--"and is the Sunday so near over! How
I have slept."

"How do you feel, dear?"

"Why, I feel well," said Nettie. "It has been a good day. The gold is
all in the air here--not in the streets." She had half raised herself
and was sitting looking out of the window.

"Do you think of that city all the time?" inquired Mrs. Mathieson, half
jealously.

"Mother," said Nettie, slowly, still looking out at the sunlight, "would
you be very sorry, and very much surprised, if I were to go there before
long?"

"I should not be very much surprised, Nettie," answered her mother, in a
tone that told all the rest. Her child's eye turned to her sorrowfully
and understandingly.

"You'll not be very long before you'll be there too," she said. "Now
kiss me, mother."

Could Mrs. Mathieson help it? She took Nettie in her arms, but instead
of the required kiss there came a burst of passion that bowed her head
in convulsive grief against her child's breast. The pent-up sorrow, the
great burden of love and tenderness, the unspoken gratitude, the
unspeakable longing of heart, all came in those tears and sobs that
shook her as if she had forgotten on what a frail support she was half
resting. Nay, nature must speak this one time; she had taken the matter
into her own hands, and she was not to be struggled with, for a while.
Nettie bore it--how did she bear it? With a little trembling of lip at
first; then that passed, and with quiet sorrow she saw and felt the
suffering which had broken forth so stormily. True to her office, the
little peacemaker tried her healing art. Softly stroking her mother's
face and head while she spoke, she said very softly and slowly,

"Mother, you know it is Jesus that said, 'Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted.' You have the mourning now, but he will
find the comfort by and by."

Ashamed of her giving way, and of her having left it to the weak one to
act the part of the strong, Mrs. Mathieson checked herself, held up her
head and dried her tears. Nettie lay down wearily.

"I will stay here, mother," she said, "till tea is ready; and then I
will come." Mrs. Mathieson went to attend to it.

When Nettie went into the other room, her father was sitting there. She
said nothing however, and even for some time did not look in his face to
see what he might have to say to her. She took a cup of tea and a
biscuit, and eat an egg that her mother had boiled for her. It was when
supper was over, and they had moved from the table and Mrs. Mathieson
was busy about, that Nettie turned her eyes once more upon her father,
with their soft, full inquiry. He looked grave, subdued, tender; she had
heard that in his voice already; not as she had ever seen him look
before. He met her eyes, and answered them.

"I understand it now, Nettie," he said.

It was worth while to see Nettie's smile. She was not a child very given
to expressing her feelings, and when pleasure reached that point with
her, it was something to see such a breaking of light upon a face that
generally dwelt in twilight sobriety. Her father drew her close, close
within his arms; and without one word Nettie sat there, till, for very
happiness and weariness, she fell asleep; and he carried her to her
room.

There was a great calm fell upon the family for a little time
thereafter. It was like one of those spring days that were passed--full
of misty light, and peace, and hope, and promise. It was a breath of
rest.

But they knew it would end--for a time; and one summer day the end came.
It was a Sunday again, and again Nettie was lying on her bed, enjoying
in her weakness the loveliness of the air and beauty without. Her mother
was with her, and knew that she had been failing very fast for some
days. Nettie knew it too.

"How soon do you think father will be home?" she said.

"Not before another hour, I think," said Mrs. Mathieson. "Why, what of
it, Nettie?"

"Nothing----" said Nettie, doubtfully. "I'd like him to come."

"It wont be long," said her mother.

"Mother, I am going to give you my little dear hymn book," said Nettie,
presently; "and I want to read you this hymn now, and then you will
think of me when you read it. May I?"

"Read," said Mrs. Mathieson; and she put up her hand to hide her face
from Nettie. Nettie did not look, however; her eyes were on her hymn,
and she read it, low and sweetly--very sweetly--through. There was no
tremor in her voice, but now and then a little accent of joy or a shade
of tenderness.

    "'Meet again! yes, we shall meet again,
      Though now we part in pain!
            His people all
            Together Christ shall call.
                  Hallelujah!

    "'Soon the days of absence shall be o'er,
      And thou shalt weep no more;
            Our meeting day
            Shall wipe all tears away.
                  Hallelujah!

    "'Now I go with gladness to our home,
      With gladness thou shalt come;
            There I will wait
            To meet thee at heaven's gate.
                  Hallelujah!

    "'Dearest! what delight again to share
      Our sweet communion there!
            To walk among
            The holy ransomed throng.
                  Hallelujah!

    "'Here, in many a grief, our hearts were one,
      But there in joys alone;
            Joys fading never,
            Increasing, deepening ever.
                  Hallelujah!

    "'Not to mortal sight can it be given
      To know the bliss of heaven;
            But thou shalt be
            Soon there, and sing with me,
                  Hallelujah!

    "'Meet again! yes, we shall meet again,
      Though now we part in vain!
            His people all
            Together Christ shall call.
                  Hallelujah!'"

Mrs. Mathieson's head bowed as the hymn went on, but she dared not give
way to tears, and Nettie's manner half awed and half charmed her into
quietness. It was not likely she would forget those words ever. When the
reading had ceased, and in a few minutes Mrs. Mathieson felt that she
could look toward Nettie again, she saw that the book had fallen from
her hand and that she was almost fainting. Alarmed instantly, she called
for help, and got one of the inmates of the house to go after Mr.
Mathieson. But Nettie sank so fast, they were afraid he would not come
in time. The messenger came back without having been able to find him;
for after the close of the services in the church Mr. Mathieson had
gone out of his way on an errand of kindness. Nettie herself was too low
to ask for him, if indeed she was conscious that he was not there. They
could not tell; she lay without taking any notice.

But just as the last rays of the sun were bright in the leaves of the
trees and on the hills in the distance, Mr. Mathieson's step was heard.
One of the neighbours met him and told him what he must expect; and he
came straight to Nettie's room. And when he bent down over her and
spoke, Nettie knew his voice and opened her eyes, and once more smiled.
It was like a smile from another country. Her eyes were fixed on him.
Mr. Mathieson bent yet nearer and put his lips to hers; then he tried to
speak.

"My little peacemaker, what shall I do without you?"

Nettie drew a long, long breath. "Peace--is--made," she slowly said.

And the peacemaker was gone.


                                THE END.


                                    LONDON: THE BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL.
                                       NEW YORK: 416, BROOME STREET.


GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS' JUVENILE BOOKS.

 s. d.
 8  6 EVERY BOY'S BOOK. Edited by _Edmund Routledge_. A New Edition,
      Re-written and Revised. A Complete Encyclopædia of Sports and
      Amusements, &c. With 600 Engravings by Harvey and Harrison Weir,
      and Coloured Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt.

_In 4to, cloth, and royal 8vo, gilt and gilt edges, price 7s. 6d._

 s. d.
 7  6 GRIMM'S HOUSEHOLD STORIES. With 240 Illustrations.

      REV. J. G. WOOD'S OUR GARDEN FRIENDS AND FOES. 200 Illustrations.

      ANDERSEN'S STORIES FOR THE HOUSEHOLD. 200 Plates.

      JABEZ HOGG ON THE MICROSCOPE. 500 Illustrations.

      POETS' CORNER. A Selection of Poetry. Edited by _J. C. M. Bellew_.

      SHERIDAN KNOWLES'S DRAMATIC WORKS.

      KITTO'S BIBLE HISTORY.

_In cloth, gilt edges, price 6s. each._

 s. d.
 6  0 ROUTLEDGE'S EVERY BOY'S ANNUAL. Edited by _Edmund Routledge_. With
      Coloured Illustrations.

      PEPPER'S PLAY-BOOK OF SCIENCE. 400 Plates.

      D'AULNOY'S FAIRY TALES. Translated by _Planché_.

      DON QUIXOTE. With Illustrations.

      PLANCHE'S FAIRY TALES. By _Perrault_.

      AN ILLUSTRATED NATURAL HISTORY. By the _Rev. J. G. Wood, M.A._
      With 500 Illustrations by William Harvey, and 8 Full-page Plates
      by Wolf and Harrison Weir.

      PEPPER'S PLAY-BOOK OF MINES, MINERALS, AND METALS. With 300
      Illustrations.

      MOTLEY'S RISE OF THE DUTCH REPUBLIC.

      PICTURES FROM NATURE. By _Mary Howitt_. With Coloured Plates.


Routledge's Five-Shilling Juvenile Books.

_With Many Illustrations, bound in cloth gilt._

 s. d.
 5  0 MY MOTHER'S PICTURE-BOOK. Containing 24 Full-page Pictures,
      printed in Colours by Kronheim. Demy 4to, cloth.

      THE RED RIDING-HOOD PICTURE-BOOK. Containing 24 Full-page
      Pictures, printed in Colours by Kronheim. Demy 4to.

      THE SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED PICTURE-BOOK. With 24 pages of
      Coloured Plates, by Kronheim and others.

      SCHNICK-SCHNACK. A New Edition, with Coloured Plates. In New
      Binding. Imperial 16mo, cloth.

      THE ORVILLE COLLEGE BOYS: A Story of School Life. By _Mrs. Henry
      Wood_, Author of "East Lynne." With Illustrations. Post 8vo,
      cloth, gilt edges.

      THE ADVENTURES OF STEPHEN SCUDAMORE. By _Arthur Locker_. With
      Full-page Plates. Post 8vo, cloth, gilt edges.

      TALES OF THE CIVIL WAR. By the _Rev. H. C. Adams, M.A._ With
      Full-page Plates. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, gilt edges.

      THE HUNTING GROUNDS OF THE OLD WORLD. By the _Old Shekarry_. New
      Edition. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo.

      MARRYAT'S CHILDREN OF THE NEW FOREST.

      MARRYAT'S LITTLE SAVAGE.

      GREAT SIEGES OF HISTORY.

      M'FARLANE'S BRITISH INDIA.

      LILLIAN'S GOLDEN HOURS. By _Silverpen_.

      THE YOUNG YAGERS. By _Mayne Reid_.

      THE YOUNG VOYAGEURS. By ditto.

      THE BOY TAR. By ditto.

      WONDERS OF SCIENCE. By _H. Mayhew_.

      PEASANT BOY PHILOSOPHER. By ditto.

      ODD PEOPLE. By _Mayne Reid_.

      PLANT HUNTERS. By ditto.

      RAN AWAY TO SEA. By ditto.

      THE WHITE BRUNSWICKERS. By the _Rev. H. C. Adams_.

      THE BOY'S TREASURY OF SPORTS AND PASTIMES.

      HOLLOWDELL GRANGE. By _G. M. Fenn_.

      THE QUEENS OF SOCIETY.

      THE WITS AND BEAUX OF SOCIETY.

      MY FATHER'S GARDEN. By _Thomas Miller_.

      BARFORD BRIDGE. By _Rev. H. C. Adams_.

      STUDIES FOR STORIES.

      PAPERS FOR THOUGHTFUL GIRLS.

      THE BOY'S OWN COUNTRY BOOK. By _T. Miller_.

      THE FOREST RANGER. By _Major Campbell_.

      AMONG THE SQUIRRELS.

      WONDERFUL INVENTIONS. By _John Timbs_.

      ROBINSON CRUSOE. 300 Illustrations.

      ENTERTAINING KNOWLEDGE. With 140 Plates.

      PLEASANT TALES. With 140 Plates.

      ÆSOP'S FABLES. With Plates by H. Weir.

      EXTRAORDINARY MEN AND WOMEN.

      DORA AND HER PAPA. By the Author of "Lillian's Golden Hours."

      TALES UPON TEXTS. By _Rev. H. C. Adams_.

      THE ILLUSTRATED GIRL'S OWN TREASURY.

      GREAT BATTLES OF THE BRITISH ARMY. Coloured Plates.

      THE PRINCE OF THE HOUSE OF DAVID. With Plates.

      THE PILLAR OF FIRE. With Plates.

      THE THRONE OF DAVID. With Plates.

      THE STORY OF THE REFORMATION. By _D'Aubigné_

      POPULAR ASTRONOMY AND ORBS OF HEAVEN.

      WOOD'S NATURAL HISTORY PICTURE-BOOK: ANIMALS. 170 Illustrations.
      Fcap. 4to.

      WOOD'S NATURAL HISTORY PICTURE-BOOK: BIRDS. 240 Illustrations.
      Fcap. 4to.

      WOOD'S NATURAL HISTORY PICTURE-BOOK: FISH, REPTILES, INSECTS, &c.
      260 Illustrations. Fcap. 4to.

      GOLDEN LIGHT: Stories for the Young. With 80 large Pictures. Imp.
      16mo.

      POPULAR NURSERY TALES AND RHYMES. With 170 Illustrations. Imp.
      16mo.

      HANS ANDERSEN'S STORIES AND TALES. With 80 Illustrations. Imp.
      16mo.

      SCRIPTURE NATURAL HISTORY. By _Maria E. Catlow_. With 16 pages of
      Coloured Illustrations. Square.

      PICTURE HISTORY OF ENGLAND. With 80 Full-page Illustrations. Fcap.
      4to.

      WHAT THE MOON SAW, and Other Tales. By _Hans C. Andersen_, With 80
      Illustrations. Imp. 16mo.

      THE BOOK OF TRADES. With Hundreds of Illustrations. Imp. 16mo.

      ROUTLEDGE'S SCRIPTURE GIFT-BOOK. With Coloured Plates. Demy 4to.

      THE CHILD'S COLOURED SCRIPTURE BOOK. With 100 Coloured Plates.
      Imp. 16mo.

      THE GOOD CHILD'S COLOURED BOOK. Oblong folio. 24 Coloured Plates.

      CHILD'S PICTURE BOOK OF WILD ANIMALS. 12 Plates, printed in
      Colours by Kronheim. Large oblong, boards. (Cloth, 6_s._)

      PICTURES FROM ENGLISH HISTORY. 24 Pages of Col. Plates.

      OTTO SPECKTER'S PICTURE FABLES. With 100 Coloured Plates. 4to,
      gilt edges.

      THE PLEASURE BOOK OF THE YEAR: A Picture Book with Coloured
      Plates.

      ANIMAL LIFE ALL THE WORLD OVER. Large Coloured Plates. Fancy
      boards. (Cloth, 6_s._)

      BUDS AND FLOWERS OF CHILDISH LIFE. With Coloured Plates (uniform
      with "Schnick-Schnack"). Imp. 16mo.

      THE CHILD'S PICTURE BOOK OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS. 12 large Plates,
      printed in Colours by Kronheim. Large oblong, boards. (In cloth,
      6_s._)

      OUR NURSE'S PICTURE BOOK. With 24 Pages of Coloured Plates. Demy
      4to.

      ROUTLEDGE'S PICTURE SCRAP-BOOK. Folio, boards.


Routledge's Three-and-Sixpenny Juvenile Books.

_All well Illustrated, bound in cloth._

 s. d.
 3  6 OUR DOMESTIC PETS. By the _Rev. J. G. Wood, M.A._ With 16
      Full-page Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo, cloth.

      JACK OF THE MILL. By _William Howitt_. With Page Illustrations.
      Fcap. 8vo, cloth.

      PATIENCE STRONG: A Book for Girls. By the Author of "The
      Gayworthys." With Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo, cloth.

      DON QUIXOTE. A New Edition for Family Reading. With Plates by John
      Gilbert. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt.

