"With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far.  Our task is now in reality more difficult
than ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst
importance.  I can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in
her face.  It is now but very, very slight.  But it is to be seen if
we have eyes to notice without prejudge.  Her teeth are sharper, and
at times her eyes are more hard.  But these are not all, there is to
her the silence now often, as so it was with Miss Lucy.  She did not
speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to be known later.
Now my fear is this.  If it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance,
tell what the Count see and hear, is it not more true that he who have
hypnotize her first, and who have drink of her very blood and make her
drink of his, should if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him
that which she know?"

I nodded acquiescence.  He went on, "Then, what we must do is to
prevent this.  We must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she
cannot tell what she know not.  This is a painful task!  Oh, so
painful that it heartbreak me to think of it, but it must be.  When
today we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not to
speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us."

He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration at
the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured.  I knew that it would be some sort of
comfort to him if I told him that I also had come to the same
conclusion.  For at any rate it would take away the pain of doubt.  I
told him, and the effect was as I expected.

It is now close to the time of our general gathering.  Van Helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it.  I
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.


Later.--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was
experienced by both Van Helsing and myself.  Mrs. Harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present,
as she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our
movements without her presence to embarrass us.  The Professor and I
looked at each other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed
relieved.  For my own part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realized the
danger herself, it was much pain as well as much danger averted.
Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer,
with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we
should have been able to confer alone again.  We went at once into our
Plan of Campaign.

Van Helsing roughly put the facts before us first, "The Czarina
Catherine left the Thames yesterday morning.  It will take her at the
quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to reach Varna.
But we can travel overland to the same place in three days.  Now, if
we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such
weather influences as we know that the Count can bring to bear, and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks.

"Thus, in order to be quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at
latest.  Then we shall at any rate be in Varna a day before the ship
arrives, and able to make such preparations as may be necessary.  Of
course we shall all go armed, armed against evil things, spiritual as
well as physical."

Here Quincey Morris added, "I understand that the Count comes from a
wolf country, and it may be that he shall get there before us.  I
propose that we add Winchesters to our armament.  I have a kind of
belief in a Winchester when there is any trouble of that sort around.
Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack after us at Tobolsk?  What
wouldn't we have given then for a repeater apiece!"

"Good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be.  Quincey's head is
level at times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man.  In the meantime
we can do nothing here.  And as I think that Varna is not familiar to
any of us, why not go there more soon?  It is as long to wait here as
there.  Tonight and tomorrow we can get ready, and then if all be
well, we four can set out on our journey."

"We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of
us.

"Of course!" answered the Professor quickly.  "You must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!"

Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a hollow voice, "Let us
talk of that part of it in the morning.  I want to consult with Mina."

I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not to
disclose our plan to her, but he took no notice.  I looked at him
significantly and coughed.  For answer he put his finger to his lips
and turned away.


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

5 October, afternoon.--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think.  The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought.  Mina's determination
not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking.  And as I
could not argue the matter with her, I could only guess.  I am as far
as ever from a solution now.  The way the others received it, too
puzzled me.  The last time we talked of the subject we agreed that
there was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us.  Mina is
sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child.  Her lips are
curved and her face beams with happiness.  Thank God, there are such
moments still for her.


Later.--How strange it all is.  I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and
I came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be.  As
the evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun
sinking lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to
me.

All at once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly said,
"Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour.
A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears.  Quick, you must make it to me at once."

"Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once.  I may
have no right to make it."

"But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it.  And it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right.  If he disagrees you
may do as you will.  Nay, more if you all agree, later you are
absolved from the promise."

"I promise!" I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy.
Though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her
forehead.

She said, "Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans
formed for the campaign against the Count.  Not by word, or inference,
or implication, not at any time whilst this remains to me!"  And she
solemnly pointed to the scar.  I saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly, "I promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant
a door had been shut between us.


Later, midnight.--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety.  As a result even I myself felt as if the
pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted.  We all
retired early.  Mina is now sleeping like a little child.  It is
wonderful thing that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst
of her terrible trouble.  Thank God for it, for then at least she can
forget her care.  Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did
tonight.  I shall try it.  Oh!  For a dreamless sleep.

6 October, morning.--Another surprise.  Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing.  I
thought that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without
question went for the Professor.  He had evidently expected some such
call, for I found him dressed in his room.  His door was ajar, so that
he could hear the opening of the door of our room.  He came at once.
As he passed into the room, he asked Mina if the others might come,
too.

"No," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary.  You can tell
them just as well.  I must go with you on your journey."

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was.  After a moment's pause he
asked, "But why?"

"You must take me with you.  I am safer with you, and you shall be
safer, too."

"But why, dear Madam Mina?  You know that your safety is our solemnest
duty.  We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable
than any of us from . . . from circumstances . . . things that have
been."  He paused embarrassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead.  "I
know.  That is why I must go.  I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up.  I may not be able again.  I know that when the Count wills
me I must go.  I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must by
wile.  By any device to hoodwink, even Jonathan."  God saw the look
that she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a Recording
Angel that look is noted to her ever-lasting honour.  I could only
clasp her hand.  I could not speak.  My emotion was too great for even
the relief of tears.

She went on.  "You men are brave and strong.  You are strong in your
numbers, for you can defy that which would break down the human
endurance of one who had to guard alone.  Besides, I may be of
service, since you can hypnotize me and so learn that which even I
myself do not know."

Dr. Van Helsing said gravely, "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most
wise.  You shall with us come.  And together we shall do that which we
go forth to achieve."

When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at her.
She had fallen back on her pillow asleep.  She did not even wake when
I had pulled up the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the
room.  Van Helsing motioned to me to come with him quietly.  We went
to his room, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr.
Morris were with us also.

He told them what Mina had said, and went on.  "In the morning we
shall leave for Varna.  We have now to deal with a new factor, Madam
Mina.  Oh, but her soul is true.  It is to her an agony to tell us so
much as she has done.  But it is most right, and we are warned in
time.  There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be ready to
act the instant when that ship arrives."

"What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically.

The Professor paused before replying, "We shall at the first board
that ship.  Then, when we have identified the box, we shall place a
branch of the wild rose on it.  This we shall fasten, for when it is
there none can emerge, so that at least says the superstition.  And to
superstition must we trust at the first.  It was man's faith in the
early, and it have its root in faith still.  Then, when we get the
opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the
box, and . . . and all will be well."

"I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris.  "When I see the
box I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a
thousand men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next
moment!"  I grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a
piece of steel.  I think he understood my look.  I hope he did.

"Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing.  "Brave boy.  Quincey is all man.
God bless him for it.  My child, believe me none of us shall lag
behind or pause from any fear.  I do but say what we may do . . . what
we must do.  But, indeed, indeed we cannot say what we may do.  There
are so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are
so various that until the moment we may not say.  We shall all be
armed, in all ways.  And when the time for the end has come, our
effort shall not be lack.  Now let us today put all our affairs in
order.  Let all things which touch on others dear to us, and who on us
depend, be complete.  For none of us can tell what, or when, or how,
the end may be.  As for me, my own affairs are regulate, and as I have
nothing else to do, I shall go make arrangements for the travel.  I
shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey."

There was nothing further to be said, and we parted.  I shall now
settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come.


Later.--It is done.  My will is made, and all complete.  Mina if she
survive is my sole heir.  If it should not be so, then the others who
have been so good to us shall have remainder.

It is now drawing towards the sunset.  Mina's uneasiness calls my
attention to it.  I am sure that there is something on her mind which
the time of exact sunset will reveal.  These occasions are becoming
harrowing times for us all.  For each sunrise and sunset opens up some
new danger, some new pain, which however, may in God's will be means
to a good end.  I write all these things in the diary since my darling
must not hear them now.  But if it may be that she can see them again,
they shall be ready.  She is calling to me.


CHAPTER 25


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

11 October, Evening.--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record
kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little before the time of sunset.  We have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar
freedom.  When her old self can be manifest without any controlling
force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action.  This
mood or condition begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise
or sunset, and lasts till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds
are still aglow with the rays streaming above the horizon.  At first
there is a sort of negative condition, as if some tie were loosened,
and then the absolute freedom quickly follows.  When, however, the
freedom ceases the change back or relapse comes quickly, preceded
only by a spell of warning silence.

Tonight, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the
signs of an internal struggle.  I put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so.

A very few minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself.
Then, motioning her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she
was half reclining, she made the rest of us bring chairs up close.

Taking her husband's hand in hers, she began, "We are all here
together in freedom, for perhaps the last time!  I know that you will
always be with me to the end."  This was to her husband whose hand had,
as we could see, tightened upon her.  "In the morning we go out upon
our task, and God alone knows what may be in store for any of us.  You
are going to be so good to me to take me with you.  I know that all
that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak woman, whose soul
perhaps is lost, no, no, not yet, but is at any rate at stake, you
will do.  But you must remember that I am not as you are.  There is a
poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me, which must
destroy me, unless some relief comes to us.  Oh, my friends, you know
as well as I do, that my soul is at stake.  And though I know there is
one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!"  She looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

"What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice.  "What is
that way, which we must not, may not, take?"

"That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought.  I know, and you know, that were
I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as
you did my poor Lucy's.  Were death, or the fear of death, the only
thing that stood in the way I would not shrink to die here now, amidst
the friends who love me.  But death is not all.  I cannot believe that
to die in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task
to be done, is God's will.  Therefore, I on my part, give up here the
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the
blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!"

We were all silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a
prelude.  The faces of the others were set, and Harker's grew ashen
grey.  Perhaps, he guessed better than any of us what was coming.

She continued, "This is what I can give into the hotch-pot."  I could
not but note the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place,
and with all seriousness.  "What will each of you give?  Your lives I
know," she went on quickly, "that is easy for brave men.  Your lives
are God's, and you can give them back to Him, but what will you give
to me?"  She looked again questioningly, but this time avoided her
husband's face.  Quincey seemed to understand, he nodded, and her face
lit up.  "Then I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be
no doubtful matter in this connection between us now.  You must
promise me, one and all, even you, my beloved husband, that should the
time come, you will kill me."

"What is that time?"  The voice was Quincey's, but it was low and
strained.

"When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better
that I die that I may live.  When I am thus dead in the flesh, then
you will, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut
off my head, or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!"

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause.  He knelt down before
her and taking her hand in his said solemnly, "I'm only a rough
fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man should to win such a
distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and dear
that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the duty that
you have set us.  And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has
come!"

"My true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears,
as bending over, she kissed his hand.

"I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!" said Van Helsing.  "And I!"
said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to take the
oath.  I followed, myself.

Then her husband turned to her wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor
which subdued the snowy whiteness of his hair, and asked, "And must I,
too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?"

"You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes.  "You must not shrink.  You are nearest and dearest
and all the world to me.  Our souls are knit into one, for all life
and all time.  Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men
have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling
into the hands of the enemy.  Their hands did not falter any the more
because those that they loved implored them to slay them.  It is men's
duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial!  And
oh, my dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it
be at the hand of him that loves me best.  Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved."  She
stopped with a flying blush, and changed her phrase, "to him who had
best right to give her peace.  If that time shall come again, I look
to you to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his
loving hand which set me free from the awful thrall upon me."

"Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice.

Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she
leaned back and said, "And now one word of warning, a warning which
you must never forget.  This time, if it ever come, may come quickly
and unexpectedly, and in such case you must lose no time in using your
opportunity.  At such a time I myself might be . . . nay!  If the time
ever come, shall be, leagued with your enemy against you.

"One more request," she became very solemn as she said this, "it is
not vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing
for me, if you will."

We all acquiesced, but no one spoke.  There was no need to speak.

"I want you to read the Burial Service."  She was interrupted by a
deep groan from her husband.  Taking his hand in hers, she held it
over her heart, and continued.  "You must read it over me some day.
Whatever may be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will
be a sweet thought to all or some of us.  You, my dearest, will I hope
read it, for then it will be in your voice in my memory forever, come
what may!"

"But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you."

"Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand.  "I am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"

"Oh, my wife, must I read it?" he said, before he began.

"It would comfort me, my husband!" was all she said, and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

How can I, how could anyone, tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror, and withal, its
sweetness.  Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of
bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to
the heart had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends
kneeling round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender
passion of her husband's voice, as in tones so broken and emotional
that often he had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service
from the Burial of the Dead.  I cannot go on . . . words . . . and
v-voices . . . f-fail m-me!

She was right in her instinct.  Strange as it was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time,
it comforted us much.  And the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's
coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of
despair to any of us as we had dreaded.


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

15 October, Varna.--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
Orient Express.  We traveled night and day, arriving here at about
five o'clock.  Lord Godalming went to the Consulate to see if any
telegram had arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this
hotel, "the Odessus."  The journey may have had incidents.  I was,
however, too eager to get on, to care for them.  Until the Czarina
Catherine comes into port there will be no interest for me in anything
in the wide world.  Thank God!  Mina is well, and looks to be getting
stronger.  Her colour is coming back.  She sleeps a great deal.
Throughout the journey she slept nearly all the time.  Before sunrise
and sunset, however, she is very wakeful and alert.  And it has become
a habit for Van Helsing to hypnotize her at such times.  At first,
some effort was needed, and he had to make many passes.  But now, she
seems to yield at once, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is
needed.  He seems to have power at these particular moments to simply
will, and her thoughts obey him.  He always asks her what she can see
and hear.

She answers to the first, "Nothing, all is dark."

And to the second, "I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and
the water rushing by.  Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards
creak.  The wind is high . . . I can hear it in the shrouds, and the
bow throws back the foam."

It is evident that the Czarina Catherine is still at sea, hastening on
her way to Varna.  Lord Godalming has just returned.  He had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect.
That the Czarina Catherine had not been reported to Lloyd's from
anywhere.  He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported.
He was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he
might be sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of
the wire.

We had dinner and went to bed early.  Tomorrow we are to see the Vice
Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship as
soon as she arrives.  Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on the boat between sunrise and sunset.  The Count, even if he takes
the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition,
and so cannot leave the ship.  As he dare not change to man's form
without suspicion, which he evidently wishes to avoid, he must remain
in the box.  If, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at
our mercy, for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of
poor Lucy, before he wakes.  What mercy he shall get from us all will
not count for much.  We think that we shall not have much trouble with
officials or the seamen.  Thank God!  This is the country where
bribery can do anything, and we are well supplied with money.  We have
only to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset
and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall be safe.  Judge
Moneybag will settle this case, I think!


16 October.--Mina's report still the same.  Lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds.  We are evidently in good time,
and when we hear of the Czarina Catherine we shall be ready.  As she
must pass the Dardanelles we are sure to have some report.


17 October.--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome
the Count on his return from his tour.  Godalming told the shippers
that he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something
stolen from a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open
it at his own risk.  The owner gave him a paper telling the Captain to
give him every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship,
and also a similar authorization to his agent at Varna.  We have seen
the agent, who was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to
him, and we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our
wishes will be done.

We have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open.  If
the Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at
once and drive a stake through his heart.  Morris and Godalming and I
shall prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we
shall have ready.  The Professor says that if we can so treat the
Count's body, it will soon after fall into dust.  In such case there
would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were
aroused.  But even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act,
and perhaps some day this very script may be evidence to come between
some of us and a rope.  For myself, I should take the chance only too
thankfully if it were to come.  We mean to leave no stone unturned to
carry out our intent.  We have arranged with certain officials that
the instant the Czarina Catherine is seen, we are to be informed by a
special messenger.


24 October.--A whole week of waiting.  Daily telegrams to Godalming,
but only the same story.  "Not yet reported."  Mina's morning and
evening hypnotic answer is unvaried.  Lapping waves, rushing water,
and creaking masts.


TELEGRAM, OCTOBER 24TH RUFUS SMITH, LLOYD'S, LONDON,
TO LORD GODALMING, CARE OF H. B. M. VICE CONSUL, VARNA

"Czarina Catherine reported this morning from Dardanelles."


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

25 October.--How I miss my phonograph!  To write a diary with a pen is
irksome to me!  But Van Helsing says I must.  We were all wild with
excitement yesterday when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd's.  I
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard.
Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion.
After all, it is not strange that she did not, for we took special
care not to let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to
show any excitement when we were in her presence.  In old days she
would, I am sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to
conceal it.  But in this way she is greatly changed during the past
three weeks.  The lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong
and well, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I are
not satisfied.  We talk of her often.  We have not, however, said a
word to the others.  It would break poor Harker's heart, certainly his
nerve, if he knew that we had even a suspicion on the subject.  Van
Helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is
in the hypnotic condition, for he says that so long as they do not
begin to sharpen there is no active danger of a change in her.  If
this change should come, it would be necessary to take steps!  We both
know what those steps would have to be, though we do not mention our
thoughts to each other.  We should neither of us shrink from the task,
awful though it be to contemplate.  "Euthanasia" is an excellent and a
comforting word!  I am grateful to whoever invented it.

It is only about 24 hours' sail from the Dardanelles to here, at the
rate the Czarina Catherine has come from London.  She should therefore
arrive some time in the morning, but as she cannot possibly get in
before noon, we are all about to retire early.  We shall get up at one
o'clock, so as to be ready.


25 October, Noon.--No news yet of the ship's arrival.  Mrs. Harker's
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment.  We men are all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who is calm.  His hands are cold as ice,
and an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka
knife which he now always carries with him.  It will be a bad lookout
for the Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat,
driven by that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker today.
About noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like.
Although we kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy
about it.  She had been restless all the morning, so that we were at
first glad to know that she was sleeping.  When, however, her husband
mentioned casually that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not
wake her, we went to her room to see for ourselves.  She was breathing
naturally and looked so well and peaceful that we agreed that the
sleep was better for her than anything else.  Poor girl, she has so
much to forget that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion
to her, does her good.


Later.--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had
been for days.  At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report.
Wherever he may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his
destination.  To his doom, I trust!


26 October.--Another day and no tidings of the Czarina Catherine.  She
ought to be here by now.  That she is still journeying somewhere is
apparent, for Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report at sunrise was still the
same.  It is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for
fog.  Some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches
of fog both to north and south of the port.  We must continue our
watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment.


27 October, Noon.--Most strange.  No news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual.  "Lapping
waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very
faint."  The telegrams from London have been the same, "no further
report."  Van Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is escaping us.

He added significantly, "I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's.
Souls and memories can do strange things during trance."  I was about
to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and he held up a
warning hand.  We must try tonight at sunset to make her speak more
fully when in her hypnotic state.


28 October.--Telegram.  Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming, care
H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna

"Czarina Catherine reported entering Galatz at one o'clock today."


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

28 October.--When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz I
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected.  True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt
would come.  But I think we all expected that something strange would
happen.  The day of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied
that things would not be just as we had expected.  We only waited to
learn where the change would occur.  None the less, however, it was a
surprise.  I suppose that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we
believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not
as we should know that they will be.  Transcendentalism is a beacon to
the angels, even if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man.  Van Helsing
raised his hand over his head for a moment, as though in remonstrance
with the Almighty.  But he said not a word, and in a few seconds stood
up with his face sternly set.

Lord Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily.  I was
myself half stunned and looked in wonder at one after another.
Quincey Morris tightened his belt with that quick movement which I
knew so well.  In our old wandering days it meant "action."  Mrs.
Harker grew ghastly white, so that the scar on her forehead seemed to
burn, but she folded her hands meekly and looked up in prayer.  Harker
smiled, actually smiled, the dark, bitter smile of one who is without
hope, but at the same time his action belied his words, for his hands
instinctively sought the hilt of the great Kukri knife and rested
there.

"When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing to us
generally.

"At 6:30 tomorrow morning!"  We all started, for the answer came from
Mrs. Harker.

"How on earth do you know?" said Art.

"You forget, or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing, that I am the train fiend.  At home in Exeter I
always used to make up the time tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband.  I found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study
of the time tables now.  I knew that if anything were to take us to
Castle Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through
Bucharest, so I learned the times very carefully.  Unhappily there are
not many to learn, as the only train tomorrow leaves as I say."

"Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor.

"Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming.

Van Helsing shook his head, "I fear not.  This land is very different
from yours or mine.  Even if we did have a special, it would probably
not arrive as soon as our regular train.  Moreover, we have something
to prepare.  We must think.  Now let us organize.  You, friend Arthur,
go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be ready for
us to go in the morning.  Do you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of
the ship and get from him letters to the agent in Galatz, with
authority to make a search of the ship just as it was here.  Quincey
Morris, you see the Vice Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in
Galatz and all he can do to make our way smooth, so that no times be
lost when over the Danube.  John will stay with Madam Mina and me, and
we shall consult.  For so if time be long you may be delayed.  And it
will not matter when the sun set, since I am here with Madam to make
report."

"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than
she had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways,
and shall think and write for you as I used to do.  Something is
shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have
been of late!"

The three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realize the significance of her words.  But Van Helsing and I, turning
to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance.  We said nothing
at the time, however.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
Harker's journal at the Castle.  She went away to get it.

When the door was shut upon her he said to me, "We mean the same!
Speak out!"

"Here is some change.  It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us."

"Quite so.  Do you know why I asked her to get the manuscript?"

"No!" said I, "unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me
alone."

"You are in part right, friend John, but only in part.  I want to tell
you something.  And oh, my friend, I am taking a great, a terrible,
risk.  But I believe it is right.  In the moment when Madam Mina said
those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to
me.  In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to
read her mind.  Or more like he took her to see him in his earth box
in the ship with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of
sun.  He learn then that we are here, for she have more to tell in her
open life with eyes to see ears to hear than he, shut as he is, in his
coffin box.  Now he make his most effort to escape us.  At present he
want her not.

"He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his
call.  But he cut her off, take her, as he can do, out of his own
power, that so she come not to him.  Ah!  There I have hope that our
man brains that have been of man so long and that have not lost the
grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his
tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only
work selfish and therefore small.  Here comes Madam Mina.  Not a word
to her of her trance!  She knows it not, and it would overwhelm her
and make despair just when we want all her hope, all her courage, when
most we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain,
but is of sweet woman and have a special power which the Count give
her, and which he may not take away altogether, though he think not
so.  Hush!  Let me speak, and you shall learn.  Oh, John, my friend,
we are in awful straits.  I fear, as I never feared before.  We can
only trust the good God.  Silence!  Here she comes!"

I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have
hysterics, just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he
controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker
tripped into the room, bright and happy looking and, in the doing of
work, seemingly forgetful of her misery.  As she came in, she handed a
number of sheets of typewriting to Van Helsing.  He looked over them
gravely, his face brightening up as he read.

Then holding the pages between his finger and thumb he said, "Friend
John, to you with so much experience already, and you too, dear Madam
Mina, that are young, here is a lesson.  Do not fear ever to think.  A
half thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to let him
loose his wings.  Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to where
that half thought come from and I find that he be no half thought at
all.  That be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings.  Nay, like the 'Ugly Duck' of my
friend Hans Andersen, he be no duck thought at all, but a big swan
thought that sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to
try them.  See I read here what Jonathan have written.

"That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land, who when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph.

"What does this tell us?  Not much?  No!  The Count's child thought
see nothing, therefore he speak so free.  Your man thought see
nothing.  My man thought see nothing, till just now.  No!  But there
comes another word from some one who speak without thought because
she, too, know not what it mean, what it might mean.  Just as there
are elements which rest, yet when in nature's course they move on
their way and they touch, the pouf!  And there comes a flash of light,
heaven wide, that blind and kill and destroy some.  But that show up
all earth below for leagues and leagues.  Is it not so?  Well, I shall
explain.  To begin, have you ever study the philosophy of crime?
'Yes' and 'No.'  You, John, yes, for it is a study of insanity.  You,
no, Madam Mina, for crime touch you not, not but once.  Still, your
mind works true, and argues not a particulari ad universale.  There is
this peculiarity in criminals.  It is so constant, in all countries
and at all times, that even police, who know not much from philosophy,
come to know it empirically, that it is.  That is to be empiric.  The
criminal always work at one crime, that is the true criminal who seems
predestinate to crime, and who will of none other.  This criminal has
not full man brain.  He is clever and cunning and resourceful, but he
be not of man stature as to brain.  He be of child brain in much.  Now
this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also.  He, too, have
child brain, and it is of the child to do what he have done.  The
little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by
principle, but empirically.  And when he learn to do, then there is to
him the ground to start from to do more.  'Dos pou sto,' said
Archimedes.  'Give me a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!'  To do
once, is the fulcrum whereby child brain become man brain.  And until
he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every
time, just as he have done before!  Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes
are opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues,"
for Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled.

He went on, "Now you shall speak.  Tell us two dry men of science what
you see with those so bright eyes."  He took her hand and held it
whilst he spoke.  His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I
thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke.

"The Count is a criminal and of criminal type.  Nordau and Lombroso
would so classify him, and qua criminal he is of an imperfectly formed
mind.  Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit.  His
past is a clue, and the one page of it that we know, and that from his
own lips, tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call
a 'tight place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort.  He came again better equipped for his work, and
won.  So he came to London to invade a new land.  He was beaten, and
when all hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he
fled back over the sea to his home.  Just as formerly he had fled back
over the Danube from Turkey Land."

"Good, good!  Oh, you so clever lady!" said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand.  A moment later
he said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick room
consultation, "Seventy-two only, and in all this excitement.  I have
hope."

Turning to her again, he said with keen expectation, "But go on.  Go
on!  There is more to tell if you will.  Be not afraid.  John and I
know.  I do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.  Speak,
without fear!"

"I will try to.  But you will forgive me if I seem too egotistical."

"Nay!  Fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think."

"Then, as he is criminal he is selfish.  And as his intellect is small
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose.  That purpose is remorseless.  As he fled back over the
Danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on
being safe, careless of all.  So his own selfishness frees my soul
somewhat from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that
dreadful night.  I felt it!  Oh, I felt it!  Thank God, for His great
mercy!  My soul is freer than it has been since that awful hour.  And
all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have
used my knowledge for his ends."

The Professor stood up, "He has so used your mind, and by it he has
left us here in Varna, whilst the ship that carried him rushed through
enveloping fog up to Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation
for escaping from us.  But his child mind only saw so far.  And it may
be that as ever is in God's Providence, the very thing that the evil
doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be his
chiefest harm.  The hunter is taken in his own snare, as the great
Psalmist says.  For now that he think he is free from every trace of
us all, and that he has escaped us with so many hours to him, then his
selfish child brain will whisper him to sleep.  He think, too, that as
he cut himself off from knowing your mind, there can be no knowledge
of him to you.  There is where he fail!  That terrible baptism of
blood which he give you makes you free to go to him in spirit, as you
have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the sun rise and set.
At such times you go by my volition and not by his.  And this power to
good of you and others, you have won from your suffering at his hands.
This is now all more precious that he know it not, and to guard
himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge of our where.
We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God is with us
through all this blackness, and these many dark hours.  We shall
follow him, and we shall not flinch, even if we peril ourselves that
we become like him.  Friend John, this has been a great hour, and it
have done much to advance us on our way.  You must be scribe and write
him all down, so that when the others return from their work you can
give it to them, then they shall know as we do."

And so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with the typewriter all since she brought the MS to us.


CHAPTER 26


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

29 October.--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz.  Last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset.  Each of us
had done his work as well as he could, so far as thought, and
endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our
journey, and for our work when we get to Galatz.  When the usual time
came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort, and
after a longer and more serious effort on the part of Van Helsing than
has been usually necessary, she sank into the trance.  Usually she
speaks on a hint, but this time the Professor had to ask her
questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn
anything.  At last her answer came.

"I can see nothing.  We are still.  There are no waves lapping, but
only a steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser.  I can
hear men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of
oars in the rowlocks.  A gun is fired somewhere, the echo of it seems
far away.  There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains
are dragged along.  What is this?  There is a gleam of light.  I can
feel the air blowing upon me."

Here she stopped.  She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she
lay on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if
lifting a weight.  Van Helsing and I looked at each other with
understanding.  Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her
intently, whilst Harker's hand instinctively closed round the hilt of
his Kukri.  There was a long pause.  We all knew that the time when
she could speak was passing, but we felt that it was useless to say
anything.

Suddenly she sat up, and as she opened her eyes said sweetly, "Would
none of you like a cup of tea?  You must all be so tired!"

We could only make her happy, and so acquiesced.  She bustled off to
get tea.  When she had gone Van Helsing said, "You see, my friends.  He
is close to land.  He has left his earth chest.  But he has yet to get
on shore.  In the night he may lie hidden somewhere, but if he be not
carried on shore, or if the ship do not touch it, he cannot achieve
the land.  In such case he can, if it be in the night, change his form
and jump or fly on shore, then, unless he be carried he cannot escape.
And if he be carried, then the customs men may discover what the box
contain.  Thus, in fine, if he escape not on shore tonight, or before
dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him.  We may then arrive in
time.  For if he escape not at night we shall come on him in daytime,
boxed up and at our mercy.  For he dare not be his true self, awake
and visible, lest he be discovered."

There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn,
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance.  The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before, and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise
was so short that we began to despair.  Van Helsing seemed to throw
his whole soul into the effort.  At last, in obedience to his will she
made reply.

"All is dark.  I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking
as of wood on wood."  She paused, and the red sun shot up.  We must
wait till tonight.

And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of
expectation.  We are due to arrive between two and three in the
morning.  But already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we
cannot possibly get in till well after sunup.  Thus we shall have two
more hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker!  Either or both may possibly
throw more light on what is happening.


Later.--Sunset has come and gone.  Fortunately it came at a time when
there was no distraction.  For had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning.  I am in fear that her power of reading the Count's
sensations may die away, just when we want it most.  It seems to me
that her imagination is beginning to work.  Whilst she has been in the
trance hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts.  If
this goes on it may ultimately mislead us.  If I thought that the
Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of
knowledge it would be a happy thought.  But I am afraid that it may
not be so.

When she did speak, her words were enigmatical, "Something is going
out.  I can feel it pass me like a cold wind.  I can hear, far off,
confused sounds, as of men talking in strange tongues, fierce falling
water, and the howling of wolves."  She stopped and a shudder ran
through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds, till at the
end, she shook as though in a palsy.  She said no more, even in answer
to the Professor's imperative questioning.  When she woke from the
trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid, but her mind was all
alert.  She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said.
When she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.


30 October, 7 A.M.--We are near Galatz now, and I may not have time to
write later.  Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual.  They produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose.  The Professor
lost no time in his questioning.

Her answer came with equal quickness, "All is dark.  I hear water
swirling by, level with my ears, and the creaking of wood on wood.
Cattle low far off.  There is another sound, a queer one like . . ."
She stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

"Go on, go on!  Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing in an agonized
voice.  At the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen
sun was reddening even Mrs. Harker's pale face.  She opened her eyes,
and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
unconcern.

"Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what you know I can't?  I don't
remember anything."  Then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces,
she said, turning from one to the other with a troubled look, "What
have I said?  What have I done?  I know nothing, only that I was lying
here, half asleep, and heard you say 'go on! speak, I command you!'  It
seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad child!"

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of
how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom
I am proud to obey!"

The whistles are sounding.  We are nearing Galatz.  We are on fire
with anxiety and eagerness.


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL

30 October.--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any foreign language.  The forces were distributed
much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the
Vice Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry.  Jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the Czarina Catherine.


Later.--Lord Godalming has returned.  The Consul is away, and the Vice
Consul sick.  So the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.  He
was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

30 October.--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called
on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of
Hapgood.  They had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord
Godalming's telegraphed request, asking them to show us any civility
in their power.  They were more than kind and courteous, and took us
at once on board the Czarina Catherine, which lay at anchor out in the
river harbor.  There we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us
of his voyage.  He said that in all his life he had never had so
favourable a run.

"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expect it that we
should have to pay for it wi' some rare piece o' ill luck, so as to
keep up the average.  It's no canny to run frae London to the Black
Sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though the Deil himself were blawin' on
yer sail for his ain purpose.  An' a' the time we could no speer a
thing.  Gin we were nigh a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell
on us and travelled wi' us, till when after it had lifted and we
looked out, the deil a thing could we see.  We ran by Gibraltar wi'
oot bein' able to signal.  An' til we came to the Dardanelles and had
to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o'
aught.  At first I inclined to slack off sail and beat about till the
fog was lifted.  But whiles, I thocht that if the Deil was minded to
get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it whether we would
or no.  If we had a quick voyage it would be no to our miscredit
wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic, an' the Old Mon who had
served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin'
him."

This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial
reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said, "Mine friend, that Devil is
more clever than he is thought by some, and he know when he meet his
match!"

The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on, "When
we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble.  Some o' them, the
Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had
started frae London.  I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out
their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard them against the evil
eye.  Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly
rideeculous!  I sent them aboot their business pretty quick, but as
just after a fog closed in on us I felt a wee bit as they did anent
something, though I wouldn't say it was again the big box.  Well, on
we went, and as the fog didn't let up for five days I joost let the
wind carry us, for if the Deil wanted to get somewheres, well, he
would fetch it up a'reet.  An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp
lookout anyhow.  Sure eneuch, we had a fair way and deep water all the
time.  And two days ago, when the mornin' sun came through the fog, we
found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz.  The Roumanians
were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling
it in the river.  I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a handspike.  An'
when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in his hand, I
had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the property and the
trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the river Danube.
They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to fling in, and as
it was marked Galatz via Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we
discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither.  We didn't do much
clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor.  But in the
mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sunup, a man came aboard wi'
an order, written to him from England, to receive a box marked for one
Count Dracula.  Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to his hand.  He
had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be rid o' the dam' thing,
for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it.  If the Deil did have
any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that
same!"

"What was the name of the man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing with
restrained eagerness.

"I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim."  Burgen-strasse
16 was the address.  We found out that this was all the Captain knew,
so with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi
Theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez.  His arguments were
pointed with specie, we doing the punctuation, and with a little
bargaining he told us what he knew.  This turned out to be simple but
important.  He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London,
telling him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid
customs, a box which would arrive at Galatz in the Czarina Catherine.
This he was to give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt
with the Slovaks who traded down the river to the port.  He had been
paid for his work by an English bank note, which had been duly cashed
for gold at the Danube International Bank.  When Skinsky had come to
him, he had taken him to the ship and handed over the box, so as to
save porterage.  That was all he knew.

We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him.  One of his
neighbors, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he
had gone away two days before, no one knew whither.  This was
corroborated by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of
the house together with the rent due, in English money.  This had been
between ten and eleven o'clock last night.  We were at a standstill
again.

Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out
that the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the
churchyard of St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if
by some wild animal.  Those we had been speaking with ran off to see
the horror, the women crying out.  "This is the work of a Slovak!"  We
hurried away lest we should have been in some way drawn into the
affair, and so detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion.  We were
all convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere, but
where that might be we would have to discover.  With heavy hearts we
came home to the hotel to Mina.

When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence.  Things are getting desperate, and it is at
least a chance, though a hazardous one.  As a preliminary step, I was
released from my promise to her.


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL

30 October, evening.--They were so tired and worn out and dispirited
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest, so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to the moment.  I feel so grateful to the man who invented the
"Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for
me.  I should have felt quite astray doing the work if I had to write
with a pen . . .

It is all done.  Poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what he must be suffering now.  He lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse.  His brows are knit.
His face is drawn with pain.  Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I
can see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his
thoughts.  Oh! if I could only help at all.  I shall do what I can.

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the papers that I
have not yet seen.  Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion.  I shall try
to follow the Professor's example, and think without prejudice on the
facts before me . . .

I do believe that under God's providence I have made a discovery.  I
shall get the maps and look over them.

I am more than ever sure that I am right.  My new conclusion is ready,
so I shall get our party together and read it.  They can judge it.  It
is well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.


MINA HARKER'S MEMORANDUM

(ENTERED IN HER JOURNAL)


Ground of inquiry.--Count Dracula's problem is to get back
to his own place.

(a) He must be brought back by some one.  This is evident;
for had he power to move himself as he wished he could go
either as man, or wolf, or bat, or in some other way.  He
evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of
helplessness in which he must be, confined as he is between
dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(b) How is he to be taken?--Here a process of exclusions may
help us.  By road, by rail, by water?

1.  By Road.--There are endless difficulties, especially in
leaving the city.

(x) There are people.  And people are curious, and
investigate.  A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to what might
be in the box, would destroy him.

(y) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers
to pass.

(z) His pursuers might follow.  This is his highest fear.
And in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled,
so far as he can, even his victim, me!

2.  By Rail.--There is no one in charge of the box.  It
would have to take its chance of being delayed, and delay
would be fatal, with enemies on the track.  True, he might
escape at night.  But what would he be, if left in a strange
place with no refuge that he could fly to?  This is not what he
intends, and he does not mean to risk it.

3.  By Water.--Here is the safest way, in one respect, but
with most danger in another.  On the water he is powerless
except at night.  Even then he can only summon fog and storm and
snow and his wolves.  But were he wrecked, the living water would
engulf him, helpless, and he would indeed be lost.  He could have
the vessel drive to land, but if it were unfriendly land, wherein
he was not free to move, his position would still be desperate.

We know from the record that he was on the water, so what
we have to do is to ascertain what water.

The first thing is to realize exactly what he has done as
yet.  We may, then, get a light on what his task is to be.

Firstly.--We must differentiate between what he did in
London as part of his general plan of action, when he was
pressed for moments and had to arrange as best he could.

Secondly.--We must see, as well as we can surmise it from the
facts we know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz,
and sent invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain
his means of exit from England.  His immediate and sole purpose
then was to escape.  The proof of this, is the letter of
instructions sent to Immanuel Hildesheim to clear and take away
the box before sunrise.  There is also the instruction to Petrof
Skinsky.  These we must only guess at, but there must have been
some letter or message, since Skinsky came to Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know.  The Czarina
Catherine made a phenomenally quick journey.  So much so that
Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused.  But his superstition
united with his canniness played the Count's game for him, and he
ran with his favouring wind through fogs and all till he brought
up blindfold at Galatz.  That the Count's arrangements were well
made, has been proved.  Hildesheim cleared the box, took it off,
and gave it to Skinsky.  Skinsky took it, and here we lose the
trail.  We only know that the box is somewhere on the water,
moving along.  The customs and the octroi, if there be any, have
been avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his
arrival, on land, at Galatz.

The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise.  At sunrise
the Count could appear in his own form.  Here, we ask why
Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work?  In my husband's
diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade
down the river to the port.  And the man's remark, that the
murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general feeling
against his class.  The Count wanted isolation.

My surmise is this, that in London the Count decided to get
back to his castle by water, as the most safe and secret
way.  He was brought from the castle by Szgany, and probably they
delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for
there they were shipped to London.  Thus the Count had knowledge
of the persons who could arrange this service.  When the box was
on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his
box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to arranging
the carriage of the box up some river.  When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he
thought, by murdering his agent.

I have examined the map and find that the river most
suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the
Pruth or the Sereth.  I read in the typescript that in my
trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my
ears and the creaking of wood.  The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat, propelled probably either
by oars or poles, for the banks are near and it is working
against stream.  There would be no such if floating down
stream.

Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth, but
we may possibly investigate further.  Now of these two, the
Pruth is the more easily navigated, but the Sereth is, at
Fundu, joined by the Bistritza which runs up round the Borgo
Pass.  The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's
castle as can be got by water.


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL--CONTINUED

When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me.
The others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said,
"Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher.  Her eyes have been
where we were blinded.  Now we are on the track once again, and this
time we may succeed.  Our enemy is at his most helpless.  And if we
can come on him by day, on the water, our task will be over.  He has a
start, but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave this box
lest those who carry him may suspect.  For them to suspect would be to
prompt them to throw him in the stream where he perish.  This he
knows, and will not.  Now men, to our Council of War, for here and
now, we must plan what each and all shall do."

"I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming.

"And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr.
Morris.

"Good!" said the Professor, "both good.  But neither must go alone.
There must be force to overcome force if need be.  The Slovak is
strong and rough, and he carries rude arms."  All the men smiled, for
amongst them they carried a small arsenal.

Said Mr. Morris, "I have brought some Winchesters.  They are pretty
handy in a crowd, and there may be wolves.  The Count, if you
remember, took some other precautions.  He made some requisitions on
others that Mrs. Harker could not quite hear or understand.  We must
be ready at all points."

Dr. Seward said, "I think I had better go with Quincey.  We have been
accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a match
for whatever may come along.  You must not be alone, Art.  It may be
necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance thrust, for I don't
suppose these fellows carry guns, would undo all our plans.  There
must be no chances, this time.  We shall not rest until the Count's
head and body have been separated, and we are sure that he cannot
reincarnate."

He looked at Jonathan as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me.  I could
see that the poor dear was torn about in his mind.  Of course he
wanted to be with me.  But then the boat service would, most likely,
be the one which would destroy the . . . the . . . Vampire.  (Why did
I hesitate to write the word?)

He was silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke,
"Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons.  First, because
you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed
at the last.  And again that it is your right to destroy him.  That,
which has wrought such woe to you and yours.  Be not afraid for Madam
Mina.  She will be my care, if I may.  I am old.  My legs are not so
quick to run as once.  And I am not used to ride so long or to pursue
as need be, or to fight with lethal weapons.  But I can be of other
service.  I can fight in other way.  And I can die, if need be, as
well as younger men.  Now let me say that what I would is this.  While
you, my Lord Godalming and friend Jonathan go in your so swift little
steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank
where perchance he might be landed, I will take Madam Mina right into
the heart of the enemy's country.  Whilst the old fox is tied in his
box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land,
where he dares not raise the lid of his coffin box lest his Slovak
carriers should in fear leave him to perish, we shall go in the track
where Jonathan went, from Bistritz over the Borgo, and find our way to
the Castle of Dracula.  Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely
help, and we shall find our way, all dark and unknown otherwise, after
the first sunrise when we are near that fateful place.  There is much
to be done, and other places to be made sanctify, so that that nest of
vipers be obliterated."

Here Jonathan interrupted him hotly, "Do you mean to say, Professor
Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina, in her sad case and tainted as
she is with that devil's illness, right into the jaws of his
deathtrap?  Not for the world!  Not for Heaven or Hell!"

He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on, "Do you
know what the place is?  Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy, with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo?
Have you felt the Vampire's lips upon your throat?"

Here he turned to me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up
his arms with a cry, "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this
terror upon us?" and he sank down on the sofa in a collapse of misery.

The Professor's voice, as he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed
to vibrate in the air, calmed us all.

"Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful
place that I would go.  God forbid that I should take her into that
place.  There is work, wild work, to be done before that place can be
purify.  Remember that we are in terrible straits.  If the Count
escape us this time, and he is strong and subtle and cunning, he may
choose to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one," he
took my hand, "would come to him to keep him company, and would be as
those others that you, Jonathan, saw.  You have told us of their
gloating lips.  You heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the
moving bag that the Count threw to them.  You shudder, and well may it
be.  Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is necessary.  My
friend, is it not a dire need for that which I am giving, possibly my
life?  If it were that any one went into that place to stay, it is I
who would have to go to keep them company."

"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over,
"we are in the hands of God!"


Later.--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked.
How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so true,
and so brave!  And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of
money!  What can it not do when basely used.  I felt so thankful that
Lord Godalming is rich, and both he and Mr. Morris, who also has
plenty of money, are willing to spend it so freely.  For if they did
not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so
well equipped, as it will within another hour.  It is not three hours
since it was arranged what part each of us was to do.  And now Lord
Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam launch, with steam up ready
to start at a moment's notice.  Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris have half a
dozen good horses, well appointed.  We have all the maps and
appliances of various kinds that can be had.  Professor Van Helsing
and I are to leave by the 11:40 train tonight for Veresti, where we
are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass.  We are bringing a
good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and horses.  We
shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust in the
matter.  The Professor knows something of a great many languages, so
we shall get on all right.  We have all got arms, even for me a large
bore revolver.  Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like
the rest.  Alas!  I cannot carry one arm that the rest do, the scar on
my forehead forbids that.  Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling
me that I am fully armed as there may be wolves.  The weather is
getting colder every hour, and there are snow flurries which come and
go as warnings.


Later.--It took all my courage to say goodbye to my darling.  We may
never meet again.  Courage, Mina!  The Professor is looking at you
keenly.  His look is a warning.  There must be no tears now, unless it
may be that God will let them fall in gladness.


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

30 October, night.--I am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch.  Lord Godalming is firing up.  He is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads.  Regarding our
plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if
any waterway was chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the one.  We
took it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would
be the place chosen for crossing the country between the river and the
Carpathians.  We have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night.  There is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart
to make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough.  Lord Godalming tells
me to sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be
on watch.  But I cannot sleep, how can I with the terrible danger
hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place . . .

My only comfort is that we are in the hands of God.  Only for that
faith it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all
the trouble.  Mr. Morris and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride
before we started.  They are to keep up the right bank, far enough off
to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and
avoid the following of its curves.  They have, for the first stages,
two men to ride and lead their spare horses, four in all, so as not to
excite curiosity.  When they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly,
they shall themselves look after the horses.  It may be necessary for
us to join forces.  If so they can mount our whole party.  One of the
saddles has a moveable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if
required.

It is a wild adventure we are on.  Here, as we are rushing along
through the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up
and strike us, with all the mysterious voices of the night around us,
it all comes home.  We seem to be drifting into unknown places and
unknown ways.  Into a whole world of dark and dreadful things.
Godalming is shutting the furnace door . . .


31 October.--Still hurrying along.  The day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping.  I am on watch.  The morning is bitterly cold, the furnace
heat is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats.  As yet we have
passed only a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or
package of anything like the size of the one we seek.  The men were
scared every time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on
their knees and prayed.


1 November, evening.--No news all day.  We have found nothing of the
kind we seek.  We have now passed into the Bistritza, and if we are
wrong in our surmise our chance is gone.  We have overhauled every
boat, big and little.  Early this morning, one crew took us for a
Government boat, and treated us accordingly.  We saw in this a way of
smoothing matters, so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the
Sereth, we got a Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously.  With
every boat which we have overhauled since then this trick has
succeeded.  We have had every deference shown to us, and not once any
objection to whatever we chose to ask or do.  Some of the Slovaks tell
us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she
had a double crew on board.  This was before they came to Fundu, so
they could not tell us whether the boat turned into the Bistritza or
continued on up the Sereth.  At Fundu we could not hear of any such
boat, so she must have passed there in the night.  I am feeling very
sleepy.  The cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon me, and nature
must have rest some time.  Godalming insists that he shall keep the
first watch.  God bless him for all his goodness to poor dear Mina and
me.


2 November, morning.--It is broad daylight.  That good fellow would
not wake me.  He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept
peacefully and was forgetting my trouble.  It seems brutally selfish
to me to have slept so long, and let him watch all night, but he was
quite right.  I am a new man this morning.  And, as I sit here and
watch him sleeping, I can do all that is necessary both as to minding
the engine, steering, and keeping watch.  I can feel that my strength
and energy are coming back to me.  I wonder where Mina is now, and Van
Helsing.  They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday.  It
would take them some time to get the carriage and horses.  So if they
had started and travelled hard, they would be about now at the Borgo
Pass.  God guide and help them!  I am afraid to think what may
happen.  If we could only go faster.  But we cannot.  The engines are
throbbing and doing their utmost.  I wonder how Dr. Seward and Mr.
Morris are getting on.  There seem to be endless streams running down
the mountains into this river, but as none of them are very large, at
present, at all events, though they are doubtless terrible in winter
and when the snow melts, the horsemen may not have met much
obstruction.  I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see them.
For if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

2 November.--Three days on the road.  No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious.  We have had only the
rest needful for the horses.  But we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful.  We must push
on.  We shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.


3 November.--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bistritza.  I wish it wasn't so cold.  There are signs of snow coming.
And if it falls heavy it will stop us.  In such case we must get a
sledge and go on, Russian fashion.

4 November.--Today we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapids.  The Slovak boats
get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge.  Some
went up only a few hours before.  Godalming is an amateur fitter
himself, and evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again.

Finally, they got up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off
on the chase afresh.  I fear that the boat is not any better for the
accident, the peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water
again, she kept stopping every now and again so long as she was in
sight.  We must push on harder than ever.  Our help may be wanted
soon.


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL

31 October.--Arrived at Veresti at noon.  The Professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotize me at all, and that all
I could say was, "dark and quiet."  He is off now buying a carriage
and horses.  He says that he will later on try to buy additional
horses, so that we may be able to change them on the way.  We have
something more than 70 miles before us.  The country is lovely, and
most interesting.  If only we were under different conditions, how
delightful it would be to see it all.  If Jonathan and I were driving
through it alone what a pleasure it would be.  To stop and see people,
and learn something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories
with all the colour and picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful
country and the quaint people!  But, alas!


Later.--Dr. Van Helsing has returned.  He has got the carriage and
horses.  We are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour.  The
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions.  It seems
enough for a company of soldiers.  The Professor encourages her, and
whispers to me that it may be a week before we can get any food again.
He has been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of
fur coats and wraps, and all sorts of warm things.  There will not be
any chance of our being cold.

We shall soon be off.  I am afraid to think what may happen to us.  We
are truly in the hands of God.  He alone knows what may be, and I pray
Him, with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will
watch over my beloved husband.  That whatever may happen, Jonathan may
know that I loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that my
latest and truest thought will be always for him.


CHAPTER 27


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL

1 November.--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed.  The
horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go
willingly their full stage at best speed.  We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged
to think that the journey will be an easy one.  Dr. Van Helsing is
laconic, he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and
pays them well to make the exchange of horses.  We get hot soup, or
coffee, or tea, and off we go.  It is a lovely country.  Full of
beauties of all imaginable kinds, and the people are brave, and
strong, and simple, and seem full of nice qualities.  They are very,
very superstitious.  In the first house where we stopped, when the
woman who served us saw the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself
and put out two fingers towards me, to keep off the evil eye.  I
believe they went to the trouble of putting an extra amount of garlic
into our food, and I can't abide garlic.  Ever since then I have taken
care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped their
suspicions.  We are travelling fast, and as we have no driver with us
to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal.  But I daresay that fear of
the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way.  The Professor
seems tireless.  All day he would not take any rest, though he made me
sleep for a long spell.  At sunset time he hypnotized me, and he says
I answered as usual, "darkness, lapping water and creaking wood."  So
our enemy is still on the river.  I am afraid to think of Jonathan,
but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself.  I write this
whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be ready.  Dr. Van
Helsing is sleeping.  Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey,
but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's.  Even in his sleep he
is intense with resolution.  When we have well started I must make him
rest whilst I drive.  I shall tell him that we have days before us,
and he must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed . . . All is ready.  We are off shortly.


2 November, morning.--I was successful, and we took turns driving all
night.  Now the day is on us, bright though cold.  There is a strange
heaviness in the air.  I say heaviness for want of a better word.  I
mean that it oppresses us both.  It is very cold, and only our warm
furs keep us comfortable.  At dawn Van Helsing hypnotized me.  He says
I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river
is changing as they ascend.  I do hope that my darling will not run
any chance of danger, more than need be, but we are in God's hands.


2 November, night.--All day long driving.  The country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front.  We both seem in good spirits.  I think we make an
effort each to cheer the other, in the doing so we cheer ourselves.
Dr. Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass.
The houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last
horse we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to
change.  He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we
have a rude four-in-hand.  The dear horses are patient and good, and
they give us no trouble.  We are not worried with other travellers,
and so even I can drive.  We shall get to the Pass in daylight.  We do
not want to arrive before.  So we take it easy, and have each a long
rest in turn.  Oh, what will tomorrow bring to us?  We go to seek the
place where my poor darling suffered so much.  God grant that we may
be guided aright, and that He will deign to watch over my husband and
those dear to us both, and who are in such deadly peril.  As for me, I
am not worthy in His sight.  Alas!  I am unclean to His eyes, and
shall be until He may deign to let me stand forth in His sight as one
of those who have not incurred His wrath.


MEMORANDUM BY ABRAHAM VAN HELSING

4 November.--This to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D.,
of Purfleet, London, in case I may not see him.  It may
explain.  It is morning, and I write by a fire which all
the night I have kept alive, Madam Mina aiding me.  It is
cold, cold.  So cold that the grey heavy sky is full of
snow, which when it falls will settle for all winter as the
ground is hardening to receive it.  It seems to have affected
Madam Mina.  She has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like herself.  She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps!  She who
is usual so alert, have done literally nothing all the day.  She
even have lost her appetite.  She make no entry into her little
diary, she who write so faithful at every pause.  Something
whisper to me that all is not well.  However, tonight she is more
_vif_.  Her long sleep all day have refresh and restore her, for
now she is all sweet and bright as ever.  At sunset I try to
hypnotize her, but alas! with no effect.  The power has grown
less and less with each day, and tonight it fail me altogether.
Well, God's will be done, whatever it may be, and whithersoever
it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her
stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so
each day of us may not go unrecorded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday
morning.  When I saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for
the hypnotism.  We stopped our carriage, and got down so
that there might be no disturbance.  I made a couch with
furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual,
but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic
sleep.  As before, came the answer, "darkness and the swirling of
water."  Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way
and soon reach the Pass.  At this time and place, she become all
on fire with zeal.  Some new guiding power be in her manifested,
for she point to a road and say, "This is the way."

"How know you it?" I ask.

"Of course I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add,
"Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?"

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there be
only one such byroad.  It is used but little, and very different
from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more
wide and hard, and more of use.

So we came down this road.  When we meet other ways, not
always were we sure that they were roads at all, for they
be neglect and light snow have fallen, the horses know and
they only.  I give rein to them, and they go on so patient.  By
and by we find all the things which Jonathan have note in that
wonderful diary of him.  Then we go on for long, long hours and
hours.  At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep.  She try, and
she succeed.  She sleep all the time, till at the last, I feel
myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her.  But she
sleep on, and I may not wake her though I try.  I do not wish to
try too hard lest I harm her.  For I know that she have suffer
much, and sleep at times be all-in-all to her.  I think I drowse
myself, for all of sudden I feel guilt, as though I have done
something.  I find myself bolt up, with the reins in my hand, and
the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever.  I look down and
find Madam Mina still asleep.  It is now not far off sunset time,
and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so
steep.  For we are going up, and up, and all is oh so wild and
rocky, as though it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina.  This time she wake with not much
trouble, and then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep.  But
she sleep not, being as though I were not.  Still I try and
try, till all at once I find her and myself in dark, so I
look round, and find that the sun have gone down.  Madam
Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her.  She is now quite
awake, and look so well as I never saw her since that night
at Carfax when we first enter the Count's house.  I am amaze, and
not at ease then.  But she is so bright and tender and thoughtful
for me that I forget all fear.  I light a fire, for we have
brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare food while I undo
the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed.  Then when
I return to the fire she have my supper ready.  I go to help her,
but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already.  That she
was so hungry that she would not wait.  I like it not, and I have
grave doubts.  But I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of
it.  She help me and I eat alone, and then we wrap in fur and lie
beside the fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch.  But
presently I forget all of watching.  And when I sudden remember
that I watch, I find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at
me with so bright eyes.  Once, twice more the same occur, and I
get much sleep till before morning.  When I wake I try to
hypnotize her, but alas! though she shut her eyes obedient, she
may not sleep.  The sun rise up, and up, and up, and then sleep
come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake.  I
have to lift her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when
I have harnessed the horses and made all ready.  Madam still
sleep, and she look in her sleep more healthy and more redder
than before.  And I like it not.  And I am afraid, afraid,
afraid!  I am afraid of all things, even to think but I must go
on my way.  The stake we play for is life and death, or more than
these, and we must not flinch.


5 November, morning.--Let me be accurate in everything, for
though you and I have seen some strange things together,
you may at the first think that I, Van Helsing, am mad.
That the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves has
at the last turn my brain.

All yesterday we travel, always getting closer to the
mountains, and moving into a more and more wild and desert
land.  There are great, frowning precipices and much falling
water, and Nature seem to have held sometime her carnival.  Madam
Mina still sleep and sleep.  And though I did have hunger and
appeased it, I could not waken her, even for food.  I began to
fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as
she is with that Vampire baptism.  "Well," said I to myself, "if
it be that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I do not
sleep at night."  As we travel on the rough road, for a road of
an ancient and imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and
slept.

Again I waked with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and
found Madam Mina still sleeping, and the sun low down.  But
all was indeed changed.  The frowning mountains seemed further
away, and we were near the top of a steep rising hill, on summit
of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary.  At
once I exulted and feared.  For now, for good or ill, the end was
near.

I woke Madam Mina, and again tried to hypnotize her, but
alas!  unavailing till too late.  Then, ere the great dark
came upon us, for even after down sun the heavens reflected
the gone sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great
twilight.  I took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I
could.  Then I make a fire, and near it I make Madam Mina, now
awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs.
I got ready food, but she would not eat, simply saying that she
had not hunger.  I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness.
But I myself eat, for I must needs now be strong for all.  Then,
with the fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for
her comfort, round where Madam Mina sat.  And over the ring I
passed some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all was
well guarded.  She sat still all the time, so still as one dead.
And she grew whiter and even whiter till the snow was not more
pale, and no word she said.  But when I drew near, she clung to
me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel.

I said to her presently, when she had grown more quiet,
"Will you not come over to the fire?" for I wished to make
a test of what she could.  She rose obedient, but when she
have made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked.  She shook her head, and coming
back, sat down in her place.  Then, looking at me with open
eyes, as of one waked from sleep, she said simply, "I cannot!"
and remained silent.  I rejoiced, for I knew that what she could
not, none of those that we dreaded could.  Though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their
tethers till I came to them and quieted them.  When they
did feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and
licked at my hands and were quiet for a time.  Many times
through the night did I come to them, till it arrive to the
cold hour when all nature is at lowest, and every time my
coming was with quiet of them.  In the cold hour the fire
began to die, and I was about stepping forth to replenish
it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it a
chill mist.  Even in the dark there was a light of some
kind, as there ever is over snow, and it seemed as though
the snow flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of
women with trailing garments.  All was in dead, grim silence only
that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the
worst.  I began to fear, horrible fears.  But then came to me the
sense of safety in that ring wherein I stood.  I began too, to
think that my imaginings were of the night, and the gloom, and
the unrest that I have gone through, and all the terrible
anxiety.  It was as though my memories of all Jonathan's horrid
experience were befooling me.  For the snow flakes and the mist
began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though a
shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed him.  And
then the horses cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as
men do in pain.  Even the madness of fright was not to them, so
that they could break away.  I feared for my dear Madam Mina when
these weird figures drew near and circled round.  I looked at her,
but she sat calm, and smiled at me.  When I would have stepped to
the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and
whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low it was.

"No!  No!  Do not go without.  Here you are safe!"

I turned to her, and looking in her eyes said, "But you?
It is for you that I fear!"

Whereat she laughed, a laugh low and unreal, and said, "Fear
for me!  Why fear for me?  None safer in all the world from
them than I am," and as I wondered at the meaning of her
words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I see the
red scar on her forehead.  Then, alas!  I knew.  Did I not,
I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist
and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy
circle.  Then they began to materialize till, if God have
not taken away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes.
There were before me in actual flesh the same three women
that Jonathan saw in the room, when they would have kissed
his throat.  I knew the swaying round forms, the bright
hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips.  They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina.  And as
their laugh came through the silence of the night, they
twined their arms and pointed to her, and said in those so
sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the intolerable
sweetness of the water glasses, "Come, sister.  Come to us.
Come!"

In fear I turned to my poor Madam Mina, and my heart with
gladness leapt like flame.  For oh! the terror in her sweet
eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart
that was all of hope.  God be thanked she was not, yet, of
them.  I seized some of the firewood which was by me, and
holding out some of the Wafer, advanced on them towards the
fire.  They drew back before me, and laughed their low horrid
laugh.  I fed the fire, and feared them not.  For I knew that we
were safe within the ring, which she could not leave no more than
they could enter.  The horses had ceased to moan, and lay still
on the ground.  The snow fell on them softly, and they grew
whiter.  I knew that there was for the poor beasts no more of
terror.

And so we remained till the red of the dawn began to fall
through the snow gloom.  I was desolate and afraid, and
full of woe and terror.  But when that beautiful sun began
to climb the horizon life was to me again.  At the first
coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling
mist and snow.  The wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam Mina,
intending to hypnotize her.  But she lay in a deep and sudden
sleep, from which I could not wake her.  I tried to hypnotize
through her sleep, but she made no response, none at all, and the
day broke.  I fear yet to stir.  I have made my fire and have
seen the horses, they are all dead.  Today I have much to do here,
and I keep waiting till the sun is up high.  For there may be
places where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist
obscure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will do my
terrible work.  Madam Mina still sleeps, and God be thanked!  She
is calm in her sleep . . .


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

4 November, evening.--The accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us.  Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago,
and by now my dear Mina would have been free.  I fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place.  We have got horses, and we
follow on the track.  I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready.
We have our arms.  The Szgany must look out if they mean to fight.  Oh,
if only Morris and Seward were with us.  We must only hope!  If I
write no more Goodby Mina!  God bless and keep you.


DR. SEWARD'S DIARY

5 November.--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany before us dashing
away from the river with their leiter wagon.  They surrounded it in a
cluster, and hurried along as though beset.  The snow is falling
lightly and there is a strange excitement in the air.  It may be our
own feelings, but the depression is strange.  Far off I hear the
howling of wolves.  The snow brings them down from the mountains, and
there are dangers to all of us, and from all sides.  The horses are
nearly ready, and we are soon off.  We ride to death of some one.  God
alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be . . .


DR. VAN HELSING'S MEMORANDUM

5 November, afternoon.--I am at least sane.  Thank God for
that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been
dreadful.  When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy
circle, I took my way to the castle.  The blacksmith hammer
which I took in the carriage from Veresti was useful, though the
doors were all open I broke them off the rusty hinges, lest some
ill intent or ill chance should close them, so that being entered
I might not get out.  Jonathan's bitter experience served me
here.  By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel,
for I knew that here my work lay.  The air was oppressive.  It
seemed as if there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made
me dizzy.  Either there was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar
off the howl of wolves.  Then I bethought me of my dear Madam
Mina, and I was in terrible plight.  The dilemma had me between
his horns.

Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left safe
from the Vampire in that Holy circle.  And yet even there
would be the wolf!  I resolve me that my work lay here, and
that as to the wolves we must submit, if it were God's will.  At
any rate it was only death and freedom beyond.  So did I choose
for her.  Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy,
the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the
Vampire!  So I make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find, graves
that are inhabit.  So I search, and search, and I find one
of them.  She lay in her Vampire sleep, so full of life and
voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I have come to
do murder.  Ah, I doubt not that in the old time, when such
things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as
mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then his
nerve.  So he delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere
beauty and the fascination of the wanton Undead have hypnotize
him.  And he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire
sleep be over.  Then the beautiful eyes of the fair woman open
and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss, and
the man is weak.  And there remain one more victim in the
Vampire fold.  One more to swell the grim and grisly ranks
of the Undead! . . .

There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the
mere presence of such an one, even lying as she lay in a
tomb fretted with age and heavy with the dust of centuries,
though there be that horrid odour such as the lairs of the
Count have had.  Yes, I was moved.  I, Van Helsing, with
all my purpose and with my motive for hate.  I was moved to
a yearning for delay which seemed to paralyze my faculties
and to clog my very soul.  It may have been that the need
of natural sleep, and the strange oppression of the air
were beginning to overcome me.  Certain it was that I was
lapsing into sleep, the open eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled
air a long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me
like the sound of a clarion.  For it was the voice of my dear
Madam Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by
wrenching away tomb tops one other of the sisters, the other dark
one.  I dared not pause to look on her as I had on her sister,
lest once more I should begin to be enthrall.  But I go on
searching until, presently, I find in a high great tomb as if
made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like
Jonathan I had seen to gather herself out of the atoms of the
mist.  She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so
exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me,
which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers,
made my head whirl with new emotion.  But God be thanked, that
soul wail of my dear Madam Mina had not died out of my ears.
And, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, I had
nerved myself to my wild work.  By this time I had searched all
the tombs in the chapel, so far as I could tell.  And as there
had been only three of these Undead phantoms around us in the
night, I took it that there were no more of active Undead
existent.  There was one great tomb more lordly than all the
rest.  Huge it was, and nobly proportioned.  On it was but one
word.


            DRACULA


This then was the Undead home of the King Vampire, to whom
so many more were due.  Its emptiness spoke eloquent to
make certain what I knew.  Before I began to restore these
women to their dead selves through my awful work, I laid in
Dracula's tomb some of the Wafer, and so banished him from
it, Undead, for ever.

Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it.  Had it been
but one, it had been easy, comparative.  But three!  To
begin twice more after I had been through a deed of horror.
For it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy, what would it
not be with these strange ones who had survived through
centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of
the years.  Who would, if they could, have fought for their
foul lives . . .

Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work.  Had I not
been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living
over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not have gone
on.  I tremble and tremble even yet, though till all was
over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand.  Had I not seen
the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole
over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realization
that the soul had been won, I could not have gone further
with my butchery.  I could not have endured the horrid screeching
as the stake drove home, the plunging of writhing form, and lips
of bloody foam.  I should have fled in terror and left my work
undone.  But it is over!  And the poor souls, I can pity them now
and weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of
death for a short moment ere fading.  For, friend John, hardly
had my knife severed the head of each, before the whole body
began to melt away and crumble into its native dust, as though
the death that should have come centuries ago had at last assert
himself and say at once and loud, "I am here!"

Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never
more can the Count enter there Undead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she
woke from her sleep and, seeing me, cried out in pain that
I had endured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this awful place!  Let us
go to meet my husband who is, I know, coming towards us."
She was looking thin and pale and weak.  But her eyes were
pure and glowed with fervour.  I was glad to see her paleness and
her illness, for my mind was full of the fresh horror of that
ruddy vampire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go
eastward to meet our friends, and him, whom Madam Mina tell
me that she know are coming to meet us.


MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL

6 November.--It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I
took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming.  We
did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to
take heavy rugs and wraps with us.  We dared not face the possibility
of being left without warmth in the cold and the snow.  We had to take
some of our provisions too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and
so far as we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the
sign of habitation.  When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with
the heavy walking and sat down to rest.  Then we looked back and saw
where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky.  For we were so
deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective
of the Carpathian mountains was far below it.  We saw it in all its
grandeur, perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice,
and with seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the
adjacent mountain on any side.  There was something wild and uncanny
about the place.  We could hear the distant howling of wolves.  They
were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the
deadening snowfall, was full of terror.  I knew from the way Dr. Van
Helsing was searching about that he was trying to seek some strategic
point, where we would be less exposed in case of attack.  The rough
roadway still led downwards.  We could trace it through the drifted
snow.

In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I got up and
joined him.  He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow
in a rock, with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders.  He
took me by the hand and drew me in.

"See!" he said, "here you will be in shelter.  And if the wolves do
come I can meet them one by one."

He brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some
provisions and forced them upon me.  But I could not eat, to even try
to do so was repulsive to me, and much as I would have liked to please
him, I could not bring myself to the attempt.  He looked very sad, but
did not reproach me.  Taking his field glasses from the case, he stood
on the top of the rock, and began to search the horizon.

Suddenly he called out, "Look!  Madam Mina, look!  Look!"

I sprang up and stood beside him on the rock.  He handed me his
glasses and pointed.  The snow was now falling more heavily, and
swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning to blow.
However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow
flurries and I could see a long way round.  From the height where we
were it was possible to see a great distance.  And far off, beyond the
white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black ribbon
in kinks and curls as it wound its way.  Straight in front of us and
not far off, in fact so near that I wondered we had not noticed
before, came a group of mounted men hurrying along.  In the midst of
them was a cart, a long leiter wagon which swept from side to side,
like a dog's tail wagging, with each stern inequality of the road.
Outlined against the snow as they were, I could see from the men's
clothes that they were peasants or gypsies of some kind.

On the cart was a great square chest.  My heart leaped as I saw it, for
I felt that the end was coming.  The evening was now drawing close,
and well I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then
imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of many
forms elude pursuit.  In fear I turned to the Professor.  To my
consternation, however, he was not there.  An instant later, I saw him
below me.  Round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found
shelter in last night.

When he had completed it he stood beside me again saying, "At least
you shall be safe here from him!"  He took the glasses from me, and at
the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.  "See," he
said, "they come quickly.  They are flogging the horses, and galloping
as hard as they can."

He paused and went on in a hollow voice, "They are racing for the
sunset.  We may be too late.  God's will be done!"  Down came another
blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole landscape was blotted
out.  It soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on
the plain.

Then came a sudden cry, "Look!  Look!  Look!  See, two horsemen follow
fast, coming up from the south.  It must be Quincey and John.  Take
the glass.  Look before the snow blots it all out!"  I took it and
looked.  The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris.  I knew at
all events that neither of them was Jonathan.  At the same time I knew
that Jonathan was not far off.  Looking around I saw on the north side
of the coming party two other men, riding at breakneck speed.  One of
them I knew was Jonathan, and the other I took, of course, to be Lord
Godalming.  They too, were pursuing the party with the cart.  When I
told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and after
looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his
Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the opening of
our shelter.

"They are all converging," he said.  "When the time comes we shall have
gypsies on all sides."  I got out my revolver ready to hand, for
whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer.
When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again.  It was strange
to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us, and beyond,
the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far
mountain tops.  Sweeping the glass all around us I could see here and
there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers.
The wolves were gathering for their prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited.  The wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us
in circling eddies.  At times we could not see an arm's length before
us.  But at others, as the hollow sounding wind swept by us, it seemed
to clear the air space around us so that we could see afar off.  We
had of late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that
we knew with fair accuracy when it would be.  And we knew that before
long the sun would set.  It was hard to believe that by our watches it
was less than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the
various bodies began to converge close upon us.  The wind came now
with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the
north.  It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for with only
occasional bursts, the snow fell.  We could distinguish clearly the
individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers.  Strangely
enough those pursued did not seem to realize, or at least to care,
that they were pursued.  They seemed, however, to hasten with
redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower and lower on the mountain
tops.

Closer and closer they drew.  The Professor and I crouched down behind
our rock, and held our weapons ready.  I could see that he was
determined that they should not pass.  One and all were quite unaware
of our presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to "Halt!"  One was my Jonathan's,
raised in a high key of passion.  The other Mr. Morris' strong
resolute tone of quiet command.  The gypsies may not have known the
language, but there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the
words were spoken.  Instinctively they reined in, and at the instant
Lord Godalming and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and
Mr. Morris on the other.  The leader of the gypsies, a splendid
looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and
in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed.  They
lashed the horses which sprang forward.  But the four men raised their
Winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop.
At the same moment Dr. Van Helsing and I rose behind the rock and
pointed our weapons at them.  Seeing that they were surrounded the men
tightened their reins and drew up.  The leader turned to them and gave
a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he
carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack.
Issue was joined in an instant.

The leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in
front, and pointed first to the sun, now close down on the hill tops,
and then to the castle, said something which I did not understand.
For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their
horses and dashed towards the cart.  I should have felt terrible fear
at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardor of battle must
have been upon me as well as the rest of them.  I felt no fear, but
only a wild, surging desire to do something.  Seeing the quick
movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command.  His
men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined
endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness
to carry out the order.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart.  It
was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun
should set.  Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them.  Neither
the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front,
nor the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their
attention.  Jonathan's impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his
purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him.  Instinctively they
cowered aside and let him pass.  In an instant he had jumped upon the
cart, and with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground.  In the meantime, Mr.
Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of
Szgany.  All the time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had,
with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and
had seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them,
and they cut at him.  He had parried with his great bowie knife, and
at first I thought that he too had come through in safety.  But as he
sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could
see that with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the
blood was spurting through his fingers.  He did not delay
notwithstanding this, for as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked
one end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid with his great
Kukri knife, he attacked the other frantically with his bowie.  Under
the efforts of both men the lid began to yield.  The nails drew with a
screeching sound, and the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the
Winchesters, and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had
given in and made no further resistance.  The sun was almost down on
the mountain tops, and the shadows of the whole group fell upon the
snow.  I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of
which the rude falling from the cart had scattered over him.  He was
deathly pale, just like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with
the horrible vindictive look which I knew so well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in
them turned to triumph.

But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great
knife.  I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat.  Whilst at
the same moment Mr. Morris's bowie knife plunged into the heart.

It was like a miracle, but before our very eyes, and almost in the
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumbled into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution, there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never
could have imagined might have rested there.

The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every
stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of
the setting sun.

The gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away
as if for their lives.  Those who were unmounted jumped upon the
leiter wagon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them.  The
wolves, which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their
wake, leaving us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding
his hand pressed to his side.  The blood still gushed through his
fingers.  I flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back;
so did the two doctors.  Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man
laid back his head on his shoulder.  With a sigh he took, with a
feeble effort, my hand in that of his own which was unstained.

He must have seen the anguish of my heart in my face, for he smiled at
me and said, "I am only too happy to have been of service!  Oh, God!"
he cried suddenly, struggling to a sitting posture and pointing to me.
"It was worth for this to die!  Look!  Look!"

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light.  With one
impulse the men sank on their knees and a deep and earnest "Amen"
broke from all as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger.

The dying man spoke, "Now God be thanked that all has not been in
vain!  See!  The snow is not more stainless than her forehead!  The
curse has passed away!"

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.





NOTE


Seven years ago we all went through the flames.  And the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured.
It is an added joy to Mina and to me that our boy's birthday is the
same day as that on which Quincey Morris died.  His mother holds, I
know, the secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has
passed into him.  His bundle of names links all our little band of men
together.  But we call him Quincey.

In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories.  It was almost impossible to believe that the
things which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears
were living truths.  Every trace of all that had been was blotted
out.  The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of
desolation.

When we got home we were talking of the old time, which we could all
look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both
happily married.  I took the papers from the safe where they had been
ever since our return so long ago.  We were struck with the fact, that
in all the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is
hardly one authentic document.  Nothing but a mass of typewriting,
except the later notebooks of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van
Helsing's memorandum.  We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish
to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story.  Van Helsing summed
it all up as he said, with our boy on his knee.

"We want no proofs.  We ask none to believe us!  This boy will some
day know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is.  Already he
knows her sweetness and loving care.  Later on he will understand how
some men so loved her, that they did dare much for her sake."

JONATHAN HARKER