(At this point, it may be proper for me to state that we make a
distinction between Religion and Theology--between Philosophy and
Metaphysics. Religion, to us, means that intuitional realization of the
existence of THE ALL, and one's relationship to it; while Theology means
the attempts of men to ascribe personality, qualities, and
characteristics to it; their theories regarding its affairs, will,
desires, plans, and designs, and their assumption of the office of ''
middle-men'' between THE ALL and the people. Philosophy, to us, means
the inquiry after knowledge of things knowable and thinkable; while
Metaphysics means the attempt to carry the inquiry over and beyond the
boundaries and into regions unknowable and unthinkable, and with the
same tendency as that of Theology. And consequently, both Religion and
Philosophy mean to us things having roots in Reality, while Theology and
Metaphysics seem like broken reeds, rooted in the quicksands of
ignorance, and affording naught but the most insecure support for the
mind or soul of Man. we do not insist upon our students accepting these
definitions--we mention them merely to show our position.
At any rate, you shall hear very little about Theology and Metaphysics
in these lessons.)

But while the essential nature of THE ALL is Unknowable, there are
certain truths connected with its existence which the human mind finds
itself compelled to accept. And an examination of these reports form a
proper subject of inquiry, particularly as they agree with the reports
of the Illumined on higher planes. And to this inquiry we now invite
you.

    "THAT which is the Fundamental Truth--the Substantial
    Reality--is beyond true naming, but the Wise Men call
    it THE ALL."--The Kybalion.

    "In its Essence, THE ALL is UNKNOWABLE."--The Kybalion.

    "But, the report of Reason must be hospitably received,
    and treated with respect."--The Kybalion.

The human reason, whose reports we must accept so long as we think at
all, informs us as follows regarding THE ALL, and that without
attempting to remove the veil of the Unknowable:

    (1) THE ALL must be ALL that REALLY IS. There can be
    nothing existing outside of THE ALL, else THE ALL would
    not be THE ALL.

    (2) THE ALL must be INFINITE, for there is nothing else
    to define, confine, bound, limit; or restrict THE ALL.
    It must be Infinite in Time, or ETERNAL,--it must have
    always continuously existed, for there is nothing else to
    have ever created it, and something can never evolve from
    nothing, and if it had ever "not been," even for a moment,
    it would not "be" now,--it must continuously exist forever,
    for there is nothing to destroy it, and it can never
    "not-be," even for a moment, because something can never
    become nothing. It must be Infinite in Space--it must be
    Everywhere, for there is no place outside of THE ALL--it
    cannot be otherwise than continuous in Space, without break,
    cessation, separation, or interruption, for there is nothing
    to break, separate, or interrupt its continuity, and nothing
    with which to "fill in the gaps." It must be Infinite in
    Power, or Absolute, for there is nothing to limit, restrict,
    restrain, confine, disturb or condition it--it is subject to
    no other Power, for there is no other Power.

    (3) THE ALL must be IMMUTABLE, or not subject to change in
    its real nature, for there is nothing to work changes upon it
    nothing into which it could change, nor from which it could
    have changed. It cannot be added to nor subtracted from;
    increased nor diminished; nor become greater or lesser in any
    respect whatsoever. It must have always been, and must always
    remain, just what it is now--THE ALL--there has never been,
    is not now, and never will be, anything else into which it
    can change.

THE ALL being Infinite, Absolute, Eternal and Unchangeable it must
follow that anything finite, changeable, fleeting, and conditioned
cannot be THE ALL. And as there is Nothing outside of THE ALL, in
Reality, then any and all such finite things must be as Nothing in
Reality. Now do not become befogged, nor frightened--we are not trying
to lead you into the Christian Science field under cover of Hermetic
Philosophy. There is a Reconciliation of this apparently contradictory
state of affairs. Be patient, we will reach it in time.

We see around us that which is called "Matter," which forms the physical
foundation for all forms. Is THE ALL merely Matter? Not at all! Matter
cannot manifest Life or Mind, and as Life and Mind are manifested in the
Universe, THE ALL cannot be Matter, for nothing rises higher than its
own source--nothing is ever manifested in an effect that is not in the
cause--nothing is evolved as a consequent that is not involved as an
antecedent. And then Modern Science informs us that there is really no
such thing as Matter--that what we call Matter is merely "interrupted
energy or force," that is, energy or force at a low rate of vibration.
As a recent writer has said "Matter has melted into Mystery." Even
Material Science has abandoned the theory of Matter, and now rests on
the basis of "Energy."

Then is THE ALL mere Energy or Force? Not Energy or Force as the
materialists use the terms, for their energy and force are blind,
mechanical things, devoid of Life or Mind. Life and Mind can never
evolve from blind Energy or Force, for the reason given a moment ago:
"Nothing can rise higher than its source--nothing is evolved unless it
is involved--nothing manifests in the effect, unless it is in the cause.
" And so THE ALL cannot be mere Energy or Force, for, if it were, then
there would be no such things as Life and Mind in existence, and we know
better than that, for we are Alive and using Mind to consider this very
question, and so are those who claim that Energy or Force is Everything.

What is there then higher than Matter or Energy that we know to be
existent in the Universe? LIFE AND MIND! Life and Mind in all their
varying degrees of unfoldment! "Then," you ask, "do you mean to tell us
that THE ALL is LIFE and MIND?" Yes! and No! is our answer. If you mean
Life and Mind as we poor petty mortals know them, we say No! THE ALL is
not that! "But what kind of Life and Mind do you mean?" you ask.

The answer is "LIVING MIND," as far above that which mortals know by
those words, as Life and Mind are higher than mechanical forces, or
matter--INFINITE LIVING MIND as compared to finite "Life and Mind." We
mean that which the illumined souls mean when they reverently pronounce
the word: "SPIRIT!"

"THE ALL" is Infinite Living Mind--the Illumined call it SPIRIT!


CHAPTER V

THE MENTAL UNIVERSE

    "The Universe is Mental--held in the Mind of THE
    ALL."--The Kybalion.

THE ALL is SPIRIT! But what is Spirit? This question cannot be answered,
for the reason that its definition is practically that of THE ALL, which
cannot be explained or defined. Spirit is simply a name that men give to
the highest conception of Infinite Living Mind--it means "the Real
Essence"--it means Living Mind, as much superior to Life and Mind as we
know them, as the latter are superior to mechanical Energy and Matter.
Spirit transcends our understanding, and we use the term merely that we
may think or speak of THE ALL. For the purposes of thought and
understanding, we are justified in thinking of Spirit as Infinite Living
Mind, at the same time acknowledging that we cannot fully understand it.
We must either do this or stop thinking of the matter at all.

Let us now proceed to a consideration of the nature of the Universe, as
a whole and in its parts. What is the Universe? We have seen that there
can be nothing outside of THE ALL. Then is the Universe THE ALL? No,
this cannot be, because the Universe seems to be made up of MANY, and is
constantly changing, and in other ways it does not measure up to the
ideas that we are compelled to accept regarding THE ALL, as stated in
our last lesson. Then if the Universe be not THE ALL, then it must be
Nothing--such is the inevitable conclusion of the mind at first thought.
But this will not satisfy the question, for we are sensible of the
existence of the Universe. Then if the Universe is neither THE ALL, nor
Nothing, what Can it be? Let us examine this question.

If the Universe exists at all, or seems to exist, it must proceed in
some way from THE ALL--it must be a creation of THE ALL. But as
something can never come from nothing, from what could THE ALL have
created it. Some philosophers have answered this question by saying that
THE ALL created the Universe from ITSELF--that is, from the being and
substance of THE ALL. But this will not do, for THE ALL cannot be
subtracted from, nor divided, as we have seen, and then again if this be
so, would not each particle in the Universe be aware of its being THE
ALL--THE ALL could not lose its knowledge of itself, nor actually BECOME
an atom, or blind force, or lowly living thing. Some men, indeed,
realizing that THE ALL is indeed ALL, and also recognizing that they,
the men, existed, have jumped to the conclusion that they and THE ALL
were identical, and they have filled the air with shouts of "I AM GOD,"
to the amusement of the multitude and the sorrow of sages. The claim of
the corpuscle that: "I am Man!" would be modest in comparison.

But, what indeed is the Universe, if it be not THE ALL, not yet created
by THE ALL having separated itself into fragments? What else can it be--
of what else can it be made? This is the great question. Let us examine
it carefully. We find here that the "Principle of Correspondence" (see
Lesson I.) comes to our aid here. The old Hermetic axiom, "As above so
below," may be pressed into service at this point. Let us endeavor to
get a glimpse of the workings on higher planes by examining those on our
own. The Principle of Correspondence must apply to this as well as to
other problems.

Let us see! On his own plane of being, how does Man create? Well, first,
he may create by making something out of outside materials. But this
will not do, for there are no materials outside of THE ALL with which it
may create. Well, then, secondly, Man pro-creates or reproduces his kind
by the process of begetting, which is self-multiplication accomplished
by transferring a portion of his substance to his offspring. But this
will not do, because THE ALL cannot transfer or subtract a portion of
itself, nor can it reproduce or multiply itself--in the first place
there would be a taking away, and in the second case a multiplication or
addition to THE ALL, both thoughts being an absurdity. Is there no third
way in which MAN creates? Yes, there is--he CREATES MENTALLY! And in so
doing he uses no outside materials, nor does he reproduce himself, and
yet his Spirit pervades the Mental Creation.

Following the Principle of Correspondence, we are justified in
considering that THE ALL creates the Universe MENTALLY, in a manner akin
to the process whereby Man creates Mental Images. And, here is where the
report of Reason tallies precisely with the report of the Illumined, as
shown by their teachings and writings. Such are the teachings of the
Wise Men. Such was the Teaching of Hermes.

THE ALL can create in no other way except mentally, without either using
material (and there is none to use), or else reproducing itself (which
is also impossible). There is no escape from this conclusion of the
Reason, which, as we have said, agrees with the highest teachings of the
Illumined. Just as you, student, may create a Universe of your own in
your mentality, so does THE ALL create Universes in its own Mentality.
But your Universe is the mental creation of a Finite Mind, whereas that
of THE ALL is the creation of an Infinite. The two are similar in kind,
but infinitely different in degree. We shall examine more closely into
the process of creation and manifestation as we proceed. But this is the
point to fix in your minds at this stage: THE UNIVERSE, AND ALL IT
CONTAINS, IS A MENTAL CREATION OF THE ALL. Verily indeed, ALL IS MIND!

    "THE ALL creates in its Infinite Mind countless Universes,
    which exist for aeons of Time--and yet, to THE ALL, the
    creation, development, decline and death of a million Universes
    is as the time of the twinkling of an eye."--The Kybalion.

    "The Infinite Mind of THE ALL is the womb of Universes."--The
    Kybalion.

The Principle of Gender (see Lesson I. and other lessons to follow) is
manifested on all planes of life, material mental and spiritual. But,
as we have said before, "Gender" does not mean "Sex" sex is merely a
material manifestation of gender. "Gender" means "relating to generation
or creation." And whenever anything is generated or created, on any
plane, the Principle of Gender must be manifested. And this is true even
in the creation of Universes.

Now do not jump to the conclusion that we are teaching that there is a
male and female God, or Creator. That idea is merely a distortion of the
ancient teachings on the subject. The true teaching is that THE ALL, in
itself, is above Gender, as it is above every other Law, including those
of Time and Space. It is the Law, from which the Laws proceed, and it is
not subject to them. But when THE ALL manifests on the plane of
generation or creation, then it acts according to Law and Principle, for
it is moving on a lower plane of Being. And consequently it manifests
the Principle of Gender, in its Masculine and Feminine aspects, on the
Mental Plane, of course.

This idea may seem startling to some of you who hear it for the first
time, but you have all really passively accepted it in your everyday
conceptions. You speak of the Fatherhood of God, and the Motherhood of
Nature--of God, the Divine Father, and Nature the Universal Mother--and
have thus instinctively acknowledged the Principle of Gender in the
Universe. Is this not so?

But, the Hermetic teaching does not imply a real duality--THE ALL is
ONE--the Two Aspects are merely aspects of manifestation. The teaching
is that The Masculine Principle manifested by THE ALL stands, in a way,
apart from the actual mental creation of the Universe. It projects its
Will toward the Feminine Principle (which may be called "Nature")
whereupon the latter begins the actual work of the evolution of the
Universe, from simple "centers of activity" on to man, and then on and
on still higher, all according to well-established and firmly enforced
Laws of Nature. If you prefer the old figures of thought, you may think
of the Masculine Principle as GOD, the Father, and of the Feminine
Principle as NATURE, the Universal Mother, from whose womb all things
have been born. This is more than a mere poetic figure of speech--it is
an idea of the actual process of the creation of the Universe. But
always remember, that THE ALL is but One, and that in its Infinite Mind
the Universe is generated, created and exists.

It may help you to get the proper idea, if you will apply the Law of
Correspondence to yourself, and your own mind. You know that the part of
You which you call "I," in a sense, stands apart and witnesses the
creation of mental Images in your own mind. The part of your mind in
which the mental generation is accomplished may be called the "Me" in
distinction from the "I" which stands apart and witnesses and examines
the thoughts, ideas and images of the "Me."  "As above, so below,"
remember, and the phenomena of one plane may be employed to solve the
riddles of higher or lower planes.

Is it any wonder that You, the child, feel that instinctive reverence
for THE ALL, which feeling we call "religion"--that respect, and
reverence for THE FATHER MIND? Is it any wonder that, when you consider
the works and wonders of Nature, you are overcome with a mighty feeling
which has its roots away down in your inmost being? It is the MOTHER
MIND that you are pressing close up to, like a babe to the breast.

Do not make the mistake of supposing that the little world you see
around you--the Earth, which is a mere grain of dust in the Universe--is
the Universe itself. There are millions upon millions of such worlds,
and greater. And there are millions of millions of such Universes in
existence within the Infinite Mind of THE ALL. And even in our own
little solar system there are regions and planes of life far higher than
ours, and beings compared to which we earth-bound mortals are as the
slimy life-forms that dwell on the ocean's bed when compared to Man.
There are beings with powers and attributes higher than Man has ever
dreamed of the gods' possessing. And yet these beings were once as you,
and still lower--and you will be even as they, and still higher, in
time, for such is the Destiny of Man as reported by the Illumined.

And Death is not real, even in the Relative sense--it is but Birth to a
new life--and You shall go on, and on, and on, to higher and still
higher planes of life, for aeons upon aeons of time. The Universe is
your home, and you shall explore its farthest recesses before the end of
Time. You are dwelling in the Infinite Mind of THE ALL, and your
possibilities and opportunities are infinite, both in time and space.
And at the end of the Grand Cycle of Aeons, when THE ALL shall draw back
into itself all of its creations--you will go gladly for you will then
be able to know the Whole Truth of being At One with THE ALL. Such is
the report of the Illumined--those who have advanced well along The
Path.

And, in the meantime, rest calm and serene--you are safe and protected
by the Infinite Power of the FATHER-MOTHER MIND.

    "Within the Father-Mother Mind, mortal children are at
    home."--The Kybalion.

    "There is not one who is Fatherless, nor Motherless in the
    Universe."--The Kybalion.


CHAPTER VI

THE DIVINE PARADOX

    "The half-wise, recognizing the comparative unreality of
    the Universe, imagine that they may defy its Laws--such
    are vain and presumptuous fools, and they are broken against
    the rocks and torn asunder by the elements by reason of
    their folly. The truly wise, knowing the nature of the Universe,
    use Law against laws; the higher against the lower; and by
    the Art of Alchemy transmute that which is undesirable into
    that which is worthy, and thus triumph. Mastery consists not
    in abnormal dreams, visions and fantastic imaginings or
    living, but in using the higher forces against the lower--escaping
    the pains of the lower planes by vibrating on the higher.
    Transmutation, not presumptuous denial, is the weapon of the
    Master."--The Kybalion.

This is the Paradox of the Universe, resulting from the Principle of
Polarity which manifests when THE ALL begins to Create--hearken to it
for it points the difference between half-wisdom and wisdom. While to
THE INFINITE ALL, the Universe, its Laws, its Powers, its life, its
Phenomena, are as things witnessed in the state of Meditation or Dream;
yet to all that is Finite, the Universe must be treated as Real, and
life, and action, and thought, must be based thereupon, accordingly,
although with an ever understanding of the Higher Truth. Each according
to its own Plane and Laws. Were THE ALL to imagine that the Universe
were indeed Reality, then woe to the Universe, for there would be then
no escape from lower to higher, divineward--then would the Universe
become a fixity and progress would become impossible. And if Man, owing
to half-wisdom, acts and lives and thinks of the Universe as merely a
dream (akin to his own finite dreams) then indeed does it so become for
him, and like a sleep-walker he stumbles ever around and around in a
circle, making no progress, and being forced into an awakening at last
by his falling bruised and bleeding over the Natural Laws which he
ignored. Keep your mind ever on the Star, but let your eyes watch over
your footsteps, lest you fall into the mire by reason of your upward
gaze. Remember the Divine Paradox, that while the Universe IS NOT, still
IT IS. Remember ever the Two Poles of Truth the Absolute and the
Relative. Beware of Half-Truths.

What Hermetists know as "the Law of Paradox" is an aspect of the
Principle of Polarity. The Hermetic writings are filled with references
to the appearance of the Paradox in the consideration of the problems of
Life and Being. The Teachers are constantly warning their students
against the error of omitting the "other side" of any question. And
their warnings are particularly directed to the problems of the Absolute
and the Relative, which perplex all students of philosophy, and which
cause so many to think and act contrary to what is generally known as
"common sense." And we caution all students to be sure to grasp the
Divine Paradox of the Absolute and Relative, lest they become entangled
in the mire of the Half-Truth. With this in view this particular lesson
has been written. Read it carefully!

The first thought that comes to the thinking man after he realizes the
truth that the Universe is a Mental Creation of THE ALL, is that the
Universe and all that it contains is a mere illusion; an unreality;
against which idea his instincts revolt. But this, like all other great
truths, must be considered both from the Absolute and the Relative
points of view. From the Absolute viewpoint, of course, the Universe is
in the nature of an illusion, a dream, a phantasmagoria, as compared to
THE ALL in itself. We recognize this even in our ordinary view, for we
speak of the world as "a fleeting show" that comes and goes, is born and
dies--for the element of impermanence and change, finiteness and
unsubstantiality, must ever be connected with the idea of a created
Universe when it is contrasted with the idea of THE ALL, no matter what
may be our beliefs concerning the nature of both. Philosopher,
metaphysician, scientist and theologian all agree upon this idea, and
the thought is found in all forms of philosophical thought and religious
conceptions, as well as in the theories of the respective schools of
metaphysics and theology.

So, the Hermetic Teachings do not preach the unsubstantiality of the
Universe in any stronger terms than those more familiar to you, although
their presentation of the subject may seem somewhat more startling.
Anything that has a beginning and an ending must be, in a sense, unreal
and untrue, and the Universe comes under the rule, in all schools of
thought. From the Absolute point of view, there is nothing Real except
THE ALL, no matter what terms we may use in thinking of, or discussing
the subject. Whether the Universe be created of Matter, or whether it be
a Mental Creation in the Mind of THE ALL--it is unsubstantial,
non-enduring, a thing of time, space and change. We want you to realize
this fact thoroughly, before you pass judgment on the Hermetic
conception of the Mental nature of the Universe. Think over any and all
of the other conceptions, and see whether this be not true of them.

But the Absolute point of view shows merely one side of the picture--the
other side is the Relative one. Absolute Truth has been defined as
"Things as the mind of God knows them," while Relative Truth is "Things
as the highest reason of Man understands them." And so while to THE ALL
the Universe must be unreal and illusionary, a mere dream or result of
meditation,--nevertheless, to the finite minds forming a part of that
Universe, and viewing it through mortal faculties, the Universe is very
real indeed, and must be so considered. In recognizing the Absolute
view, we must not make the mistake of ignoring or denying the facts and
phenomena of the Universe as they present themselves to our mortal
faculties--we are not THE ALL, remember.

To take familiar illustrations, we all recognize the fact that matter
"exists" to our senses--we will fare badly if we do not. And yet, even
our finite minds understand the scientific dictum that there is no such
thing as Matter from a scientific point of view--that which we call
Matter is held to be merely an aggregation of atoms, which atoms
themselves are merely a grouping of units of force, called electrons or
"ions," vibrating and in constant circular motion. We kick a stone and
we feel the impact--it seems to be real, notwithstanding that we know it
to be merely what we have stated above. But remember that our foot,
which feels the impact by means of our brains, is likewise Matter, so
constituted of electrons, and for that matter so are our brains. And, at
the best, if it were not by reason of our Mind, we would not know the
foot or stone at all.

Then again, the ideal of the artist or sculptor, which he is endeavoring
to reproduce in stone or on canvas, seems very real to him. So do the
characters in the mind of the author; or dramatist, which he seeks to
express so that others may recognize them. And if this be true in the
case of our finite minds, what must be the degree of Reality in the
Mental Images created in the Mind of the Infinite? Oh, friends, to
mortals this Universe of Mentality is very real indeed--it is the only
one we can ever know, though we rise from plane to plane, higher and
higher in it. To know it otherwise, but actual experience, we must be
THE ALL itself. It is true that the higher we rise in the scale--the
nearer to "the mind of the Father" we reach--the more apparent becomes
the illusory nature of finite things, but not until THE ALL finally
withdraws us into itself does the vision actually vanish.

So, we need not dwell upon the feature of illusion. Rather let us,
recognizing the real nature of the Universe, seek to understand its
mental laws, and endeavor to use them to the best effect in our upward
progress through life, as we travel from plane to plane of being. The
Laws of the Universe are none the less "Iron Laws" because of the mental
nature. All, except THE ALL, are bound by them. What is IN THE INFINITE
MIND OF THE ALL is REAL in a degree second only to that Reality itself
which is vested in the nature of THE ALL.

So, do not feel insecure or afraid--we are all HELD FIRMLY IN THE
INFINITE MIND OF THE ALL, and there is naught to hurt us or for us to
fear. There is no Power outside of THE ALL to affect us. So we may rest
calm and secure. There is a world of comfort and security in this
realization when once attained. Then "calm and peaceful do we sleep,
rocked in the Cradle of the Deep"--resting safely on the bosom of the
Ocean of Infinite Mind, which is THE ALL. In THE ALL, indeed, do "we
live and move and have our being."

Matter is none the less Matter to us, while we dwell on the plane of
Matter, although we know it to be merely an aggregation of "electrons,"
or particles of Force, vibrating rapidly and gyrating around each other
in the formations of atoms; the atoms in turn vibrating and gyrating,
forming molecules, which latter in turn form larger masses of Matter.
Nor does Matter become less Matter, when we follow the inquiry still
further, and learn from the Hermetic Teachings, that the "Force" of
which the electrons are but units is merely a manifestation of the Mind
of THE ALL, and like all else in the Universe is purely Mental in its
nature. While on the Plane of matter, we must recognize its phenomena--
we may control Matter (as all Masters of higher or lesser degree do),
but we do so by applying the higher forces. We commit a folly when we
attempt to deny the existence of Matter in the relative aspect. We may
deny its mastery over us--and rightly so--but we should not attempt to
ignore it in its relative aspect, at least so long as we dwell upon its
plane.

Nor do the Laws of Nature become less constant or effective, when we
know them, likewise, to be merely mental creations. They are in full
effect on the various planes. We overcome the lower laws, by applying
still higher ones--and in this way only. But we cannot escape Law or
rise above it entirely. Nothing but THE ALL can escape Law--and that
because THE ALL is LAW itself, from which all Laws emerge. The most
advanced Masters may acquire the powers usually attributed to the gods
of men; and there are countless ranks of being, in the great hierarchy
of life, whose being and power transcends even that of the highest
Masters among men to a degree unthinkable by mortals, but even the
highest Master, and the highest Being, must bow to the Law, and be as
Nothing in the eye of THE ALL. So that if even these highest Beings,
whose powers exceed even those attributed by men to their gods--if even
these are bound by and are subservient to Law, then imagine the
presumption of mortal man, of our race and grade, when he dares to
consider the Laws of Nature as "unreal!" visionary and illusory, because
he happens to be able to grasp the truth that the Laws are Mental in
nature, and simply Mental Creations of THE ALL. Those Laws which THE ALL
intends to be governing Laws are not to be defied or argued away. So
long as the Universe endures, will they endure--for the Universe exists
by virtue of these Laws which form its framework and which hold it
together.

The Hermetic Principle of Mentalism, while explaining the true nature of
the Universe upon the principle that all is Mental, does not change the
scientific conceptions of the Universe, Life, or Evolution. In fact,
science merely corroborates the Hermetic Teachings. The latter merely
teaches that the nature of the Universe is "Mental," while modern
science has taught that it is "Material"; or (of late) that it is
"Energy" at the last analysis. The Hermetic Teachings have no fault to
find with Herbert Spencer's basic principle which postulates the
existence of an "Infinite and Eternal Energy, from which all things
proceed." In fact, the Hermetics recognize in Spencer's philosophy the
highest outside statement of the workings of the Natural Laws that have
ever been promulgated, and they believe Spencer to have been a
reincarnation of an ancient philosopher who dwelt in ancient Egypt
thousands of years ago, and who later incarnated as Heraclitus, the
Grecian philosopher who lived B. C. 500. And they regard his statement
of the "Infinite and Eternal Energy" as directly in the line of the
Hermetic Teachings, always with the addition of their own doctrine
that his "Energy" is the Energy of the Mind of THE ALL. With the
Master-Key of the Hermetic Philosophy, the student of Spencer will be
able to unlock many doors of the inner philosophical conceptions of the
great English philosopher, whose work shows the results of the
preparation of his previous incarnations. His teachings regarding
Evolution and Rhythm are in almost perfect agreement with the Hermetic
Teachings regarding the Principle of Rhythm.

So, the student of Hermetics need not lay aside any of his cherished
scientific views regarding the Universe. All he is asked to do is to
grasp the underlying principle of "THE ALL is Mind; the Universe is
Mental--held in the mind of THE ALL." He will find that the other six of
the Seven Principles will "fit into" his scientific knowledge, and will
serve to bring out obscure points and to throw light in dark corners.
This is not to be wondered at, when we realize the influence of the
Hermetic thought of the early philosophers of Greece, upon whose
foundations of thought the theories of modern science largely rest. The
acceptance of the First Hermetic Principle (Mentalism) is the only great
point of difference between Modern Science and Hermetic students, and
Science is gradually moving toward the Hermetic position in its groping
in the dark for a way out of the Labyrinth into which it has wandered in
its search for Reality.

The purpose of this lesson is to impress upon the minds of our students
the fact that, to all intents and purposes, the Universe and its laws,
and its phenomena, are just as REAL, so far as Man is concerned, as they
would be under the hypotheses of Materialism or Energism. Under any
hypothesis the Universe in its outer aspect is changing, ever-flowing,
and transitory--and therefore devoid of substantiality and reality. But
(note the other pole of the truth) under the same hypotheses, we are
compelled to ACT AND LIVE as if the fleeting things were real and
substantial. With this difference, always, between the various
hypotheses--that under the old views Mental Power was ignored as a
Natural Force, while under Mentalism it becomes the Greatest Natural
Force. And this one difference revolutionizes Life, to those who
understand the Principle and its resulting laws and practice.

So, finally, students all, grasp the advantage of Mentalism, and learn
to know, use and apply the laws resulting therefrom. But do not yield to
the temptation which, as The Kybalion states, overcomes the half-wise
and which causes them to be hypnotized by the apparent unreality of
things, the consequence being that they wander about like dream-people
dwelling in a world of dreams, ignoring the practical work and life of
man, the end being that "they are broken against the rocks and torn
asunder by the elements, by reason of their folly." Rather follow the
example of the wise, which the same authority states, "use Law against
Laws; the higher against the lower; and by the Art of Alchemy transmute
that which is undesirable into that which is worthy, and thus triumph."
Following the authority, let us avoid the half-wisdom (which is folly)
which ignores the truth that: "Mastery consists not in abnormal dreams,
visions, and fantastic imaginings or living, but in using the higher
forces against the lower--escaping the pains of the lower planes by
vibrating on the higher." Remember always, student, that "Transmutation,
not presumptuous denial, is the weapon of the Master." The above
quotations are from The Kybalion, and are worthy of being committed to
memory by the student.

We do not live in a world of dreams, but in an Universe which while
relative, is real so far as our lives and actions are concerned. Our
business in the Universe is not to deny its existence, but to LIVE,
using the Laws to rise from lower to higher--living on, doing the best
that we can under the circumstances arising each day, and living, so far
as is possible, to our biggest ideas and ideals. The true Meaning of
Life is not known to men on this plane .if, indeed, to any--but the
highest authorities, and our own intuitions, teach us that we will make
no mistake in living up to the best that is in us, so far as is
possible, and realising the Universal tendency in the same direction in
spite of apparent evidence to the contrary. We are all on The Path--and
the road leads upward ever, with frequent resting places.

Read the message of The Kybalion--and follow the example of "the
wise"--avoiding the mistake of "the half-wise" who perish by reason of
their folly.


CHAPTER VII

"THE ALL" IN ALL

    "While All is in THE ALL, it is equally true that THE
    ALL is in ALL.  To him who truly understands this
    truth hath come great knowledge."--The Kybalion.

How often have the majority of people heard repeated the statement that
their Deity (called by many names) was "All in All" and how little have
they suspected the inner occult truth concealed by these carelessly
uttered words? The commonly used expression is a survival of the ancient
Hermetic Maxim quoted above. As the Kybalion says: "To him who truly
understands this truth, hath come great knowledge." And, this being so,
let us seek this truth, the understanding of which means so much. In
this statement of truth--this Hermetic Maxim--is concealed one of the
greatest philosophical, scientific and religious truths.

We have given you the Hermetic Teaching regarding the Mental Nature of
the Universe--the truth that "the Universe is Mental--held in the Mind
of THE ALL." As the Kybalion says, in the passage quoted above: "All is
in THE ALL." But note also the co-related statement, that: "It is
equally true that THE ALL is in ALL." This apparently contradictory
statement is reconcilable under the Law of Paradox. It is, moreover, an
exact Hermetic statement of the relations existing between THE ALL and
its Mental Universe. We have seen how "All is in THE ALL"--now let us
examine the other aspect of the subject.

The Hermetic Teachings are to the effect that THE ALL is Imminent in
("remaining within; inherent; abiding within") its Universe, and in
every part, particle, unit, or combination, within the Universe. This
statement is usually illustrated by the Teachers by a reference to the
Principle of Correspondence. The Teacher instructs the student to form a
Mental Image of something, a person, an idea, something having a mental
form, the favorite example being that of the author or dramatist forming
an idea of his characters; or a painter or sculptor forming an image of
an ideal that he wishes to express by his art. In each case, the student
will find that while the image has its existence, and being, solely
within his own mind, yet he, the student, author, dramatist, painter, or
sculptor, is, in a sense, immanent in; remaining within; or abiding
within, the mental image also. In other words, the entire virtue, life,
spirit, of reality in the mental image is derived from the "immanent
mind" of the thinker. Consider this for a moment, until the idea is
grasped.

