He muttered something about 'Pedlar,--Montpipeau,'--and still
continued.  Then came a small silver casket, diffusing an odour of
attar of roses--he leant back in his chair--and his mother would
have taken it from him, supposing him overcome by the scent, but he
held it fast and shook his head, saying, "For Lucy,--but she must
give it herself.  She gave up any gift for herself for it--she said
we needed no love-tokens.' And he closed his eyes.  Dame Annora
plunged into the unpacking, and brought out a pocket-mirror with
enamelled cupids in the corner, addressed to herself; and then came
upon Berenger's own.

Again came a fringed pair of gloves among the personal jewellery
such as gentlemen were wont to wear, the rings, clasps and brooches
he had carried from home.  Dame Annora's impatience at last found
vent in the exclamation, 'The pearls, son; I do not see the chaplet
of pearls.'

'She had them, 'answered Berenger, in a matter-of-fact tone, 'to
wear at the masque.'

'She----'

Sir Marmaduke's great hand choked, as it were, the query on his
wife's lips, unseen by her son, who, as if the words had touched
some chord, was more eagerly seeking in the box, and presently drew
out a bow of carnation ribbon with a small piece of paper full of
pin-holes attached to it.  At once he carried it to his lips,
kissed it fervently, and then, sinking back in his chair, seemed to
be trying to gather up the memory that had prompted the impulse,
knitted his brows together, and then suddenly exclaimed, 'Where is
she?'

His mother tried the last antecedent.  'Lucy? She shall come and
thank you to-morrow.'

He shook his head with a vehement negative, beckoned Cecily
impatiently, and said earnestly, 'Is it the contagion?  Is she
sick?  I will go to her.'

Cecily and Sir Marmaduke both replied with a 'No, no!' and were
thankful, though in much suspense at the momentary pause, while
again he leant back on the cushions, looked steadily at the pin-
holes, that formed themselves into the word 'Sweet heart,' then
suddenly began to draw up the loose sleeve of his wrapping-gown and
unbutton the wristband of his right sleeve.  His mother tried to
help him, asking if he had hurt or tired his arm.  They would have
been almost glad to hear that it was so, but he shook her off
impatiently, and the next moment had a view of the freshly skinned
over, but still wide and gaping gash on his arm.  He looked for a
brief space, and said, 'It is a sword-cut,'

'Truly it is, lad,' said Sir Marmaduke, 'and a very bad one,
happily whole!  Is this the first time you have seen it?'

He did not answer, but covered his eyes with his hand, and
presently burst out again, 'Then it is no dream?  Sir--have I been
to France?'

'Yes, my son, you have,' said Sir Marmaduke, gently, and with more
tenderness than could have been looked for; 'but what passed there
is much better viewed as a dream, and cast behind your back,'

Berenger had, while he spoke, taken up the same little mirror where
he had once admired himself; and as he beheld the scar and plaster
that disfigured his face, with a fresh start of recollection,
muttered over, '_"Barbouiller ce chien de visage"_ --ay, so he
said.  I felt the pistol's muzzle touch!  Narcisse!  Has God had
mercy on me?  I prayed Him.  Ah! _"le baiser d'Eustacie"_ --so he
said.  I was waiting in the dark.  Why did he come instead of her?
Oh! father, where is she?'

It was a sore task, but Sir Marmaduke went bravely and bluntly,
though far from unkindly, to the point: 'She remains with her
friends in France.'

There the youth's look of utter horror and misery shocked and
startled them all, and he groaned rather than said, 'Left there!
Left to them!  What have I done to leave her there?'

'Come, Berenger, this will not serve,' said his mother, trying to
rouse and cheer him.  'You should rather be thankful that when you
had been so foully ensnared by their wiles, good Osbert brought you
off with your life away from those bloody doings.  Yes, you may
thank Heaven and Osbert, for you are the only one of them living
now.'

'Of whom, mother?'

'Of all the poor Protestants that like you were deluded by the pack
of murderers over there.  What,'--fancying it would exhilarate him
to hear of his own escape--'you knew not that the bloody Guise and
the Paris cut-throats rose and slew every Huguenot they could lay
hands on?  Why, did not the false wench put off your foolish
runaway project for the very purpose of getting you into the trap
on the night of the massacre?'

He looked with a piteous, appealing glance from her to Cecily and
Sir Marmaduke, as if in hopes that they would contradict.

'Too true, my lad,' said Sir Marmaduke.  'It is Heaven's good mercy
that Osbert carried you out alive.  No other Protestant left the
palace alive but the King of Navarre and his cousin, who turned
renegades.'

'And she is left there?' he repeated.

'Heed her not, my dear boy,' began his mother; 'you are safe, and
must forget her ill-faith and----'

Berenger seemed scarcely to hear this speech--he held out his hands
as if stunned and dizzied, and only said, or rather indicated, 'Let
me lie down.'

His stepfather almost carried him across the room, and laid him on
his bed, where he turned away from the light and shut his eyes; but
the knot of ribbon and the pin-pricked word was still in his hand,
and his mother longed to take away the token of this false love, as
she believed it.  The great clock struck the hour for her to go.
'Leave him quiet,' said Cecily, gently; 'he can bear no more now.
I will send over in the evening to let you know how he fares.'

'But that he should be so set on the little bloodthirsty baggage,'
sighed Lady Thistlewood; and then going up to her son, she poured
out her explanation of being unable to stay, as her parents were
already at the Manor, with no better entertainers than Lucy,
Philip, and the children.  She thanked him for the gifts, which she
would take to them with his love. All this passed by him as though
he heard it not, but when leaning down, she kissed his forehead,
and at the same time tried to withdraw the knot of ribbon: his
fingers closed on it with a grasp like steel, so cold were they,
yet so fast.

Sir Masmaduke lingered a few moments behind her, and Berenger
opening his eyes, as if to see whether solitude had been achieved,
found the kind-hearted knight gazing at him with eyes full of
tears.  'Berry, my lad,' he said, 'bear it like a man.  I know how
hard it is.  There's not a woman of them all that an honest, plain
Englishman has a chance with, when a smooth-tongued Frenchman comes
round her!  But a man may live a true and honest life however sore
his heart may be, and God Almighty makes it up to him if he faces
it out manfully.'

Good Sir Marmaduke in his sympathy had utterly forgotten both
Berenger's French blood, and that he was the son of the very
smooth-tongued interloper who had robbed his life of its first
bloom.  Berenger was altogether unequal to do more than murmur, as
he held out his hand in response to the kindness, 'You do not know
her.'

'Ah! Poor lad.'  Sir Marmaduke shook his head and left him to
Cecily.

After the first shock, Berenger never rested till he had made
Osbert, Mr.Adderley, and Cecily tell him all they knew, and asked
by name after those whom he had known best at Paris.  Alas! of all
those, save such as had been in the Ambassador's house, there was
but one account to give.  Venerable warrior, noble-hearted youth,
devoted pastor, all alike had perished!

