"Who could love so old a man? Always with his diplomatic coat and manner
on, too. I shouldn't have been able to do it, I'm sure," cried Marietta,
thoughtlessly.

Her mother-in-law, who held her brother's memory sacred, said tartly:

"Such an opportunity would never have come in your way. A man like
Herbert von Wallmoden would scarcely have chosen you, you little
insolent thing--"

The little insolent thing threw her arms around Frau Regine's neck, and
said, flatteringly:

"Now, don't be angry, mamma! I wouldn't exchange my Will for all the
great ambassadors of the world, and neither would you."

"You're a little minx," said Regine, striving to look as severe as ever.
"You know very well that one can't be angry with you long. Oh, there'll
be a petticoat government at Burgsdorf from this time on, such as the
place has never witnessed before. Will's a little ashamed before me yet,
but as soon as I'm gone he'll surrender at discretion."

"Why do you cling to that idea, mother?" said Willibald, reprovingly.
"Why do you want to go when all is love and peace between us?"

"Just for that reason I go, that peace may continue; we need not discuss
it, my son. I must always be first where I live and work. You must be
that now, and we wouldn't pull together. Until now we have been
distressed and anxious about you, not knowing what hour would bring
tidings to break our hearts. That's all over, but I'm not so old that I
must be set aside as useless. Wherever I am I must be the head, and for
that reason I am going."

She turned and entered the house, while her son gazed after her and gave
a troubled sigh.

"Perhaps she is right," he said, "but it will be hard for her to be
without duties or occupation. Enforced quiet will be very hard for her,
I know. You should have begged her to remain, Marietta."

Marietta laid her head on his shoulder and looked up smiling:

"O no, I'll do something better. I'll have a care that when she leaves
us she will not be unhappy."

"You? What will you do?"

"Only a simple thing--have her get married."

"What do you mean?"

"O, Will, to be so wise and yet see nothing," said his wife with her old
sweet silvery laugh. "Have you no idea why uncle Schönau was in such a
bad humor when we met him in Berlin, and urged him to visit us? Your
mother didn't invite him because she feared another proposal; he
understood that, and it made him furious. I saw them at Waldhofen the
time of our marriage, and I knew he would have been very glad to have a
similar ceremony performed for himself, only your mother said him nay.
Don't put on such a face, Will; you look exactly as you did the first
day I saw you."

Her husband was gazing at her in boundless astonishment. He had never
dreamed of such a possibility as his mother marrying again, or his uncle
either, for that matter. It struck him now as a most excellent
arrangement.

"Marietta, how wise you are!" he said, looking with admiration at the
smiling girl, who was beaming with satisfaction at the manner in which
her news had been received.

"I'm wiser than you think," she declared triumphantly, "for I have set
the wheel going. I took occasion to let uncle Schönau know that if he
stormed the fort again, a complete surrender might follow. He said he
had no intention of being refused again, but you'll see him sooner than
you think. In fact he's in the house now, came half an hour ago, but I
determined to say nothing about it before mamma--here he is now!"

The head forester stepped on the terrace just in time to hear the last
words.

"Yes, here I am," said Herr von Schönau. "It's all your little wife's
fault, Will, that I am at Burgsdorf. I'm here at her suggestion, and if
that mother of your's is not obstinate and unreasonable and pig-headed
as usual--why I'll marry her."

"I pray to God you may, uncle," answered Will, to whom this summary of
his mother's wonted characteristics was very singular, to say the least.

"Yes, so do I," agreed Schönau, "your wife thinks--"

"I think that you shouldn't lose a moment," cried Marietta, "Mamma has
just gone to her sitting-room and knows nothing of your arrival. Will
and I will remain behind, and if the worst comes to the worst call on
us. Forward, march!"

With these words she gave him a push, and the sturdy, broad shouldered
man turned at her bidding, saying to Will, who entered the house with
him:

"They are all commanders whether they be large or small--it's born in
them, I suppose."

Regine von Eschenhagen stood at the window of her cosy room looking out
upon her beloved Burgsdorf, which she was to leave in a few days. Though
she had said so decidedly she would go, the decision had been no light
matter to her. The strong, active, capable woman who had been mistress
here for thirty years and over, dreaded the quiet and inactivity of city
life, of which she had had some slight experience at the time of her
quarrel with her son. She dreaded going back to it now, though she knew
it was but just and fitting to leave Willibald and his wife alone, and
she had the courage to do what was right. She heard the door open and
turned to see the head forester enter the room.

"Moritz, you here?" she said, surprised. "It was very sensible of you to
come."

"Yes, I'm always sensible," answered the head forester, with his usual
lack of tact. "You didn't have the grace to invite me, but I thought I'd
come in person to invite you and your children to Toni's marriage. You
will come to Fürstenstein, will you not?"

"Certainly we will come, but we were surprised to hear it was to take
place so soon. I thought you were going to buy them an estate first and
settle the matter more slowly!"

"No, they wouldn't wait or listen to reason. Our warriors make great
demands when they come home covered with glory. Walldorf said to me
quite coolly: 'You know you said first conquer then marry. Well we have
conquered; now I shall marry without any delay. The estate can wait, the
land won't run away, but we must be married now!' Of course Toni
seconded everything he said. What could I do? I let them name the day
then and there."

Frau von Eschenhagen laughed.

"The young are in a hurry to marry, though they have plenty of time to
wait."

"The old have none to spare, though," said the head forester promptly,
glad of so good a chance to get on the subject near his heart. "Have you
reflected enough over our little affair, Regine?"

"What affair?"

"Why, our marriage. I trust you are in the humor for it now." Regine
turned away somewhat embarrassed.

"How you do love to take one by surprise, Moritz."

"So that is what you call taking by surprise?" cried the head forester,
irritated. "Over five years ago I asked you to marry me, then last year
a second time, and now for the third time, so you have had plenty of
time to consider the matter. Yes, or no? If you send me away this time
I'll never come again, understand that!"

Regine did not answer, but it was not indecision which made her
hesitate. Notwithstanding her hard, unyielding nature, deep down in her
heart there had always been a warm feeling for the man who was to have
been her husband long years ago, for Hartmut von Falkenried. When he had
turned from her she had married another, for she had no thought of
leading a desolate, useless life; but the same feeling of bitter woe
which had entered the young girl's heart was in the heart of the older
woman to-day and closed her lips. She stood silent for a few minutes,
then cast the sweet, sad memory from her forever, and gave her hand to
her brother-in-law:

"Well then, yes, Moritz! I will make you a good and true wife."

