Suddenly a clamor of discordant yells fell upon her ears. Jenks rose to
his knees. The Dyaks had discovered their refuge and were about to open
fire. He offered them a target lest perchance Iris were not thoroughly
screened.

"Keep close," he said. "They have found us. Lead will be flying around
soon."

She flinched back into the crevice; the sailor fell prone. Four bullets
spat into the ledge, of which three pierced the tarpaulin and one
flattened itself against the rock.

Then Jenks took up the tale. So curiously constituted was this man,
that although he ruthlessly shot the savage who first spied out their
retreat, he was swayed only by the dictates of stern necessity. There
was a feeble chance that further bloodshed might be averted. That
chance had passed. Very well. The enemy must start the dreadful game
about to be played. They had thrown the gage and he answered them. Four
times did the Lee-Metford carry death, unseen, almost unfelt, across
the valley.

Ere the fourth Dyak collapsed limply where he stood, others were there,
firing at the little puff of smoke above the grass. They got in a few
shots, most of which sprayed at various angles off the face of the
cliff. But they waited for no more. When the lever of the Lee-Metford
was shoved home for the fifth time the opposing crest was bare of all
opponents save two, and they lay motionless.

The fate of the flanking detachment was either unperceived or unheeded
by the Dyaks left in the vicinity of the house and well. Astounded by
the firing that burst forth in mid-air, Jenks had cleared the dangerous
rock before they realized that here, above their heads, were the white
man and the maid whom they sought.

With stupid zeal they blazed away furiously, only succeeding in
showering fragments of splintered stone into the Eagle's Nest. And the
sailor smiled. He quietly picked up an old coat, rolled it into a ball
and pushed it into sight amidst the grass. Then he squirmed round on
his stomach and took up a position ten feet away. Of course those who
still carried loaded guns discharged them at the bundle of rags,
whereupon Jenks thrust his rifle beyond the edge of the rock and leaned
over.

Three Dyaks fell before the remainder made up their minds to run. Once
convinced, however, that running was good for their health, they moved
with much celerity. The remaining cartridges in the magazine slackened
the pace of two of their number. Jenks dropped the empty weapon and
seized another. He stood up now and sent a quick reminder after the
rearmost pirate. The others had disappeared towards the locality where
their leader and his diminished troupe were gathered, not daring to
again come within range of the whistling Dum-dums. The sailor, holding
his rifle as though pheasant-shooting, bent forward and sought a
belated opponent, but in vain. In military phrase, the _terrain_
was clear of the enemy. There was no sound save the wailing of birds,
the soft sough of the sea, and the yelling of the three wounded men in
the house, who knew not what terrors threatened, and vainly bawled for
succor.

Again Jenks could look at Iris. Her face was bleeding. The sight
maddened him.

"My God!" he groaned, "are you wounded?"

She smiled bravely at him.

"It is nothing," she said. "A mere splash from the rock which cut my
forehead."

He dared not go to her. He could only hope that it was no worse, so he
turned to examine the valley once more for vestige of a living foe.


CHAPTER XII

A TRUCE


Though his eyes, like live coals, glowered with sullen fire at the
strip of sand and the rocks in front, his troubled brain paid
perfunctory heed to his task. The stern sense of duty, the ingrained
force of long years of military discipline and soldierly thought,
compelled him to keep watch and ward over his fortress, but he could
not help asking himself what would happen if Iris were seriously
wounded.

There was one enemy more potent than these skulking Dyaks, a foe more
irresistible in his might, more pitiless in his strength, whose
assaults would tax to the utmost their powers of resistance. In another
hour the sun would be high in the heavens, pouring his ardent rays upon
them and drying the blood in their veins.

Hitherto, the active life of the island, the shade of trees, hut or
cave, the power of unrestricted movement and the possession of water in
any desired quantity, robbed the tropical heat of the day of its chief
terrors. Now all was changed. Instead of working amidst grateful
foliage, they were bound to the brown rock, which soon would glow with
radiated energy and give off scorching gusts like unto the opening of a
furnace-door.

This he had foreseen all along. The tarpaulin would yield them some
degree of uneasy protection, and they both were in perfect physical
condition. But--if Iris were wounded! If the extra strain brought fever
in its wake! That way he saw nothing but blank despair, to be ended,
for her, by delirium and merciful death, for him by a Berserk rush
among the Dyaks, and one last mad fight against overwhelming numbers.

Then the girl's voice reached him, self-reliant, almost cheerful--

"You will be glad to hear that the cut has stopped bleeding. It is only
a scratch."

So a kindly Providence had spared them yet a little while. The cloud
passed from his mind, the gathering mist from his eyes. In that instant
he thought he detected a slight rustling among the trees where the
cliff shelved up from the house. Standing as he was on the edge of the
rock, this was a point he could not guard against.

When her welcome assurance recalled his scattered senses, he stepped
back to speak to her, and in the same instant a couple of bullets
crashed against the rock overhead. Iris had unwittingly saved him from
a serious, perhaps fatal, wound.

He sprang to the extreme right of the ledge and boldly looked into the
trees beneath. Two Dyaks were there, belated wanderers cut off from the
main body. They dived headlong into the undergrowth for safety, but one
of them was too late. The Lee-Metford reached him, and its
reverberating concussion, tossed back and forth by the echoing rocks,
drowned his parting scream.

In the plenitude of restored vigor the sailor waited for no counter
demonstration. He turned and crouchingly approached the southern end of
his parapet. Through his screen of grass he could discern the long
black hair and yellow face of a man who lay on the sand and twisted his
head around the base of the further cliff. The distance, oft measured,
was ninety yards, the target practically a six-inch bull's-eye. Jenks
took careful aim, fired, and a whiff of sand flew up.

Perhaps he had used too fine a sight and ploughed a furrow beneath the
Dyak's ear. He only heard a faint yell, but the enterprising head
vanished and there were no more volunteers for that particular service.

He was still peering at the place when a cry of unmitigated anguish
came from Iris--

"Oh, come quick! Our water! The casks have burst!"

It was not until Jenks had torn the tarpaulin from off their stores,
and he was wildly striving with both hands to scoop up some precious
drops collected in the small hollows of the ledge, that he realized the
full magnitude of the disaster which had befallen them.

During the first rapid exchange of fire, before the enemy vacated the
cliff, several bullets had pierced the tarpaulin. By a stroke of
exceeding bad fortune two of them had struck each of the water-barrels
and started the staves. The contents quietly ebbed away beneath the
broad sheet, and flowing inwards by reason of the sharp slope of the
ledge, percolated through the fault. Iris and he, notwithstanding their
frenzied efforts, were not able to save more than a pint of gritty
discolored fluid. The rest, infinitely more valuable to them than all
the diamonds of De Beers, was now oozing through the natural channel
cut by centuries of storm, dripping upon the headless skeleton in the
cave, soaking down to the very heart of their buried treasure.

Jenks was so paralyzed by this catastrophe that Iris became alarmed. As
yet she did not grasp its awful significance. That he, her hero, so
brave, so confident in the face of many dangers, should betray such
sense of irredeemable loss, frightened her much more than the incident
itself.

Her lips whitened. Her words become incoherent.

"Tell me," she whispered. "I can bear anything but silence. Tell me, I
implore you. Is it so bad?"

The sight of her distress sobered him. He ground his teeth together as
a man does who submits to a painful operation and resolves not to
flinch beneath the knife.

"It is very bad," he said; "not quite the end, but near it."

"The end," she bravely answered, "is death! We are living and
uninjured. You must fight on. If the Lord wills it we shall not die."

He looked in her blue eyes and saw there the light of Heaven.

"God bless you, dear girl," he murmured brokenly. "You would cheer any
man through the Valley of the Shadow, were he Christian or
Faint-heart."

Her glance did not droop before his. In such moments heart speaks to
heart without concealment.

"We still have a little water," she cried. "Fortunately we are not
thirsty. You have not forgotten our supply of champagne and brandy?"

There was a species of mad humor in the suggestion. Oh for another
miracle that should change the wine into water!

He could only fall in with her unreflective mood and leave the dreadful
truth to its own evil time. In their little nook the power of the sun
had not yet made itself felt. By ordinary computation it was about nine
o'clock. Long before noon they would be grilling. Throughout the next
few hours they must suffer the torture of Dives with one meager pint of
water to share between them. Of course the wine and spirit must be
shunned like a pestilence. To touch either under such conditions would
be courting heat, apoplexy, and death. And next day!

He tightened his jaws before he answered--

"We will console ourselves with a bottle of champagne for dinner.
Meanwhile, I hear our friends shouting to those left on this side of
the island. I must take an active interest in the conversation."

He grasped a rifle and lay down on the ledge, already gratefully warm.
There was a good deal of sustained shouting going on. Jenks thought he
recognized the chief's voice, giving instructions to those who had come
from Smugglers' Cove and were now standing on the beach near the
quarry.

"I wonder if he is hungry," he thought. "If so, I will interfere with
the commissariat."

Iris peeped forth at him.

"Mr. Jenks!"

"Yes," without turning his head. He knew it was an ordinary question.

"May I come too?"

"What! expose yourself on the ledge!"

"Yes, even that. I am so tired of sitting here alone."

"Well, there is no danger at present. But they might chance to see you,
and you remember what I--"

"Yes, I remember quite well. If that is all--" There was a rustle of
garments. "I am very mannish in appearance. If you promise not to look
at me I will join you."

"I promise."

Iris stepped forth. She was flushed a little, and, to cover her
confusion, may be, she picked up a Lee-Metford.

"Now there are two guns," she said, as she stood near him.

He could see through the tail of his eye that a slight but elegantly
proportioned young gentleman of the sea-faring profession had suddenly
appeared from nowhere. He was glad she had taken this course. It might
better the position were the Dyaks to see her thus.

"The moment I tell you, you must fall flat," he warned her. "No
ceremony about it. Just flop!"

"I don't know anything better calculated to make one flop than a
bullet," she laughed. Not yet did the tragedy of the broken kegs appeal
to her.

"Yes, but it achieves its purpose in two ways. I want you to adopt the
precautionary method."

"Trust me for that. Good gracious!"

The sailor's rifle went off with an unexpected bang that froze the
exclamation on her lips. Three Dyaks were attempting to run the
gauntlet to their beleaguered comrades. They carried a jar and two
wicker baskets. He with the jar fell and broke it. The others doubled
back like hares, and the first man dragged himself after them. Jenks
did not fire again.

Iris watched the wounded wretch crawling along the ground. Her eyes
grew moist, and she paled somewhat. When he vanished she looked into
the valley and at the opposing ledge; three men lay dead within twenty
yards of her. Two others dangled from the rocks. It took her some time
to control her quavering utterance sufficiently to say--

"I hope I may not have to use a gun. I know it cannot be helped, but if
I were to kill a human being I do not think I would ever rest again."

"In that case I have indeed murdered sleep today," was the unfeeling
reply.

"No! no! A man must be made of sterner stuff. We have a right to defend
ourselves. If need be I will exercise that right. Still it is horrid,
oh, so horrid!"

She could not see the sailor's grim smile. It would materially affect
his rest, for the better, were he able to slay every Dyak on the island
with a single shot. Yet her gentle protest pleased him. She could not
at the same time be callous to human suffering and be Iris. But he
declined the discussion of such sentiments.

"You were going to say something when a brief disturbance took place?"
he inquired.

"Yes. I was surprised to find how hot the ledge has become."

"You notice it more because you are obliged to remain here."

After a pause--

"I think I understand now why you were so upset by the loss of our
water supply. Before the day ends we will be in great straits, enduring
agonies from thirst!"

"Let us not meet the devil half-way," he rejoined. He preferred the
unfair retort to a confession which could only foster dismay.

"But, please, I am thirsty now."

He moved uneasily. He was only too conscious of the impish weakness,
common to all mankind, which creates a desire out of sheer inability to
satisfy it. Already his own throat was parched. The excitement of the
early struggle was in itself enough to engender an acute thirst. He
thought it best to meet their absolute needs as far as possible.

"Bring the tin cup," he said. "Let us take half our store and use the
remainder when we eat. Try to avoid breathing through your mouth. The
hot air quickly affects the palate and causes an artificial dryness. We
cannot yet be in real need of water. It is largely imagination."

Iris needed no second bidding. She carefully measured out half a pint
of the unsavory fluid--the dregs of the casks and the scourings of the
ledge.

"I will drink first," she cried.

"No, no," he interrupted impatiently. "Give it to me."

She pretended to be surprised.

"As a mere matter of politeness----"

"I am sorry, but I must insist."

She gave him the cup over his shoulder. He placed it to his lips and
gulped steadily.

"There," he said, gruffly. "I was in a hurry. The Dyaks may make
another rush at any moment."

Iris looked into the vessel.

"You have taken none at all," she said.

"Nonsense!"

"Mr. Jenks, be reasonable! You need it more than I. I d-don't want
to--live w-without--you."

His hands shook somewhat. It was well there was no call for accurate
shooting just then.

"I assure you I took all I required," he declared with unnecessary
vehemence.

"At least drink your share, to please me," she murmured.

"You wished to humbug me," he grumbled. "If you will take the first
half I will take the second."

And they settled it that way. The few mouthfuls of tepid water gave
them new life. One sense can deceive the others. A man developing all
the symptoms of hydrophobia has been cured by the assurance that the
dog which bit him was not mad. So these two, not yet aflame with
drought, banished the arid phantom for a little while.

Nevertheless, by high noon they were suffering again. The time passed
very slowly. The sun rose to the zenith and filled earth and air with
his ardor. It seemed to be a miracle--now appreciated for the first
time in their lives--that the sea did not dry up, and the leaves wither
on the trees. The silence, the deathly inactivity of all things, became
intolerable. The girl bravely tried to confine her thoughts to the task
of the hour. She displayed alert watchfulness, an instant readiness to
warn her companion of the slightest movement among the trees or by the
rocks to the north-west, this being the arc of their periphery assigned
to her.

Looking at a sunlit space from cover, and looking at the same place
when sweltering in the direct rays of a tropical sun, are kindred
operations strangely diverse in achievement. Iris could not reconcile
the physical sensitiveness of the hour with the careless hardihood of
the preceding days. Her eyes ached somewhat, for she had tilted her
sou'wester to the back of her head in the effort to cool her throbbing
temples. She put up her right hand to shade the too vivid reflection of
the glistening sea, and was astounded to find that in a few minutes the
back of her hand was scorched. A faint sound of distant shouting
disturbed her painful reverie.

"How is it," she asked, "that we feel the heat so much today? I have
hardly noticed it before."

"For two good reasons--forced idleness and radiation from this
confounded rock. Moreover, this is the hottest day we have experienced
on the island. There is not a breath of air, and the hot weather has
just commenced."

"Don't you think," she said, huskily, "that our position here is quite
hopeless?"

They were talking to each other sideways. The sailor never turned his
gaze from the southern end of the valley.

"It is no more hopeless now than last night or this morning," he
replied.

"But suppose we are kept here for several days?"

"That was always an unpleasant probability."

"We had water then. Even with an ample supply it would be difficult to
hold out. As things are, such a course becomes simply impossible."

Her despondency pierced his soul. A slow agony was consuming her.

"It is hard, I admit," he said. "Nevertheless you must bear up until
night falls. Then we will either obtain water or leave this place."

"Surely we can do neither."

"We may be compelled to do both."

"But how?"

In this, his hour of extremest need, the man was vouchsafed a shred of
luck. To answer her satisfactorily would have baffled a Talleyrand. But
before he could frame a feeble pretext for his too sanguine prediction,
a sampan appeared, eight hundred yards from Turtle Beach, and
strenuously paddled by three men. The vague hallooing they had heard
was explained.

The Dyaks, though to the manner born, were weary of sun-scorched rocks
and salt water. The boat was coming in response to their signals, and
the sight inspired Jenks with fresh hope. Like a lightning flash came
the reflection that if he could keep them away from the well and
destroy the sampan now hastening to their assistance, perhaps conveying
the bulk of their stores, they would soon tire of slaking their thirst,
on the few pitcher-plants growing on the north shore.

"Come quick," he shouted, adjusting the backsight of a rifle. "Lie down
and aim at the front of that boat, a little short if anything. It
doesn't matter if the bullets strike the sea first."

He placed the weapon in readiness for her and commenced operations
himself before Iris could reach his side. Soon both rifles were
pitching twenty shots a minute at the sampan. The result of their
long-range practice was not long in doubt. The Dyaks danced from seat
to seat in a state of wild excitement. One man was hurled overboard.
Then the craft lurched seaward in the strong current, and Jenks told
Iris to leave the rest to him.

Before he could empty a second magazine a fortunate bullet ripped a
plank out and the sampan filled and went down, amidst a shrill yell of
execration from the back of the cliff. The two Dyaks yet living
endeavored to swim ashore, half a mile through shark-invested reefs.
The sailor did not even trouble about them. After a few frantic
struggles each doomed wretch flung up his arms and vanished. In the
clear atmosphere the on-lookers could see black fins cutting the
pellucid sea.

This exciting episode dispelled the gathering mists from the girl's
brain. Her eyes danced and she breathed hard. Yet something worried
her.

"I hope I didn't hit the man who fell out of the boat," she said.

"Oh," came the prompt assurance, "I took deliberate aim at that chap.
He was a most persistent scoundrel."

Iris was satisfied. Jenks thought it better to lie than to tell the
truth, for the bald facts hardly bore out his assertion. Judging from
the manner of the Dyak's involuntary plunge he had been hit by a
ricochet bullet, whilst the sailor's efforts were wholly confined to
sinking the sampan. However, let it pass. Bullet or shark, the end was
the same.

They were quieting down--the thirst fiend was again slowly salting
their veins--when something of a dirty white color fluttered into sight
from behind the base of the opposite cliff. It was rapidly withdrawn,
to reappear after an interval. Now it was held more steadily and a
brown arm became visible. As Jenks did not fire, a turbaned head popped
into sight. It was the Mahommedan.

"No shoot it," he roared. "Me English speak it."

"Don't you speak Hindustani?" shouted Jenks in Urdu of the Higher
Proficiency.

"Hañ, sahib!"[Footnote: Yes, sir.] was the joyful response. "Will your
honor permit his servant to come and talk with him?"

"Yes, if you come unarmed."

"And the chief, too, sahib?"

"Yes, but listen! On the first sign of treachery I shoot both of you!"

"We will keep faith, sahib. May kites pick our bones if we fail!"

Then there stepped into full view the renegade Mussulman and his
leader. They carried no guns; the chief wore his kriss.

[Illustration: THE TWO HALTED SOME TEN PACES IN FRONT OF THE CAVERN.
AND THE BELLIGERENTS SURVEYED EACH OTHER.]

"Tell him to leave that dagger behind!" cried the sailor imperiously.
As the enemy demanded a parley he resolved to adopt the conqueror's
tone from the outset. The chief obeyed with a scowl, and the two
advanced to the foot of the rock.

"Stand close to me," said Jenks to Iris. "Let them see you plainly, but
pull your hat well down over your eyes."

She silently followed his instructions. Now that the very crisis of
their fate had arrived she was nervous, shaken, conscious only of a
desire to sink on her knees, and pray.

One or two curious heads were craned round the corner of the rock.

"Stop!" cried Jenks. "If those men do not instantly go away I will fire
at them."

The Indian translated this order and the chief vociferated some
clanging syllables which had the desired effect. The two halted some
ten paces in front of the cavern, and the belligerents surveyed each
other. It was a fascinating spectacle, this drama in real life. The
yellow-faced Dyak, gaudily attired in a crimson jacket and sky-blue
pantaloons of Chinese silk--a man with the _beauté du diable_,
young, and powerfully built--and the brown-skinned white-clothed
Mahommedan, bony, tall, and grey with hardship, looked up at the
occupants of the ledge. Iris, slim and boyish in her male garments, was
dwarfed by the six-foot sailor, but her face was blood-stained, and
Jenks wore a six weeks' stubble of beard. Holding their Lee-Metfords
with alert ease, with revolvers strapped to their sides, they presented
a warlike and imposing tableau in their inaccessible perch. In the path
of the emissaries lay the bodies of the slain. The Dyak leader scowled
again as he passed them.

"Sahib," began the Indian, "my chief, Taung S'Ali, does not wish to
have any more of his men killed in a foolish quarrel about a woman.
Give her up, he says, and he will either leave you here in peace, or
carry you safely to some place where you can find a ship manned by
white men."

"A woman!" said Jenks, scornfully. "That is idle talk! What woman is
here?"

This question nonplussed the native.

"The woman whom the chief saw half a month back, sahib."

"Taung S'Ali was bewitched. I slew his men so quickly that he saw
spirits."

The chief caught his name and broke in with a question. A volley of
talk between the two was enlivened with expressive gestures by Taung
S'Ali, who several times pointed to Iris, and Jenks now anathematized
his thoughtless folly in permitting the Dyak to approach so near. The
Mahommedan, of course, had never seen her, and might have persuaded the
other that in truth there were two men only on the rock.

His fears were only too well founded. The Mussulman salaamed
respectfully and said--

"Protector of the poor, I cannot gainsay your word, but Taung S'Ali
says that the maid stands by your side, and is none the less the woman
he seeks in that she wears a man's clothing."

"He has sharp eyes, but his brain is addled," retorted the sailor. "Why
does he come here to seek a woman who is not of his race? Not only has
he brought death to his people and narrowly escaped it himself, but he
must know that any violence offered to us will mean the extermination
of his whole tribe by an English warship. Tell him to take away his
boats and never visit this isle again. Perhaps I will then forget his
treacherous attempt to murder us whilst we slept last night."

The chief glared back defiantly, whilst the Mahommedan said--

"Sahib, it is beet not to anger him too much. He says he means to have
the girl. He saw her beauty that day and she inflamed his heart. She
has cost him many lives, but she is worth a Sultan's ransom. He cares
not for warships. They cannot reach his village in the hills. By the
tomb of Nizam-ud-din, sahib, he will not harm you if you give her up,
but if you refuse he will kill you both. And what is one woman more or
less in the world that she should cause strife and blood-letting?"

The sailor knew the Eastern character too well not to understand the
man's amazement that he should be so solicitous about the fate of one
of the weaker sex. It was seemingly useless to offer terms, yet the
native was clearly so anxious for an amicable settlement that he caught
at a straw.

"You come from Delhi?" he asked.

"Honored one, you have great wisdom."

"None but a Delhi man swears by the tomb on the road to the Kutub. You
have escaped from the Andamans?"

"Sahib, I did but slay a man in self-defence."

"Whatever the cause, you can never again see India. Nevertheless, you
would give many years of your life to mix once more with the
bazaar-folk in the Chandni Chowk, and sit at night on a charpoy near
the Lahore Gate?"

The brown skin assumed a sallow tinge.

"That is good speaking," he gurgled.

"Then help me and my friend to escape. Compel your chief to leave the
island. Kill him! Plot against him! I will promise you freedom and
plenty of rupees. Do this, and I swear to you I will come in a ship and
take you away. The miss-sahib's father is powerful. He has great
influence with the Sirkar."[Footnote: The Government of India.]

Taung S'Ali was evidently bewildered and annoyed by this passionate
appeal which he did not understand. He demanded an explanation, and the
ready-witted native was obliged to invent some plausible excuse. Yet
when he raised his face to Jenks there was the look of a hunted animal
in his eyes.

"Sahib," he said, endeavoring to conceal his agitation. "I am one among
many. A word from me and they would cut my throat. If I were with you
there on the rock I would die with you, for I was in the Kumaon
Rissala[Footnote: A native cavalry regiment.] when the trouble befell
me. It is of no avail to bargain with a tiger, sahib. I suppose you
will not give up the miss-sahib. Pretend to argue with me. I will help
in any way possible."

Jenks's heart bounded when this unlooked-for offer reached his ears.
The unfortunate Mahommedan was evidently eager to get away from the
piratical gang into whose power he had fallen. But the chief was
impatient, if not suspicious of these long speeches.

Angrily holding forth a Lee-Metford the sailor shouted--

"Tell Taung S'Ali that I will slay him and all his men ere tomorrow's
sun rises. He knows something of my power, but not all. Tonight, at the
twelfth hour, you will find a rope hanging from the rock. Tie thereto a
vessel of water. Fail not in this. I will not forget your services. I
am Anstruther Sahib, of the Belgaum Rissala."

The native translated his words into a fierce defiance of Taung S'Ali
and his Dyaks. The chief glanced at Jenks and Iris with an ominous
smile. He muttered something.

"Then, sahib. There is nothing more to be said. Beware of the trees on
your right. They can send silent death even to the place where you
stand. And I will not fail you tonight, on my life," cried the
interpreter.

"I believe you. Go! But inform your chief that once you have
disappeared round the rock whence you came I will talk to him only with
a rifle."

Taung S'Ali seemed to comprehend the Englishman's emphatic motions.
Waving his hand defiantly, the Dyak turned, and, with one parting
glance of mute assurance, the Indian followed him.

And now there came to Jenks a great temptation. Iris touched his arm
and whispered--

"What have you decided? I did not dare to speak lest he should hear my
voice."

Poor girl! She was sure the Dyak could not penetrate her disguise,
though she feared from the manner in which the conference broke up that
it had not been satisfactory.

Jenks did not answer her. He knew that if he killed Taung S'Ali his men
would be so dispirited that when the night came they would fly. There
was so much at stake--Iris, wealth, love, happiness, life itself--all
depended on his plighted word. Yet his savage enemy, a slayer of women,
a human vampire soiled with every conceivable crime, was stalking back
to safety with a certain dignified strut, calmly trusting to the white
man's bond.

Oh, it was cruel! The ordeal of that ghastly moment was more trying
than all that he had hitherto experienced. He gave a choking sob of
relief when the silken-clad scoundrel passed out of sight without even
deigning to give another glance at the ledge or at those who silently
watched him.

Iris could not guess the nature of the mortal struggle raging in the
sailor's soul.

"Tell me," she repeated, "what have you done?"

"Kept faith with that swaggering ruffian," he said, with an odd feeling
of thankfulness that he spoke truly.

"Why? Have you made him any promise?"

"Unhappily I permitted him to come here, so I had to let him go. He
recognized you instantly."

This surprised her greatly.

"Are you sure? I saw him pointing at me, but he seemed to be in such a
bad temper that I imagined that he was angry with you for exchanging a
prepossessing young lady for an ill-favored youth."

Jenks with difficulty suppressed a sigh. Her words for an instant had
the old piquant flavor.

Keeping a close watch on the sheltering promontory, he told her all
that had taken place. Iris became very downcast when she grasped the
exact state of affairs. She was almost certain when the Dyaks proposed
a parley that reasonable terms would result. It horrified her beyond
measure to find that she was the rock on which negotiations were
wrecked. Hope died within her. The bitterness of death was in her
breast.

"What an unlucky influence I have had on your existence!" she
exclaimed. "If it were not for me this trouble at least would be spared
you. Because I am here you are condemned. Again, because I stopped you
from shooting that wretched chief and his companions they are now
demanding your life as a forfeit. It is all my fault. I cannot bear
it."

She was on the verge of tears. The strain had become too great for her.
After indulging in a wild dream of freedom, to be told that they must
again endure the irksome confinement, the active suffering, the slow
horrors of a siege in that rocky prison, almost distracted her.

Jenks was very stern and curt in his reply.

"We must make the best of a bad business," he said. "If we are in a
tight place the Dyaks are not much better off, and eighteen of their
number are dead or wounded. You forget, too, that Providence has sent
us a most useful ally in the Mahommedan. When all is said and done,
things might be far worse than they are."

Never before had his tone been so cold, his manner so abrupt, not even
in the old days when he purposely endeavored to make her dislike him.

She walked along the ledge and timidly bent over him.

"Forgive me!" she whispered; "I did forget for the moment, not only the
goodness of Providence, but also your self-sacrificing devotion. I am
only a woman, and I don't want to die yet, but I will not live unless
you too are saved."

Once already that day she had expressed this thought in other words.
Was some shadowy design flitting through her brain? Suppose they were
faced with the alternatives of dying from thirst or yielding to the
Dyaks. Was there another way out? Jenks shivered, though the rock was
grilling him. He must divert her mind from this dreadful brooding.

"The fact is," he said with a feeble attempt at cheerfulness, "we are
both hungry and consequently grumpy. Now, suppose you prepare lunch. We
will feel ever so much better after we have eaten."

The girl choked back her emotion, and sadly essayed the task of
providing a meal which was hateful to her. In doing so she saw her
Bible, lying where she had placed it that morning, the leaves still
open at the 91st Psalm. She had indeed forgotten the promise it
contained--

"For He shall give His angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways."

A few tears fell now and made little furrows down her soiled cheeks.
But they were helpful tears, tears of resignation, not of despair.
Although the "destruction that wasteth at noonday" was trying her
sorely she again felt strong and sustained.

She even smiled on detecting an involuntary effort to clear her stained
face. She was about to carry a biscuit and some tinned meat to the
sailor when a sharp exclamation from him caused her to hasten to his
side.

The Dyaks had broken cover. Running in scattered sections across the
sands, they were risking such loss as the defenders might be able to
inflict upon them during a brief race to the shelter and food to be
obtained in the other part of the island.

Jenks did not fire at the scurrying gang. He was waiting for one man,
Taung S'Ali. But that redoubtable person, having probably suggested
this dash for liberty, had fully realized the enviable share of
attention he would attract during the passage. He therefore discarded
his vivid attire, and, by borrowing odd garments, made himself
sufficiently like unto the remainder of his crew to deceive the sailor
until the rush of men was over. Among them ran the Mahommedan, who did
not look up the valley but waved his hand.

When all had quieted down again Jenks understood how he had been
fooled. He laughed so heartily that Iris, not knowing either the cause
of his merriment or the reason of his unlooked-for clemency to the
flying foe, feared the sun had affected him.

He at once quitted the post occupied during so protracted a vigil.

"Now," he cried, "we can eat in peace. I have stripped the chief of his
finery. His men can twit him on being forced to shed his gorgeous
plumage in order to save his life. Anyhow, they will leave us in peace
until night falls, so we must make the best of a hot afternoon."

But he was mistaken. A greater danger than any yet experienced now
threatened them, though Iris, after perusing that wonderful psalm,
might have warned him of it had she known the purpose of those long
bamboos carried by some of the savages.

For Taung S'Ali, furious and unrelenting, resolved that if he could not
obtain the girl he would slay the pair of them; and he had terrible
weapons in his possession--weapons that could send "silent death even
to the place where they stood."


CHAPTER XIII

REALITY _V_. ROMANCE--THE CASE FOR THE DEFENDANT


Residents in tropical countries know that the heat is greatest, or
certainly least bearable, between two and four o'clock in the
afternoon.

At the conclusion of a not very luscious repast, Jenks suggested that
they should rig up the tarpaulin in such wise as to gain protection
from the sun and yet enable him to cast a watchful eye over the valley.
Iris helped to raise the great canvas sheet on the supports he had
prepared. Once shut off from the devouring sun rays, the hot breeze
then springing into fitful existence cooled their blistered but
perspiring skin and made life somewhat tolerable.

Still adhering to his policy of combatting the first enervating attacks
of thirst, the sailor sanctioned the consumption of the remaining
water. As a last desperate expedient, to be resorted to only in case of
sheer necessity, he uncorked a bottle of champagne and filled the tin
cup. The sparkling wine, with its volume of creamy foam, looked so
tempting that Iris would then and there have risked its potency were
she not promptly withheld.

Jenks explained to her that when the wine became quite flat and insipid
they might use it to moisten their parched lips. Even so, in their
present super-heated state, the liquor was unquestionably dangerous,
but he hoped it would not harm them if taken in minute quantities.

Accustomed now to implicitly accept his advice, she fought and steadily
conquered the craving within her. Oddly enough, the "thawing" of their
scorched bodies beneath the tarpaulin brought a certain degree of
relief. They were supremely uncomfortable, but that was as naught
compared with the relaxation from the torments previously borne.

For a long time--the best part of an hour, perhaps--they remained
silent.

The sailor was reviewing the pros and cons of their precarious
condition. It would, of course, be a matter of supreme importance were
the Indian to be faithful to his promise. Here the prospect was
decidedly hopeful. The man was an old _sowar_, and the ex-officer
of native cavalry knew how enduring was the attachment of this poor
convict to home and military service. Probably at that moment the
Mahommedan was praying to the Prophet and his two nephews to aid him in
rescuing the sahib and the woman whom the sahib held so dear, for the
all-wise and all-powerful Sirkar is very merciful to offending natives
who thus condone their former crimes.

But, howsoever willing he might be, what could one man do among so
many? The Dyaks were hostile to him in race and creed, and assuredly
infuriated against the foreign devil who had killed or wounded, in
round numbers, one-fifth of their total force. Very likely, the hapless
Mussulman would lose his life that night in attempting to bring water
to the foot of the rock.

Well, he, Jenks, might have something to say in that regard. By
midnight the moon would illumine nearly the whole of Prospect Park. If
the Mahommedan were slain in front of the cavern his soul would travel
to the next world attended by a Nizam's cohort of slaughtered slaves.

Even if the man succeeded in eluding the vigilance of his present
associates, where was the water to come from? There was none on the
island save that in the well. In all likelihood the Dyaks had a store
in the remaining sampans, but the native ally of the beleaguered pair
would have a task of exceeding difficulty in obtaining one of the jars
or skins containing it.

Again, granting all things went well that night, what would be the
final outcome of the struggle? How long could Iris withstand the
exposure, the strain, the heart-breaking misery of the rock? The future
was blurred, crowded with ugly and affrighting fiends passing in
fantastic array before his vision, and mouthing dumb threats of madness
and death.

He shook restlessly, not aware that the girl's sorrowful glance,
luminous with love and pain, was fixed upon him. Summarily dismissing
these grisly phantoms of the mind, he asked himself what the Mahommedan
exactly meant by warning him against the trees on the right and the
"silent death" that might come from them. He was about to crawl forth
to the lip of the rock and investigate matters in that locality when
Iris, who also was busy with her thoughts, restrained him.

"Wait a little while," she said. "None of the Dyaks will venture into
the open until night falls. And I have something to say to you."

There was a quiet solemnity in her voice that Jenks had never heard
before. It chilled him. His heart acknowledged a quick sense of evil
omen. He raised himself slightly and turned towards her. Her face,
beautiful and serene beneath its disfigurements, wore an expression of
settled purpose. For the life of him he dared not question her.

"That man, the interpreter," she said, "told you that if I were given
up to the chief, he and his followers would go away and molest you no
more."

His forehead seamed with sudden anger.

"A mere bait," he protested. "In any event it is hardly worth
discussion."

And the answer came, clear and resolute--

"I think I will agree to those terms."

At first he regarded her with undisguised and wordless amazement. Then
the appalling thought darted through his brain that she contemplated
this supreme sacrifice in order to save him. A clammy sweat bedewed his
brow, but by sheer will power he contrived to say--

"You must be mad to even dream of such a thing. Don't you understand
what it means to you--and to me? It is a ruse to trap us. They are
ungoverned savages. Once they had you in their power they would laugh
at a promise made to me."

"You may be mistaken. They must have some sense of fair dealing. Even
assuming that such was their intention, they may depart from it. They
have already lost a great many men. Their chief, having gained his main
object, might not be able to persuade them to take further risks. I
will make it a part of the bargain that they first supply you with
plenty of water. Then you, unaided, could keep them at bay for many
days. We lose nothing; we can gain a great deal by endeavoring to
pacify them."

"Iris!" he gasped, "what are you saying?"

The unexpected sound of her name on his lips almost unnerved her. But
no martyr ever went to the stake with more settled purpose than this
pure woman, resolved to immolate herself for the sake of the man she
loved. He had dared all for her, faced death in many shapes. Now it was
her turn. Her eyes were lit with a seraphic fire, her sweet face
resigned as that of an angel.

"I have thought it out," she murmured, gazing at him steadily, yet
scarce seeing him. "It is worth trying as a last expedient. We are
abandoned by all, save the Lord; and it does not appear to be His holy
will to help us on earth. We can struggle on here until we die. Is that
right, when one of us may live?"

Her very candor had betrayed her. She would go away with these
monstrous captors, endure them, even flatter them, until she and they
were far removed from the island. And then--she would kill herself. In
her innocence she imagined that self-destruction, under such
circumstances, was a pardonable offence. She only gave a life to save a
life, and greater love than this is not known to God or man.

The sailor, in a tempest of wrath and wild emotion, had it in his mind
to compel her into reason, to shake her, as one shakes a wayward child.

He rose to his knees with this half-formed notion in his fevered brain.
Then he looked at her, and a mist seemed to shut her out from his
sight. Was she lost to him already? Was all that had gone before an
idle dream of joy and grief, a wizard's glimpse of mirrored happiness
and vague perils? Was Iris, the crystal-souled--thrown to him by the
storm-lashed waves--to be snatched away by some irresistible and malign
influence?

In the mere physical effort to assure himself that she was still near
to him he gathered her up in his strong hands. Yes, she was there,
breathing, wondering, palpitating. He folded her closely to his breast,
and, yielding to the passionate longings of his tired heart, whispered
to her--

"My darling, do you think I can survive your loss? You are life itself
to me. If we have to die, sweet one, let us die together."

Then Iris flung her arms around his neck.

"I am quite, quite happy now," she sobbed brokenly. "I
didn't--imagine--it would come--this way, but--I am thankful--it has
come."

[Illustration: LOVE, TREMENDOUS IN ITS POWER, UNFATHOMABLE IN ITS
MYSTERY, HAD CAST ITS SPELL OVER THEM.]

For a little while they yielded to the glamour of the divine knowledge
that amidst the chaos of eternity each soul had found its mate. There
was no need for words. Love, tremendous in its power, unfathomable in
its mystery, had cast its spell over them. They were garbed in light,
throned in a palace built by fairy hands. On all sides squatted the
ghouls of privation, misery, danger, even grim death; but they heeded
not the Inferno; they had created a Paradise in an earthly hell.

Then Iris withdrew herself from the man's embrace. She was delightfully
shy and timid now.

"So you really do love me?" she whispered, crimson-faced, with shining
eyes and parted lips.

He drew her to him again and kissed her tenderly. For he had cast all
doubt to the winds. No matter what the future had in store she was his,
his only; it was not in man's power to part them. A glorious effulgence
dazzled his brain. Her love had given him the strength of Goliath, the
confidence of David. He would pluck her from the perils that environed
her. The Dyak was not yet born who should rend her from him.

He fondled her hair and gently rubbed her cheek with his rough fingers.
The sudden sense of ownership of this fair woman was entrancing. It
almost bewildered him to find Iris nestling close, clinging to him in
utter confidence and trust.

"But I knew, I knew," she murmured. "You betrayed yourself so many
times. You wrote your secret to me, and, though you did not tell me, I
found your dear words on the sands, and have treasured them next my
heart."

What girlish romance was this? He held her away gingerly, just so far
that he could look into her eyes.

"Oh, it is true, quite true," she cried, drawing the locket from her
neck. "Don't you recognize your own handwriting, or were you not
certain, just then, that you really did love me?"

Dear, dear! How often would she repeat that wondrous phrase! Together
they bent over the tiny slips of paper. There it was again--"I love
you"--twice blazoned in magic symbols. With blushing eagerness she told
him how, by mere accident of course, she caught sight of her own name.
It was not very wrong, was it, to pick up that tiny scrap, or those
others, which she could not help seeing, and which unfolded their
simple tale so truthfully? Wrong! It was so delightfully right that he
must kiss her again to emphasize his convictions.

All this fondling and love-making had, of course, an air of grotesque
absurdity because indulged in by two grimy and tattered individuals
crouching beneath a tarpaulin on a rocky ledge, and surrounded by
bloodthirsty savages intent on their destruction. Such incidents
require the setting of convention, the conservatory, with its wealth of
flowers and plants, a summer wood, a Chippendale drawing-room. And yet,
God wot, men and women have loved each other in this grey old world
without stopping to consider the appropriateness of place and season.

After a delicious pause Iris began again----

"Robert--I must call you Robert now--there, there, please let me get a
word in even edgeways--well then, Robert dear, I do not care much what
happens now. I suppose it was very wicked and foolish of me to speak as
I did before--before you called me Iris. Now tell me at once. Why did
you call me Iris?"

"You must propound that riddle to your godfather."

"No wriggling, please. Why did you do it?"

"Because I could not help myself. It slid out unawares."

"How long have you thought of me only as Iris, your Iris?"

"Ever since I first understood that somewhere in the wide world was a
dear woman to love me and be loved."

"But at one time you thought her name was Elizabeth?"

"A delusion, a mirage! That is why those who christened you had the
wisdom of the gods."

Another interlude. They grew calmer, more sedate. It was so undeniably
true they loved one another that the fact was becoming venerable with
age. Iris was perhaps the first to recognize its quiet certainty.

"As I cannot get you to talk reasonably," she protested, "I must appeal
to your sympathy. I am hungry, and oh, so thirsty."

The girl had hardly eaten a morsel for her midday meal. Then she was
despondent, utterly broken-hearted. Now she was filled with new hope.
There was a fresh motive in existence. Whether destined to live an hour
or half a century, she would never, never leave him, nor, of course,
could he ever, ever leave her. Some things were quite impossible--for
example, that they should part.

Jenks brought her a biscuit, a tin of meat, and that most doleful cup
of champagne.

"It is not exactly _frappé_," he said, handing her the insipid
beverage, "but, under other conditions, it is a wine almost worthy to
toast you in."

She fancied she had never before noticed what a charming smile he had.

"'Toast' is a peculiarly suitable word," she cried. "I am simply
frizzling. In these warm clothes----"

She stopped. For the first time since that prehistoric period when she
was "Miss Deane" and he "Mr. Jenks" she remembered the manner of her
garments.

"It is not the warm clothing you feel so much as the want of air,"
explained the sailor readily. "This tarpaulin has made the place very
stuffy, but we must put up with it until sundown. By the way, what is
that?"

A light tap on the tarred canvas directly over his head had caught his
ear. Iris, glad of the diversion, told him she had heard the noise
three or four times, but fancied it was caused by the occasional
rustling of the sheet on the uprights.

Jenks had not allowed his attention to wander altogether from external
events. Since the Dyaks' last escapade there was no sign of them in the
valley or on either beach. Not for trivial cause would they come again
within range of the Lee-Metfords.

They waited and listened silently. Another tap sounded on the tarpaulin
in a different place, and they both concurred in the belief that
something had darted in curved flight over the ledge and fallen on top
of their protecting shield.

"Let us see what the game is," exclaimed the sailor. He crept to the
back of the ledge and drew himself up until he could reach over the
sheet. He returned, carrying in his hand a couple of tiny arrows.

"There are no less than seven of these things sticking in the canvas,"
he said. "They don't look very terrible. I suppose that is what my
Indian friend meant by warning me against the trees on the right."

He did not tell Iris all the Mahommedan said. There was no need to
alarm her causelessly. Even whilst they examined the curious little
missile another flew up from the valley and lodged on the roof of their
shelter.

The shaft of the arrow, made of some extremely hard wood, was about ten
inches in length. Affixed to it was a pointed fish-bone, sharp, but not
barbed, and not fastened in a manner suggestive of much strength. The
arrow was neither feathered nor grooved for a bowstring. Altogether it
seemed to be a childish weapon to be used by men equipped with lead and
steel.

Jenks could not understand the appearance of this toy. Evidently the
Dyaks believed in its efficacy, or they would not keep on
pertinaciously dropping an arrow on the ledge.

"How do they fire it?" asked Iris. "Do they throw it?"

"I will soon tell you," he replied, reaching for a rifle.

"Do not go out yet," she entreated him. "They cannot harm us. Perhaps
we may learn more by keeping quiet. They will not continue shooting
these things all day."

Again a tiny arrow traveled towards them in a graceful parabola. This
one fell short. Missing the tarpaulin, it almost dropped on the girl's
outstretched hand. She picked it up. The fish-bone point had snapped by
contact with the floor of the ledge.

She sought for and found the small tip.

"See," she said. "It seems to have been dipped in something. It is
quite discolored."

Jenks frowned peculiarly. A startling explanation had suggested itself
to him. Fragments of forgotten lore were taking cohesion in his mind.

"Put it down. Quick!" he cried.

Iris obeyed him, with wonder in her eyes. He spilled a teasponful of
champagne into a small hollow of the rock and steeped one of the
fish-bones in the liquid. Within a few seconds the champagne assumed a
greenish tinge and the bone became white. Then he knew.

"Good Heavens!" he exclaimed, "these are poisoned arrows shot through a
blowpipe. I have never before seen one, but I have often read about
them. The bamboos the Dyaks carried were sumpitans. These fish-bones
have been steeped in the juice of the upas tree. Iris, my dear girl, if
one of them had so much as scratched your finger nothing on earth could
save you."

She paled and drew back in sudden horror. This tiny thing had taken the
semblance of a snake. A vicious cobra cast at her feet would be less
alarming, for the reptile could be killed, whilst his venomous fangs
would only be used in self-defence.

Another tap sounded on their thrice-welcome covering. Evidently the
Dyaks would persist in their efforts to get one of those poisoned darts
home.

Jenks debated silently whether it would be better to create a
commotion, thus inducing the savages to believe they had succeeded in
inflicting a mortal wound, or to wait until the next arrow fell, rush
out, and try conclusions with Dum-dum bullets against the sumpitan
blowers.

He decided in favor of the latter course. He wished to dishearten his
assailants, to cram down their throats the belief that he was
invulnerable, and could visit their every effort with a deadly
reprisal.

Iris, of course, protested when he explained his project. But the
fighting spirit prevailed. Their love idyll must yield to the needs of
the hour.

He had not long to wait. The last arrow fell, and he sprang to the
extreme right of the ledge. First he looked through that invaluable
screen of grass. Three Dyaks were on the ground, and a fourth in the
fork of a tree. They were each armed with a blowpipe. He in the tree
was just fitting an arrow into the bamboo tube. The others were
watching him.

Jenks raised his rifle, fired, and the warrior in the tree pitched
headlong to the ground. A second shot stretched a companion on top of
him. One man jumped into the bushes and got away, but the fourth
tripped over his unwieldy sumpitan and a bullet tore a large section
from his skull. The sailor then amused himself with breaking the
bamboos by firing at them. He came back to the white-faced girl.

"I fancy that further practice with blowpipes will be at a discount on
Rainbow Island," he cried cheerfully.

But Iris was anxious and distrait.

"It is very sad," she said, "that we are obliged to secure our own
safety by the ceaseless slaughter of human beings. Is there no offer we
can make them, no promise of future gain, to tempt them to abandon
hostilities?"

"None whatever. These Borneo Dyaks are bred from infancy to prey on
their fellow-creatures. To be strangers and defenceless is to court
pillage and massacre at their hands. I think no more of shooting them
than of smashing a clay pigeon. Killing a mad dog is perhaps a better
simile."

"But, Robert dear, how long can we hold out?"

"What! Are you growing tired of me already?"

He hoped to divert her thoughts from this constantly recurring topic.
Twice within the hour had it been broached and dismissed, but Iris
would not permit him to shirk it again. She made no reply, simply
regarding him with a wistful smile.

So Jenks sat down by her side, and rehearsed the hopes and fears which
perplexed him. He determined that there should be no further
concealment between them. If they failed to secure water that night, if
the Dyaks maintained a strict siege of the rock throughout the whole of
next day, well--they might survive--it was problematical. Best leave
matters in God's hands.

With feminine persistency she clung to the subject, detecting his
unwillingness to discuss a possible final stage in their sufferings.

"Robert!" she whispered fearfully, "you will never let me fall into the
power of the chief, will you?"

"Not whilst I live."

"You _must_ live. Don't you understand? I would go with them to
save you. But I would have died--by my own hand. Robert, my love, you
must do this thing before the end. I must be the first to die."

He hung his head in a paroxysm of silent despair. Her words rung like a
tocsin of the bright romance conjured up by the avowal of their love.
It seemed to him, in that instant, they had no separate existence as
distinguished from the great stream of human life--the turbulent river
that flowed unceasingly from an eternity of the past to an eternity of
the future. For a day, a year, a decade, two frail bubbles danced on
the surface and raced joyously together in the sunshine; then they were
broken--did it matter how, by savage sword or lingering ailment? They
vanished--absorbed again by the rushing waters--and other bubbles rose
in precarious iridescence. It was a fatalist view of life, a dim and
obscurantist groping after truth induced by the overpowering nature of
present difficulties. The famous Tentmaker of Naishapur blindly sought
the unending purpose when he wrote:--

  "Up from Earth's Centre through the Seventh Gate
  I rose, and on the throne of Saturn sate,
      And many a Knot unravel'd by the Road;
  But not the Master-Knot of Human Fate.

  "There was the Door to which I found no Key;
  There was the Veil through which I could not see:
      Some little talk awhile of Me and Thee
  There was--and then no more of Thee and Me."

The sailor, too, wrestled with the great problem. He may be pardoned if
his heart quailed and he groaned aloud.

"Iris," he said solemnly, "whatever happens, unless I am struck dead at
your feet, I promise you that we shall pass the boundary hand in hand.
Be mine the punishment if we have decided wrongly. And now," he cried,
tossing his head in a defiant access of energy, "let us have done with
the morgue. For my part I refuse to acknowledge I am inside until the
gates clang behind me. As for you, you cannot help yourself. You must
do as I tell you. I never knew of a case where the question of Woman's
Rights was so promptly settled."

His vitality was infectious. Iris smiled again. Her sensitive highly
strung nerves permitted these sharp alternations between despondency
and hope.

"You must remember," he went on, "that the Dyak score is twenty-one to
the bad, whilst our loss stands at love. Dear me, that cannot be right.
Love is surely not a loss."

"A cynic might describe it as a negative gain."

"Oh, a cynic is no authority. He knows nothing whatever about the
subject."

"My father used to say, when he was in Parliament, that people who knew
least oft-times spoke best. Some men get overweighted with facts."

They chatted in lighter vein with such pendulum swing back to
nonchalance that none would have deemed it possible for these two to
have already determined the momentous issue of the pending struggle
should it go against them. There is, glory be, in the Anglo-Saxon race
the splendid faculty of meeting death with calm defiance, almost with
contempt. Moments of panic, agonizing memories of bygone days, visions
of dear faces never to be seen again, may temporarily dethrone this
proud fortitude. But the tremors pass, the gibbering specters of fear
and lamentation are thrust aside, and the sons and daughters of Great
Britain answer the last roll-call with undaunted heroism. They know how
to die.

And so the sun sank to rest in the sea, and the star, pierced the
deepening blue of the celestial arch, whilst the man and the woman
awaited patiently the verdict of the fates.

Before the light failed, Jenks gathered all the poisoned arrows and
ground their vemoned points to powder beneath his heel. Gladly would
Iris and he have dispensed with the friendly protection of the
tarpaulin when the cool evening breeze came from the south. But such a
thing might not be even considered. Several hours of darkness must
elapse before the moon rose, and during that period, were their foes so
minded, they would be absolutely at the mercy of the sumpitan shafts if
not covered by their impenetrable buckler.

The sailor looked long and earnestly at the well. Their own bucket,
improvised out of a dish-cover and a rope, lay close to the brink. A
stealthy crawl across the sandy valley, half a minute of grave danger,
and he would be up the ladder again with enough water to serve their
imperative needs for days to come.

There was little or no risk in descending the rock. Soon after sunset
it was wrapped in deepest gloom, for night succeeds day in the tropics
with wondrous speed. The hazard lay in twice crossing the white sand,
were any of the Dyaks hiding behind the house or among the trees.

He held no foolhardy view of his own powers. The one-sided nature of
the conflict thus far was due solely to his possession of Lee-Metfords
as opposed to muzzle-loaders. Let him be surrounded on the level at
close quarters by a dozen determined men and he must surely succumb.

Were it not for the presence of Iris he would have given no second
thought to the peril. It was just one of those undertakings which a
soldier jumps at. "Here goes for the V.C. or Kingdom Come!" is the
pithy philosophy of Thomas Atkins under such circumstances.

Now, there was no V.C., but there was Iris.

To act without consulting her was impossible, so they discussed the
project. Naturally she scouted it.

"The Mahommedan may be able to help us," she pointed out. "In any event
let us wait until the moon wanes. That is the darkest hour. We do not
know what may happen meanwhile."

The words had hardly left her mouth when an irregular volley was fired
at them from the right flank of the enemy's position. Every bullet
struck yards above their heads, the common failing of musketry at night
being to take too high an aim. But the impact of the missiles on a rock
so highly impregnated with minerals caused sparks to fly, and Jenks saw
that the Dyaks would obtain by this means a most dangerous index of
their faulty practice. Telling Iris to at once occupy her safe corner,
he rapidly adjusted a rifle on the wooden rests already prepared in
anticipation of an attack from that quarter, and fired three shots at
the opposing crest, whence came the majority of gun-flashes.

One, at least, of the three found a human billet. There was a shout of
surprise and pain, and the next volley spurted from the ground level.
This could do no damage owing to the angle, but he endeavored to
disconcert the marksmen by keeping up a steady fire in their direction.
He did not dream of attaining other than a moral effect, as there is a
lot of room to miss when aiming in the dark. Soon he imagined that the
burst of flame from his rifle helped the Dyaks, because several bullets
whizzed close to his head, and about this time firing recommenced from
the crest.

Notwithstanding all his skill and manipulation of the wooden supports,
he failed to dislodge the occupants. Every minute one or more ounces of
lead pitched right into the ledge, damaging the stores and tearing the
tarpaulin, whilst those which struck the wall of rock were dangerous to
Iris by reason of the molten spray.

He could guess what had happened. By lying flat on the sloping plateau,
or squeezing close to the projecting shoulder of the cliff, the Dyaks
were so little exposed that idle chance alone would enable him to hit
one of them. But they must be shifted, or this night bombardment would
prove the most serious development yet encountered.

"Are you all right, Iris?" he called out.

"Yes, dear," she answered.

"Well, I want you to keep yourself covered by the canvas for a little
while--especially your head and shoulders. I am going to stop these
chaps. They have found our weak point, but I can baffle them."

She did not ask what he proposed to do. He heard the rustling of the
tarpaulin as she pulled it. Instantly he cast loose the rope-ladder,
and, armed only with a revolver, dropped down the rock. He was quite
invisible to the enemy. On reaching the ground he listened for a
moment. There was no sound save the occasional reports ninety yards
away. He hitched up the lower rungs of the ladder until they were six
feet from the level, and then crept noiselessly, close to the rock, for
some forty yards.

He halted beside a small poon-tree, and stooped to find something
embedded near its roots. At this distance he could plainly hear the
muttered conversation of the Dyaks, and could see several of them prone
on the sand. The latter fact proved how fatal would be an attempt on
his part to reach the well. They must discover him instantly once he
quitted the somber shadows of the cliff. He waited, perhaps a few
seconds longer than was necessary, endeavoring to pierce the dim
atmosphere and learn something of their disposition.

A vigorous outburst of firing sent him back with haste. Iris was up
there alone. He knew not what might happen. He was now feverishly
anxious to be with her again, to hear her voice, and be sure that all
was well.

To his horror he found the ladder swaying gently against the rock. Some
one was using it. He sprang forward, careless of consequence, and
seized the swinging end which had fallen free again. He had his foot on
the bottom rung when Iris's voice, close at hand and shrill with
terror, shrieked--

"Robert, where are you?"

"Here!" he shouted; the next instant she dropped into his arms.

A startled exclamation from the vicinity of the house, and some loud
cries from the more distant Dyaks on the other side of Prospect Park,
showed that they had been overheard.

"Up!" he whispered. "Hold tight, and go as quickly as you can."

"Not without you!"

"Up, for God's sake! I follow at your heels."

She began to climb. He took some article from between his teeth, a
string apparently, and drew it towards him, mounting the ladder at the
same time. The end tightened. He was then about ten feet from the
ground. Two Dyaks, yelling fiercely, rushed from the cover of the
house.

"Go on," he said to Iris. "Don't lose your nerve whatever happens. I am
close behind you."

"I am quite safe," she gasped.

Turning, and clinging on with one hand, he drew his revolver and fired
at the pair beneath, who could now faintly discern them, and were
almost within reach of the ladder. The shooting made them halt. He did
not know or care if they were hit. To frighten them was sufficient.
Several others were running across the sands to the cave, attracted by
the noise and the cries of the foremost pursuers.

Then he gave a steady pull to the cord. The sharp crack of a rifle came
from the vicinity of the old quarry. He saw the flash among the trees.
Almost simultaneously a bright light leapt from the opposite ledge,
illumining the vicinity like a meteor. It lit up the rock, showed Iris
just vanishing into the safety of the ledge, and revealed Jenks and the
Dyaks to each other. There followed instantly a tremendous explosion
that shook earth and air, dislodging every loose stone in the
south-west pile of rocks, hurling from the plateau some of its
occupants, and wounding the remainder with a shower of lead and débris.

The island birds, long since driven to the remote trees, clamored in
raucous peal, and from the Dyaks came yells of fright or anguish.

The sailor, unmolested further, reached the ledge to find Iris
prostrate where she had fallen, dead or unconscious, he knew not which.
He felt his face become grey in the darkness. With a fierce tug he
hauled the ladder well away from the ground and sank to his knees
beside her.

He took her into his arms. There was no light. He could not see her
eyes or lips. Her slight breathing seemed to indicate a fainting fit,
but there was no water, nor was it possible to adopt any of the
ordinary expedients suited to such a seizure. He could only wait in a
dreadful silence--wait, clasping her to his breast--and dumbly wonder
what other loss he could suffer ere the final release came.

At last she sighed deeply. A strong tremor of returning life stirred
her frame.

"Thank God!" he murmured, and bowed his head. Were the sun shining he
could not see her now, for his eyes were blurred.

"Robert!" she whispered.

"Yes, darling."

"Are you safe?"

"Safe! my loved one! Think of yourself! What has happened to you?"

"I fainted--I think. I have no hurt. I missed you! Something told me
you had gone. I went to help you, or die with you. And then that noise!
And the light! What did you do?"

He silenced her questioning with a passionate kiss. He carried her to a
little nook and fumbled among the stores until he found a bottle of
brandy. She drank some. Under its revivifying influence she was soon
able to listen to the explanation he offered--after securing the
ladder.

In a tall tree near the Valley of Death he had tightly fixed a loaded
rifle which pointed at a loose stone in the rock overhanging the ledge
held by the Dyaks. This stone rested against a number of percussion
caps extracted from cartridges, and these were in direct communication
with a train of powder leading to a blasting charge placed at the end
of a twenty-four inch hole drilled with a crowbar. The impact of the
bullet against the stone could not fail to explode some of the caps. He
had used the contents of three hundred cartridges to secure a
sufficiency of powder, and the bullets were all crammed into the
orifice, being tamped with clay and wet sand. The rifle was fired by
means of the string, the loose coils of which were secreted at the foot
of the poon. By springing this novel mine he had effectually removed
every Dyak from the ledge, over which its contents would spread like a
fan. Further, it would probably deter the survivors from again
venturing near that fatal spot.

Iris listened, only half comprehending. Her mind was filled with one
thought to the exclusion of all others. Robert had left her, had done
this thing without telling her. She forgave him, knowing he acted for
the best, but he must never, never deceive her again in such a manner.
She could not bear it.

What better excuse could man desire for caressing her, yea, even
squeezing her, until the sobs ceased and she protested with a weak
little laugh----

"Robert, I haven't got much breath--after that excitement--but
please--leave me--the remains!"


CHAPTER XIV

THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS


"You are a dear unreasonable little girl," he said. "Have you breath
enough to tell me why you came down the ladder?"

"When I discovered you were gone, I became wild with fright. Don't you
see, I imagined you were wounded and had fallen from the ledge. What
else could I do but follow, either to help you, or, if that were not
possible--"

He found her hand and pressed it to his lips.

"I humbly crave your pardon," he said. "That explanation is more than
ample. It was I who behaved unreasonably. Of course I should have
warned you. Yet, sweetheart, I ran no risk. The real danger passed a
week ago."

"How can that be?"

"I might have been blown to pieces whilst adjusting the heavy stone in
front of the caps. I assure you I was glad to leave the place that day
with a whole skin. If the stone had wobbled, or slipped, well--it was a
case of determined _felo-de-se_."

"May I ask how many more wild adventures you undertook without my
knowledge?"

"One other, of great magnitude. I fell in love with you."

"Nonsense!" she retorted. "I knew that long before you admitted it to
yourself."

"Date, please?"

"Well, to begin at the very beginning, you thought I was nice on board
the _Sirdar_. Now, didn't you?"

And they were safely embarked on a conversation of no interest to any
other person in the wide world, but which provided them with the most
delightful topic imaginable.

Thus the time sped until the rising moon silhouetted the cliff on the
white carpet of coral-strewn sand. The black shadow-line traveled
slowly closer to the base of the cliff, and Jenks, guided also by the
stars, told Iris that midnight was at hand.

They knelt on the parapet of the ledge, alert to catch any unusual
sound, and watching for any indication of human movement. But Rainbow
Island was now still as the grave. The wounded Dyaks had seemingly been
removed from hut and beach; the dead lay where they had fallen. The sea
sang a lullaby to the reef, and the fresh breeze whispered among the
palm fronds--that was all.

"Perhaps they have gone!" murmured Iris.

The sailor put his arm round her neck and gently pressed her lips
together. Anything would serve as an excuse for that sort of thing, but
he really did want absolute silence at that moment. If the Mussulman
kept his compact, the hour was at hand.

An unlooked-for intruder disturbed the quietude of the scene. Their old
acquaintance, the singing beetle, chortled his loud way across the
park. Iris was dying--as women say--to remind Jenks of their first
meeting with that blatant insect, but further talk was impossible;
there was too much at stake--water they must have.

Then the light hiss of a snake rose to them from the depths. That is a
sound never forgotten when once heard. It is like unto no other.
Indeed, the term "hiss" is a misnomer for the quick sibilant expulsion
of the breath by an alarmed or angered serpent.

Iris paid no heed to it, but Jenks, who knew there was not a reptile of
the snake variety on the island, leaned over the ledge and emitted a
tolerably good imitation. The native was beneath. Probably the flight
of the beetle had helped his noiseless approach.

"Sahib!"

The girl started at the unexpected call from the depths.

"Yes," said Jenks quietly.

"A rope, sahib."

The sailor lowered a rope. Something was tied to it beneath. The
Mahommedan apparently had little fear of being detected.

"Pull, sahib."

"Usually it is the sahib who says 'pull,' but circumstances alter
cases," communed Jenks. He hauled steadily at a heavy weight--a
goatskin filled with cold water. He emptied the hot and sour wine out
of the tin cup, and was about to hand the thrice-welcome draught to
Iris when a suspicious thought caused him to withhold it.

"Let me taste first," he said.

The Indian might have betrayed them to the Dyaks. More unlikely things
had happened. What if the water were poisoned or drugged?

He placed the tin to his lips. The liquid was musty, having been in the
skin nearly two days. Otherwise it seemed to be all right. With a sigh
of profound relief he gave Iris the cup, and smiled at the most
unladylike haste with which she emptied it.

"Drink yourself, and give me some more," she said.

"No more for you at present, madam. In a few minutes, yes."

"Oh, why not now?"

"Do not fret, dear one. You can have all you want in a little while.
But to drink much now would make you very ill."

Iris waited until he could speak again.

"Why did you----" she began.

But he bent over the parapet--

"_Koi hai_!"[Footnote: Equivalent to "Hello, there!"]

"Sahib!"

"You have not been followed?"

"I think not, sahib. Do not talk too loud; they are foxes in cunning.
You have a ladder, they say, sahib. Will not your honor descend? I have
much to relate."

Iris made no protest when Jenks explained the man's request. She only
stipulated that he should not leave the ladder, whilst she would remain
within easy earshot. The sailor, of course, carried his revolver. He
also picked up a crowbar, a most useful and silent weapon. Then he went
quietly downwards. Nearing the ground, he saw the native, who salaamed
deeply and was unarmed. The poor fellow seemed to be very anxious to
help them.

"What is your name?" demanded the sailor.

"Mir Jan, sahib, formerly _naik_[Footnote: Corporal.] in the
Kumaon Rissala."

"When did you leave the regiment?"

"Two years ago, sahib. I killed--"

"What was the name of your Colonel?"

"Kurnal I-shpence-sahib, a brave man, but of no account on a horse."

Jenks well remembered Colonel Spence--a fat, short-legged warrior, who
rolled off his charger if the animal so much as looked sideways. Mir
Jan was telling the truth.

"You are right, Mir Jan. What is Taung S'Ali doing now?"

"Cursing, sahib, for the most part. His men are frightened. He wanted
them to try once more with the tubes that shoot poison, but they
refused. He could not come alone, for he could not use his right hand,
and he was wounded by the blowing up of the rock. You nearly killed me,
too, sahib. I was there with the bazaar-born whelps. By the Prophet's
beard, it was a fine stroke."

"Are they going away, then?"

"No, sahib. The dogs have been whipped so sore that they snarl for
revenge. They say there is no use in firing at you, but they are
resolved to kill you and the miss-sahib, or carry her off if she
escapes the assault."

"What assault?"

"Protector of the poor, they are building scaling-ladders--four in all.
Soon after dawn they intend to rush your position. You may slay some,
they say, but you cannot slay three score. Taung S'Ali has promised a
gold _tauk_[Footnote: A native ornament.] to every man who
survives if they succeed. They have pulled down your signal on the high
rocks and are using the poles for the ladders. They think you have a
_jadu_[Footnote: A charm.] sahib, and they want to use your own
work against you."

This was serious news. A combined attack might indeed be dangerous,
though it had the excellent feature that if it failed the Dyaks would
certainly leave the island. But his sky-sign destroyed! That was bad.
Had a vessel chanced to pass, the swinging letters would surely have
attracted attention. Now, even that faint hope was dispelled.

"Sahib, there is a worse thing to tell," said Mir Jan.

"Say on, then."

"Before they place the ladders against the cliff they will build a fire
of green wood so that the smoke will be blown by the wind into your
eyes. This will help to blind your aim. Otherwise, you never miss."

"That will assuredly be awkward, Mir Jan."

"It will, sahib. Soul of my father, if we had but half a troop with
us----"

But they had not, and they were both so intent on the conversation that
they were momentarily off their guard. Iris was more watchful. She
fancied there was a light rustling amidst the undergrowth beneath the
trees on the right. And she could hiss too, if that were the correct
thing to do.

So she hissed.

Jenks swarmed half way up the ladder.

"Yes, Iris?" he said.

"I am not sure, but I imagine something moved among the bushes behind
the house."

"All right, dear. I will keep a sharp look-out. Can you hear us
talking?"

"Hardly. Will you be long?"

"Another minute."

He descended and told Mir Jan what the miss-sahib said. The native was
about to make a search when Jenks stopped him.

"Here,"--he handed the man his revolver--"I suppose you can use this?"

Mir Jan took it without a word, and Jenks felt that the incident atoned
for previous unworthy doubts of his dark friend's honesty. The
Mahommedan cautiously examined the back of the house, the neighboring
shrubs, and the open beach. After a brief absence he reported all safe,
yet no man has ever been nearer death and escaped it than he during
that reconnaissance. He, too, forgot that the Dyaks were foxes, and
foxes can lie close when hounds are a trifle stale.

Mir Jan returned the revolver.

"Sahib," he said with another salaam, "I am a disgraced man, but if you
will take me up there with you, I will fight by your side until both my
arms are hacked off. I am weary of these thieves. Ill chance threw me
into their company: I will have no more of them. If you will not have
me on the rock, give me a gun. I will hide among the trees, and I
promise that some of them shall die to-night before they find me. For
the honor of the regiment, sahib, do not refuse this thing. All I ask
is, if your honor escapes, that you will write to Kurnal
I-shpence-sahib, and tell him the last act of Mir Jan, _naik_ in B
troop."

There was an intense pathos in the man's words. He made this
self-sacrificing offer with an utter absence of any motive save the old
tradition of duty to the colors. Here was Anstruther-sahib, of the
Belgaum Rissala, in dire peril. Very well, then, Corporal Mir Jan, late
of the 19th Bengal Lancers, must dare all to save him.

Jenks was profoundly moved. He reflected how best to utilize the
services of this willing volunteer without exposing him to certain
death in the manner suggested. The native misinterpreted his silence.

"I am not a _budmash_,[Footnote: Rascal.] sahib," he exclaimed
proudly. "I only killed a man because--"

"Listen, Mir Jan. You cannot well mend what you have said. The Dyaks,
you are sure, will not come before morning?"

"They have carried the wounded to the boats and are making the ladders.
Such was their talk when I left them."

"Will they not miss you?"

"They will miss the _mussak_,[Footnote: Goatskin.] sahib. It was
the last full one."

"Mir Jan, do as I bid, and you shall see Delhi again, Have you ever
used a Lee-Metford?"

"I have seen them, sahib; but I better understand the Mahtini."

"I will give you a rifle, with plenty of ammunition, Do you go inside
the cave, there, and----"

Mir Jan was startled.

"Where the ghost is, sahib?" he said.

"Ghost! That is a tale for children. There is no ghost, only a few
bones of a man murdered by these scoundrels long ago. Have you any
food?"

"Some rice, sahib; sufficient for a day, or two at a pinch."

"Good! We will get water from the well. When the fighting begins at
dawn, fire at every man you see from the back of the cave. On no
account come out. Then they can never reach you if you keep a full
magazine. Wait here!"

"I thought you were never coming," protested Iris when Jenks reached
the ledge. "I have been quite creepy. I am sure there is some one down
there. And, please, may I have another drink?"

The sailor had left the crowbar beneath. He secured a rifle, a spare
clip, and a dozen packets of cartridges, meanwhile briefly explaining
to Iris the turn taken by events so far as Mir Jan was concerned. She
was naturally delighted, and forgot her fears in the excitement caused
by the appearance of so useful an ally. She drank his health in a
brimming beaker of water.

She heard her lover rejoin Mir Jan, and saw the two step out into the
moonlight, whilst Jenks explained the action of the Lee-Metford.
Fortunately Iris was now much recovered from the fatigue and privation
of the earlier hours. Her senses were sharpened to a pitch little
dreamed of by stay-at-home young ladies of her age, and she deemed it
her province to act as sentry whilst the two men conferred. Hence, she
was the first to detect, or rather to become conscious of, the stealthy
crawl of several Dyaks along the bottom of the cliff from Turtle Beach.
They advanced in Indian file, moving with the utmost care, and
crouching in the murky shadows like so many wild beasts stalking their
prey.

"Robert!" she screamed. "The Dyaks! On your left!"

But Iris was rapidly gaining some knowledge of strategy. Before she
shrieked her warning she grasped a rifle. Holding it at the
"Ready"--about the level of her waist--and depressing the muzzle
sufficiently, she began firing down the side of the rock as fast as she
could handle lever and trigger. Two of the nickel bullets struck a
projection and splashed the leading savages with molten metal.

Unfortunately the Lee-Metford beneath was unloaded, being in Mir Jan's
possession for purposes of instruction. Jenks whipped out his revolver.

"To the cave!" he roared, and Mir Jan's unwillingness to face a goblin
could not withstand the combined impetus of the sahib's order and the
onward rush of the enemy. He darted headlong for the entrance.

[Illustration: IRIS BEGAN FIRING DOWN THE SIDE OF THE ROCK AS FAST AS
SHE COULD HANDLE LEVER AND TRIGGER.]

Jenks, shooting blindly as he, too, ran for the ladder, emptied the
revolver just as his left hand clutched a rung. Three Dyaks were so
close that it would be folly to attempt to climb. He threw the weapon
into the face of the foremost man, effectually stopping his onward
progress, for the darkness made it impossible to dodge the missile.

The sailor turned to dive into the cave and secure the rifle from Mir
Jan, when his shin caught the heavy crowbar resting against the rock.
The pain of the blow lent emphasis to the swing with which the
implement descended upon some portion of a Dyak anatomy. Jenks never
knew where he hit the second assailant, but the place cracked like an
eggshell.

He had not time to recover the bar for another blow, so he gave the
point in the gullet of a gentleman who was about to make a vicious
sweep at him with a parang. The downfall of this worthy caused his
immediate successor to stumble, and Jenks saw his opportunity. With the
agility of a cat he jumped up the ladder. Once started, he had to go
on. He afterwards confessed to an unpleasant sensation of pins and
needles along his back during that brief acrobatic display; but he
reached the ledge without further injury, save an agonizing twinge when
the unprotected quick of his damaged finger was smartly rapped against
the rock.

These things happened with the speed of thought. Within forty seconds
of Iris's shrill cry the sailor was breast high with the ledge and
calling to her--

"All right, old girl. Keep it up!"

The cheerful confidence of his words had a wonderful effect on her.
Iris, like every good woman, had the maternal instinct strong within
her--the instinct that inspires alike the mild-eyed Sister of Charity
and the tigress fighting for her cubs. When Jenks was down below there,
in imminent danger of being cut to pieces, the gentle, lovable girl,
who would not willingly hurt the humblest of God's creatures, became
terrible, majestic in her frenzied purpose. Robert must be saved. If a
Maxim were planted on the rock she would unhesitatingly have turned the
lever and sprayed the Dyaks with bullets.

But here he was close to her, unhurt and calmly jubilant, as was his
way when a stiff fight went well. He was by her side now, firing and
aiming too, for the Dyaks broke cover recklessly in running for
shelter, and one may do fair work by moonlight, as many a hunter of
wild duck can testify by the rheumatism in his bones.

She had strength enough left to place the rifle out of harm's way
before she broke down and sobbed, not tearfully, but in a paroxysm of
reaction. Soon all was quiet beneath, save for the labored efforts of
some wounded men to get far away from that accursed rock. Jenks was
able to turn to Iris. He endeavored to allay her agitation, and
succeeded somewhat, for tears came, and she clung to him. It was
useless to reproach him. The whole incident was unforeseen: she was
herself a party to it. But what an escape!

He lifted her in his arms and carried her to a seat where the tarpaulin
rested on a broken water-cask.

"You have been a very good little girl and have earned your supper," he
said.

"Oh, how can you talk so callously after such an awful experience?" she
expostulated brokenly.

The Jesuits, say their opponents, teach that at times a "white lie" is
permissible. Surely this was an instance.

"It is a small thing to trouble about, sweetheart," he explained. "You
spotted the enemy so promptly, and blazed away with such ferocity, that
they never got within yards of me."

"Are you sure?"

"I vow and declare that after we have eaten something, and sampled our
remaining bottle of wine, I will tell you exactly what happened."

"Why not now?"

"Because I must first see to Mir Jan. I bundled him neck and crop into
the cave. I hope I did not hurt him."

"You are not going down there again?"

"No need, I trust."

He went to the side of the ledge, recovered the ladder which he had
hastily hauled out of the Dyaks' reach after his climb, and cried--

"Mir Jan."

"Ah, sahib! Praised be the name of the Most High, you are alive. I was
searching among the slain with a sorrowful heart."

The Mahommedan's voice came from some little distance on the left.

"The slain, you say. How many?"

"Five, sahib."

"Impossible! I fired blindly with the revolver, and only hit one man
hard with the iron bar. One other dropped near the wood after I
obtained a rifle."

"Then there be six, sahib, not reckoning the wounded. I have accounted
for one, so the miss-sahib must have--"

"What is he saying about me?" inquired Iris, who had risen and joined
her lover.

"He says you absolutely staggered the Dyaks by opening fire the moment
they appeared."

"How did _you_ come to slay one, Mir Jan?" he continued.

"A son of a black pig followed me into the cave. I waited for him in
the darkness. I have just thrown his body outside."

"_Shabash!_[Footnote: "Well done!"] Is Taung S'Ali dead, by any
lucky chance?"

"No, sahib, if he be not the sixth. I will go and see."

"You may be attacked?"

"I have found a sword, sahib. You left me no cartridges."

Jenks told him that the clip and the twelve packets were lying at the
foot of the rock, where Mir Jan speedily discovered them. The
Mahommedan gave satisfactory assurance that he understood the mechanism
of the rifle by filling and adjusting the magazine. Then he went to
examine the corpse of the man who lay in the open near the quarry path.

The sailor stood in instant readiness to make a counter demonstration
were the native assailed. But there was no sign of the Dyaks. Mir Jan
returned with the news that the sixth victim of the brief yet fierce
encounter was a renegade Malay. He was so confident that the enemy had
had enough of it for the night that, after recovering Jenks's revolver,
he boldly went to the well and drew himself a supply of water.

During supper, a feast graced by a quart of champagne worthy of the
Carlton, Jenks told Iris so much of the story as was good for her: that
is to say, he cut down the casualty list.

It was easy to see what had happened. The Dyaks, having missed the
Mahommedan and their water-bag, searched for him and heard the
conversation at the foot of the rock. Knowing that their presence was
suspected, they went back for reinforcements, and returned by the
shorter and more advantageous route along Turtle Beach.

Iris would have talked all night, but Jenks made her go to sleep, by
pillowing her head against his shoulder and smoothing her tangled
tresses with his hand. The wine, too, was helpful. In a few minutes her
voice became dreamy: soon she was sleeping like a tired child.

He managed to lay her on a comfortable pile of ragged clothing and then
resumed his vigil. Mir Jan offered to mount guard beneath, but Jenks
bade him go within the cave and remain there, for the dawn would soon
be upon them.

Left alone with his thoughts, he wondered what the rising sun would
bring in its train. He reviewed the events of the last twenty-four
hours. Iris and he--Miss Deane, Mr. Jenks, to each other--were then
undiscovered in their refuge, the Dyaks were gathered around a roaring
fire in the valley, and Mir Jan was keen in the hunt as the keenest
among them. Now, Iris was his affianced bride, over twenty of the enemy
were killed and many wounded, and Mir Jan, a devoted adherent, was
seated beside the skeleton in the gloom of the cavern.

What a topsy-turvy world it was, to be sure! What alternations between
despair and hope! What rebound from the gates of Death to the threshold
of Eden! How untrue, after all, was the nebulous philosophy of Omar,
the Tentmaker. Surely in the happenings of the bygone day there was
more than the purposeless


  "Magic Shadow-show,
      Play'd in a Box whose Candle is the Sun,
     Round which we Phantom Figures come and go."


He had, indeed, cause to be humbly thankful. Was there not One who
marked the fall of a sparrow, who clothed the lilies, who knew the
needs of His creatures? There, in the solemn temple of the night, he
gave thanks for the protection vouchsafed to Iris and himself, and
prayed that it might be continued. He deplored the useless bloodshed,
the horror of mangled limbs and festering bodies, that converted this
fair island into a reeking slaughter-house. Were it possible, by any
personal sacrifice, to divert the untutored savages from their deadly
quest, he would gladly condone their misdeeds and endeavor to assuage
the torments of the wounded.

But he was utterly helpless, a pawn on that tiny chessboard where the
game was being played between Civilization and Barbarism. The fight
must go on to the bitter end: he must either vanquish or be vanquished.
There were other threads being woven into the garment of his life at
that moment, but he knew not of them. Sufficient for the day was the
evil, and the good thereof. Of both he had received full measure.

A period of such reflection could hardly pass without a speculative
dive into the future. If Iris and he were rescued, what would happen
when they went forth once more into the busy world? Not for one instant
did he doubt her faith. She was true as steel, knit to him now by bonds
of triple brass. But, what would Sir Arthur Deane think of his
daughter's marriage to a discredited and cashiered officer? What was it
that poor Mir Jan called himself?--"a disgraced man." Yes, that was it.
Could that stain be removed? Mir Jan was doing it. Why not he?--by
other means, for his good name rested on the word of a perjured woman.
Wealth was potent, but not all-powerful. He would ask Iris to wait
until he came to her unsoiled by slander, purged of this odium cast
upon him unmerited.

And all this goes to show that he, a man wise beyond his fellows, had
not yet learned the unwisdom of striving to lift the veil of tomorrow,
behind whose mystic curtain what is to be ever jostles out of place
what is hoped for.

Iris, smiling in her dreams, was assailed by no torturing doubts.
Robert loved her--that was enough. Love suffices for a woman; a man
asks for honor, reputation, an unblemished record.

To awake her he kissed her; he knew not, perchance it might be their
last kiss on earth. Not yet dawn, there was morning in the air, for the
first faint shafts of light were not visible from their eyrie owing to
its position. But there was much to be done. If the Dyaks carried out
the plan described by Mir Jan, he had a good many preparations to make.

The canvas awning was rolled back and the stores built into a barricade
intended to shelter Iris.

"What is that for?" she asked, when she discovered its nature. He told
her. She definitely refused to avail herself of any such protection.

"Robert dear," she said, "if the attack comes to our very door, so to
speak, surely I must help you. Even my slight aid may stem a rush in
one place whilst you are busy in another."

He explained to her that if hand-to-hand fighting were necessary he
would depend more upon a crowbar than a rifle to sweep the ledge clear.
She might be in the way.

"Very well. The moment you tell me to get behind that fence I will do
so. Even there I can use a revolver."

That reminded him. His own pistol was unloaded. He possessed only five
more cartridges of small caliber. He placed them in the weapon and gave
it to her.

"Now you have eleven men's lives in your hands," he said. "Try not to
miss if you must shoot."

In the dim light he could not see the spasm of pain that clouded her
face. No Dyak would reach her whilst he lived. If he fell, there was
another use for one of those cartridges.

The sailor had cleared the main floor of the rock and was placing his
four rifles and other implements within easy reach when a hiss came
from beneath.

"Mir Jan!" exclaimed Iris.

"What now?" demanded Jenks over the side.

"Sahib, they come!"

"I am prepared. Let that snake get back to his hole in the rock, lest a
mongoose seize him by the head."

Mir Jan, engaged in a scouting expedition on his own account,
understood that the officer-sahib's orders must be obeyed. He vanished.
Soon they heard a great crackling among the bushes on the right, but
Jenks knew even before he looked that the Dyaks had correctly estimated
the extent of his fire zone and would keep out of it.

The first physical intimation of the enemy's design they received was a
pungent but pleasant smell of burning pine, borne to them by the
northerly breeze and filling the air with its aroma. The Dyaks kindled
a huge fire. The heat was perceptible even on the ledge, but the
minutes passed, and the dawn broadened into day without any other
result being achieved.

Iris, a little drawn and pale with suspense, said with a timid giggle--

"This does not seem to be so very serious. It reminds me of my efforts
to cook."

"There is more to follow, I fear, dear one. But the Dyaks are fools.
They should have waited until night fell again, after wearing us out by
constant vigilance all day. If they intend to employ smoke it would be
far worse for us at night."

Phew! A volume of murky vapor arose that nearly suffocated them by the
first whiff of its noisome fumes. It curled like a black pall over the
face of the rock and blotted out sea and sky. They coughed incessantly,
and nearly choked, for the Dyaks had thrown wet seaweed on top of the
burning pile of dry wood. Mir Jan, born in interior India, knew little
about the sea or its products, and when the savages talked of seaweed
he thought they meant green wood. Fortunately for him, the ascending
clouds of smoke missed the cave, or infallibly he must have been
stifled.

"Lie flat on the rock!" gasped Jenks. Careless of waste, he poured
water over a coat and made Iris bury her mouth and nose in the wet
cloth. This gave her immediate relief, and she showed her woman's wit
by tying the sleeves of the garment behind her neck. Jenks nodded
comprehension and followed her example, for by this means their hands
were left free.

The black cloud grew more dense each few seconds. Nevertheless, owing
to the slope of the ledge, and the tendency of the smoke to rise, the
south side was far more tenable than the north. Quick to note this
favorable circumstance, the sailor deduced a further fact from it. A
barrier erected on the extreme right of the ledge would be a material
gain. He sprang up, dragged the huge tarpaulin from its former
location, and propped it on the handle of the pickaxe, driven by one
mighty stroke deep into a crevice of the rock.

It was no mean feat of strength that he performed. He swung the heavy
and cumbrous canvas into position as if it were a dust cloth. He
emerged from the gloom of the driven cloud red-eyed but triumphant.
Instantly the vapor on the ledge lessened, and they could breathe, even
talk. Overhead and in front the smoke swept in ever-increasing density,
but once again the sailor had outwitted the Dyaks' manoeuvres.

"We have won the first rubber," he whispered to Iris.

Above, beneath, beyond, they could see nothing. The air they breathed
was hot and foetid. It was like being immured in a foul tunnel and
almost as dark. Jenks looked over the parapet. He thought he could
distinguish some vague figures on the sands, so he fired at them. A
volley of answering bullets crashed into the rock on all sides. The
Dyaks had laid their plans well this time. A firing squad stationed
beyond the smoke area, and supplied with all the available guns,
commenced and kept up a smart fusillade in the direction of the ledge
in order to cover the operations of the scaling party.

Jenks realized that to expose himself was to court a serious wound and
achieve no useful purpose. He fell back out of range, laid down his
rifle and grabbed the crowbar. At brief intervals a deep hollow boom
came up from the valley. At first it puzzled them until the sailor hit
upon an explanation. Mir Jan was busy.

The end of a strong roughly made ladder swung through the smoke and
banged against the ledge. Before Jenks could reach it those hoisting it
into position hastily retreated. They were standing in front of the
cave and the Mahommedan made play on them with a Lee-Metford at thirty
feet.

Jenks, using his crowbar as a lever, toppled the ladder clean over. It
fell outwards and disconcerted a section of the musketeers.

"Well done," cried Iris.

The sailor, astounded by her tone, gave her a fleeting glance. She was
very pale now, but not with fear. Her eyes were slightly contracted,
her nostrils quivering, her lips set tight and her chin dimpled. She
had gone back thirty generations in as many seconds. Thus might one of
the daughters of Boadicea have looked whilst guiding her mother's
chariot against the Roman phalanx. Resting on one knee, with a revolver
in each hand, she seemed no puling mate for the gallant man who fought
for her.

She caught his look.

"We will beat them yet!" she cried again, and she smiled, not as a
woman smiles, but with the joy of a warrior when the fray is toward.

There was no time for further speech. Three ladders were reared against
the rock. They were so poised and held below that Jenks could not force
them backwards. A fourth appeared, its coarse shafts looming into sight
like the horns of some gigantic animal. The four covered practically
the whole front of the ledge save where Mir Jan cleared a little space
on the level.

The sailor was standing now, with the crowbar clenched in both hands.
The firing in the valley slackened and died away. A Dyak face, grinning
like a Japanese demon, appeared at the top of the ladder nearest to
Iris.

"Don't fire!" shouted Jenks, and the iron bar crushed downwards. Two
others pitched themselves half on to the ledge. Now both crowbar and
revolver were needed. Three ladders were thus cumbered somewhat for
those beneath, and Jenks sprang towards the fourth and most distant.
Men were crowding it like ants. Close to his feet lay an empty
water-cask. It was a crude weapon, but effective when well pitched, and
the sailor had never made a better shot for a goal in the midst of a
hard-fought scrimmage than he made with that tub for the head of the
uppermost pirate.

Another volley came from the sands. A bullet ploughed through his hair,
and sent his sou'wester flying. Again the besiegers swarmed to the
attack. One way or the other, they must succeed. A man and a
woman--even such a man and such a woman--could not keep at bay an
infuriated horde of fifty savages fighting at close quarters and under
these grievous conditions.

Jenks knew what would happen. He would be shot in the head or breast
whilst repelling the scaling party. And Iris! Dear heart! She was
thinking of him.

"Keep back! They can never gain the ledge!" she shrieked.

And then, above the din of the fusillade, the yells of the assailants
and the bawling of the wounded, there came through the air a screaming,
tearing, ripping sound which drowned all others. It traveled with
incredible speed, and before the sailor could believe his ears--for he
well knew what it meant--a shrapnel shell burst in front of the ledge
and drenched the valley with flying lead.

Jenks was just able to drag Iris flat against the rock ere the time
fuse operated and the bullets flew. He could form no theory, hazard no
conjecture. All he knew was that a 12-pounder shell had flown towards
them through space, scattering red ruin among the amazed scoundrels
beneath. Instantly he rose again, lest perchance any of the Dyaks
should have gained a foothold on the ledge.

The ladders were empty. He could hear a good deal of groaning, the
footsteps of running men, and some distant shouting.

"Sahib!" yelled Mir Jan, drawn from his retreat by the commotion
without.

"Yes," shouted Jenks.

The native, in a voice cracked with excitement, told him something. The
sailor asked a few rapid questions to make quite sure that Mir Jan was
not mistaken.

Then he threw his arms round Iris, drew her close and whispered--

"My darling, we are saved! A warship has anchored just beyond the south
reef, and two boats filled with armed sailors are now pulling ashore."

And she answered proudly--

"The Dyaks could never have conquered us, Robert. We were manifestly
under God's protection. Oh, my love, my love, I am so happy and
thankful!"


CHAPTER XV

THE DIFFICULTY OF PLEASING EVERYBODY


The drifting smoke was still so dense that not even the floor of the
valley could be discerned. Jenks dared not leave Iris at such a moment.
He feared to bring her down the ladder lest another shell might be
fired. But something must be done to end their suspense.

He called to Mir Jan--

"Take off your turban and hold it above your head, if you think they
can see you from the warship."

"It is all right, sahib," came the cheering answer. "One boat is close
inshore. I think, from the uniforms, they are English sahibs, such as I
have seen at Garden Reach. The Dyaks have all gone."

Nevertheless Jenks waited. There was nothing to gain by being too
precipitate. A false step now might undo the achievements of many
weeks.

Mir Jan was dancing about beneath in a state of wild excitement.

"They have seen the Dyaks running to their sampans, sahib," he yelled,
"and the second boat is being pulled in that direction. Yet another has
just left the ship."

A translation made Iris excited, eager to go down and see these
wonders.

"Better wait here, dearest," he said. "The enemy may be driven back in
this direction, and I cannot expose you to further risk. The sailors
will soon land, and you can then descend in perfect safety."

The boom of a cannon came from the sea. Instinctively the girl ducked
for safety, though her companion smiled at her fears, for the shell
would have long preceded the report, had it traveled their way.

"One of the remaining sampans has got under way," he explained, "and
the warship is firing at her."

Two more guns were fired. The man-o'-war evidently meant business.

"Poor wretches!" murmured Iris. "Cannot the survivors be allowed to
escape?"

"Well, we are unable to interfere. Those caught on the island will
probably be taken to the mainland and hanged for their crimes, so the
manner of their end is not of much consequence."

To the girl's manifest relief there was no more firing, and Mir Jan
announced that a number of sailors were actually on shore. Then her
thoughts turned to a matter of concern to the feminine mind even in the
gravest moments of existence. She laved her face with water and sought
her discarded skirt!

Soon the steady tramp of boot-clad feet advancing at the double was
heard on the shingle, and an officer's voice, speaking the crude
Hindustani of the engine-room and forecastle, shouted to Mir Jan--

"Hi, you black fellow! Are there any white people here?"

Jenks sang out--

"Yes, two of us! Perched on the rock over your heads. We are coming
down."

He cast loose the rope-ladder. Iris was limp and trembling.

"Steady, sweetheart," he whispered. "Don't forget the slip between the
cup and the lip. Hold tight! But have no fear! I will be just beneath."

It was well he took this precaution. She was now so unnerved that an
unguarded movement might have led to an accident. But the knowledge
that her lover was near, the touch of his hand guiding her feet on to
the rungs of the ladder, sustained her. They had almost reached the
level when a loud exclamation and the crash of a heavy blow caused
Jenks to halt and look downwards.

A Dyak, lying at the foot of one of the scaling ladders, and severely
wounded by a shell splinter, witnessed their descent. In his left hand
he grasped a parang; his right arm was bandaged. Though unable to rise,
the vengeful pirate mustered his remaining strength to crawl towards
the swaying ladder. It was Taung S'Ali, inspired with the hate and
venom of the dying snake. Even yet he hoped to deal a mortal stroke at
the man who had defied him and all his cut-throat band. He might have
succeeded, as Jenks was so taken up with Iris, were it not for the
watchful eyes of Mir Jan. The Mahommedan sprang at him with an oath,
and gave him such a murderous whack with the butt of a rifle that the
Dyak chief collapsed and breathed out his fierce spirit in a groan.

At the first glance Jenks did not recognize Taung S'Ali, owing to his
change of costume. Through the thinner smoke he could see several
sailors running up.

"Look out, there!" he cried. "There is a lady here. If any Dyak moves,
knock him on the head!"

But, with the passing of the chief, their last peril had gone. The next
instant they were standing on the firm ground, and a British naval
lieutenant was saying eagerly--

"We seem to have turned up in the nick of time. Do you, by any chance,
belong to the _Sirdar_?"

"We are the sole survivors," answered the sailor.

"You two only?"

"Yes. She struck on the north-west reef of this island during a
typhoon. This lady, Miss Iris Deane, and I were flung ashore--"

"Miss Deane! Can it be possible? Let me congratulate you most heartily.
Sir Arthur Deane is on board the _Orient_ at this moment."

"The _Orient_!"

Iris was dazed. The uniforms, the pleasant faces of the English
sailors, the strange sensation of hearing familiar words in tones other
than those of the man she loved, bewildered her.

"Yes," explained the officer, with a sympathetic smile. "That's our
ship, you know, in the offing there."

It was all too wonderful to be quite understood yet. She turned to
Robert--

"Do you hear? They say my father is not far away. Take me to him."

[Illustration: "WE ARE THE SOLE SURVIVORS," ANSWERED THE SAILOR.]

"No need for that, miss," interrupted a warrant officer. "Here he is
coming ashore. He wanted to come with us, but the captain would not
permit it, as there seemed to be some trouble ahead."

Sure enough, even the girl's swimming eyes could distinguish the
grey-bearded civilian seated beside an officer in the stern-sheets of a
small gig now threading a path through the broken reef beyond Turtle
Beach. In five minutes, father and daughter would meet.

Meanwhile the officer, intent on duty, addressed Jenks again.

"May I ask who you are?"

"My name is Anstruther--Robert Anstruther."

Iris, clinging to his arm, heard the reply.

So he had abandoned all pretence. He was ready to face the world at her
side. She stole a loving glance at him as she cried--

"Yes, Captain Anstruther, of the Indian Staff Corps. If he will not
tell you all that he has done, how he has saved my life twenty times,
how he has fought single-handed against eighty men, ask me!"

The naval officer did not need to look a second time at Iris's face to
lengthen the list of Captain Anstruther's achievements, by one more
item. He sighed. A good sailor always does sigh when a particularly
pretty girl is labeled "Engaged."

But he could be very polite.

"Captain Anstruther does not appear to have left much for us to do,
Miss Deane," he said. "Indeed," turning to Robert, "is there any way in
which my men will be useful?"

"I would recommend that they drag the green stuff off that fire and
stop the smoke. Then, a detachment should go round the north side of
the island and drive the remaining Dyaks into the hands of the party
you have landed, as I understand, at the further end of the south
beach. Mir Jan, the Mahommedan here, who has been a most faithful ally
during part of our siege, will act as guide."

The other man cast a comprehensive glance over the rock, with its
scaling ladders and dangling rope-ladder, the cave, the little groups
of dead or unconscious pirates--for every wounded man who could move a
limb had crawled away after the first shell burst--and drew a deep
breath.

"How long were you up there?" he asked.

"Over thirty hours."

"It was a great fight!"

"Somewhat worse than it looks," said Anstruther. "This is only the end
of it. Altogether, we have accounted for nearly two score of the poor
devils."

"Do you think you can make them prisoners, without killing any more of
them?" asked Iris.

"That depends entirely on themselves, Miss Deane. My men will not fire
a shot unless they encounter resistance."

Robert looked towards the approaching boat. She would not land yet for
a couple of minutes.

"By the way," he said, "will you tell me your name?"

"Playdon--Lieutenant Philip H. Playdon."

"Do you know to what nation this island belongs?"

"It is no-man's land, I think. It is marked 'uninhabited' on the
chart."

"Then," said Anstruther, "I call upon you, Lieutenant Playdon, and all
others here present, to witness that I, Robert Anstruther, late of the
Indian Army, acting on behalf of myself and Miss Iris Deane, declare
that we have taken possession of this island in the name of His
Britannic Majesty the King of England, that we are the joint occupiers
and owners thereof, and claim all property rights vested therein."

These formal phrases, coming at such a moment, amazed his hearers. Iris
alone had an inkling of the underlying motive.

"I don't suppose any one will dispute your title," said the naval
officer gravely. He unquestionably imagined that suffering and exposure
had slightly disturbed the other man's senses, yet he had seldom seen
any person who looked to be in more complete possession of his
faculties.

"Thank you," replied Robert with equal composure, though he felt
inclined to laugh at Playdon's mystification. "I only wished to secure
a sufficient number of witnesses for a verbal declaration. When I have
a few minutes to spare I will affix a legal notice on the wall in front
of our cave."

Playdon bowed silently. There was something in the speaker's manner
that puzzled him. He detailed a small guard to accompany Robert and
Iris, who now walked towards the beach, and asked Mir Jan to pilot him
as suggested by Anstruther.

The boat was yet many yards from shore when Iris ran forward and
stretched out her arms to the man who was staring at her with wistful
despair.

"Father! Father!" she cried. "Don't you know me?"

Sir Arthur Deane was looking at the two strange figures on the sands,
and each moment his heart sank lower. This island held his final hope.
During many weary weeks, since the day when a kindly Admiral placed the
cruiser _Orient_ at his disposal, he had scoured the China Sea,
the coasts of Borneo and Java, for some tidings of the ill-fated
_Sirdar_.

He met naught save blank nothingness, the silence of the great ocean
mausoleum. Not a boat, a spar, a lifebuoy, was cast up by the waves to
yield faintest trace of the lost steamer. Every naval man knew what had
happened. The vessel had met with some mishap to her machinery, struck
a derelict, or turned turtle, during that memorable typhoon of March 17
and 18. She had gone down with all hands. Her fate was a foregone
conclusion. No ship's boat could live in that sea, even if the crew
were able to launch one. It was another of ocean's tragedies, with the
fifth act left to the imagination.

To examine every sand patch and tree-covered shoal in the China Sea was
an impossible task. All the _Orient_ could do was to visit the
principal islands and institute inquiries among the fishermen and small
traders. At last, the previous night, a Malay, tempted by hope of
reward, boarded the vessel when lying at anchor off the large island
away to the south, and told the captain a wondrous tale of a
devil-haunted place inhabited by two white spirits, a male and a
female, whither a local pirate named Taung S'Ali had gone by chance
with his men and suffered great loss. But Taung S'Ali was bewitched by
the female spirit, and had returned there, with a great force, swearing
to capture her or perish. The spirits, the Malay said, had dwelt upon
the island for many years. His father and grandfather knew the place
and feared it. Taung S'Ali would never be seen again.

This queer yarn was the first indication they received of the
whereabouts of any persons who might possibly be shipwrecked Europeans,
though not survivors from the _Sirdar_. Anyhow, the tiny dot lay
in the vessel's northward track, so a course was set to arrive off the
island soon after dawn.

Events on shore, as seen by the officer on watch, told their own tale.
Wherever Dyaks are fighting there is mischief on foot, so the
_Orient_ took a hand in the proceedings.

But Sir Arthur Deane, after an agonized scrutiny of the weird-looking
persons escorted by the sailors to the water's edge, sadly acknowledged
that neither of these could be the daughter whom he sought. He bowed
his head in humble resignation, and he thought he was the victim of a
cruel hallucination when Iris's tremulous accents reached his ears--

"Father, father! Don't you know me?"

He stood up, amazed and trembling.

"Yes, father dear. It is I, your own little girl given back to you. Oh
dear! Oh dear! I cannot see you for my tears."

They had some difficulty to keep him in the boat, and the man pulling
stroke smashed a stout oar with the next wrench.

And so they met at last, and the sailors left them alone, to crowd
round Anstruther and ply him with a hundred questions. Although he fell
in with their humor, and gradually pieced together the stirring story
which was supplemented each instant by the arrival of disconsolate
Dyaks and the comments of the men who returned from cave and beach, his
soul was filled with the sight of Iris and her father, and the happy,
inconsequent demands with which each sought to ascertain and relieve
the extent of the other's anxiety.

Then Iris called to him--

"Robert, I want you."

The use of his Christian name created something akin to a sensation.
Sir Arthur Deane was startled, even in his immeasurable delight at
finding his child uninjured--the picture of rude health and happiness.

Anstruther advanced.

"This is my father," she cried, shrill with joy. "And, father darling,
this is Captain Robert Anstruther, to whom alone, under God's will, I
owe my life, many, many times since the moment the _Sirdar_ was
lost."

It was no time for questioning. Sir Arthur Deane took off his hat and
held out his hand--

"Captain Anstruther," he said, "as I owe you my daughter's life, I owe
you that which I can never repay. And I owe you my own life, too, for I
could not have survived the knowledge that she was dead."

Robert took the proffered hand--

"I think, Sir Arthur, that, of the two, I am the more deeply indebted.
There are some privileges whose value cannot be measured, and among
them the privilege of restoring your daughter to your arms takes the
highest place."

Then, being much more self-possessed than the older man, who was
naturally in a state of agitation that was almost painful, he turned to
Iris.

"I think," he said, "that your father should take you on board the
_Orient_, Iris. There you may, perhaps, find some suitable
clothing, eat something, and recover from the exciting events of the
morning. Afterwards, you must bring Sir Arthur ashore again, and we
will guide him over the island. I am sure you will find much to tell
him meanwhile."

The baronet could not fail to note the manner in which these two
addressed each other, the fearless love which leaped from eye to eye,
the calm acceptance of a relationship not be questioned or gainsaid.
Robert and Iris, without spoken word on the subject, had tactily agreed
to avoid the slightest semblance of subterfuge as unworthy alike of
their achievements and their love. Yet what could Sir Arthur Deane do?
To frame a suitable protest at such a moment was not to be dreamed of.
As yet he was too shaken to collect his thoughts. Anstruther's
proposal, however, helped him to blurt out what he intuitively felt to
be a disagreeable fact. Yet something must be said, for his brain
reeled.

"Your suggestion is admirable," he cried, striving desperately to
affect a careless complaisance. "The ship's stores may provide Iris
with some sort of rig-out, and an old friend of hers is on board at
this moment, little expecting her presence. Lord Ventnor has
accompanied me in my search. He will, of course, be delighted--"

Anstruther flushed a deep bronze, but Iris broke in--

"Father, why did _he_ come with you?"

Sir Arthur, driven into this sudden squall of explanation, became
dignified.

"Well, you see, my dear, under the circumstances, he felt an anxiety
almost commensurate with my own."

"But why, why?"

Iris was quite calm. With Robert near, she was courageous. Even the
perturbed baronet experienced a new sensation as his troubled glance
fell before her searching eyes. His daughter had left him a joyous,
heedless girl. He found her a woman, strong, self-reliant, purposeful.
Yet he kept on, choosing the most straightforward means as the only
honorable way of clearing a course so beset with unsuspected obstacles.

"It is only reasonable, Iris, that your affianced husband should suffer
an agony of apprehension on your account, and do all that was possible
to effect your rescue."

"My--affianced--husband?"

"Well, my dear girl, perhaps that is hardly the correct phrase from
your point of view. Yet you cannot fail to remember that Lord
Ventnor--"

"Father, dear," said Iris solemnly, but in a voice free from all
uncertainty, "my affianced husband stands here! We plighted our troth
at the very gate of death. It was ratified in the presence of God, and
has been blessed by Him. I have made no compact with Lord Ventnor. He
is a base and unworthy man. Did you but know the truth concerning him
you would not mention his name in the same breath with mine. Would he,
Robert?"

Never was man so perplexed as the unfortunate shipowner. In the instant
that his beloved daughter was restored to him out of the very depths of
the sea, he was asked either to undertake the rôle of a disappointed
and unforgiving parent, or sanction her marriage to a truculent-looking
person of most forbidding if otherwise manly appearance, who had
certainly saved her from death in ways not presently clear to him, but
who could not be regarded as a suitable son-in-law solely on that
account.

What could he do, what could he say, to make the position less
intolerable?

Anstruther, quicker than Iris to appreciate Sir Arthur Deane's dilemma,
gallantly helped him. He placed a loving hand on the girl's shoulder.

"Be advised by me, Sir Arthur, and you too, Iris," he said. "This is no
hour for such explanations. Leave me to deal with Lord Ventnor. I am
content to trust the ultimate verdict to you, Sir Arthur. You will
learn in due course all that has happened. Go on board, Iris. Meet Lord
Ventnor as you would meet any other friend. You will not marry him, I
know. I can trust you." He said this with a smile that robbed the words
of serious purport. "Believe me, you two can find plenty to occupy your
minds today without troubling yourselves about Lord Ventnor."

"I am very much obliged to you," murmured the baronet, who,
notwithstanding his worry, was far too experienced a man of the world
not to acknowledge the good sense of this advice, no matter how
ruffianly might be the guise of the strange person who gave it.

"That is settled, then," said Robert, laughing good-naturedly, for he
well knew what a weird spectacle he must present to the bewildered old
gentleman.

Even Sir Arthur Deane was fascinated by the ragged and hairy giant who
carried himself so masterfully and helped everybody over the stile at
the right moment He tried to develop the change in the conversation.

"By the way," he said, "how came you to be on the _Sirdar_? I have
a list of all the passengers and crew, and your name does not appear
therein."

"Oh, that is easily accounted for. I shipped as a steward, in the name
of Robert Jenks."

"Robert Jenks! A steward!"

This was worse than ever. The unhappy shipowner thought the sky must
have fallen.

"Yes. That forms some part of the promised explanation."

Iris rapidly gathered the drift of her lover's wishes. "Come, father,"
she cried merrily. "I am aching to see what the ship's stores, which
you and Robert pin your faith to, can do for me in the shape of
garments. I have the utmost belief in the British navy, and even a
skeptic should be convinced of its infallibility if H.M.S.
_Orient_ is able to provide a lady's outfit."

Sir Arthur Deane gladly availed himself of the proffered compromise. He
assisted Iris into the boat, though that active young person was far
better able to support him, and a word to the officer in command sent
the gig flying back to the ship. Anstruther, during a momentary delay,
made a small request on his own account. Lieutenant Playdon, nearly as
big a man as Robert, despatched a note to his servant, and the gig
speedily returned with a complete assortment of clothing and linen. The
man also brought a dressing case, with the result that a dip in the
bath, and ten minutes in the hands of an expert valet, made Anstruther
a new man.

Acting under his advice, the bodies of the dead were thrown into the
lagoon, the wounded were collected in the hut to be attended to by the
ship's surgeon, and the prisoners were paraded in front of Mir Jan, who
identified every man, and found, by counting heads, that none was
missing.

Robert did not forget to write out a formal notice and fasten it to the
rock. This proceeding further mystified the officers of the
_Orient_, who had gradually formed a connected idea of the great
fight made by the shipwrecked pair, though Anstruther squirmed inwardly
when he thought of the manner in which Iris would picture the scene. As
it was, he had the first innings, and he did not fail to use the
opportunity. In the few terse words which the militant Briton best
understands, he described the girl's fortitude, her unflagging
cheerfulness, her uncomplaining readiness to do and dare.

Little was said by his auditors, save to interpolate an occasional
question as to why such and such a thing was necessary, or how some
particular drawback had been surmounted. Standing near the well, it was
not necessary to move to explain to them the chief features of the
island, and point out the measures he had adopted.

When he ended, the first lieutenant, who commanded the boats sent in
pursuit of the flying Dyaks--the _Orient_ sank both sampans as
soon as they were launched--summed up the general verdict--

"You do not need our admiration, Captain Anstruther. Each man of us
envies you from the bottom of his soul."

"I do, I know--from the very bilge," exclaimed a stout midshipman, one
of those who had seen Iris.

Robert waited until the laugh died away.

"There is an error about my rank," he said. "I did once hold a
commission in the Indian army, but I was court-marshaled and cashiered
in Hong Kong six months ago. I was unjustly convicted on a grave
charge, and I hope some day to clear myself. Meanwhile I am a mere
civilian. It was only Miss Deane's generous sympathy which led her to
mention my former rank, Mr. Playdon."

Had another of the _Orient's_ 12-pounder shells suddenly burst in
the midst of the group of officers, it would have created less dismay
than this unexpected avowal. Court-martialed! Cashiered! None but a
service man can grasp the awful significance of those words to the
commissioned ranks of the army and navy.

Anstruther well knew what he was doing. Somehow, he found nothing hard
in the performance of these penances now. Of course, the ugly truth
must be revealed the moment Lord Ventnor heard his name. It was not
fair to the good fellows crowding around him, and offering every
attention that the frank hospitality of the British sailor could
suggest, to permit them to adopt the tone of friendly equality which
rigid discipline, if nothing else, would not allow them to maintain.

The first lieutenant, by reason of his rank, was compelled to say
something--

"That is a devilish bad job, Mr. Anstruther," he blurted out.

"Well, you know, I had to tell you."

He smiled unaffectedly at the wondering circle. He, too, was an
officer, and appreciated their sentiments. They were unfeignedly sorry
for him, a man so brave and modest, such a splendid type of the soldier
and gentleman, yet, by their common law, an outcast. Nor could they
wholly understand his demeanor. There was a noble dignity in his
candor, a conscious innocence that disdained to shield itself under a
partial truth. He spoke, not as a wrong-doer, but as one who addresses
those who have been and will be once more his peers.

The first lieutenant again phrased the thoughts of his juniors--

"I, and every other man in the ship, cannot help but sympathize with
you. But whatever may be your record--if you were an escaped convict,
Mr. Anstruther--no one could withhold from you the praise deserved for
your magnificent stand against overwhelming odds. Our duty is plain. We
will bring you to Singapore, where the others will no doubt wish to go
immediately. I will tell the Captain what you have been good enough to
acquaint us with. Meanwhile we will give you every assistance,
and--er--attention in our power."

A murmur of approbation ran through the little circle. Robert's face
paled somewhat. What first-rate chaps they were, to be sure!

"I can only thank you," he said unsteadily. "Your kindness is more
trying than adversity."

A rustle of silk, the intrusion into the intent knot of men of a young
lady in a Paris gown, a Paris hat, carrying a Trouville parasol, and
most exquisitely gloved and booted, made every one gasp.

"Oh, Robert dear, how _could_ you? I actually didn't know you!"

Thus Iris, bewitchingly attired, and gazing now with provoking
admiration at Robert, who certainly offered almost as great a contrast
to his former state as did the girl herself. He returned her look with
interest.

"Would any man believe," he laughed, "that clothes would do so much for
a woman?"

"What a left-handed compliment! But come, dearest, Captain Fitzroy and
Lord Ventnor have come ashore with father and me. They want us to show
them everything! You will excuse him, won't you?" she added, with a
seraphic smile to the others.

They walked off together.

"Jimmy!" gasped the fat midshipman to a lanky youth. "She's got on your
togs!"

Meaning that Iris had ransacked the _Orient's_ theatrical
wardrobe, and pounced on the swell outfit of the principal female
impersonator in the ship's company.

Lieutenant Playdon bit the chin strap of his pith helmet, for the
landing party wore the regulation uniform for service ashore in the
tropics. He muttered to his chief--

"Damme if I've got the hang of this business yet."

"Neither have I. Anstruther looks a decent sort of fellow, and the girl
is a stunner. Yet, d'ye know, Playdon, right through the cruise I've
always understood that she was the fiancée of that cad, Ventnor."

"Anstruther appears to have arranged matters differently. Wonder what
pa will say when that Johnnie owns up about the court-martial."

"Give it up, which is more than the girl will do, or I'm much mistaken.
Funny thing, you know, but I've a sort of hazy recollection of
Anstruther's name being mixed up with that of a Colonel's wife at Hong
Kong. Fancy Ventnor was in it too, as a witness. Stand by, and we'll
see something before we unload at Singapore."


CHAPTER XVI

BARGAINS, GREAT AND SMALL


Lord Ventnor was no fool. Whilst Iris was transforming herself from a
semi-savage condition into a semblance of an ultra _chic_
Parisienne--the _Orient's_ dramatic costumier went in for strong
stage effects in feminine attire--Sir Arthur Deane told the Earl
something of the state of affairs on the island.

His lordship--a handsome, saturnine man, cool, insolently polite, and
plentifully endowed with the judgmatical daring that is the necessary
equipment of a society libertine--counseled patience, toleration, even
silent recognition of Anstruther's undoubted claims for services
rendered.

"She is an enthusiastic, high-spirited girl," he urged upon his
surprised hearer, who expected a very different expression of opinion.
"This fellow Anstruther is a plausible sort of rascal, a good man in a
tight place too--just the sort of fire-eating blackguard who would fill
the heroic bill where a fight is concerned. Damn him, he licked me
twice."

Further amazement for the shipowner.

"Yes, it's quite true. I interfered with his little games, and he gave
me the usual reward of the devil's apothecary. Leave Iris alone. At
present she is strung up to an intense pitch of gratitude, having
barely escaped a terrible fate. Let her come back to the normal.
Anstruther's shady record must gradually leak out. That will disgust
her. In a week she will appeal to you to buy him off. He is hard
up--cut off by his people and that sort of thing. There you probably
have the measure of his scheming. He knows quite well that he can never
marry your daughter. It is all a matter of price."

Sir Arthur willingly allowed himself to be persuaded. At the back of
his head there was an uneasy consciousness that it was not "all a
matter of price." If it were he would never trust a man's face again.
But Ventnor's well-balanced arguments swayed him. The course indicated
was the only decent one. It was humanly impossible for a man to chide
his daughter and flout her rescuer within an hour of finding them.

Lord Ventnor played his cards with a deeper design. He bowed to the
inevitable. Iris said she loved his rival. Very well. To attempt to
dissuade her was to throw her more closely into that rival's arms. The
right course was to appear resigned, saddened, compelled against his
will to reveal the distressing truth. Further, he counted on
Anstruther's quick temper as an active agent. Such a man would be the
first to rebel against an assumption of pitying tolerance. He would
bring bitter charges of conspiracy, of unbelievable compact to secure
his ruin. All this must recoil on his own head when the facts were laid
bare. Not even the hero of the island could prevail against the
terrible indictment of the court-martial. Finally, at Singapore, three
days distant, Colonel Costobell and his wife were staying. Lord
Ventnor, alone of those on board, knew this. Indeed, he accompanied Sir
Arthur Deane largely in order to break off a somewhat trying
entanglement. He smiled complacently as he thought of the effect on
Iris of Mrs. Costobell's indignant remonstrances when the baronet asked
that injured lady to tell the girl all that had happened at Hong Kong.

In a word, Lord Ventnor was most profoundly annoyed, and he cursed
Anstruther from the depths of his heart. But he could see a way out.
The more desperate the emergency the more need to display finesse.
Above all, he must avoid an immediate rupture.

He came ashore with Iris and her father; the captain of the
_Orient_ also joined the party. The three men watched Robert and
the girl walking towards them from the group of officers.

"Anstruther is a smart-looking fellow," commented Captain Fitzroy. "Who
is he?"

Truth to tell, the gallant commander of the _Orient_ was secretly
amazed by the metamorphosis effected in Robert's appearance since he
scrutinized him through his glasses. Iris, too, unaccustomed to the
constraint of high-heeled shoes, clung to the nondescript's arm in a
manner that shook the sailor's faith in Lord Ventnor's pretensions as
her favored suitor.

Poor Sir Arthur said not a word, but his lordship was quite at ease--

"From his name, and from what Deane tells me, I believe he is an
ex-officer of the Indian Army."

"Ah. He has left the service?"

"Yes. I met him last in Hong Kong."

"Then you know him?"

"Quite well, if he is the man I imagine."

"That is really very nice of Ventnor," thought the shipowner. "The last
thing I should credit him with would be a forgiving disposition."

Meanwhile Anstruther was reading Iris a little lecture. "Sweet one," he
explained to her, "do not allude to me by my former rank. I am not
entitled to it. Some day, please God, it will be restored to me. At
present I am a plain civilian."

"I think you very handsome."

"Don't tease, there's a good girl. It is not fair with all these people
looking."

"But really, Robert, only since you scraped off the upper crust have I
been able to recognize you again. I remember now that I thought you
were a most distinguished looking steward."

"Well, I am helpless. I cannot even squeeze you. By the way, Iris,
during the next few days say nothing about our mine."

"Oh, why not?"

"Just a personal whim. It will please me."

"If it pleases you, Robert, I am satisfied."

He pressed her arm by way of answer. They were too near to the waiting
trio for other comment.

"Captain Fitzroy," cried Iris, "let me introduce Mr. Anstruther to you.
Lord Ventnor, you have met Mr. Anstruther before."

The sailor shook hands. Lord Ventnor smiled affably.

"Your enforced residence on the island seems to have agreed with you,"
he said.

"Admirably. Life here had its drawbacks, but we fought our enemies in
the open. Didn't we, Iris?"

"Yes, dear. The poor Dyaks were not sufficiently modernized to attack
us with false testimony."

His lordship's sallow face wrinkled somewhat. So Iris knew of the
court-martial, nor was she afraid to proclaim to all the world that
this man was her lover. As for Captain Fitzroy, his bushy eyebrows
disappeared into his peaked cap when he heard the manner of their
speech.

Nevertheless Ventnor smiled again.

"Even the Dyaks respected Miss Deane," he said.

But Anstruther, sorry for the manifest uneasiness of the shipowner,
repressed the retort on his lips, and forthwith suggested that they
should walk to the north beach in the first instance, that being the
scene of the wreck.

During the next hour he became auditor rather than narrator. It was
Iris who told of his wild fight against wind and waves, Iris who showed
them where he fought with the devil-fish, Iris who expatiated on the
long days of ceaseless toil, his dauntless courage in the face of every
difficulty, the way in which he rescued her from the clutch of the
savages, the skill of his preparations against the anticipated attack,
and the last great achievement of all, when, time after time, he foiled
the Dyaks' best-laid plans, and flung them off, crippled and
disheartened, during the many phases of the thirty hours' battle.

She had an attentive audience. Most of the _Orient's_ officers
quietly came up and followed the girl's glowing recital with breathless
interest. Robert vainly endeavored more than once to laugh away her
thrilling eulogy. But she would have none of it. Her heart was in her
words. He deserved this tribute of praise, unstinted, unmeasured,
abundant in its simple truth, yet sounding like a legend spun by some
romantic poet, were not the grim evidences of its accuracy visible on
every hand.

She was so volubly clear, so precise in fact, so subtle in her clever
delineations of humorous or tragic events, that her father was
astounded, and even Anstruther silently admitted that a man might live
until he equaled the years of a Biblical patriarch without discovering
all the resources of a woman.

There were tears in her eyes when she ended; but they were tears of
thankful happiness, and Lord Ventnor, a silent listener who missed
neither word nor look, felt a deeper chill in his cold heart as he
realized that this woman's love could never be his. The knowledge
excited his passion the more. His hatred of Anstruther now became a
mania, an insensate resolve to mortally stab this meddler who always
stood in his path.

Robert hoped that his present ordeal was over. It had only begun. He
was called on to answer questions without number. Why had the tunnel
been made? What was the mystery of the Valley of Death? How did he
manage to guess the dimensions of the sun-dial? How came he to acquire
such an amazing stock of out-of-the-way knowledge of the edible
properties of roots and trees? How? Why? Where? When? They never would
be satisfied, for not even the British navypoking its nose into the
recesses of the world--often comes across such an amazing story as the
adventures of this couple on Rainbow Island.

He readily explained the creation of quarry and cave by telling them of
the vein of antimony embedded in the rock near the fault. Antimony is
one of the substances that covers a multitude of doubts. No one, not
excepting the doctors who use it, knows much about it, and in Chinese
medicine it might be a chief factor of exceeding nastiness.

Inside the cavern, the existence of the partially completed shaft to
the ledge accounted for recent disturbances on the face of the rock,
and new-comers could not, of course, distinguish the bones of poor
"J.S." as being the remains of a European.

Anstruther was satisfied that none of them hazarded the remotest guess
as to the value of the gaunt rock they were staring at, and chance
helped him to baffle further inquiry.

A trumpeter on board the _Orient_ was blowing his lungs out to
summon them to luncheon, when Captain Fitzroy put a final query.

"I can quite understand," he said to Robert, "that you have an
affection for this weird place."

"I should think so indeed," muttered the stout midshipman, glancing at
Iris.

"But I am curious to know," continued the commander, "why you lay claim
to the island? You can hardly intend to return here."

He pointed to Robert's placard stuck on the rock.

Anstruther paused before he answered. He felt that Lord Ventnor's dark
eyes were fixed on him. Everybody was more or less desirous to have
this point cleared up. He looked the questioner squarely in the face.

"In some parts of the world," he said, "there are sunken reefs,
unknown, uncharted, on which many a vessel has been lost without any
contributory fault on the part of her officers?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Well, Captain Fitzroy, when I was stationed with my regiment in Hong
Kong I encountered such a reef, and wrecked my life on it. At least,
that is how it seemed to me then. Fortune threw me ashore here, after a
long and bitter submergence. You can hardly blame me if I cling to the
tiny speck of land that gave me salvation."

"No," admitted the sailor. He knew there was something more in the
allegory than the text revealed, but it was no business of his.

"Moreover," continued Robert smilingly, "you see I have a partner."

"There cannot be the slightest doubt about the partner," was the prompt
reply.

Then every one laughed, Iris more than any, though Sir Arthur Deane's
gaiety was forced, and Lord Ventnor could taste the acidity of his own
smile.

Later in the day the first lieutenant told his chief of Anstruther's
voluntary statement concerning the court-martial. Captain Fitzroy was
naturally pained by this unpleasant revelation, but he took exactly the
same view as that expressed by the first lieutenant in Robert's
presence.

Nevertheless he pondered the matter, and seized an early opportunity of
mentioning it to Lord Ventnor. That distinguished nobleman was vastly
surprised to learn how Anstruther had cut the ground from beneath his
feet.

"Yes," he said, in reply to the sailor's request for information, "I
know all about it. It could not well be otherwise, seeing that next to
Mrs. Costobell I was the principal witness against him."

"That must have been d----d awkward for you," was the unexpected
comment.

"Indeed! Why?"

"Because rumor linked your name with that of the lady in a somewhat
outspoken way."

"You astonish me. Anstruther certainly made some stupid allegations
during the trial; but I had no idea he was able to spread this
malicious report subsequently."

"I am not talking of Hong Kong, my lord, but of Singapore, months
later."

Captain Fitzroy's tone was exceedingly dry. Indeed, some people might
deem it offensive.

His lordship permitted himself the rare luxury of an angry scowl.

"Rumor is a lying jade at the best," he said curtly. "You must
remember, Captain Fitzroy, that I have uttered no word of scandal about
Mr. Anstruther, and any doubts concerning his conduct can be set at
rest by perusing the records of his case in the Adjutant-General's
office at Hong Kong."

"Hum!" said the sailor, turning on his heel to enter the chart-room.
This was no way to treat a real live lord, a personage of some
political importance, too, such as the Special Envoy to Wang Hai.
Evidently, Iris was no mean advocate. She had already won for the
"outcast" the suffrages of the entire ship's company.

The girl and her father went back to the island with Robert. After
taking thought, the latter decided to ask Mir Jan to remain in
possession until he returned. There was not much risk of another Dyak
invasion. The fate of Taung S'Ali's expedition would not encourage a
fresh set of marauders, and the Mahommedan would be well armed to meet
unforeseen contingencies, whilst on his, Anstruther's, representations
the _Orient_ would land an abundance of stores. In any event, it
was better for the native to live in freedom on Rainbow Island than to
be handed over to the authorities as an escaped convict, which must be
his immediate fate no matter what magnanimous view the Government of
India might afterwards take of his services.

Mir Jan's answer was emphatic. He took off his turban and placed it on
Anstruther's feet.

"Sahib," he said, "I am your dog. If, some day, I am found worthy to be
your faithful servant, then shall I know that Allah has pardoned my
transgressions. I only killed a man because--"

"Peace, Mir Jan. Let him rest."

"Why is he worshiping you, Robert?" demanded Iris.

He told her.

"Really," she cried, "I must keep up my studies in Hindustani. It is
quite too sweet."

And then, for the benefit of her father, she rattled off into a
spirited account of her struggles with the algebraic x and the Urdu
compound verb.

Sir Arthur Deane managed to repress a sigh. In spite of himself he
could not help liking Anstruther. The man was magnetic, a hero, an
ideal gentleman. No wonder his daughter was infatuated with him. Yet
the future was dark and storm-tossed, full of sinister threats and
complications. Iris did not know the wretched circumstances which had
come to pass since they parted, and which had changed the whole aspect
of his life. How could he tell her? Why should it be his miserable lot
to snatch the cup of happiness from her lips? In that moment of silent
agony he wished he were dead, for death alone could remove the burthen
laid on him. Well, surely he might bask in the sunshine of her laughter
for another day. No need to embitter her joyous heart until he was
driven to it by dire necessity.

So he resolutely brushed aside the woe-begone phantom of care, and
entered into the _abandon_ of the hour with a zest that delighted
her. The dear girl imagined that Robert, her Robert, had made another
speedy conquest, and Anstruther himself was much elated by the sudden
change in Sir Arthur Deane's demeanor.

They behaved like school children on a picnic. They roared over Iris's
troubles in the matter of divided skirts, too much divided to be at all
pleasant. The shipowner tasted some of her sago bread, and vowed it was
excellent. They unearthed two bottles of champagne, the last of the
case, and promised each other a hearty toast at dinner. Nothing would
content Iris but that they should draw a farewell bucketful of water
from the well and drench the pitcher-plant with a torrential shower.

Robert carefully secured the pocket-books, money and other effects
found on their dead companions. The baronet, of course, knew all the
principal officers of the _Sirdar_. He surveyed these mournful
relics with sorrowful interest.

"The _Sirdar_ was the crack ship of my fleet, and Captain Ross my
most trusted commander," he said. "You may well imagine, Mr.
Anstruther, what a cruel blow it was to lose such a vessel, with all
these people on board, and my only daughter amongst them. I wonder now
that it did not kill me."

"She was a splendid sea-boat, sir. Although disabled, she fought
gallantly against the typhoon. Nothing short of a reef would break her
up."

"Ah, well," sighed the shipowner, "the few timbers you have shown me
here are the remaining assets out of £300,000."

"Was she not insured?" inquired Robert.

"No; that is, I have recently adopted a scheme of mutual
self-insurance, and the loss falls _pro rata_ on my other
vessels."

The baronet glanced covertly at Iris. The words conveyed little meaning
to her. Indeed, she broke in with a laugh--

"I am afraid I have heard you say, father dear, that some ships in the
fleet paid you best when they ran ashore."

"Yes, Iris. That often happened in the old days. It is different now.
Moreover, I have not told you the extent of my calamities. The
_Sirdar_ was lost on March 18, though I did not know it for
certain until this morning. But on March 25 the _Bahadur_ was sunk
in the Mersey during a fog, and three days later the _Jemadar_
turned turtle on the James and Mary shoal in the Hooghly. Happily there
were no lives lost in either of these cases."

Even Iris was appalled by this list of casualties.

"My poor, dear dad!" she cried. "To think that all these troubles
should occur the very moment I left you!"

Yet she gave no thought to the serious financial effect of such a
string of catastrophes. Robert, of course, appreciated this side of the
business, especially in view of the shipowner's remark about the
insurance. But Sir Arthur Deane's stiff upper lip deceived him. He
failed to realize that the father was acting a part for his daughter's
sake.

Oddly enough, the baronet did not seek to discuss with them the
legal-looking document affixed near the cave. It claimed all rights in
the island in their joint names, and this was a topic he wished to
avoid. For the time, therefore, the younger man had no opportunity of
taking him into his confidence, and Iris held faithfully to her promise
of silence.

The girl's ragged raiment, sou'wester, and strong boots were already
packed away on board. She now rescued the Bible, the copy of Tennyson's
poems, the battered tin cup, her revolver, and the Lee-Metford which
"scared" the Dyaks when they nearly caught Anstruther and Mir Jan
napping. Robert also gathered for her an assortment of Dyak hats,
belts, and arms, including Taung S'Ali's parang and a sumpitan. These
were her trophies, the _spolia opima_ of the campaign.

His concluding act was to pack two of the empty oil tins with all the
valuable lumps of auriferous quartz he could find where he shot the
rubbish from the cave beneath the trees. On top of these he placed some
antimony ore, and Mir Jan, wondering why the sahib wanted the stuff,
carried the consignment to the waiting boat. Lieutenant Playdon, in
command of the last party of sailors to quit the island, evidently
expected Mir Jan to accompany them, but Anstruther explained that the
man would await his return, some time in June or July.

Sir Arthur Deane found himself speculating on the cause of this
extraordinary resolve, but, steadfast to his policy of avoiding
controversial matters, said nothing. A few words to the captain
procured enough stores to keep the Mahommedan for six months at least,
and whilst these were being landed, the question was raised how best to
dispose of the Dyaks.

The commander wished to consult the convenience of his guests.

"If we go a little out of our way and land them in Borneo," he said,
"they will be hanged without troubling you further. If I take them to
Singapore they will be tried on your evidence and sent to penal
servitude. Which is it to be?"

It was Iris who decided.

"I cannot bear to think of more lives being sacrificed," she protested.
"Perhaps if these men are treated mercifully and sent to their homes
after some punishment their example may serve as a deterrent to
others."

So it was settled that way. The anchor rattled up to its berth and the
_Orient_ turned her head towards Singapore. As she steadily passed
away into the deepening azure, the girl and her lover watched the
familiar outlines of Rainbow Island growing dim in the evening light.
For a long while they could see Mir Jan's tall, thin figure motionless
on a rock at the extremity of Europa Point. Their hut, the reef, the
ledge, came into view as the cruiser swung round to a more northerly
course.

Iris had thrown an arm across her father's shoulders. The three were
left alone just then, and they were silent for many minutes. At last,
the flying miles merged the solitary palm beyond the lagoon with the
foliage on the cliff. The wide cleft of Prospect Park grew less
distinct. Mir Jan's white-clothed figure was lost in the dark
background. The island was becoming vague, dream-like, a blurred
memory.

"Robert," said the girl devoutly, "God has been very good to us."

"Yes," he replied. "I was thinking, even this instant, of the verse
that is carved on the gate of the Memorial Well at Cawnpore: 'These are
they which came out of great tribulation.' We, too, have come out of
great tribulation, happily with our lives--and more. The decrees of
fate are indeed inscrutable."

Iris turned to him a face roseate with loving comprehension.

"Do you remember this hour yesterday?" she murmured--"how we suffered
from thirst--how the Dyaks began their second attack from the
ridge--how you climbed down the ladder and I followed you? Oh father,
darling," she went on impulsively, tightening her grasp, "you will
never know how brave he was, how enduring, how he risked all for me and
cheered me to the end, even though the end seemed to be the grave."

"I think I am beginning to understand now," answered the shipowner,
averting his eyes lest Iris should see the tears in them. Their Calvary
was ended, they thought--was it for him to lead them again through the
sorrowful way? It was a heartrending task that lay before him, a task
from which his soul revolted. He refused even to attempt it. He sought
forgetfulness in a species of mental intoxication, and countenanced his
daughter's love idyll with such apparent approval that Lord Ventnor
wondered whether Sir Arthur were not suffering from senile decay.

The explanation of the shipowner's position was painfully simple. Being
a daring yet shrewd financier, he perceived in the troubled condition
of the Far East a magnificent opportunity to consolidate the trading
influence of his company. He negotiated two big loans, one, of a
semi-private nature, to equip docks and railways in the chief maritime
province of China, the other of a more public character, with the
Government of Japan. All his own resources, together with those of his
principal directors and shareholders, were devoted to these objects.
Contemporaneously, he determined to stop paying heavy insurance
premiums on his fleet and make it self-supporting, on the well-known
mutual principle.

His vessels were well equipped, well manned, replete with every modern
improvement, and managed with great commercial skill. In three or four
years, given ordinary trading luck, he must have doubled his own
fortune and earned a world-wide reputation for far-seeing sagacity.

No sooner were all his arrangements completed than three of his best
ships went down, saddling his company with an absolute loss of nearly
£600,000, and seriously undermining his financial credit. A
fellow-director, wealthy and influential, resigned his seat on the
board, and headed a clique of disappointed stockholders. At once the
fair sky became overcast. A sound and magnificent speculation
threatened to dissolve in the Bankruptcy Court.

Sir Arthur Deane's energy and financial skill might have enabled him to
weather this unexpected gale were it not for the apparent loss of his
beloved daughter with the crack ship of his line. Half-frenzied with
grief, he bade his enemies do their worst, and allowed his affairs to
get into hopeless confusion whilst he devoted himself wholly to the
search for Iris and her companions. At this critical juncture Lord
Ventnor again reached his side. His lordship possessed a large private
fortune and extensive estates. He was prudent withal, and knew how
admirably the shipowner's plans would develop if given the necessary
time. He offered the use of his name and money. He more than filled the
gap created by the hostile ex-director. People argued that such a
clever man, just returning from the Far East after accomplishing a
public mission of some importance, must be a reliable guide. The mere
cabled intelligence of his intention to join the board restored
confidence and credit.

But--there was a bargain. If Iris lived, she must become the Countess
of Ventnor. His lordship was weary of peripatetic love-making. It was
high time he settled down in life, took an interest in the legislature,
and achieved a position in the world of affairs. He had a chance now.
The certain success of his friend's project, the fortunate completion
of his own diplomatic undertaking, marriage with a beautiful and
charming woman--these items would consolidate his career. If Iris were
not available, plenty of women, high-placed in society, would accept
such an eligible bachelor. But his heart was set on Iris. She was
honest, high-principled, pure in body and mind, and none prizes these
essentials in a wife more than a worn-out _roué_.

He seized the first opportunity that presented itself to make Sir
Arthur Deane acquainted with a decision already dreaded by the
unfortunate shipowner. Iris must either abandon her infatuation for
Anstruther or bring about the ruin of her father. There was no mean.

"If she declines to become Countess of Ventnor, she can marry whom she
likes, as you will be all paupers together," was the Earl's caustic
summing up.

This brutal argument rather overshot the mark. The shipowner's face
flushed with anger, and Lord Ventnor hastened to retrieve a false step.

"I didn't exactly mean to put it that way, Deane, but my temper is a
little short these days. My position on board this ship is intolerable.
As a matter of fair dealing to me, you should put a stop to your
daughter's attitude towards Anstruther, on the ground that her
engagement is neither approved of by you nor desirable under any
consideration."

It may be assumed from this remark that even the Earl's sardonic temper
was ruffled by the girl's outrageous behavior. Nor was it exactly
pleasant to him to note how steadily Anstruther advanced in the favor
of every officer on the ship. By tacit consent the court-martial was
tabooed, at any rate until the _Orient_ reached Singapore. Every
one knew that the quarrel lay between Robert and Ventnor, and it is not
to be wondered at if Iris's influence alone were sufficient to turn the
scale in favor of her lover.

The shipowner refused point-blank to interfere in any way during the
voyage.

"You promised your co-operation in business even if we found that the
_Sirdar_ had gone down with all hands," he retorted bitterly. "Do
you wish me to make my daughter believe she has come back into my life
only to bring me irretrievable ruin?"

"That appears to be the result, no matter how you may endeavor to
disguise it."

"I thought the days were gone when a man would wish to marry a woman
against her will."

"Nonsense! What does she know about it? The glamour of this island
romance will soon wear off. It would be different if Anstruther were
able to maintain her even decently. He is an absolute beggar, I tell
you. Didn't he ship on your own vessel as a steward? Take my tip,
Deane. Tell him how matters stand with you, and he will cool off."

He believed nothing of the sort, but he was desperately anxious that
Iris should learn the truth as to her father's dilemma from other lips
than his own. This would be the first point gained. Others would
follow.

The two men were conversing in the Earl's cabin. On the deck overhead a
very different chat was taking place.

The _Orient_ was due in Singapore that afternoon. Iris was invited
into the chart-room on some pretext, and Lieutenant Playdon, delegated
by the commander and the first lieutenant, buttonholed Robert.

With sailor-like directness he came straight to the point--

"A few of us have been talking about you, Anstruther, and we cannot be
far wrong in assuming that you are hard up. The fact that you took a
steward's job on the _Sirdar_ shows your disinclination to appeal
to your own people for funds. Now, once you are ashore, you will be
landed in difficulties. To cut any further explanations, I am
commissioned to offer you a loan of fifty pounds, which you can repay
when you like."

Robert's mouth tightened somewhat. For the moment he could not find
words. Playdon feared he was offended.

"I am sorry, old chap, if we are mistaken," he said hesitatingly; "but
we really thought--"

"Please do not endeavor to explain away your generous act," exclaimed
Anstruther. "I accept it thankfully, on one condition."

"Blow the condition. But what is it?"

"That you tell me the names of those to whom I am indebted besides
yourself."

"Oh, that is easy enough. Fitzroy and the first luff are the others. We
kept it to a small circle, don't you know. Thought you would prefer
that."

Anstruther smiled and wrung his hand. There were some good fellows left
in the world after all. The three officers acted in pure good nature.
They were assisting a man apparently down in his luck, who would soon
be called on to face other difficulties by reason of his engagement to
a girl apparently so far removed from him in station. And the last
thing they dreamed of was that their kindly loan was destined to yield
them a better return than all the years of their naval service, for
their fifty pounds had gone into the pocket of a potential millionaire,
who was endowed with the faculty, rare in millionaires, of not
forgetting the friends of his poverty-stricken days.


CHAPTER XVII

RAINBOW ISLAND AGAIN--AND AFTERWARD


Sir Arthur Deane was sitting alone in his cabin in a state of deep
dejection, when he was aroused by a knock, and Robert entered.

"Can you give me half an hour?" he asked. "I have something to say to
you before we land."

The shipowner silently motioned him to a seat.

"It concerns Iris and myself," continued Anstruther. "I gathered from
your words when we met on the island that both you and Lord Ventnor
regarded Iris as his lordship's promised bride. From your point of view
the arrangement was perhaps natural and equitable, but since your
daughter left Hong Kong it happens that she and I have fallen in love
with each other. No; please listen to me. I am not here to urge my
claims on you. I won her fairly and intend to keep her, were the whole
House of Peers opposed to me. At this moment I want to tell you, her
father, why she could never, even under other circumstances, marry Lord
Ventnor."

Then he proceeded to place before the astounded baronet a detailed
history of his recent career. It was a sordid story of woman's perfidy,
twice told. It carried conviction in every sentence. It was possible,
of course, to explain matters more fully to the baronet than to Iris,
and Anstruther's fierce resentment of the cruel wrong inflicted upon
him blazed forth with overwhelming force. The intensity of his wrath in
no way impaired the cogency of his arguments. Rather did it lend point
and logical brevity. Each word burned itself into his hearer's
consciousness, for Robert did not know that the unfortunate father was
being coerced to a distasteful compact by the scoundrel who figured in
the narrative as his evil genius.

At the conclusion Sir Arthur bowed his head between his hands.

"I cannot choose but believe you," he admitted huskily. "Yet how came
you to be so unjustly convicted by a tribunal composed of your brother
officers?"

"They could not help themselves. To acquit me meant that they
discredited the sworn testimony not only of my Colonel's wife, but of
the civil head of an important Government Mission, not to mention some
bought Chinese evidence. Am I the first man to be offered up as a
sacrifice on the altar of official expediency?"

"But you are powerless now. You can hardly hope to have your case
revised. What chance is there that your name will ever be cleared?"

"Mrs. Costobell can do it if she will. The vagaries of such a woman are
not to be depended on. If Lord Ventnor has cast her off, her hatred may
'prove stronger than her passion. Anyhow, I should be the last man to
despair of God's Providence. Compare the condition of Iris and myself
today with our plight during the second night on the ledge! I refuse to
believe that a bad and fickle woman can resist the workings of destiny,
and it was a happy fate which led me to ship on board the
_Sirdar_, though at the time I saw it in another light."

How different the words, the aspirations, of the two suitors. Quite
unconsciously, Robert could not have pleaded better. The shipowner
sighed heavily.

"I hope your faith will be justified. If it be not--the more likely
thing to happen--do I understand that my daughter and you intend to get
married whether I give or withhold my sanction?"

Anstruther rose and opened the door.

"I have ventured to tell you," he said, "why she should not marry Lord
Ventnor. When I come to you and ask you for her, which I pray may be
soon, it will be time enough to answer that question, should you then
decide to put it."

It must be remembered that Robert knew nothing whatever of the older
man's predicament, whilst the baronet, full of his own troubles, was in
no mood to take a reasonable view of Anstruther's position. Neither
Iris nor Robert could make him understand the long-drawn-out duel of
their early life on the island, nor was it easy to depict the
tumultuous agony of that terrible hour on the ledge when the girl
forced the man to confess his love by suggesting acceptance of the
Dyaks' terms.

Thus, for a little while, these two were driven apart, and Anstruther
disdained to urge the plea that not many weeks would elapse before he
would be a richer man than his rival. The chief sufferer was Sir Arthur
Deane. Had Iris guessed how her father was tormented, she would not
have remained on the bridge, radiant and mirthful, whilst the
grey-haired baronet gazed with stony-eyed despair at some memoranda
which he extracted from his papers.

"Ten thousand pounds!" he muttered. "Not a great sum for the
millionaire financier, Sir Arthur Deane, to raise on his note of hand.
A few months ago men offered me one hundred times the amount on no
better security. And now, to think that a set of jabbering fools in
London should so destroy my credit and their own, that not a bank will
discount our paper unless they are assured Lord Ventnor has joined the
board! Fancy me, of all men, being willing to barter my child for a few
pieces of gold!"

The thought was maddening. For a little while he yielded to utter
despondency. It was quite true that a comparatively small amount of
money would restore the stability of his firm. Even without it, were
his credit unimpaired, he could easily tide over the period of
depression until the first fruits of his enterprise were garnered.
Then, all men would hail him as a genius.

Wearily turning over his papers, he suddenly came across the last
letter written to him by Iris's mother. How she doted on their only
child! He recalled one night, shortly before his wife died, when the
little Iris was brought into her room to kiss her and lisp her
infantile prayers. She had devised a formula of her own--"God bless
father! God bless mother! God bless me, their little girl!"

And what was it she cried to him from the beach?

"Your own little girl given back to you!"

Given back to him! For what--to marry that black-hearted scoundrel
whose pastime was the degradation of women and the defaming of honest
men? That settled it. Instantly the cloud was lifted from his soul. A
great peace came upon him. The ruin of his business he might not be
able to avert, but he would save from, the wreck that which he prized
more than all else--his daughter's love.

The engines dropped to half speed--they were entering the harbor of
Singapore. In a few hours the worst would be over. If Ventnor
telegraphed to London his withdrawal from the board, nothing short of a
cabled draft for ten thousand pounds would prevent certain creditors
from filing a bankruptcy petition. In the local banks the baronet had
about a thousand to his credit. Surely among the rich merchants of the
port, men who knew the potentialities of his scheme, he would be able
to raise the money needed. He would try hard. Already he felt braver.
The old fire had returned to his blood. The very belief that he was
acting in the way best calculated to secure his daughter's happiness
stimulated and encouraged him.

He went on deck, to meet Iris skipping down the hatchway.

"Oh, there you are!" she cried. "I was just coming to find out why you
were moping in your cabin. You are missing the most beautiful view--all
greens, and blues, and browns! Run, quick! I want you to see every inch
of it."

She held out her hand and pulled him gleefully up the steps. Leaning
against the taffrail, some distance apart from each other, were
Anstruther and Lord Ventnor. Need it be said to whom Iris drew her
father?

"Here he is, Robert," she laughed. "I do believe he was sulking because
Captain Fitzroy was so very attentive to me. Yet you didn't mind it a
bit!"

The two men looked into each other eyes. They smiled. How could they
resist the contagion of her sunny nature?

"I have been thinking over what you said to me just now, Anstruther,"
said the shipowner slowly.

"Oh!" cried Iris. "Have you two been talking secrets behind my back?"

"It is no secret to you--my little girl--" Her father's voice lingered
on the phrase. "When we are on shore, Robert, I will explain matters to
you more fully. Just now I wish only to tell you that where Iris has
given her heart I will not refuse her hand."

"You darling old dad! And is that what all the mystery was about?"

She took his face between her hands and kissed him. Lord Ventnor,
wondering at this effusiveness, strolled forward.

"What has happened, Miss Deane?" he inquired. "Have you just discovered
what an excellent parent you possess?"

The baronet laughed, almost hysterically. "'Pon my honor," he cried,
"you could not have hit upon a happier explanation."

His lordship was not quite satisfied.

"I suppose you will take Iris to Smith's Hotel?" he said with cool
impudence.

Iris answered him.

"Yes. My father has just asked Robert to come with us--by inference,
that is. Where are you going?"

The adroit use of her lover's Christian name goaded his lordship to
sudden heat.

"Indeed!" he snarled. "Sir Arthur Deane has evidently decided a good
many things during the last hour."

"Yes," was the shipowner's quiet retort. "I have decided that my
daughter's happiness should be the chief consideration of my remaining
years. All else must give way to it."

The Earl's swarthy face grew sallow with fury. His eyes blazed, and
there was a tense vibrato in his voice as he said--

"Then I must congratulate you, Miss Deane. You are fated to endure
adventures. Having escaped from the melodramatic perils of Rainbow
Island you are destined to experience another variety of shipwreck
here."

He left them. Not a word had Robert spoken throughout the unexpected
scene. His heart was throbbing with a tremulous joy, and his lordship's
sneers were lost on him. But he could not fail to note the malignant
purpose of the parting sentence.

In his quietly masterful way he placed his hand on the baronet's
shoulder.

"What did Lord Ventnor mean?" he asked.

Sir Arthur Deane answered, with a calm smile--"It is difficult to talk
openly at this moment. Wait until we reach the hotel."

The news flew fast through the settlement that H.M.S. _Orient_ had
returned from her long search for the _Sirdar_. The warship
occupied her usual anchorage, and a boat was lowered to take off the
passengers. Lieutenant Playdon went ashore with them. A feeling of
consideration for Anstruther prevented any arrangements being made for
subsequent meetings. Once their courteous duty was ended, the officers
of the _Orient_ could not give him any further social recognition.

Lord Ventnor was aware of this fact and endeavored to turn it to
advantage.

"By the way, Fitzroy," he called out to the commander as he prepared to
descend the gangway, "I want you, and any others not detained by duty,
to come and dine with me tonight."

Captain Fitzroy answered blandly--"It is very good of you to ask us,
but I fear I cannot make any definite arrangements until I learn what
orders are awaiting me here."

"Oh, certainly. Come if you can, eh?"

"Yes; suppose we leave it at that."

It was a polite but decided rebuff. It in no way tended to sweeten Lord
Ventnor's temper, which was further exasperated when he hurt his shin
against one of Robert's disreputable-looking tins, with its
accumulation of debris.

The boat swung off into the tideway. Her progress shorewards was
watched by a small knot of people, mostly loungers and coolies. Among
them, however, were two persons who had driven rapidly to the
landing-place when the arrival of the _Orient_ was reported. One
bore all the distinguishing marks of the army officer of high rank, but
the other was unmistakably a globetrotter. Only in Piccadilly could he
have purchased his wondrous _sola topi_, or pith helmet--with its
imitation _puggri_ neatly frilled and puckered--and no tailor who
ever carried his goose through the Exile's Gate would have fashioned
his expensive garments. But the old gentleman made no pretence that he
could "hear the East a-callin'." He swore impartially at the climate,
the place, and its inhabitants. At this instant he was in a state of
wild excitement. He was very tall, very stout, exceedingly red-faced.
Any budding medico who understood the pre-eminence enjoyed by _aq.
ad_ in a prescription, would have diagnosed him as a first-rate
subject for apoplexy.

Producing a tremendous telescope, he vainly endeavored to balance it on
the shoulder of a native servant.

"Can't you stand still, you blithering idiot!" he shouted, after futile
attempts to focus the advancing boat, "or shall I steady you by a clout
over the ear?"

His companion, the army man, was looking through a pair of
field-glasses.

"By Jove!" he cried, "I can see Sir Arthur Deane, and a girl who looks
like his daughter. There's that infernal scamp, Ventnor, too."

The big man brushed the servant out of his way, and brandished the
telescope as though it were a bludgeon.

"The dirty beggar! He drove my lad to misery and death, yet he has come
back safe and sound. Wait till I meet him. I'll--"

"Now, Anstruther! Remember your promise. I will deal with Lord Ventnor.
My vengeance has first claim. What! By the jumping Moses, I do
believe--Yes. It is. Anstruther! Your nephew is sitting next to the
girl!"

The telescope fell on the stones with a crash. The giant's rubicund
face suddenly blanched. He leaned on his friend for support.

"You are not mistaken," he almost whimpered. "Look again, for God's
sake, man. Make sure before you speak. Tell me! Tell me!"

"Calm yourself, Anstruther. It is Robert, as sure as I'm alive. Don't
you think I know him, my poor disgraced friend, whom I, like all the
rest, cast off in his hour of trouble? But I had some excuse. There!
There! I didn't mean that, old fellow. Robert himself will be the last
man to blame either of us. Who could have suspected that two
people--one of them, God help me! my wife--would concoct such a hellish
plot!"

The boat glided gracefully alongside the steps of the quay, and Playdon
sprang ashore to help Iris to alight. What happened immediately
afterwards can best be told in his own words, as he retailed the story
to an appreciative audience in the ward-room.

"We had just landed," he said, "and some of the crew were pushing the
coolies out of the way, when two men jumped down the steps, and a most
fiendish row sprang up. That is, there was no dispute or wrangling, but
one chap, who, it turned out, was Colonel Costobell, grabbed Ventnor by
the shirt front, and threatened to smash his face in if he didn't
listen then and there to what he had to say. I really thought about
interfering, until I heard Colonel Costobell's opening words. After
that I would gladly have seen the beggar chucked into the harbor. We
never liked him, did we?"

"Ask no questions, Pompey, but go ahead with the yarn," growled the
first lieutenant.

"Well, it seems that Mrs. Costobell is dead. She got enteric a week
after the _Orient_ sailed, and was a goner in four days. Before
she died she owned up."

He paused, with a base eye to effect. Not a man moved a muscle.

"All right," he cried. "I will make no more false starts. Mrs.
Costobell begged her husband's forgiveness for her treatment of him,
and confessed that she and Lord Ventnor planned the affair for which
Anstruther was tried by court-martial. It must have been a beastly
business, for Costobell was sweating with rage, though his words were
icy enough. And you ought to have seen Ventnor's face when he heard of
the depositions, sworn to and signed by Mrs. Costobell and by several
Chinese servants whom he bribed to give false evidence. He promised to
marry Mrs. Costobell if her husband died, or, in any event, to bring
about a divorce when the Hong Kong affair had blown over. Then she
learnt that he was after Miss Iris, and there is no doubt her fury
helped on the fever. Costobell said that, for his wife's sake, he would
have kept the wretched thing secret, but he was compelled to clear
Anstruther's name, especially as he came across the other old
Johnnie--"

"Pompey, you are incoherent with excitement. Who is 'the other old
Johnnie'?" asked the first luff severely.

"Didn't I tell you? Why, Anstruther's uncle, of course, a heavy old
swell with just a touch of Yorkshire in his tongue. I gathered that he
disinherited his nephew when the news of the court-martial reached him.
Then he relented, and cabled to him. Getting no news, he came East to
look for him. He met Costobell the day after the lady died, and the two
swore--the stout uncle can swear a treat--anyhow, they vowed to be
revenged on Ventnor, and to clear Anstruther's character, living or
dead. Poor old chap! He cried like a baby when he asked the youngster
to forgive him. It was quite touching. I can tell you----"

Playdon affected to search for his pocket-handkerchief.

"Do tell us, or it will be worse for you," cried his mentor.

"Give me time, air, a drink! What you fellows want is a phonograph. Let
me see. Well, Costobell shook Ventnor off at last, with the final
observation that Anstruther's court-martial has been quashed. The next
batch of general orders will re-instate him in the regiment, and it
rests with him to decide whether or not a criminal warrant shall be
issued against his lordship for conspiracy. Do you fellows know what
conspir----?"

"You cuckoo! What did Miss Deane do?"

"Clung to Anstruther like a weeping angel, and kissed everybody all
round when Ventnor got away. Well--hands off. I mean her father,
Anstruther and the stout uncle. Unfortunately I was not on in that
scene. But, for some reason, they all nearly wrung my arm off, and the
men were so excited that they gave the party a rousing cheer as their
rickshaws went off in a bunch. Will no Christian gentleman get me a
drink?"

The next commotion arose in the hotel when Sir Arthur Deane seized the
first opportunity to explain the predicament in which his company was
placed, and the blow which Lord Ventnor yet had it in his power to
deal.

Mr. William Anstruther was an interested auditor. Robert would have
spoken, but his uncle restrained him.

"Leave this to me, lad," he exclaimed. "When I was coming here in the
_Sirdar_ there was a lot of talk about Sir Arthur's scheme, and
there should not be much difficulty in raising all the brass required,
if half what I heard be true. Sit you down, Sir Arthur, and tell us all
about it."

The shipowner required no second bidding. With the skill for which he
was noted, he described his operations in detail, telling how every
farthing of the first instalments of the two great loans was paid up,
how the earnings of his fleet would quickly overtake the deficit in
capital value caused by the loss of the three ships, and how, in six
months' time, the leading financial houses of London, Paris, and Berlin
would be offering him more money than he would need.

To a shrewd man of business the project could not fail to commend
itself, and the Yorkshire squire, though a trifle obstinate in temper,
was singularly clear-headed in other respects. He brought his great
fist down on the table with a whack.

"Send a cable to your company, Sir Arthur," he cried, "and tell them
that your prospective son-in-law will provide the ten thousand pounds
you require. I will see that his draft is honored. You can add, if you
like, that another ten will be ready if wanted when this lot is spent.
I did my lad one d--er--deuced bad turn in my life. This time, I think,
I am doing him a good one."

"You are, indeed," said Iris's father enthusiastically. "The unallotted
capital he is taking up will be worth four times its face value in two
years."

"All the more reason to make his holding twenty instead of ten," roared
the Yorkshireman. "But look here. You talk about dropping proceedings
against that precious earl whom I saw to-day. Why not tell him not to
try any funny tricks until Robert's money is safely lodged to your
account? We have him in our power. Dash it all, let us use him a bit."

Even Iris laughed at this naive suggestion. It was delightful to think
that their arch enemy was actually helping the baronet's affairs at
that very moment, and would continue to do so until he was flung aside
as being of no further value. Although Ventnor himself had carefully
avoided any formal commitment, the cablegrams awaiting the shipowner at
Singapore showed that confidence had already been restored by the
uncontradicted use of his lordship's name.

Robert at last obtained a hearing.

"You two are quietly assuming the attitude of the financial magnates of
this gathering," he said. "I must admit that you have managed things
very well between you, and I do not propose for one moment to interfere
with your arrangements. Nevertheless, Iris and I are really the chief
moneyed persons present. You spoke of financial houses in England and
on the Continent backing up your loans six months hence, Sir Arthur.
You need not go to them. We will be your bankers."

The baronet laughed with a whole-hearted gaiety that revealed whence
Iris got some part, at least, of her bright disposition.

"Will you sell your island, Robert?" he cried. "I am afraid that not
even Iris could wheedle any one into buying it."

"But father, dear," interrupted the girl earnestly, "what Robert says
is true. We have a gold mine there. It is worth so much that you will
hardly believe it until then? can no longer be any doubt in your mind.
I suppose that is why Robert asked me not to mention his discovery to
you earlier."

"No, Iris, that was not the reason," said her lover, and the older men
felt that more than idle fancy inspired the astounding intelligence
that they had just heard. "Your love was more to me than all the gold
in the world. I had won you. I meant to keep you, but I refused to buy
you."

He turned to her father. His pent-up emotion mastered him, and he spoke
as one who could no longer restrain his feelings.

"I have had no chance to thank you for the words you uttered at the
moment we quitted the ship. Yet I will treasure them while life lasts.
You gave Iris to me when I was poor, disgraced, an outcast from my
family and my profession. And I know why you did this thing. It was
because you valued her happiness more than riches or reputation. I am
sorry now I did not explain matters earlier. It would have saved you
much needless suffering. But the sorrow has sped like an evil dream,
and you will perhaps not regret it, for your action today binds me to
you with hoops of steel. And you, too, uncle. You traveled thousands of
miles to help and comfort me in my anguish. Were I as bad as I was
painted, your kind old heart still pitied me; you were prepared to
pluck me from the depths of despair and degradation. Why should I hate
Lord Ventnor? What man could have served me as he did? He has given me
Iris. He gained for me at her father's hands a concession such as
mortal has seldom wrested from black-browed fate. He brought my uncle
to my side in the hour of my adversity. Hate him! I would have his
statue carved in marble, and set on high to tell all who passed how
good may spring out of evil--how God's wisdom can manifest itself by
putting even the creeping and crawling things of the earth to some
useful purpose."

"Dash it all, lad," vociferated the elder Anstruther, "what ails thee?
I never heard you talk like this before!"

The old gentleman's amazement was so comical that further tension was
out of the question.

Robert, in calmer mood, informed them of the manner in which he hit
upon the mine. The story sounded like wildest romance--this finding of
a volcanic dyke guarded by the bones of "J.S." and the poison-filled
quarry--but the production of the ore samples changed wonder into
certainty.

Next day a government metallurgist estimated the value of the contents
of the two oil-tins at about £500, yet the specimens brought from the
island were not by any means the richest available.

And now there is not much more to tell of Rainbow Island and its
castaways. On the day that Captain Robert Anstruther's name appeared in
the _Gazette_, reinstating him to his rank and regiment, Iris and
he were married in the English Church at Hong Kong, for it was his
wife's wish that the place which witnessed his ignominy should also
witness his triumph.

A good-natured admiral decided that the urgent requirements of the
British Navy should bring H.M.S. _Orient_ to the island before the
date fixed for the ceremony. Lieutenant Playdon officiated as best man,
whilst the _Orient_ was left so scandalously short-handed for many
hours that a hostile vessel, at least twice her size, might have
ventured to attack her.

Soon afterwards, Robert resigned his commission. He regretted the
necessity, but the demands of his new sphere in life rendered this step
imperative. Mining engineers, laborers, stores, portable houses,
engines, and equipment were obtained with all haste, and the whole
party sailed on one of Sir Arthur Deane's ships to convoy a small
steamer specially hired to attend to the wants of the miners.

At last, one evening, early in July, the two vessels anchored outside
Palm-tree Rock, and Mir Jan could be seen running frantically about the
shore, for no valid reason save that he could not stand still. The
sahib brought him good news. The Governor of Hong Kong felt that any
reasonable request made by Anstruther should be granted if possible. He
had written such a strong representation of the Mahommedan's case to
the Government of India that there was little doubt the returning mail
would convey an official notification that Mir Jan, formerly
_naik_ in the Kumaon Rissala--he who once killed a man--had been
granted a free pardon.

The mining experts verified Robert's most sanguine views after a very
brief examination of the deposit. Hardly any preliminary work was
needed. In twenty-four hours a small concentrating plant was erected,
and a ditch made to drain off the carbonic anhydride in the valley.
After dusk a party of coolies cleared the quarry of its former
occupants. Towards the close of the following day, when the great
steamer once more slowly turned her head to the north-west, Iris could
hear the steady thud of an engine at work on the first consignment of
ore.

Robert had been busy up to the last moment. There was so much to be
done in a short space of time. The vessel carried a large number of
passengers, and he did not wish to detain them too long, though they
one and all expressed their willingness to suit his convenience in this
respect.

Now his share of the necessary preparations was concluded. His wife,
Sir Arthur and his uncle were gathered in a corner of the promenade
deck when he approached and told them that his last instruction ashore
was for a light to be fixed on Summit Rock as soon as the dynamo was in
working order.

"When we all come back in the cold weather," he explained gleefully,
"we will not imitate the _Sirdar_ by running on to the reef,
should we arrive by night."

Iris answered not. Her blue eyes were fixed on the fast-receding
cliffs.

"Sweetheart," said her husband, "why are you so silent?"

She turned to him. The light of the setting sun! illumined her face
with its golden radiance.

"Because I am so happy," she said. "Oh, Robert, dear, so happy and
thankful."

       *       *       *       *       *

POSTSCRIPT

The latest news of Col. and Mrs. Anstruther is contained in a letter
written by an elderly maiden lady, resident in the North Riding of
Yorkshire, to a friend in London. It is dated some four years after the
events already recorded.

Although its information is garbled and, to a certain extent,
inaccurate, those who have followed the adventures of the young couple
under discussion will be able to appreciate its opinions at their true
value. When the writer states facts, of course, her veracity is
unquestionable, but occasionally she flounders badly when she depends
upon her own judgment.

Here is the letter:

    "MY DEAR HELEN:

    "I have not seen or heard of you during so long a time that I am
    _simply dying_ to tell you all that is happening here. You
    will remember that some people named Anstruther bought the Fairlawn
    estate near our village some three years ago. They are, as you
    know, _enormously_ rich. The doctor tells me that when they
    are not squeezing money out of the wretched Chinese, they dig it in
    _barrow-loads_ out of some magic island in the Atlantic or the
    Pacific--I really forget which.

    "Anyhow, they could afford to _entertain_ much more than they
    do. Mrs. Anstruther is very nice looking, and could be a leader of
    society if she chose, but she _seems_ to care for no one but
    her husband and her babies. She has a boy and a girl, very charming
    children, I admit, and you seldom see her without them. They have a
    French _bonne_ apiece, and a most _murderous_-looking
    person--a Mahommedan native, I believe--stalks alongside and
    behaves as if he would _instantly decapitate_ any person who
    as much as looked at them. Such a procession you never saw! Mrs.
    Anstruther's devotion to her husband is _too_ absurd. He is a
    tall, handsome man, of distinguished appearance, but on the few
    occasions I have spoken to him he impressed me as somewhat
    _taciturn_. Yet to see the way in which his wife even
    _looks_ at him you would imagine that he had not his equal in
    the world!

    "I believe there is some _secret_ in their lives. Colonel
    Anstruther used to be in the army--he is now in command of our
    local yeomanry--and although his name is 'Robert,' _tout
    court_, I have often heard Mrs. Anstruther call him 'Jenks.'
    Their boy, too, is christened Robert _Jenks_ Anstruther.' Now,
    my dear Helen, _do_ make inquiries about them in town circles.
    I _particularly_ wish you to find out who is this person
    'Jenks'--a most vulgar name. I am sure you will unearth something
    curious, because Mrs. Anstruther was a Miss Deane, daughter of the
    baronet, and Anstruther's people are well known in Yorkshire. There
    are absolutely no Jenkses connected with them on either side.

    "I think I can help you by another _clue_, as a very
    _odd_ incident occurred at our hunt ball last week. The
    Anstruthers, I must tell you, usually go away for the winter, to
    China, or to their fabulous island. This year they remained at
    home, and Colonel Anstruther became M.F.H., as he is certainly a
    most liberal man so far as _sport_ and _charity_ are
    concerned.

    "Well, dear, the Dodgsons--you remember the Leeds clothier
    people--having _contrived_ to enter county society, invited
    the Earl of Ventnor down for the ball. He, it seems, knew nothing
    about Anstruther being M.F.H., and of course Mrs. Anstruther
    _received_. The moment Lord Ventnor heard her name he was very
    angry. He said he did not care to meet her, and left for London by
    the next train. The Dodgsons were _awfully_ annoyed with him,
    and Mrs. Dodgson had the bad taste to tell Mrs, Anstruther all
    about it. And what do you think _she_ said--'Lord Ventnor need
    not have been so frightened. My husband has not brought his
    hunting-crop with him!'

    "I was not there, but young Barker told me that Mrs. Anstruther
    looked very _impressive_ as she said this. 'Stunning!' was the
    word he used, but young Barker is a _fool_, and thinks Mrs. A.
    is the most beautiful woman in Yorkshire. Her dress, they say, was
    _magnificent_, which I can hardly credit, as she usually goes
    about in the _plainest_ tailor-made clothes. By the way. I
    forgot to mention that the Anstruthers have restored our parish
    church. The vicar, of course, is enraptured with them. I dislike
    people who are so free with their money and yet reserved in their
    friendship. It is a sure sign, when they _court_ popularity,
    that they dread something leaking out about the _past_.

    "_Do_ write soon. Don't forget 'Jenks' and 'Lord Ventnor';
    those are the lines of _inquiry_.

    "Yours,

    "MATILDA.

    "PS.--Perhaps I am misjudging them. Mrs. Anstruther has just sent
    me an invitation to an 'At Home' next Thursday.--M.

    "PPS.--Dear me, this letter will never get away, I have just
    destroyed another envelope to tell you that the vicar came in to
    tea. From what he told me about Lord Ventnor, I imagine that Mrs.
    Anstruther said no more than he deserved.--M."

NOTE.--Colonel Anstruther's agents discovered, after long and costly
inquiry, that a Shields man named James Spence, a marine engineer,
having worked for a time as a miner in California, shipped as third
engineer on a vessel bound for Shanghai. There be quitted her. He
passed some time ashore in dissipation, took another job on a Chinese
river steamer, and was last heard of some eighteen months before the
_Sirdar_ was wrecked. He then informed a Chinese boarding-house
keeper that he was going to make his fortune by accompanying some
deep-sea fishermen, and he bought some stores and tools from a
marine-store dealer. No one knew when or where he went, but from that
date all trace of him disappeared. The only persons who mourned his
loss were his mother and sister. The last letter they received from him
was posted in Shanghai. Though the evidence connecting him with the
recluse of Rainbow Island was slight, and purely circumstantial,
Colonel Anstruther provided for the future of his relatives in a manner
that secured their lasting gratitude.