Early in the New Year the first of these orchestral concerts took
place, and brought me much popularity on account of its unusual
programme. I had discovered that if any real significance were to
be given to these concerts, in distinction to those consisting of
heterogeneous scraps of music of every different species under
the sun, and which are so opposed to all serious artistic taste,
we could only afford to give two kinds of genuine music
alternately if a good effect was to be produced. Accordingly
between two symphonies I placed one or two longer vocal pieces,
which were not to be heard elsewhere, and these were the only
items in the whole concert. After the Mozart Symphony in D major,
I made all the musicians move from their places to make room for
an imposing choir, which had to sing Palestrina's Stabat Mater,
from an adaptation of the original recitative, which I had
carefully revised, and Bach's Motet for eight voices: Singet dem
Herrn ein neues Lied ('Sing unto the Lord a new song'); thereupon
I let the orchestra again take its place to play Beethoven's
Sinfonia Eroica, and with that to end the concert.

This success was very encouraging, and disclosed to me a somewhat
consoling prospect of increasing my influence as musical
conductor at a time when my disgust was daily growing stronger at
the constant meddling with our opera repertoire, which made me
lose more and more influence as compared with the wishes of my
would-be prima donna niece, whom even Tichatschek supported.
Immediately on my return from Berlin I had begun the
orchestration of Lohengrin, and in all other respects had given
myself up to greater resignation, which made me feel I could face
my fate calmly, when I suddenly received a very disturbing piece
of news.

In the beginning of February my mother's death was announced to
me. I at once hastened to her funeral at Leipzig, and was filled
with deep emotion and joy at the wonderfully calm and sweet
expression of her face. She had passed the latter years of her
life, which had before been so active and restless, in cheerful
ease, and at the end in peaceful and almost childlike happiness.
On her deathbed she exclaimed in humble modesty, and with a
bright smile on her face: 'Oh! how beautiful! how lovely! how
divine! Why do I deserve such favour?' It was a bitterly cold
morning when we lowered the coffin into the grave in the
churchyard, and the hard, frozen lumps of earth which we
scattered on the lid, instead of the customary handful of dust,
frightened me by the loud noise they made. On the way home to the
house of my brother-in-law, Hermann Brockhaus, where the whole
family were to gather together for an hour, Laube, of whom my
mother had been very fond, was my only companion. He expressed
his anxiety at my unusually exhausted appearance, and when he
afterwards accompanied me to the station, we discussed the
unbearable burden which seemed to us to lie like a dead weight on
every noble effort made to resist the tendency of the time to
sink into utter worthlessness. On my return to Dresden the
realisation of my complete loneliness came over me for the first
time with full consciousness, as I could not help knowing that
with the loss of my mother every natural bond of union was
loosened with my brothers and sisters, each of whom was taken up
with his or her own family affairs. So I plunged dully and coldly
into the only thing which could cheer and warm me, the working
out of my Lohengrin and my studies of German antiquity.

Thus dawned the last days of February, which were to plunge
Europe once more into revolution. I was among those who least
expected a probable or even possible overthrow of the political
world. My first knowledge of such things had been gained in my
youth at the time of the July Revolution, and the long and
peaceful reaction that followed it. Since then I had become
acquainted with Paris, and from all the signs of public life
which I saw there, I thought all that had occurred had been
merely the preliminaries of a great revolutionary movement. I had
been present at the erection of the forts detaches around Paris,
which Louis Philippe had carried out, and been instructed about
the strategic value of the various fixed sentries scattered about
Paris, and I agreed with those who considered that everything was
ready to make even an attempt at a rising on the part of the
populace of Paris quite impossible. When, therefore, the Swiss
War of Separation at the end of the previous year, and the
successful Sicilian Revolution at the beginning of the New Year,
turned all men's eyes in great excitement to watch the effect of
these risings on Paris, I did not take the slightest interest in
the hopes and fears which were aroused. News of the growing
restlessness in the French capital did indeed reach us, but I
disputed Rockel's belief that any significance could be attached
to it. I was sitting in the conductor's desk at a rehearsal of
Martha when, during an interval, Rockel, with the peculiar joy of
being in the right, brought me the news of Louis Philippe's
flight, and the proclamation of the Republic in Paris. This made
a strange and almost astonishing impression on me, although at
the same time the doubt as to the true significance of these
events made it possible for me to smile to myself. I too caught
the fever of excitement which had spread everywhere. The German
March days were coming, and from all directions ever more
alarming news kept coming in. Even within the narrow confines of
my native Saxony serious petitions were framed, which the King
withstood for a long time; even he was deceived, in a way which
he was soon to acknowledge, as to the meaning of this commotion
and the temper that prevailed in the country.

On the evening of one of these really anxious days, when the very
air was heavy and full of thunder, we gave our third great
orchestral concert, at which the King and his court were present,
as on the two previous occasions. For the opening of this one I
had chosen Mendelssohn's Symphony in A minor, which I had played
on the occasion of his funeral. The mood of this piece, which
even in the would-be joyful phrases is always tenderly
melancholy, corresponded strangely with the anxiety and
depression of the whole audience, which was more particularly
accentuated in the demeanour of the royal family. I did not
conceal from Lipinsky, the leader of the orchestra, my regret at
the mistake I had made in the arrangement of that day's
programme, as Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, also in a minor key,
was to follow this minor symphony. With a merry twinkle in his
eyes the eccentric Pole comforted me by exclaiming: 'Oh, let us
play only the first two movements of the Symphony in C minor,
then no one will know whether we have played Mendelssohn in the
major or the minor key.' Fortunately before these two movements
began, to our great surprise, a loud shout was raised by some
patriotic spirit in the middle of the audience, who called out
'Long live the King!' and the cry was promptly repeated with
unusual enthusiasm and energy on all sides. Lipinsky was
perfectly right: the symphony, with the passionate and stormy
excitement of the first theme, swelled out like a hurricane of
rejoicing, and had seldom produced such an effect on the audience
as on that night. This was the last of the newly inaugurated
concerts that I ever conducted in Dresden.

Shortly after this the inevitable political changes took place.
The King dismissed his ministry and elected a new one, consisting
partly of Liberals and partly even of really enthusiastic
Democrats, who at once proclaimed the well-known regulations,
which are the same all over the world, for founding a thoroughly
democratic constitution. I was really touched by this result, and
by the heartfelt joy which was evident among the whole
population, and I would have given much to have been able to gain
access to the King, and convince myself of his hearty confidence
in the people's love for him, which seemed to me so desirable a
consummation. In the evening the town was gaily illuminated, and
the King drove through the streets in an open carriage. In the
greatest excitement I went out among the dense crowds and
followed his movements, often running where I thought it likely
that a particularly hearty shout might rejoice and reconcile the
monarch's heart. My wife was quite frightened when she saw me
come back late at night, tired out and very hoarse from shouting.

The events which took place in Vienna and Berlin, with their
apparently momentous results, only moved me as interesting
newspaper reports, and the meeting of a Frankfort parliament in
the place of the dissolved Bundestag sounded strangely pleasant
in my ears. Yet all these significant occurrences could not tear
me for a single day from my regular hours of work. With immense,
almost overweening satisfaction, I finished, in the last days of
this eventful and historic month of March, the score of Lohengrin
with the orchestration of the music up to the vanishing of the
Knight of the Holy Grail into the remote and mystic distance.

About this time a young Englishwomen, Madame Jessie Laussot, who
had married a Frenchman in Bordeaux, one day presented herself at
my house in the company of Karl Ritter, who was barely eighteen
years of age. This young man, who was born in Russia of German
parents, was a member of one of those northern families who had
settled down permanently in Dresden, on account of the pleasant
artistic atmosphere of that place. I remembered that I had seen
him once before not long after the first performance of
Tannhauser, when he asked me for my autograph for a copy of the
score of that opera, which was on sale at the music-shop. I now
learned that this copy really belonged to Frau Laussot, who had
been present at those performances, and who was now introduced to
me. Overcome with shyness, the young lady expressed her
admiration in a way I had never experienced before, and at the
same time told me how great was her regret at being called away
by family affairs from her favourite home in Dresden with the
Ritter family, who, she gave me to understand, were deeply
devoted to me. It was with a strange, and in its way quite a new,
sensation that I bade farewell to this young lady. This was the
first time since my meeting with Alwine Frommann and Werder, when
the Fliegender Hollander was produced, that I came across this
sympathetic tone, which seemed to come like an echo from some old
familiar past, but which I never heard close at hand. I invited
young Ritter to come and see me whenever he liked, and to
accompany me sometimes on my walks. His extraordinary shyness,
however, seemed to prevent him from doing this, and I only
remember seeing him very occasionally at my house. He used to
turn up more often with Hans von Bulow, whom he seemed to know
pretty well, and who had already entered the Leipzig University
as a student of law. This well-informed and talkative young man
showed his warm and hearty devotion to me more openly, and I felt
bound to reciprocate his affection. He was the first person who
made me realise the genuine character of the new political
enthusiasm. On his hat, as well as on his father's, the black,
red, and gold cockade was paraded before my eyes.

Now that I had finished my Lohengrin, and had leisure to study
the course of events, I could no longer help myself sympathising
with the ferment aroused by the birth of German ideals and the
hopes attached to their realisation. My old friend Franck had
already imbued me with a fairly sound political judgment, and,
like many others, I had grave doubts as to whether the German
parliament now assembling would serve any useful purpose.
Nevertheless, the temper of the populace, of which there could be
no question, although it might not have been given very obvious
expression, and the belief, everywhere prevalent, that it was
impossible to return to the old conditions, could not fail to
exercise its influence upon me. But I wanted actions instead of
words, and actions which would force our princes to break for
ever with their old traditions, which were so detrimental to the
cause of the German commonwealth. With this object I felt
inspired to write a popular appeal in verse, calling upon the
German princes and peoples to inaugurate a great crusade against
Russia, as the country which had been the prime instigator of
that policy in Germany which had so fatally separated the
monarchs from their subjects. One of the verses ran as follows:--

The old fight against the East Returns again to-day. The people's
sword must not rust Who freedom wish for aye.

As I had no connection with political journals, and had learned
by chance that Berthold Auerbach was on the staff of a paper in
Mannheim, where the waves of revolution ran high, I sent him my
poem with the request to do whatever he thought best with it, and
from that day to this I have never heard or seen anything of it.

Whilst the Frankfort Parliament continued to sit on from day to
day, and it seemed idle to conjecture whither this big talk by
small men would lead, I was much impressed by the news which
reached us from Vienna. In the May of this year an attempt at a
reaction, such as had succeeded in Naples and remained indecisive
in Paris, had been triumphantly nipped in the bud by the
enthusiasm and energy of the Viennese people under the leadership
of the students' band, who had acted with such unexpected
firmness. I had arrived at the conclusion that, in matters
directly concerning the people, no reliance could be placed on
reason or wisdom, but only on sheer force supported by fanaticism
or absolute necessity; but the course of events in Vienna, where
I saw the youth of the educated classes working side by side with
the labouring man, filled me with peculiar enthusiasm, to which I
gave expression in another popular appeal in verse. This I sent
to the Oesterreichischen Zeitung, where it was printed in their
columns with my full signature.

In Dresden two political unions had been formed, as a result of
the great changes that had taken place. The first was called the
Deutscher Verein (German Union), whose programme aimed at 'a
constitutional monarchy on the broadest democratic foundation.'
The names of its principal leaders, among which, in spite of its
broad democratic foundation, my friends Eduard Devrient and
Professor Rietschel had the courage openly to appear, guaranteed
the safety of its objects. This union, which tried to include
every element that regarded a real revolution with abhorrence,
conjured into existence an opposition club which called itself
the Vaterlands-Verein (Patriotic Union). In this the 'democratic
foundation' seemed to be the chief basis, and the 'constitutional
monarchy' only provided the necessary cloak.

Rockel canvassed passionately for the latter, as he seemed to
have lost all confidence in the monarchy. The poor fellow was,
indeed, in a very bad way. He had long ago given up all hope of
rising to any position in the musical world; his directorship had
become pure drudgery, and was, unfortunately, so badly paid that
he could not possibly keep himself and his yearly increasing
family on the income he derived from his post. He always had an
unconquerable aversion from teaching, which was a fairly
profitable employment in Dresden among the many wealthy visitors.
So he went on from bad to worse, running miserably into debt, and
for a long time saw no hope for his position as the father of a
family except in emigration to America, where he thought he could
secure a livelihood for himself and his dependants by manual
labour, and for his practical mind by working as a farmer, from
which class he had originally sprung. This, though tedious, would
at least be certain. On our walks he had of late been
entertaining me almost exclusively with ideas he had gleaned from
reading books on farming, doctrines which he applied with zeal to
the improvement of his encumbered position. This was the mood in
which the Revolution of 1848 found him, and he immediately went
over to the extreme socialist side, which, owing to the example
set by Paris, threatened to become serious. Every one who knew
him was utterly taken aback at the apparently vital change which
had so suddenly taken place in him, when he declared that he had
at last found his real vocation--that of an agitator.

His persuasive faculties, on which, however, he could not rely
sufficiently for platform purposes, developed in private
intercourse into stupefying energy. It was impossible to stop his
flow of language with any objection, and those he could not draw
over to his cause he cast aside for ever. In his enthusiasm about
the problems which occupied his mind day and night, he sharpened
his intellect into a weapon capable of demolishing every foolish
objection, and suddenly stood in our midst like a preacher in the
wilderness. He was at home in every department of knowledge. The
Vaterlands-Verein had elected a committee for carrying into
execution a plan for arming the populace; this included Rockel
and other thoroughgoing democrats, and, in addition, certain
military experts, among whom was my old friend Hermann Muller,
the lieutenant of the Guards who had once been engaged to
Schroder-Devrient. He and another officer named Zichlinsky were
the only members of the Saxon army who joined the political
movement. The part I played in the meetings of this committee, as
in everything else, was dictated by artistic motives. As far as I
can remember, the details of this plan, which at last became a
nuisance, afforded very sound foundation for a genuine arming of
the people, though it was impossible to carry it out during the
political crisis.

My interest and enthusiasm about the social and political
problems which were occupying the whole world increased every
day, until public meetings and private intercourse, and the
shallow platitudes which formed the staple eloquence of the
orators of the day, proved to me the terrible shallowness of the
whole movement.

If only I could rest assured that, while such senseless confusion
was the order of the day, people well versed in these matters
would withhold from any demonstration (which to my great regret I
observed in Hermann Franck, and told him of, openly), then, on
the contrary, I should feel myself compelled, as soon as the
opportunity arose, to discuss the purport of such questions and
problems according to my judgment. Needless to say, the
newspapers played an exciting and prominent part on this
occasion. Once, when I went incidentally (as I might go to see a
play) to a meeting of the Vaterlands-Verein, when they were
assembled in a public garden, they chose for the subject of their
discussion, 'Republic or Monarchy?' I was astonished to hear and
to read with what incredible triviality it was carried on, and
how the sum-total of their explanation was, that, to be sure, a
republic is best, but, at the worst, one could put up with a
monarchy if it were well conducted. As the result of many heated
discussions on this point, I was incited to lay bare my views on
the subject in an article which I published in the DRESDENER
ANZEIGER, but which I did not sign. My special aim was to turn
the attention of the few who really took the matter seriously,
from the external form of the government to its intrinsic value.
When I had pursued and consistently discussed the utmost
idealistic conclusions of all that which, to my mind, was
necessary and inseparable from the perfect state and from social
order, I inquired whether it would not be possible to realise all
this with a king at the head, and entered so deeply into the
matter as to portray the king in such a fashion, that he seemed
even more anxious than any one else that his state should be
organised on genuinely republican lines, in order that he might
attain to the fulfilment of his own highest aims. I must own,
however, that I felt bound to urge this king to assume a much
more familiar attitude towards his people than the court
atmosphere and the almost exclusive society of his nobles would
seem to render possible. Finally, I pointed to the King of Saxony
as being specially chosen by Fate to lead the way in the
direction I had indicated, and to give the example to all the
other German princes. Rockel considered this article a true
inspiration from the Angel of Propitiation, but as he feared that
it would not meet with proper recognition and appreciation in the
paper, he urged me to lecture on it publicly at the next meeting
of the Vaterlands-Verein for he attached great importance to my
discoursing on the subject personally. Quite uncertain as to
whether I could really persuade myself to do this, I attended the
meeting, and there, owing to the intolerable balderdash uttered
by a certain barrister named Blode and a master-furrier Klette,
whom at that time Dresden venerated as a Demosthenes and a Cleon,
I passionately decided to appear at this extraordinary tribunal
with my paper, and to give a very spirited reading of it to about
three thousand persons.

The success I had was simply appalling. The astounded audience
seemed to remember nothing of the speech of the Orchestral
Conductor Royal save the incidental attack I had made upon the
court sycophants. The news of this incredible event spread like
wildfire. The next day I rehearsed Rienzi, which was to be
performed the following evening. I was congratulated on all sides
upon my self-sacrificing audacity. On the day of the performance,
however, I was informed by Eisolt, the attendant of the
orchestra, that the plans had been changed, and he gave me to
understand that thereby there hung a tale. True enough, the
terrible sensation I had made became so great, that the directors
feared the most unheard-of demonstrations at any performance of
Rienzi. Then a perfect storm of derision and vituperation broke
loose in the press, and I was besieged on all sides to such an
extent that it was useless to think of self-defence. I had even
offended the Communal Guard of Saxony, and was challenged by the
commander to make a full apology. But the most inexorable enemies
I made were the court officials, especially those holding a minor
office, and to this day I still continue to be persecuted by
them. I learned that, as far as it lay in their power, they
incessantly besought the King, and finally the director, to
deprive me at once of my office. On account of this I thought it
necessary to write to the monarch personally, in order to explain
to him that my action was to be regarded more in the light of a
thoughtless indiscretion than as a culpable offence. I sent this
letter to Herr von Luttichau, begging him to deliver it to the
King, and to arrange at the same time a short leave for me, so
that the provoking disturbance should have a chance of dying down
during my absence from Dresden. The striking kindness and
goodwill which Herr von Luttichau showed me on this occasion made
no little impression upon me, and this I took no pains to conceal
from him. As in the course of time, however, his ill-controlled
rage at various things, and especially at a good deal that he had
misunderstood in my pamphlet, broke loose, I learned that it was
not from any humane motives that he had spoken in such a
propitiatory manner to me, but rather by desire of the King
himself. On this point I received most accurate information, and
heard that when everybody, and even von Luttichau himself, were
besieging the King to visit me with punishment, the King had
forbidden any further talk on the subject. After this very
encouraging experience, I flattered myself that the King had
understood not only my letter, but also my pamphlet, better than
many others.

In order to change my mind a little, I determined for the present
(it was the beginning of July) to take advantage of the short
period of leave granted to me, by going to Vienna. I travelled by
way of Breslau, where I looked up an old friend of my family, the
musical director Mosewius, at whose house I spent an evening. We
had a most lively conversation, but, unfortunately, were unable
to steer clear of the stirring political questions of the day.
What interested me most was his exceptionally large, or even, if
I remember rightly, complete collection of Sebastian Bach's
cantatas in most excellent copies. Besides this, he related, with
a humour quite his own, several amusing musical anecdotes which
were a pleasant memory for many a year. When Mosewius returned my
visit in the course of the summer at Dresden, I played a part of
the first act of Lohengrin on the piano for him, and the
expression of his genuine astonishment at this conception was
very gratifying to me. In later years, however, I found that he
had spoken somewhat scoffingly about me; but I did not stop to
reflect as to the truth of this information, or as to the real
character of the man, for little by little I had had to accustom
myself to the most inconceivable things. At Vienna the first
thing I did was to call on Professor Fischhof, as I knew that he
had in his keeping important manuscripts, chiefly by Beethoven,
among which the original of the C minor Sonata, opus 111, I was
particularly curious to see. Through this new friend, whom I
found somewhat dry, I made the acquaintance of Herr Vesque von
Puttlingen, who, as the composer of a most insignificant opera
(Joan of Arc), which had been performed in Dresden, had with
cautious good taste adopted only the last two syllables of
Beethoven's name--Haven. One day we were at his house to dinner,
and I then recognised in him a former confidential official of
Prince Metternich, who now, with his ribbon of black, red, and
gold, followed the current of the age, apparently quite
convinced. I made another interesting acquaintance in the person
of Herr von Fonton, the Russian state councillor, and attache at
the Russian Embassy in Vienna. I frequently met this man, both at
Fischhof's house and on excursions into the surrounding country;
and it was interesting to me for the first time to run up against
a man who could so strongly profess his faith in the pessimistic
standpoint, that a consistent despotism guarantees the only order
of things which can be tolerated. Not without interest, and
certainly not without intelligence--for he boasted of having been
educated at the most enlightened schools in Switzerland--he
listened to my enthusiastic narration of the art ideal which I
had in my mind, and which was destined to exercise a great and
decided influence upon the human race. As he had to allow that
the realisation of this ideal could not be effected through the
strength of despotism, and as he was unable to foresee any
rewards for my exertions, by the time we came to the champagne he
thawed to such a degree of affable good-nature as to wish me
every success. I learned later on that this man, of whose talent
and energetic character I had at the time no small opinion, was
last heard of as being in great distress.

Now, as I never undertook anything whatever without some serious
object in view, I had made up my mind to avail myself of this
visit to Vienna, in order to try in some practical manner to
promote my ideas for the reform of the theatre. Vienna seemed to
me specially suitable for this purpose, as at that, time it had
five theatres, all totally different in character, which were
dragging on a miserable existence. I quickly worked out a plan,
according to which these various theatres might be formed into a
sort of co-operative organisation, and placed under one
administration composed not only of active members, but also of
all those having any literary connection with the theatre. With a
view to submitting my plan to them, I then made inquiries about
persons with such capacities as seemed most likely to answer my
requirements. Besides Herr Friedrich Uhl, whom I had got to know
at the very beginning through Fischer, and who did me very
good service, I was told of a Herr Franck (the same, I presume,
who later on published a big epic work called Tannhauser), and a
Dr. Pacher, an agent of Meyerbeer's, and a pettifogger of whose
acquaintance later on I was to have no reason to be proud. The
most sympathetic, and certainly the most important, of those
chosen by me for the conference meeting at Fischhof's house, was
undoubtedly Dr. Becher, a passionate and exceedingly cultivated
man. He was the only one present who seriously followed the
reading of my plan, although, of course, he by no means agreed
with everything. I observed in him a certain wildness and
vehemence, the impression of which returned to me very vividly
some months later, when I heard of his being shot as a rebel who
had participated in the October Insurrection at Vienna. For the
present, then, I had to satisfy myself with having read the plan
of my theatre reform to a few attentive listeners. All seemed to
be convinced that the time was not opportune for putting forward
such peaceable schemes of reform. On the other hand, Uhl thought
it right to give me an idea of what was at present all the rage
in Vienna, by taking me one evening to a political club of the
most advanced tendencies. There I heard a speech by Herr
Sigismund Englander, who shortly afterwards attracted much
attention in the political monthly papers; the unblushing
audacity with which he and others expressed themselves that
evening with regard to the most dreaded persons in public power
astounded me almost as much as the poverty of the political views
expressed on that occasion. By way of contrast I received a very
nice impression of Herr Grillparzer, the poet, whose name was
like a fable to me, associated as it was, from my earliest days,
with his Ahnfrau. I approached him also with respect to the
matter of my theatre reform. He seemed quite disposed to listen
in a friendly manner to what I had to say to him; he did not,
however, attempt to conceal his surprise at my direct appeals and
the personal demands I made of him. He was the first playwright I
had ever seen in an official uniform.

After I had paid an unsuccessful visit to Herr Bauernfeld,
relative to the same business, I concluded that Vienna was of no
more use for the present, and gave myself up to the exceptionally
stimulating impressions produced by the public life of the motley
crowd, which of late had undergone such marked changes. If the
student band, which was always represented in great numbers in
the streets, had already amused me with the extraordinary
constancy with which its members sported the German colours, I
was very highly diverted by the effect produced when at the
theatres I saw even the ices served by attendants in the black,
red, and gold of Austria. At the Karl Theatre, in the Leopold
quarter of the town, I saw a new farce, by Nestroy, which
actually introduced the character of Prince Metternich, and in
which this statesman, on being asked whether he had poisoned the
Duke of Reichstadt, had to make his escape behind the wings as an
unmasked sinner. On the whole, the appearance of this imperial
city--usually so fond of pleasure--impressed one with a feeling
of youthful and powerful confidence. And this impression was
revived in me when I heard of the energetic participation of the
youthful members of the population, during those fateful October
days, in the defence of Vienna against the troops of Prince
Windischgratz.

On the homeward journey I touched at Prague, where I found my old
friend Kittl (who had grown very much more corpulent) still in
the most terrible fright about the riotous events which had taken
place there. He seemed to be of opinion that the revolt of the
Tschech party against the Austrian Government was directed at him
personally, and he thought fit to reproach himself with the
terrible agitation of the time, which he believed he had
specially inflamed by his composition of my operatic text of Die
Franzosen vor Nizza, out of which a kind of revolutionary air
seemed to have become very popular. To my great pleasure, on my
homeward journey I had the company of Hanel the sculptor, whom I
met on the steamer. There travelled with us also a Count Albert
Nostitz, with whom he had just settled up his business concerning
the statue of the Emperor Charles IV., and he was in the gayest
mood, as the extremely insecure state of Austrian paper money had
led to his being paid at a great profit to himself, in silver
coin in accordance with his agreement. I was very pleased to find
that, thanks to this circumstance, he was in such a confident
mood, and so free from prejudice, that on, arriving at Dresden he
accompanied me the whole way--a very long distance--from the
landing-stage at which we had left the steamer to my house, in an
open carriage; and this despite the fact that he very well knew
that, only a few weeks before, I had caused a really terrible
stir in this very city.

As far as the public were concerned, the storm seemed quite to
have died down, and I was able to resume my usual occupations and
mode of life without any further trouble. I am sorry to say,
however, that my old worries and anxieties started afresh; I
stood in great need of money, and had not the vaguest notion
whither to go in search of it. I then examined very thoroughly
the answer I had received during the preceding winter to my
petition for a higher salary. I had left it unread, as the
modifications made in it had already disgusted me. If I had till
now believed that it was Herr von Luttichau who had brought about
the increase of salary I had demanded, in the shape of a
supplement which I was to receive annually--in itself a
humiliating thing--I now saw to my horror that all the time there
had been no mention save of one single supplement, and that there
was nothing to show that this should be repeated annually. On
learning this, I saw that I should now be at the hopeless
disadvantage of coming too late with a remonstrance if I should
attempt to make one; so there was nothing left for me but to
submit to an insult which, under the circumstances, was quite
unprecedented. My feelings towards Herr von Luttichau, which
shortly before had been rather warm owing to his supposed kind
attitude towards me during the last disturbance, now underwent a
serious change, and I soon had a new reason (actually connected
with the above-mentioned affair) for altering my favourable
opinion of him, and for turning finally against him for good and
all. He had informed me that the members of the Imperial
Orchestra had sent him a deputation demanding my instant
dismissal, as they thought that it affected their honour to be
any longer under a conductor who had compromised himself
politically to the extent which I had. He also informed me that
he had not only reprimanded them very severely, but that he had
also been at great pains to pacify them concerning me. All this,
which Luttichau had put in a highly favourable light, had
latterly made me feel very friendly towards him. Then, however,
as the result of inquiries into the matter, I heard accidentally
through members of the orchestra that the facts of the case were
almost exactly the reverse. What had happened was this, that the
members of the Imperial Orchestra had been approached on all
sides by the officials of the court, and had been not only
earnestly requested to do what Luttichau had declared they had
done of their own accord, but also threatened with the
displeasure of the King, and of incurring the strongest suspicion
if they refused to comply. In order to protect themselves against
this intrigue, and to avoid all evil consequences should they not
take the required step, the musicians had turned to their
principal, and had sent him a deputation, through which they
declared that, as a corporation of artists, they did not in the
least feel called upon to mix themselves up in a matter that did
not concern them. Thus the halo with which my former attachment
to Herr von Luttichau had surrounded him at last disappeared for
good and all, and it was chiefly my shame at having been so very
much upset by his false conduct that now inspired me for ever
with such bitter feelings for this man. What determined this
feeling even more than the insults I had suffered, was the
recognition of the fact that I was now utterly incapable of ever
being able to enlist his influence in the cause of theatrical
reform, which was so dear to me. It was natural that I should
learn to attach ever less and less importance to the mere
retention of the post of orchestral conductor on so
extraordinarily inadequate and reduced a salary; and in keeping
to this office, I merely bowed to what was an inevitable though
purely accidental circumstance of a wretched fate. I did nothing
to make the post more intolerable, but, at the same time, I moved
not a finger to ensure its permanence.

The very next thing I must do was to attempt to establish my
hopes of a larger income, so sadly doomed hitherto, upon a very
much sounder basis. In this respect it occurred to me that I
might consult my friend Liszt, and beg him to suggest a remedy
for my grievous position. And lo and behold, shortly after those
fateful March days, and not long before the completion of my
Lohengrin score, to my, very great delight and astonishment, the
very man I wanted walked into my room. He had come from Vienna,
where he had lived through the 'Barricade Days,' and he was going
on to Weimar, where he intended to settle permanently. We spent
an evening together at Schumann's, had a little music, and
finally began a discussion on Mendelssohn and Meyerbeer, in which
Liszt and Schumann differed so fundamentally that the latter,
completely losing his temper, retired in a fury to his bedroom
for quite a long time. This incident did indeed place us in a
somewhat awkward position towards our host, but it furnished us
with a most amusing topic of conversation on the way home, I have
seldom seen Liszt so extravagantly cheerful as on that night,
when, in spite of the cold and the fact that he was clad only in
ordinary evening-dress, he accompanied first the music director
Schubert, and then myself, to our respective homes. Subsequently
I took advantage of a few days' holiday in August to make an
excursion to Weimar, where I found Liszt permanently installed
and, as is well known, enjoying a life of most intimate
intercourse with the Grand Duke. Even though he was unable to
help me in my affairs, except by giving me a recommendation which
finally proved useless, his reception of me on this short visit
was so hearty and so exceedingly stimulating, that it left me
profoundly cheered and encouraged. On returning to Dresden I
tried as far as possible to curtail my expenses and to live
within my means; and, as every means of assistance failed me, I
resorted to the expedient of sending out a circular letter
addressed jointly to my remaining creditors, all of whom were
really friends; and in this I told them frankly of my situation,
and enjoined them to relinquish their demands for an indefinite
time, till my affairs took a turn for the better, as without this
I should certainly never be in a position to satisfy them. By
this means they would, at all events, be in a position to oppose
my general manager, whom I had every reason to suspect of evil
designs, and who would have been only too glad to seize any signs
of hostility towards me, on the part of my creditors, as a
pretext for taking the worst steps against me. The assurance I
required was given me unhesitatingly; my friend Pusinelli, and
Frau Klepperbein (an old friend of my mother's), even going so
far as to declare that they were prepared to give up all claim to
the money they had lent me. Thus, in some measure reassured, and
with my position relative to Luttichau so far improved that I
could consult my own wishes as to whether and when I should give
up my post entirely, I now continued to fulfil my duties as a
conductor as patiently and conscientiously as I was able, while
with great zeal I also resumed my studies, which were carrying me
ever further and further afield.

Thus settled, I now began to watch the wonderful developments in
the fate of my friend Rockel. As every day brought fresh rumours
of threatened reactionary coups d'etat and similar violent
outbreaks, which Rockel thought it right to prevent, he drew up
an appeal to the soldiers of the army of Saxony, in which he
explained every detail of the cause for which he stood, and which
he then had printed and distributed broadcast. This was too
flagrant a misdeed for the public prosecutors: he was therefore
immediately placed under arrest, and had to remain three days in
gaol while an action for high treason was lodged against him. He
was only released when the solicitor Minkwitz stood bail for the
requisite three thousand marks (equal to L150). This return home
to his anxious wife and children was celebrated by a little
public festival, which the committee of the Vaterlands-Verein had
arranged in his honour, and the liberated man was greeted as the
champion of the people's cause. On the other hand, however, the
general management of the court theatre, who had before suspended
him temporarily, now gave him his final dismissal. Rockel let a
full beard grow, and began the publication of a popular journal
called the Volksblatt, of which he was sole editor. He must have
counted on its success to compensate him for the loss of his
salary as musical director, for he at once hired an office in the
Brudergasse for his undertaking. This paper succeeded in
attracting the attention of a great many people to its editor,
and showed up his talents in quite a new light, he never got
involved in his style or indulged in any elaboration of words,
but confined himself to matters of immediate importance and
general interest; it was only after having discussed them in a
calm and sober fashion, that he led up from them to further
deductions of still greater interest connected with them. The
individual articles were short, and never contained anything
superfluous, in addition to which they were so clearly written,
that they made an instructive and convincing appeal to the most
uneducated mind. By always going to the root of things, instead
of indulging in circumlocutions which, in politics, have caused
such great confusion in the minds of the uneducated masses, he
soon had a large circle of readers, both among cultivated and
uncultivated people. The only drawback was that the price of the
little weekly paper was too small to yield him a corresponding
profit. Moreover, it was necessary to warn him that if the
reactionary party should ever come into power again, it could
never possibly forgive him for this newspaper. His younger
brother, Edward, who was paying a visit at the time in Dresden,
declared himself willing to accept a post as piano-teacher in
England, which, though most uncongenial to him, would be
lucrative and place him in a position to help Rockel's family,
if, as seemed probable, he met his reward in prison or on the
gallows. Owing to his connection with various societies, his time
was so much taken up that my intercourse with him was limited to
walks, which became more and more rare. On these occasions I
often got lost in the most wildly speculative and profound
discussions, while this wonderfully exciteable man always
remained calmly reflective and clear-headed. First and foremost,
he had planned a drastic social reform of the middle classes--as
at present constituted--by aiming at a complete alteration of the
basis of their condition. He constructed a totally new moral
order of things, founded on the teaching of Proudhon and other
socialists regarding the annihilation of the power of capital, by
immediately productive labour, dispensing with the middleman.
Little by little he converted me, by most seductive arguments, to
his own views, to such an extent that I began to rebuild my hopes
for the realisation of my ideal in art upon them. Thus there were
two questions which concerned me very nearly: he wished to
abolish matrimony, in the usual acceptation of the word,
altogether. I thereupon asked him what he thought the result
would be of promiscuous intercourse with women of a doubtful
character. With amiable indignation he gave me to understand that
we could have no idea about the purity of morals in general, and
of the relations of the sexes in particular, so long as we were
unable to free people completely from the yoke of the trades,
guilds, and similar coercive institutions. He asked me to
consider what the only motive would be which would induce a woman
to surrender herself to a man, when not only the considerations
of money, fortune, position, and family prejudices, but also the
various influences necessarily arising from these, had
disappeared. When I, in my turn, asked him whence he would obtain
persons of great intellect and of artistic ability, if everybody
were to be merged in the working classes, he met my objection by
replying, that owing to the very fact that everybody would
participate in the necessary labour according to his strength and
capacity, work would cease to be a burden, and would become
simply an occupation which would finally assume an entirely
artistic character. He demonstrated this on the principle that,
as had already been proved, a field, worked laboriously by a
single peasant, was infinitely less productive than when
cultivated by several persons in a scientific way. These and
similar suggestions, which Rockel communicated to me with a
really delightful enthusiasm, led me to further reflections, and
gave birth to new plans upon which, to my mind, a possible
organisation of the human race, which would correspond to my
highest ideals in art, could alone be based. In reference to
this, I immediately turned my thoughts to what was close at hand,
and directed my attention to the theatre. The motive for this
came not only from my own feelings, but also from external
circumstances. In accordance with the latest democratic suffrage
laws, a general election seemed imminent in Saxony; the election
of extreme radicals, which had now taken place nearly everywhere
else, showed us that if the movement lasted, there would be the
most extraordinary changes even in the administration of the
revenue. Apparently a general resolution had been passed to
subject the Civil List to a strict revision; all that was deemed
superfluous in the royal household was to be done away with; the
theatre, as an unnecessary place of entertainment for a depraved
portion of the public, was threatened with the withdrawal of the
subsidy granted it from the Civil List. I now resolved, in view
of the importance which I attached to the theatre, to suggest to
the ministers that they should inform the members of parliament,
that if the theatre in its present condition were not worth any
sacrifice from the state, it would sink to still more doubtful
tendencies--and might even become dangerous to public morals--if
deprived of that state control which had for its aim the ideal,
and, at the same time, felt itself called upon to place culture
and education under its beneficial protection. It was of the
highest importance to me to secure an organisation of the
theatre, which would make the carrying out its loftiest ideals
not only a possibility but also a certainty. Accordingly I drew
up a project by which the same sum as that which was allotted
from the Civil List for the support of a court theatre should be
employed for the foundation and upkeep of a national theatre for
the kingdom of Saxony. In showing the practical nature of the
well-planned particulars of my scheme, I defined them with such
great precision, that I felt assured my work would serve as a
useful guide to the ministers as to how they should put this
matter before parliament. The point now was to have a personal
interview with one of the ministers, and it occurred to me that
the best man to apply to in the matter would be Herr von der
Pfordten, the Minister of Education. Although he already enjoyed
the reputation of being a turncoat in politics, and was said to
be struggling to efface the origin of his political promotion,
which had taken place at a time of great agitation, the mere fact
of his having formerly been a professor was sufficient to make me
suppose that he was a man with whom I could discuss the question
that I had so much at heart. I learned, however, that the real
art institutions of the kingdom, such, for instance, as the
Academy of Fine Arts, to whose number I so ardently desired to
see the theatre added, belonged to the department of the Minister
of the Interior. To this man--the worthy though not highly
cultivated or artistic Herr Oberlander--I submitted my plans,
not, however, without having first made myself known to Herr von
der Pfordten, in order, for the reasons above stated, to command
my project to him. This man, who apparently was very busy,
received me in a polite and reassuring manner; but his whole
bearing, indeed the very expression of his face, seemed to
destroy all hopes I might ever have cherished of finding in him
that understanding which I had expected. The minister Oberlander,
on the other hand, earned my confidence by the straightforward
earnestness with which he promised a thorough inquiry into the
matter. Unfortunately, however, at the same time, he informed me
with the most simple frankness, that he could entertain but very
little hope of getting the King's authorisation for any unusual
treatment of a question hitherto given over to routine. It must
be understood that the relations of the King to his ministers
were both strained and unconfidential, and that this was more
especially so in the case of Oberlander, who never approached the
monarch on any other business than that which the strictest
discharge of his current duties rendered indispensable. He
therefore thought it would be better if my plan could be brought
forward, in the first place, by the Chamber of Deputies. As, in
the event of the new Civil List being discussed, I was
particularly anxious to avoid the question of the continuation of
the court theatre being treated in the ignorant and shortsighted
radical fashion, which was to be feared above all, I did not
despair of making the acquaintance of some of the most
influential among the new members of parliament. In this wise I
found myself suddenly plunged into quite a new and strange world,
and became acquainted with persons and opinions, the very
existence of which until then I had not even suspected. I found
it somewhat trying always to be obliged to meet these gentlemen
at their beer and shrouded in the dense clouds of their tobacco
smoke, and to have to discuss with them matters which, though
very dear to me, must have seemed a little fantastic to their
mind. After a certain Herr von Trutschler, a very handsome,
energetic man, whose seriousness was almost gloomy, had listened
to me calmly for some time, and had told me that he no longer
knew anything about the state, but only about society, and that
the latter would know, without either his or my aid, how it
should act in regard to art and to the theatre, I was filled with
such extraordinary feelings, half mingled with shame, that there
and then I gave up, not only all my exertions, but all my hopes
as well. The only reminder I ever had of the whole affair came
some while, after when, on meeting Herr von Luttichau, I quickly
gathered from his attitude to me that he had got wind of the
episode, and that it only inspired him with fresh hostility
towards me.

During my walks, which I now took absolutely alone, I thought
ever more deeply--and much to the relief of my mind--over my
ideas concerning that state of human society for which the
boldest hopes and efforts of the socialists and communists, then
busily engaged in constructing their system, offered me but the
roughest foundation. These efforts could begin to have some
meaning and value for me only when they had attained to that
political revolution and reconstruction which they aimed at; for
it was only then that I, in my turn, could start my reforms in
art.

At the same time my thoughts were busy with a drama, in which the
Emperor Frederick I. (surnamed 'Barbarossa') was to be the hero.
In it the model ruler was portrayed in a manner which lent him
the greatest and most powerful significance. His dignified
resignation at the impossibility of making his ideals prevail was
intended not only to present a true transcript of the arbitrary
multifariousness of the things of this world, but also to arouse
sympathy for the hero. I wished to carry out this drama in
popular rhyme, and in the style of the German used by our epic
poets of the Middle Ages, and in this respect the poem Alexander,
by the priest Lambert, struck me as a good example; but I never
got further with this play than to sketch its outline in the
broadest manner possible. The five acts were planned in the
following manner: Act i. Imperial Diet in the Roncaglian fields,
a demonstration of the significance of imperial power which
should extend even to the investiture of water and air; Act ii.
the siege and capture of Milan; Act iii. revolt of Henry the Lion
and his overthrow at Ligano; Act iv. Imperial Diet in Augsburg,
the humiliation and punishment of Henry the Lion; Act v. Imperial
Diet and grand court assembly at Mainz; peace with the Lombards,
reconciliation with the Pope, acceptance of the Cross, and the
departure for the East. I lost all interest, however, in the
carrying out of this dramatic scheme directly I discovered its
resemblance to the subject-matter of the Nibelungen and Siegfried
myths, which possessed a more powerful attraction for me. The
points of similarity which I recognised between the history and
the legend in question then induced me to write a treatise on the
subject; and in this I was assisted by some stimulating
monographs (found in the royal library), written by authors whose
names have now escaped my memory, but which taught me in a very
attractive manner a considerable amount about the old original
kingdom of Germany. Later on I published this fairly extensive
essay with the title of Die Nibelungen, but in working it out I
finally lost all inclination to elaborate the historical material
for a real drama.

In direct connection with this I began to sketch a clear summary
of the form which the old original Nibelungen myth had assumed in
my mind in its immediate association with the mythological legend
of the gods--a form which, though full of detail, was yet much
condensed in its leading features. Thanks to this work, I was
able to convert the chief part of the material itself into a
musical drama. It was only by degrees, however, and after long
hesitation that I dared to enter more deeply into my plans for
this work; for the thought of the practical realisation of such a
work on our stage literally appalled me. I must confess that it
required all the despair which I then felt of ever having the
chance of doing anything more for our theatre, to give me the
necessary courage to begin upon this new work. Until that time I
simply allowed myself to drift, while I meditated listlessly upon
the possibility of things pursuing their course further under the
existing circumstances. In regard to Lohengrin, I had got to that
point when I hoped for nothing more than the best possible
production of it at the Dresden theatre, and felt that I should
have to be satisfied in all respects, and for all time, if I were
able to achieve even that. I had duly announced the completion of
the score to Herr von Luttichau; but, in consideration of the
unfavourable nature of my circumstances at the time, I had left
it entirely to him to decide when my work should be produced.

Meanwhile the time arrived when the keeper of the Archives of the
Royal Orchestra called to mind that it was just three hundred
years since this royal institution had been founded, and that a
jubilee would therefore have to be celebrated. To this end a
great concert festival was planned, the programme of which was to
be made up of the compositions of all the Saxon orchestral
conductors that had lived since the institution had been founded.
The whole body of musicians, with both their conductors at their
head, were first to present their grateful homage to the King in
Pillnitz; and on this occasion a musician was, for the first
time, to be elevated to the rank of Knight of the Civil Order of
Merit of Saxony. This musician was my colleague Reissiger. Until
then he had been treated by the court, and by the manager
himself, in the most scornful manner possible, but had, owing to
his conspicuous loyalty at this critical time, especially to me,
found exceptional favour in the eyes of our committees. When he
appeared before the public decorated with the wonderful order, he
was greeted with great jubilation by the loyal audience that
filled the theatre on the evening of the festival concert. His
overture to Yelva was also received with a perfect uproar of
enthusiastic applause, such as had never fallen to his lot;
whereas the finale of the first act from Lohengrin, which was
produced as the work of the youngest conductor, was accorded only
an indifferent reception. This was all the more strange as I was
quite unaccustomed to such coolness in regard to my work on the
part of the Dresden public. Following upon the concert, there was
a festive supper, and when this was over, as all kinds of
speeches were being made, I freely proclaimed to the orchestra,
in a loud and decided tone, my views as to what was desirable for
their perfection in the future. Hereupon Marschner, who, as a
former musical conductor in Dresden, had been invited to the
jubilee celebrations, expressed the opinion that I should do
myself a great deal of harm by holding too good an opinion of the
musicians. He said I ought just to consider how uncultivated
these people were with whom I had to deal; he pointed out that
they were trained simply for the one instrument they played; and
asked me whether I did not think that by discoursing to them on
the aspirations of art I would produce not only confusion, but
even perhaps bad blood? Far more pleasant to me than these
festivities is the remembrance of the quiet memorial ceremony
which united us on the morning of the Jubilee Day, with the
object of placing wreaths on Weber's grave. As nobody could find
a word to utter, and even Marschner was able to give expression
only to the very driest and most trivial of speeches about the
departed master, I felt it incumbent upon me to say a few
heartfelt words concerning the memorial ceremony for which we
were gathered together. This brief spell of artistic activity was
speedily broken by fresh excitements, which kept pouring in upon
us from the political world. The events of October in Vienna
awakened our liveliest sympathy, and our walls daily blazed with
red and black placards, with summonses to march on Vienna, with
the curse of 'Red Monarchy,' as opposed to the hated 'Red
Republic,' and with other equally startling matter. Except for
those who were best informed as to the course of events--and who
certainly did not swarm in our streets--these occurrences aroused
great uneasiness everywhere. With the entry of Windischgratz into
Vienna, the acquittal of Frobel and the execution of Blum, it
seemed as though even Dresden were on the eve of an explosion. A
vast demonstration of mourning was organised for Blum, with an
endless procession through the streets. At the head marched the
ministry, among whom the people were particularly glad to see
Herr von der Pfordten taking a sympathetic share in the
ceremony, as he had already become an object of suspicion to
them. From that day gloomy forebodings of disaster grew ever more
prevalent on every side. People even went so far as to say, with
little attempt at circumlocution, that the execution of Blum had
been an act of friendship on the part of the Archduchess Sophia
to her sister, the Queen of Saxony, for during his agitation in
Leipzig the man had made himself both hated and feared. Troops of
Viennese fugitives, disguised as members of the student bands,
began to arrive in Dresden, and made a formidable addition to its
population, which from this time forth paraded the streets with
ever-increasing confidence. One day, as I was on my way to the
theatre to conduct a performance of Rienzi, the choir-master
informed me that several foreign gentlemen had been asking for
me. Thereupon half a dozen persons presented themselves, greeted
me as a brother democrat, and begged me to procure them free
entrance tickets. Among them I recognised a former dabbler in
literature, a man named Hafner, a little hunchback, in a
Calabrian hat cocked at a terrific angle, to whom I had been
introduced by Uhl on the occasion of my visit to the Vienna
political club. Great as was my embarrassment at this visit,
which evidently astonished our musicians, I felt in no wise
compelled to make any compromising admission, but quietly went to
the booking-office, took six tickets and handed them to my
strange visitors, who parted from me before all the world with
much hearty shaking of hands. Whether this evening call improved
my position as musical conductor in Dresden in the minds of the
theatrical officials and others, may well be doubted; but, at all
events, on no occasion was I so frantically called for after
every act as at this particular performance of Rienzi.

Indeed, at this time I seemed to have won over to my side a party
of almost passionate adherents among the theatre-going public, in
opposition to the clique which had shown such marked coldness on
the occasion of the gala concert already mentioned. It mattered
not whether Tannhauser or Rienzi were being played, I was always
greeted with special applause; and although the political
tendencies of this party may have given our management some cause
for alarm, yet it forced them to regard me with a certain amount
of awe. One day Luttichau proposed to have my Lohengrin performed
at an early date. I explained my reasons for not having offered
it to him before, but declared myself ready to further his
wishes, as I considered the opera company was now sufficiently
powerful. The son of my old friend, F. Heine, had just returned
from Paris, where he had been sent by the Dresden management to
study scene-painting under the artists Desplechin and Dieterle.
By way of testing his powers, with a view to an engagement at the
Dresden Royal Theatre, the task of preparing suitable scenery for
this opera was entrusted to him. He had already asked permission
to do this for Lohengrin at the instigation of Luttichau, who
wished to call attention to my latest work. Consequently, when I
gave my consent, young Heine's wish was granted.

I regarded this turn of events with no little satisfaction,
believing that in the study of this particular work I should find
a wholesome and effective diversion from all the excitement and
confusion of recent events. My horror, therefore, was all the
greater, when young Wilhelm Heine one day came to my room with
the news that the scenery for Lohengrin had been suddenly
countermanded, and instructions given him to prepare for another
opera. I did not make any remark, nor ask the reason for this
singular behaviour. The assurances which Luttichan afterwards
made to my wife--if they were really true--made me regret having
laid the chief blame for this mortification at his door, and
having thereby irrevocably alienated my sympathy from him. When
she asked him about this many years later, he assured her that he
had found the court vehemently hostile to me, and that his well-
meant attempts to produce my work had met with insuperable
obstacles.

However that may have been, the bitterness I now experienced
wrought a decisive effect upon my feelings. Not only did I
relinquish all hope of a reconciliation with the theatre
authorities by a splendid production of my Lohengrin, but I
determined to turn my back for ever on the theatre, and to make
no further attempt to meddle with its concerns. By this act I
expressed not merely my utter indifference as to whether I kept
my position as musical conductor or no, but my artistic ambitions
also entirely cut me off from all possibility of ever cultivating
modern theatrical conditions again.

I at once proceeded to execute my long-cherished plans for
Siegfried's Tod, which I had been half afraid of before. In this
work I no longer gave a thought to the Dresden or any other court
theatre in the world; my sole preoccupation was to produce
something that should free me, once and for all, from this
irrational subservience. As I could get nothing more from Rockel
in this connection, I now corresponded exclusively with Eduard
Devrient on matters connected with the theatre and dramatic art.
When, on the completion of my poem, I read it to him, he listened
with amazement, and at once realised the fact that such a
production would be an absolute drug in the modern theatrical
market, and he naturally could not agree to let it remain so. On
the other hand, he tried so far to reconcile himself to my work
as to try and make it less startling and more adapted for actual
production. He proved the sincerity of his intentions by pointing
out my error in asking too much of the public, and requiring it
to supply from its own knowledge many things necessary for a
right under-standing of my subject-matter, at which I had only
hinted in brief and scattered suggestions. He showed me, for
instance, that before Siegfried and Brunhilda are displayed in a
position of bitter hostility towards each other, they ought first
to have been presented in their true and calmer relationship. I
had, in fact, opened the poem of SIEGFRIED'S TOD with those
scenes which now form the first act of the GOTTERDAMMERUNG.
The details of Siegfried's relation to Brunhilda had been merely
outlined to the listeners in a lyrico-episodical dialogue between
the hero's wife, whom he had left behind in solitude, and a crowd
of Valkyries passing before her rock. To my great joy, Devrient's
hint on this point directed my thoughts to those scenes which I
afterwards worked out in the prologue of this drama.

This and other matters of a similar nature brought me into
intimate contact with Eduard Devrient, and made our intercourse
much more lively and pleasant. He often invited a select circle
of friends to attend dramatic readings at his house in which I
gladly took part, for I found, to my surprise, that his gift for
declamation, which quite forsook him on the stage, here stood out
in strong relief. It was, moreover, a consolation to pour into a
sympathetic ear my worries about my growing unpopularity with the
director. Devrient seemed particularly anxious to prevent a
definite breach; but of this there was little hope. With the
approach of winter the court had returned to town, and once more
frequented the theatre, and various signs of dissatisfaction in
high quarters with my behaviour as conductor began to be
manifested. On one occasion the Queen thought that I had
conducted NORMA badly, and on another that I 'had taken the time
wrongly' in ROBERT THE DEVIL. As Luettichau had to communicate
these reprimands to me, it was natural that our intercourse at
such times should hardly be of a nature to restore our mutual
satisfaction with each other.

Notwithstanding all this, it still seemed possible to prevent
matters from coming to a crisis, though everything continued in a
state of agitating uncertainty and fermentation. At all events
the forces of reaction, which were holding themselves in
readiness on every side, were not yet sufficiently certain that
the hour of their triumph had come as not to consider it
advisable for the present, at least, to avoid all provocation.
Consequently our management did not meddle with the musicians of
the royal orchestra, who, in obedience to the spirit of the
times, had formed a union for debate and the protection of their
artistic and civic interests. In this matter one of our youngest
musicians, Theodor Uhlig, had been particularly active. He was a
young man, still in his early twenties, and was a violinist in
the orchestra. His face was strikingly mild, intelligent and
noble, and he was conspicuous among his fellows on account of his
great seriousness and his quiet but unusually firm character. He
had particularly attracted my notice on several occasions by his
quick insight and extensive knowledge of music. As I recognised
in him a spirit keenly alert in every direction, and unusually
eager for culture, it was not long before I chose him as my
companion in my regular walks--a habit I still continued to
cultivate--and on which Roeckel had hitherto accompanied me. He
induced me to come to a meeting of this union of the orchestral
company, in order that I might form an opinion about it, and
encourage and support so praiseworthy a movement. On this
occasion I communicated to its members the contents of my
memorandum to the director, which had been rejected a year
before, and in which I had made suggestions for reforms in the
band, and I also explained further intentions and plans arising
therefrom. At the same time I was obliged to confess that I had
lost all hope of carrying out any projects of the kind through
the general management, and must therefore recommend them to take
the initiative vigorously into their own hands. They acclaimed
the idea with enthusiastic approval. Although, as I have said
before, Luettichau left these musicians unmolested in their more
or less democratic union, yet he took care to be informed through
spies of what took place at their highly treasonable gatherings.
His chief instrument was a bugler named Lewy, who, much to the
disgust of all his comrades in the orchestra, was in particularly
high favour with the director. He consequently received precise,
or rather exaggerated, accounts of my appearance there, and
thought it was now high time to let me once more feel the weight
of his authority. I was officially summoned to his presence, and
had to listen to a long and wrathful tirade which he had been
bottling up for some time about several matters. I also learned
that he knew all about the plan of theatre reform which I had
laid before the ministry. This knowledge he betrayed in a popular
Dresden phrase, which until then I had never heard; he knew very
well, he said, that in a memorandum respecting the theatre I had
'made him look ridiculous' (ihm an den Laden gelegt). In answer
to this I did not refrain from telling him how I intended to act
in retaliation, and when he threatened to report me to the King
and demand my dismissal, I calmly replied that he might do as he
pleased, as I was well assured that I could rely on his Majesty's
justice to hear, not only his charges, but also my defence.
Moreover, I added, this was the only befitting manner for me to
discuss with the King the many points on which I had to complain,
not only in my own interests, but also in those of the theatre
and of art. This was not pleasant hearing for Luttichau, and he
asked how it was possible for him to try and co-operate with me,
when I for my part had openly declared (to use his own
expression) that all labour was wasted upon him (Hopfen und Malz
verloren seien). We had at last to part with mutual shruggings of
the shoulder. My conduct seemed to trouble my former patron, and
he therefore enlisted the tact and moderation of Eduard Devrient
in his service, and asked him to use his influence with me to
facilitate some further arrangement between us. But, in spite of
all his zeal, Devrient had to admit with a smile, after we had
discussed his message, that nothing much could be done; and as I
persisted in my refusal to meet the director again in
consultation respecting the service of the theatre, he had at
last to recognise that his own wisdom would have to help him out
of the difficulty.

Throughout the whole period during which I was fated to fill the
post of conductor at Dresden, the effects of this dislike on the
part of the court and the director continued to make themselves
felt in everything. The orchestral concerts, which had been
organised by me in the previous winter, were this year placed
under Reissiger's control, and at once sank to the usual level of
ordinary concerts. Public interest quickly waned, and the
undertaking could only with difficulty be kept alive. In opera I
was unable to carry out the proposed revival of the Fliegender
Hollander, for which I had found in Mitterwurzer's maturer talent
an admirable and promising exponent. My niece Johanna, whom I had
destined for the part of Senta, did not like the role, because it
offered little opportunity for splendid costumes. She preferred
ZAMPA and FAVORITA, partly to please her new protector, my
erstwhile RIENZI enthusiast, Tichatschck, partly for the sake of
THREE BRILLIANT COSTUMES which the management had to furnish for
each of these parts. In fact, these two ringleaders of the
Dresden opera of that day had formed an alliance of rebellion
against my vigorous rule in the matter of operatic repertoire.
Their opposition, to my great discomfiture, was crowned by
success when they secured the production of this FAVORITA of
Donizetti's, the, arrangement of which I had once been obliged to
undertake for Schlesinger in Paris. I had at first emphatically
refused to have anything to do with this opera, although its
principal part suited my niece's voice admirably, even in her
father's judgment. But now that they knew of my feud with the
director, and of my voluntary loss of influence, and finally of
my evident disgrace, they thought the opportunity ripe for
compelling me to conduct this tiresome work myself, as it
happened to be my turn.

Besides this, my chief occupation at the royal theatre during
this period consisted in conducting Flotow's opera MARTHA, which,
although it failed to attract the public, was nevertheless
produced with excessive frequency, owing to its convenient cast.
On reviewing the results of my labours in Dresden--where I had
now been nearly seven years--I could not help feeling humiliated
when I considered the powerful and energetic impetus I knew I had
given in many directions to the court theatre, and I found myself
obliged to confess that, were I now to leave Dresden, not, the
smallest trace of my influence would remain behind. From various
signs I also gathered that, if ever it should come to a trial
before the King between the director and myself, even if his
Majesty were in my favour, yet out of consideration for the
courtier the verdict would go against me.

Nevertheless, on Palm Sunday of the new year, 1849, I received
ample amends. In order to ensure liberal receipts, our orchestra
had again decided to produce Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. Every
one did his utmost to make this one of our finest performances,
and the public took up the matter with real enthusiasm. Michael
Bakunin, unknown to the police, had been present at the public
rehearsal. At its close he walked unhesitatingly up to me in the
orchestra, and said in a loud voice, that if all the music that
had ever been written were lost in the expected world-wide
conflagration, we must pledge ourselves to rescue this symphony,
even at the peril of our lives. Not many weeks after this
performance it really seemed as though this world-wide
conflagration would actually be kindled in the streets of
Dresden, and that Bakunin, with whom I had meanwhile become more
closely associated through strange and unusual circumstances,
would undertake the office of chief stoker.

It was long before this date that I first made the acquaintance
of this most remarkable man. For years I had come across his name
in the newspapers, and always under extraordinary circumstances.
He turned up in Paris at a Polish gathering, but although he was
a Russian, he declared that it mattered little whether a man were
a Russian or a Pole, so long as he wanted to be a free man, and
that this was all that mattered. I heard afterwards, through
George Herwegh, that he had renounced all his sources of income
as a member of an influential Russian family, and that one day,
when his entire fortune consisted of two francs, he had given
them away to a beggar on the boulevard, because it was irksome to
him to be bound by this possession to take any thought for the
morrow. I was informed of his presence in Dresden one day by
Rockel, after the latter had become a rampant republican. He had
taken the Russian into his house, and invited me to come and make
his acquaintance. Bakunin was at that time being persecuted by
the Austrian government for his share in the events which took
place in Prague in the summer of 1848, and because he was a
member of the Slav Congress which had preceded them. He had
consequently sought refuge in our city, as he did not wish to
settle too far from the Bohemian frontier. The extraordinary
sensation he had created in Prague arose from the fact that, when
the Czechs sought the protection of Russia against the dreaded
Germanising policy of Austria, he conjured them to defend
themselves with fire and sword against those very Russians, and
indeed against any other people who lived under the rule of a
despotism like that of the Tsars. This superficial acquaintance
with Balumin's aims had sufficed to change the purely national
prejudices of the Germans against him into sympathy. When I met
him, therefore, under the humble shelter of Rockel's roof, I was
immediately struck by his singular and altogether imposing
personality. He was in the full bloom of manhood, anywhere
between thirty and forty years of age. Everything about him was
colossal, and he was full of a primitive exuberance and strength.
I never gathered that he set much store by my acquaintance.
Indeed, he did not seem to care for merely intellectual men; what
he demanded was men of reckless energy. As I afterwards
perceived, theory in this case had more weight with him than
purely personal sentiment; and he talked much and expatiated
freely on the matter. His general mode of discussion was the
Socratic method, and he seemed quite at his ease when, stretched
on his host's hard sofa, he could argue discursively with a crowd
of all sorts of men on the problems of revolution. On these
occasions he invariably got the best of the argument. It was
impossible to triumph against his opinions, stated as they were
with the utmost conviction, and overstepping in every direction
even the extremest bounds of radicalism. So communicative was he,
that on the very first evening of our meeting he gave me full
details about the various stages of his development, he was a
Russian officer of high birth, but smarting under the yoke of the
narrowest martial tyranny, he had been led by a study of
Rousseau's writings to escape to Germany under pretence of taking
furlough. In Berlin he had flung himself into the study of
philosophy with all the zest of a barbarian newly awakened to
civilisation. Hegel's philosophy was the one which was the rage
at that moment, and he soon became such an expert in it, that he
had been able to hurl that master's most famous disciples from
the saddle of their own philosophy, in a thesis couched in terms
of the strictest Hegelian dialectic. After he had got philosophy
off his chest, as he expressed it, he proceeded to Switzerland,
where he preached communism, and thence wandered over France and
Germany back to the borderland of the Slav world, from which
quarter he looked for the regeneration of humanity, because the
Slavs had been less enervated by civilisation. His hopes in this
respect were centred in the more strongly pronounced Slav type
characteristic of the Russian peasant class. In the natural
detestation of the Russian serf for his cruel oppressor the
nobleman, he believed he could trace a substratum of simple-
minded brotherly love, and that instinct which leads animals to
hate the men who hunt them. In support of this idea he cited the
childish, almost demoniac delight of the Russian people in fire,
a quality on which Rostopschin calculated in his strategic
burning of Moscow. He argued that all that was necessary to set
in motion a world-wide movement was to convince the Russian
peasant, in whom the natural goodness of oppressed human nature
had preserved its most childlike characteristics, that it was
perfectly right and well pleasing to God for them to burn their
lords' castles, with everything in and about them. The least that
could result from such a movement would be the destruction of all
those things which, rightly considered, must appear, even to
Europe's most philosophical thinkers, the real source of all the
misery of the modern world. To set these destructive forces in
action appeared to him the only object worthy of a sensible man's
activity. (Even while he was preaching these horrible doctrines,
Bakunin, noticing that my eyes troubled me, shielded them with
his outstretched hand from the naked light for a full hour, in
spite of my protestations.) This annihilation of all civilisation
was the goal upon which his heart was set. Meanwhile it amused
him to utilise every lever of political agitation he could lay
hands on for the advancement of this aim, and in so doing he
often found cause for ironical merriment. In his retreat he
received people belonging to every shade of revolutionary
thought. Nearest to him stood those of Slav nationality, because
these, he thought, would be the most convenient and effective
weapons he could use in the uprooting of Russian despotism. In
spite of their republic and their socialism a la Proudhon, he
thought nothing of the French, and as for the Germans, he never
mentioned them to me. Democracy, republicanism, and anything else
of the kind he regarded as unworthy of serious consideration.

Every objection raised by those who had the slightest wish to
reconstruct what had been demolished, he met with overwhelming
criticism. I well remember on one occasion that a Pole, startled
by his theories, maintained that there must be an organised state
to guarantee the individual in the possession of the fields he
had cultivated. 'What!' he answered; 'would you carefully fence
in your field to provide a livelihood for the police again!' This
shut the mouth of the terrified Pole. He comforted himself by
saying that the creators of the new order of things would arise
of themselves, but that our sole business in the meantime was to
find the power to destroy. Was any one of us so mad as to fancy
that he would survive the desired destruction? We ought to
imagine the whole of Europe with St. Petersburg, Paris, and
London transformed into a vast rubbish-heap. How could we expect
the kindlers of such a fire to retain any consciousness after so
vast a devastation? He used to puzzle any who professed their
readiness for self-sacrifice by telling them it was not the so-
called tyrants who were so obnoxious, but the smug Philistines.
As a type of these he pointed to a Protestant parson, and
declared that he would not believe he had really reached the full
stature of a man until he saw him commit his own parsonage, with
his wife and child, to the flames.

I was all the more perplexed for a while, in the face of such
dreadful ideas, by the fact that Bakunin in other respects proved
a really amiable and tender-hearted man. He was fully alive to
my own anxiety and despair with regard to the risk I ran of
forever destroying my ideals and hopes for the future of art. It
is true, he declined to receive any further instruction
concerning these artistic schemes, and would not even look at my
work on the Nibelungen saga. I had just then been inspired by a
study of the Gospels to conceive the plan of a tragedy for the
ideal stage of the future, entitled Jesus of Nazareth. Bakunin
begged me to spare him any details; and when I sought to win him
over to my project by a few verbal hints, he wished me luck, but
insisted that I must at all costs make Jesus appear as a weak
character. As for the music of the piece, he advised me, amid all
the variations, to use only one set of phrases, namely: for the
tenor, 'Off with His head!'; for the soprano, 'Hang Him!'; and
for the basso continuo, 'Fire! fire!' And yet I felt more
sympathetically drawn towards this prodigy of a man when I one
day induced him to hear me play and sing the first scenes of my
Fliegender Hollander. After listening with more attention than
most people gave, he exclaimed, during a momentary pause, 'That
is stupendously fine!' and wanted to hear more.

As his life of permanent concealment was very dull, I
occasionally invited him to spend an evening with me. For supper
my wife set before him finely cut slices of sausage and meat,
which he at once devoured wholesale, instead of spreading them
frugally on his bread in Saxon fashion. Noticing Minna's alarm at
this, I was guilty of the weakness of telling him how we were
accustomed to consume such viands, whereupon he reassured me with
a laugh, saying that it was quite enough, only he would like to
eat what was set before him in his own way. I was similarly
astonished at the manner in which he drank wine from our
ordinary-sized small glasses. As a matter of fact he detested
wine, which only satisfied his craving for alcoholic stimulants
in such paltry, prolonged, and subdivided doses; whereas a stiff
glass of brandy, swallowed at a gulp, at once produced the same
result, which, after all, was only temporarily attained. Above
all, he scorned the sentiment which seeks to prolong enjoyment by
moderation, arguing that a true man should only strive to still
the cravings of nature, and that the only real pleasure in life
worthy of a man was love.

These and other similar little characteristics showed clearly
that in this remarkable man the purest impulses of an ideal
humanity conflicted strangely with a savagery entirely inimical
to all civilisation, so that my feelings during my intercourse
with him fluctuated between involuntary horror and irresistible
attraction. I frequently called for him to share my lonely
wanderings. This he gladly did, not only for the sake of
necessary bodily exercise, but also because he could do so in
this part of the world without fear of meeting his pursuers. My
attempts during our conversations to instruct him more fully
regarding my artistic aims remained quite unavailing as long as
we were unable to quit the field of mere discussion. All these
things seemed to him premature. He refused to admit that out of
the very needs of the evil present all laws for the future would
have to be evolved, and that these, moreover, must be moulded
upon quite different ideas of social culture. Seeing that he
continued to urge destruction, and again destruction, I had at
last to inquire how my wonderful friend proposed to set this work
of destruction in operation. It then soon became clear, as I had
suspected it would, and as the event soon proved, that with this
man of boundless activity everything rested upon the most
impossible hypotheses. Doubtless I, with my hopes of a future
artistic remodelling of human society, appeared to him to be
floating in the barren air; yet it soon became obvious to me that
his assumptions as to the unavoidable demolition of all the
institutions of culture were at least equally visionary. My first
idea was that Bakunin was the centre of an international
conspiracy; but his practical plans seem originally to have been
restricted to a project for revolutionising Prague, where he
relied merely on a union formed among a handful of students.
Believing that the time had now come to strike a blow, he
prepared himself one evening to go there. This proceeding was not
free from danger, and he set off under the protection of a
passport made out for an English merchant. First of all, however,
with the view of adapting himself to the most Philistine culture,
he had to submit his huge beard and bushy hair to the tender
mercies of the razor and shears. As no barber was available,
Rockel had to undertake the task. A small group of friends
watched the operation, which had to be executed with a dull
razor, causing no little pain, under which none but the victim
himself remained passive. We bade farewell to Bakunin with the
firm conviction that we should never see him again alive. But in
a week he was back once more, as he had realised immediately what
a distorted account he had received as to the state of things in
Prague, where all he found ready for him was a mere handful of
childish students. These admissions made him the butt of Rockel's
good-humoured chaff, and after this he won the reputation among
us of being a mere revolutionary, who was content with
theoretical conspiracy. Very similar to his expectations from the
Prague students were his presumptions with regard to the Russian
people. These also afterwards proved to be entirely groundless,
and based merely on gratuitous assumptions drawn from the
supposed nature of things. I consequently found myself driven to
explain the universal belief in the terrible dangerousness of
this man by his theoretical views, as expressed here and
elsewhere, and not as arising from any actual experience of his
practical activity. But I was soon to become almost an eye-
witness of the fact that his personal conduct was never for a
moment swayed by prudence, such as one is accustomed to meet in
those whose theories are not seriously meant. This was shortly to
be proved in the momentous insurrection of May, 1849.

The winter of this year, up to the spring of 1849, passed in a
many-sided development of my position and temper, as I have
described them, that is to say, in a sort of dull agitation. My
latest artistic occupation had been the five-act drama, Jesus of
Nazareth, just mentioned. Henceforth I lingered on in a state of
brooding instability, full of expectation, yet without any
definite wish. I felt fully convinced that my activity in
Dresden, as an artist, had come to an end, and I was only waiting
for the pressure of circumstances to shake myself free. On the
other hand, the whole political situation, both in Saxony and the
rest of Germany, tended inevitably towards a catastrophe. Day by
day this drew nearer, and I flattered myself into regarding my
own personal fate as interwoven with this universal unrest. Now
that the powers of reaction were everywhere more and more openly
bracing themselves for conflict, the final decisive struggle
seemed indeed close at hand. My feelings of partisanship were not
sufficiently passionate to make me desire to take any active
share in these conflicts. I was merely conscious of an impulse to
give myself up recklessly to the stream of events, no matter
whither it might lead.

Just at this moment, however, an entirely new influence forced
itself in a most strange fashion into my fortunes, and was at
first greeted by me with a smile of scepticism. Liszt wrote
announcing an early production in Weimar of my Tannhauser under
his own conductorship--the first that had taken place outside
Dresden--and he added with great modesty that this was merely a
fulfilment of his own personal desire. In order to ensure success
he had sent a special invitation to Tichatschek to be his guest
for the two first performances. When the latter returned he said
that the production had, on the whole, been a success, which
surprised me very much. I received a gold snuff-box from the
Grand Duke as a keepsake, which I continued to use until the year
1864. All this was new and strange to me, and I was still
inclined to regard this otherwise agreeable occurrence as a
fleeting episode, due to the friendly feeling of a great artist.
'What does this mean for me?' I asked myself. 'Has it come too
early or too late?' But a very cordial letter from Liszt induced
me to visit Weimar for a few days later on, for a third
performance of Tannhausar, which was to be carried out entirely
by native talent, with a view to the permanent addition of this
opera to the repertoire. For this purpose I obtained leave of
absence from my management for the second week in May.

Only a few days elapsed before the execution of this little plan;
but they were destined to be momentous ones. On the 1st of May
the Chambers were dissolved by the new Beust ministry, which the
King had charged with carrying out his proposed reactionary
policy. This event imposed upon me the friendly task of caring
for Rockel and his family. Hitherto his position as a deputy had
shielded him from the danger of criminal prosecution; but as soon
as the Chambers were dissolved this protection was withdrawn, and
he had to escape by flight from being arrested again. As I could
do little to help him in this matter, I promised at least to
provide for the continued publication of his popular Volksblatt,
mainly because the proceeds from this would support his family.
Scarcely was Rockel safely across the Bohemian frontier, while I
was still toiling at great inconvenience to myself in the
printer's office, in order to provide material for an issue of
his paper, when the long-expected storm burst over Dresden.
Emergency deputations, nightly mob demonstrations, stormy
meetings of the various unions, and all the other signs that
precede a swift decision in the streets, manifested themselves.
On the 3rd May the demeanour of the crowds moving in our
thoroughfares plainly showed that this consummation would soon be
reached, as was undoubtedly desired. Each local deputation which
petitioned for the recognition of the German constitution, which
was the universal cry, was refused an audience by the government,
and this with a peremptoriness which at last became startling. I
was present one afternoon at a committee meeting of the
Vaterlands-Verein, although merely as a representative of
Rockel's Volksblatt, for whose continuance, both from economic as
well as humane motives, I felt pledged. Here I was at once
absorbed in watching the conduct and demeanour of the men whom
popular favour had raised to the leadership of such unions. It
was quite evident that events had passed beyond the control of
these persons; more particularly were they utterly at a loss as
to how to deal with that peculiar terrorism exerted by the lower
classes which is always so ready to react upon the
representatives of democratic theories. On every side I heard a
medley of wild proposals and hesitating responses. One of the
chief subjects under debate was the necessity of preparing for
defence. Arms, and how to procure them, were eagerly discussed,
but all in the midst of great disorder; and when at last they
discovered that it was time to break up, the only impression I
received was one of the wildest confusion. I loft the hall with a
young painter named Kaufmann, from whose hand I had previously
seen a series of cartoons in the Dresden Art Exhibition,
illustrating 'The History of the Mind.' One day I had seen the
King of Saxony standing before one of these, representing the
torture of a heretic under the Spanish Inquisition, and observed
him turn away with a disapproving shake of the head from so
abstruse a subject. I was on my way home, deep in conversation
with this man, whose pale face and troubled look betrayed that he
foresaw the disaster that was imminent, when, just as we reached
the Postplatz, near the fountain erected from Semper's design,
the clang of bells from the neighbouring tower of St. Ann's
Church suddenly sounded the tocsin of revolt. With a terrified
cry, 'Good God, it has begun!' my companion vanished from my
side. He wrote to me--afterwards to say that he was living as a
fugitive in Berne, but I never saw his face again.

The clang of this bell, so close at hand, made a profound
impression upon me also. It was a very sunny afternoon, and I at
once noticed the same phenomenon which Goethe describes in his
attempt to depict his own sensations during the bombardment of
Valmy. The whole square looked as though it were illuminated by a
dark yellow, almost brown, light, such as I had once before seen
in Magdeburg during an eclipse of the sun. My most pronounced
sensation beyond this was one of great, almost extravagant,
satisfaction. I felt a sudden strange longing to play with
something hitherto regarded as dangerous and important. My first
idea, suggested probably by the vicinity of the square, was to
inquire at Tichatschek's house for the gun which, as an
enthusiastic Sunday sportsman, he was accustomed to use. I only
found his wife at home, as he was away on a holiday tour. Her
evident terror as to what was going to happen provoked me to
uncontrollable laughter. I advised her to lodge her husband's gun
in a place of safety, by handing it to the committee of the
Vaterlands-Verein in return for a receipt, as it might otherwise
soon be requisitioned by the mob. I have since learned that my
eccentric behaviour on this occasion, was afterwards reckoned
against me as a serious crime. I then returned to the streets, to
see whether anything beyond a ringing of bells and a yellowish
eclipse of the sun might be going on in the town, I first made my
way to the Old Market-place, where I noticed a group of men
gathered round a vociferous orator. It was also an agreeable
surprise to me to see Schroder-Devrient descending at the door of
a hotel. She had just arrived from Merlin, and was keenly excited
by the news which had reached her, that the populace had already
been fired upon. As she had only recently seen an abortive
insurrection crushed by arms in Berlin, she was indignant to find
the same things happening in her 'peaceful Dresden' as she termed
it.

When she turned to me from the stolid crowd, which had
complacently been listening to her passionate outpourings, she
seemed relieved at finding some one to whom she could appeal to
oppose these horrible proceedings with all his might. I met her
on another occasion at the house of my old friend Heine, where
she had taken refuge. When she noticed my indifference she again
adjured me to use every possible effort to prevent the senseless,
suicidal conflict. I heard afterwards that a charge of high
treason on account of sedition had been brought against Schroder-
Devrient by reason of her conduct in regard to this matter. She
had to prove her innocence in a court of law, so as to establish
beyond dispute her claim to the pension which she had been
promised by contract for her many years' service in Dresden as an
opera-singer.

On the 3rd of May I betook myself direct to that quarter of the
town where I heard unpleasant rumours of a sanguinary conflict
having taken place. I afterwards learned that the actual cause of
the dispute between the civil and military power had arisen when
the watch had been changed in front of the Arsenal. At that
moment the mob, under a bold leader, had seized the opportunity
to take forcible possession of the armoury. A display of military
force was made, and the crowd was fired upon by a few cannon
loaded with grape-shot. As I approached the scene of operations
through the Rampische Gasse, I met a company of the Dresden
Communal Guards, who, although they were quite innocent, had
apparently been exposed to this fire. I noticed that one of the
citizen guards, leaning heavily on the arm of a comrade, was
trying to hurry along, in spite of the fact that his right leg
seemed to be dragging helplessly behind him. Some of the crowd,
seeing the blood on the pavement behind him, shouted 'He is
bleeding.' In the midst of this excitement I suddenly became
conscious of the cry raised on all sides: 'To the barricades! to
the barricades!' Driven by a mechanical impulse I followed the
stream of people, which moved once more in the direction of the
Town Hall in the Old Market-place. Amid the terrific tumult I
particularly noticed a significant group stretching right across
the street, and striding along the Rosmaringasse. It reminded me,
though the simile was rather exaggerated, of the crowd that had
once stood at the doors of the theatre and demanded free entrance
to Rienzi; among them was a hunchback, who at once suggested
Goethe's Vansen in Egmont, and as the revolutionary cry rose
about his ears, I saw him rub his hands together in great glee
over the long-desired ecstasy of revolt which he had realised at
last.

I recollect quite clearly that from that moment I was attracted
by surprise and interest in the drama, without feeling any desire
to join the ranks of the combatants. However, the agitation
caused by my sympathy as a mere spectator increased with every
step I felt impelled to take. I was able to press right into the
rooms of the town council, escaping notice in the tumultuous
crowd, and it seemed to me as if the officials were guilty of
collusion with the mob. I made my way unobserved into the
council-chamber; what I saw there was utter disorder and
confusion. When night fell I wandered slowly through the hastily
made barricades, consisting chiefly of market stalls, back to my
house in the distant Friedrichstrasse, and next morning I again
watched these amazing proceedings with sympathetic interest.

On Thursday, 4th May, I could see that the Town Hall was
gradually becoming the undoubted centre of the revolution. That
section of the people who had hoped for a peaceful understanding
with the monarch was thrown into the utmost consternation by the
news that the King and his whole court, acting on the advice of
his minister Beust, had left the palace, and had gone by ship
down the Elbe to the fortress of Konigstein. In those
circumstances the town council saw they were no longer able to
face the situation, and thereupon took part in summoning those
members of the Saxon Chamber who were still in Dresden. These
latter now assembled in the Town Hall to decide what steps should
be taken for the protection of the state. A deputation was sent
to the ministry, but returned with the report that they were
nowhere to be found. At the same moment news arrived from all
sides that, in accordance with a previous compact, the King of
Prussia's troops would advance to occupy Dresden. A general
outcry immediately arose for measures to be adopted to prevent
this incursion of foreign troops.

Simultaneously with this, came the intelligence of the national
uprising in Wurtemberg, where the troops themselves had
frustrated the intentions of the government by their declaration
of fidelity to the parliament, and the ministry had been
compelled against their will to acknowledge the Pan-German
Constitution. The opinion of our politicians, who were assembled
in consultation, was that the matter might still be settled by
peaceful means, if it were possible to induce the Saxon troops to
take up a similar attitude, as by this means the King would at
least be placed under the wholesome necessity of offering
patriotic resistance to the Prussian occupation of his country.

Everything seemed to depend on making the Saxon battalions in
Dresden understand the paramount importance of their action. As
this seemed to me the only hope of an honourable peace in this
senseless chaos, I confess that, on this one occasion, I did
allow myself to be led astray so far as to organise a
demonstration which, however, proved futile.

I induced the printer of Rockel's Volksblatt, which was for the
moment at a standstill, to employ all the type he would have used
for his next number, in printing in huge characters on strips of
paper the words: Seid Ihr mit uns gegen fremde Truppen? ('Are you
on our side against the foreign troops?'). Placards bearing these
words were fixed on those barricades which it was thought would
be the first to be assaulted, and were intended to bring the
Saxon troops to a halt if they were commanded to attack the
revolutionaries. Of course no one took any notice of these
placards except intending informers. On that day nothing but
confused negotiations and wild excitement took place which threw
no light on the situation. The Old Town of Dresden, with its
barricades, was an interesting enough sight for the spectators. I
looked on with amazement and disgust, but my attention was
suddenly distracted by seeing Bakunin emerge from his hiding-
place and wander among the barricades in a black frockcoat. But I
was very much mistaken in thinking he would be pleased with what
he saw; he recognised the childish inefficiency of all the
measures that had been taken for defence, and declared that the
only satisfaction he could feel in the state of affairs was that
he need not trouble about the police, but could calmly consider
the question of going elsewhere, as he found no inducement to
take part in an insurrection conducted in such a slovenly
fashion. While he walked about, smoking his cigar, and making fun
of the naivete of the Dresden revolution, I watched the Communal
Guards assembling under arms in front of the Town Hall at the
summons of their commandant. From the ranks of its most popular
corps, the Schutzen-Compagnie, I was accosted by Rietschel, who
was most anxious about the nature of the rising, and also by
Semper. Rietschel, who seemed to think I was better informed of
the facts than he was, assured me that he felt his position was a
very difficult one. He said the select company to which he
belonged was very democratic, and as his professorship at the
Fine Arts Academy placed him in a peculiar position, he did not
know how to reconcile the sentiments he shared with his company
with his duty as a citizen. The word 'citizen' amused me; I
glanced sharply at Semper and repeated the word 'citizen.'
Semper responded with a peculiar smile, and turned away without
further comment.

The next day (Friday the 5th of May), when I again took my place
as a passionately interested spectator of the proceedings at the
Town Hall, events took a decisive turn. The remnant of the
leaders of the Saxon people there assembled thought it advisable
to constitute themselves into a provisional government, as there
was no Saxon government in existence with which negotiations
could be conducted. Professor Kochly, who was an eloquent
speaker, was chosen to proclaim the new administration. He
performed this solemn ceremony from the balcony of the Town Hall,
facing the faithful remnant of the Communal Guards and the not
very numerous crowd. At the same time the legal existence of the
Pan-German Constitution was proclaimed, and allegiance to it was
sworn by the armed forces of the nation. I recollect that these
proceedings did not seem to me imposing, and Bakunin's reiterated
opinion about their triviality gradually became more
comprehensible. Even from a technical point of view these
reflections were justified when, to my great amusement and
surprise, Semper, in the full uniform of a citizen guard, with a
hat bedecked with the national colours, asked for me at the Town
Hall, and informed me of the extremely faulty construction of the
barricades in the Wild Strufergasse and the neighbouring
Brudergasse. To pacify his artistic conscience as an engineer I
directed him to the office of the 'Military Commission for the
Defence.' He followed my advice with conscientious satisfaction;
possibly he obtained the necessary authorisation to give
instructions for the building of suitable works of defence at
that neglected point. After that I never saw him again in
Dresden; but I presume that he carried out the strategic works
entrusted to him by that committee with all the conscientiousness
of a Michael Angelo or a Leonardo da Vinci.

The rest of the day passed in continuous negotiations over the
truce which, by arrangement with the Saxon troops, was to last
until noon of the next day. In this business I noticed the very
pronounced activity of a former college friend, Marschall von
Bieberstein, a lawyer who, in his capacity as senior officer of
the Dresden Communal Guard, distinguished himself by his
boundless zeal amid the shouts of a mighty band of fellow-
orators. On that day a certain Heinz, formerly a Greek colonel,
was placed in command of the armed forces. These proceedings did
not seem at all satisfactory to Bakunin, who put in an occasional
appearance. While the provisional government placed all its hopes
on finding a peaceful settlement of the conflict by moral
persuasion, he, on the contrary, with his clear vision foresaw a
well-planned military attack by the Prussians, and thought it
could only be met by good strategic measures. He therefore
urgently pressed for the acquisition of some experienced Polish
officers who happened to be in Dresden, as the Saxon
revolutionaries appeared to be absolutely lacking in military
tactics. Everybody was afraid to take this course; on the other
hand, great expectations were entertained from negotiations with
the Frankfort States Assembly, which was on its last legs.
Everything was to be done as far as possible in legal form. The
time passed pleasantly enough. Elegant ladies with their
cavaliers promenaded the barricaded streets during those
beautiful spring evenings. It seemed to be little more than an
entertaining drama. The unaccustomed aspect of things even
afforded me genuine pleasure, combined with a feeling that the
whole thing was not quite serious, and that a friendly
proclamation from the government would put an end to it. So I
strolled comfortably home through the numerous barricades at a
late hour, thinking as I went of the material for a drama,
Achilleus, with which I had been occupied for some time.

At home I found my two nieces, Clara and Ottilie Brockhaus, the
daughters of my sister Louisa. They had been living for a year
with a governess in Dresden, and their weekly visits and
contagious good spirits delighted me. Every one was in a high
state of glee about the revolution; they all heartily approved of
the barricades, and felt no scruples about desiring victory for
their defenders. Protected by the truce, this state of mind
remained undisturbed the whole of Friday (5th May). From all
parts came news which led us to believe in a universal uprising
throughout Germany. Baden and the Palatinate were in the throes
of a revolt on behalf of the whole of Germany. Similar rumours
came in from free towns like Breslau. In Leipzig, volunteer
student corps had mustered contingents for Dresden, which arrived
amid the exultation of the populace. A fully equipped defence
department was organised at the Town Hall, and young Heine,
disappointed like myself in his hopes of the performance of
Lohengrin, had also joined this body. Vigorous promises of
support came from the Saxon Erzgebirge, as well as announcements
that armed contingents were forthcoming. Every one thought,
therefore, that if only the Old Town were kept well barricaded,
it could safely defy the threat of foreign occupation. Early on
Saturday, 6th May, it was obvious that the situation was becoming
more serious. Prussian troops had marched into the New Town, and
the Saxon troops, which it had not been considered advisable to
use for an attack, were kept loyal to the flag. The truce expired
at noon, and the troops, supported by several guns, at once
opened the attack on one, of the principal positions held by the
people on the Neumarkt.

So far I had entertained no other conviction than that the matter
would be decided in the most summary fashion as soon as it came
to an actual conflict, for there was no evidence in the state of
my own feelings (or, indeed, in what I was able to gather
independently of them) of that passionate seriousness of purpose,
without which tests as severe as this have never been
successfully withstood. It was irritating to me, while I heard
the sharp rattle of fire, to be unable to gather anything of what
was going on, and I thought by climbing the Kreuz tower I might
get a good view. Even from this elevation I could not see
anything clearly, but I gathered enough to satisfy myself that
after an hour of heavy firing the advance artillery of the
Prussian troops had retired, and had at last been completely
silenced, their withdrawal being signalled by a loud shout of
jubilation from the populace. Apparently the first attack had
exhausted itself; and now my interest in what was going on began
to assume a more and more vivid hue. To obtain information in
greater detail I hurried back to the Town Hall. I could extract
nothing, however, from the boundless confusion which I met, until
at last I came upon Bakunin in the midst of the main group of
speakers. He was able to give me an extraordinarily accurate
account of what had happened. Information had reached
headquarters from a barricade in the Neumarkt where the attack
was most serious, that everything had been in a state of
confusion there before the onslaught of the troops; thereupon my
friend Marschall von Bieberstein, together with Leo von
Zichlinsky, who were officers in the citizen corps, had called up
some volunteers and conducted them to the place of danger. Kreis-
Amtmann Heubner of Freiberg, without a weapon to defend himself,
and with bared head, jumped immediately on to the top of the
barricade, which had just been abandoned by all its defenders. He
was the sole member of the provisional government to remain on
the spot, the leaders, Todt and Tschirner, having disappeared at
the first sign of a panic. Heubner turned round to exhort the
volunteers to advance, addressing them in stirring words. His
success was complete, the barricade was taken again, and a fire,
as unexpected as it was fierce, was directed upon the troops,
which, as I myself saw, were forced to retire. Bakunin had been
in close touch with this action, he had followed the volunteers,
and he now explained to me that however narrow might be the
political views of Heubner (he belonged to the moderate Left of
the Saxon Chamber), he was a man of noble character, at whose
service he had immediately placed his own life.

Bakunin had only needed this example to determine his own line of
conduct; he had decided to risk his neck in the attempt and to
ask no further questions. Heubner too was now bound to recognise
the necessity for extreme measures, and no longer recoiled from
any proposal on the part of Bakunin which was directed to this
end. The military advice of experienced Polish officers was
brought to bear on the commandant, whose incapacity had not been
slow to reveal itself; Bakunin, who openly confessed that he
understood nothing of pure strategy, never moved from the Town
Hall, but remained at Heubner's side, giving advice and
information in every direction with wonderful sangfroid. For the
rest of the day the battle confined itself to skirmishes by
sharpshooters from the various positions. I was itching to climb
the Kreuz tower again, so as to get the widest possible survey
over the whole field of action. In order to reach this tower from
the Town Hall, one had to pass through a space which was under a
cross-fire of rifle-shots from the troops posted in the royal
palace. At a moment when this square was quite deserted, I
yielded to my daring impulse, and crossed it on my way to the
Kreuz tower at a slow pace, remembering that in such
circumstances the young soldier is advised never to hurry,
because by so doing he may draw the shot upon himself. On
reaching this post of vantage I found several people who had
gathered there, some of them driven by a curiosity like my own,
others in obedience to an order from the headquarters of the
revolutionaries to reconnoitre the enemy's movements. Amongst
them I made the acquaintance of a schoolmaster called Berthold, a
man of quiet and gentle disposition, but full of conviction and
determination. I lost myself in an earnest philosophical
discussion with him which extended to the widest spheres of
religion. At the same time he showed a homely anxiety to protect
us from the cone-shaped bullets of the Prussian sharpshooters by
placing us ingeniously behind a barricade consisting of one of
the straw mattresses which he had cajoled out of the warder. The
Prussian sharpshooters were posted on the distant tower of the
Frauenkirche, and had chosen the height occupied by us as their
target. At nightfall I found it impossible to make up my mind to
go home and leave my interesting place of refuge, so I persuaded
the warder to send a subordinate to Friedrichstadt with a few
lines to my wife, and with instructions to ask her to let me have
some necessary provisions. Thus I spent one of the most
extraordinary nights of my life, taking turns with Berthold to
keep watch and sleep, close beneath the great bell with its
terrible groaning clang, and with the accompaniment of the
continuous rattle of the Prussian shot as it beat against the
tower walls.

Sunday (the 7th of May) was one of the most beautiful days in the
year. I was awakened by the song of a nightingale, which rose to
our ears from the Schutze garden close by. A sacred calm and
peacefulness lay over the town and the wide suburbs of Dresden,
which were visible from my point of vantage. Towards sunrise a
mist settled upon the outskirts, and suddenly through its folds
we could hear the music of the Marseillaise making its way
clearly and distinctly from the district of the Tharanderstrasse.
As the sound drew nearer and nearer, the mist dispersed, and the
glow of the rising sun spread a glittering light upon the weapons
of a long column which was winding its way towards the town. It
was impossible not to feel deeply impressed at the sight of this
continuous procession. Suddenly a perception of that element
which I had so long missed in the German people was borne in upon
me in all its essential freshness and vital colour. The fact that
until this moment I had been obliged to resign myself to its
absence, had contributed not a little to the feelings by which I
had been swayed. Here I beheld some thousand men from the
Erzgebirge, mostly miners, well armed and organised, who had
rallied to the defence of Dresden. Soon we saw them march up the
Altmarkt opposite the Town Hall, and after receiving a joyful
welcome, bivouac there to recover from their journey.
Reinforcements continued to pour in the whole day long, and the
heroic achievement of the previous day now received its reward in
the shape of a universal elevation of spirits. A change seemed to
have been made in the plan of attack by the Prussian troops. This
could be gathered from the fact that numerous simultaneous
attacks, but of a less concentrated type, were made upon various
positions. The troops which had come to reinforce us brought with
them four small cannon, the property of a certain Herr Thade von
Burgk, whose acquaintance I had made before on the occasion of
the anniversary of the founding of the Dresden Choral Society,
when he had made a speech which was well intentioned but
wearisome to the point of being ludicrous. The recollection of
this speech returned to me with peculiar irony, now that his
cannon were being fired from the barricade upon the enemy. I felt
a still deeper impression, however, when, towards eleven o'clock,
I saw the old Opera House, in which a few weeks ago I had
conducted the last performance of the Ninth Symphony, burst into
flames. As I have had occasion to mention before, the danger from
fire to which this building was exposed, full as it was with wood
and all kind of textile fabric, and originally built only for a
temporary purpose, had always been a subject of terror and
apprehension to those who visited it.

I was told that the Opera House had been set alight on
strategical grounds, in order to face a dangerous attack on this
exposed side, and also to protect the famous 'Semper' barricade
from an overpowering surprise. From this I concluded that reasons
of this kind act as far more powerful motives in the world than
aesthetic considerations. For a long time men of taste had vainly
cried aloud for abolition of this ugly building which was such an
eyesore by the side of the elegant proportions of the Zwinger
Gallery in its neighbourhood. In a few moments the Opera House
(which as regards size was, it is true, an imposing edifice),
together with its highly inflammable contents, was a vast sea of
flames. When this reached the metal roofs of the neighbouring
wings of the Zwinger, and enveloped them in wonderful bluish
waves of fire, the first expression of regret made itself audible
amongst the spectators. What a disaster! Some thought that the
Natural History collection was in danger; others maintained that
it was the Armoury, upon which a citizen soldier retorted that if
such were the case, it would be a very good job if the 'stuffed
noblemen' were burnt to cinders. But it appeared that a keen
sense of the value of art knew how to curb the fire's lust for
further dominion, and, as a matter of fact, it did but little
damage in that quarter. Finally our post of observation, which
until now had remained comparatively quiet, was filled itself
with swarms and swarms of armed men, who had been ordered thither
to defend the approach from the church to the Altmarkt, upon
which an attack was feared from the side of the ill-secured
Kreuzgasse. Unarmed men were now in the way; moreover, I had
received a message from my wife summoning me home after the long
and terrible anxiety she had suffered.

At last, after meeting with innumerable obstacles and overcoming
a host of difficulties, I succeeded, by means of all sorts of
circuitous routes, in reaching my remote suburb, from which I was
cut off by the fortified portions of the town, and especially by
a cannonade directed from the Zwinger. My lodgings were full to
overflowing with excited women who had collected round Minna;
among them the panic-stricken wife of Rockel, who suspected her
husband of being in the very thick of the fight, as she thought
that on the receipt of the news that Dresden had risen he would
probably have returned. As a matter of fact, I had heard a rumour
that Rockel had arrived on this very day, but as yet I had not
obtained a glimpse of him. My young nieces helped once more to
raise my spirits. The firing had put them into a high state of
glee, which to some extent infected my wife, as soon as she was
reassured as to my personal safety. All of them were furious with
the sculptor Hanel, who had never ceased insisting upon the
expedience of bolting the house to prevent an entry of the
revolutionaries. All the women without exception were joking
about his abject terror at the sight of some men armed with
scythes who had appeared in the street In this way Sunday passed
like a sort of family jollification.

On the following morning (Monday, 8th May) I tried again to get
information as to the state of affairs by forcing my way to the
Town Hall from my house, which was cut off from the place of
action. As in the course of my journey I was making my way over
a barricade near St. Ann's Church, one of the Communal Guard
shouted out to me, 'Hullo, conductor, your der Freude schoner
Gotterfunken [Footnote: These words refer to the opening of the
Ninth Symphony chorus: 'Freude, Freude, Freude, schoner
gotterfunken Tochter aus Elysium'--(Praise her, praise oh praise
Joy, the god-descended daughter of Elysium.) English version by
Natalia Macfarren.--Editor.] has indeed set fire to things. The
rotten building is rased to the ground.' Obviously the man was an
enthusiastic member of the audience at my last performance of the
Ninth Symphony. Coming upon me so unexpectedly, this pathetic
greeting filled me with a curious sense of strength and freedom.
A little further on, in a lonely alley in the suburb of Plauen, I
fell in with the musician Hiebendahl, the first oboist in the
royal orchestra, and a man who still enjoyed a very high
reputation; he was in the uniform of the Communal Guards, but
carried no gun, and was chatting with a citizen in a similar
costume. As soon as he saw me, he felt he must immediately make
an appeal to me to use my influence against Rockel, who,
accompanied by ordnance officers of the revolutionary party, was
instituting a search for guns in this quarter. As soon as he
realised that I was making sympathetic inquiries about Rockel, he
drew back frightened, and said to me in tones of the deepest
anxiety: 'But, conductor, have you no thought for your position,
and what you may lose by exposing yourself in this fashion?' This
remark had the most drastic effect upon me; I burst into a loud
laugh, and told him that my position was not worth a thought one
way or the other. This indeed was the expression of my real
feelings, which had long been suppressed, and now broke out into
almost jubilant utterance. At that moment I caught sight of
Rockel, with two men of the citizen army who were carrying some
guns, making his way towards me. He gave me a most friendly
greeting, but turned at once to Hiebendahl and his companion and
asked him why he was idling about here in uniform instead of
being at his post. When Hiebendahl made the excuse that his gun
had been requisitioned, Rockel cried out to him, 'You're a fine
lot of fellows!' and went away laughing. He gave me a brief
account as we proceeded of what had happened to him since I had
lost sight of him, and thus spared me the obligation of giving
him a report of his Volksblatt. We were interrupted by an
imposing troop of well-armed young students of the gymnasium who
had just entered the city and wished to have a safe conduct to
their place of muster. The sight of these serried ranks of
youthful figures, numbering several hundreds, who were stepping
bravely to their duty, did not fail to make the most elevating
impression upon me. Rockel undertook to accompany them over the
barricade in safety to the mastering place in front of the Town
Hall. He took the opportunity of lamenting the utter absence of
true spirit which he had hitherto encountered in those in
command. He had proposed, in case of extremity, to defend the
most seriously threatened barricades by tiring them with pitch
brands; at the mere word the provisional government had fallen
into a veritable state of panic. I let him go his way in order
that I might enjoy the privilege of a solitary person and reach
the Town Hall by a short cut, and it was not until thirteen years
later that I again set eyes upon him.

In the Town Hall I learned from Bakunin that the provisional
government had passed a resolution, on his advice, to abandon the
position in Dresden, which had been entirely neglected from the
beginning, and was consequently quite untenable for any length of
time. This resolution proposed an armed retreat to the Erzgebirge,
where it would be possible to concentrate the reinforcements
pouring in from all sides, especially from Thuringia, in such
strength, that the advantageous position could be used to
inaugurate a German civil war that would sound no hesitating note
at its outset. To persist in defending isolated barricaded
streets in Dresden could, on the other hand, lend little but the
character of an urban riot to the contest, although it was
pursued with the highest courage. I must confess that this idea
seemed to me magnificent and full of meaning. Up to this moment I
had been moved only by a feeling of sympathy for a method of
procedure entered upon at first with almost ironical incredulity,
and then pursued with the vigour of surprise. Now, however, all
that had before seemed incomprehensible, unfolded itself before
my vision in the form of a great and hopeful solution. Without
either feeling that I was in any way being compelled, or that it
was my vocation to get some part or function allotted to me in
these events, I now definitely abandoned all consideration for my
personal situation, and determined to surrender myself to the
stream of developments which flowed in the direction towards
which my feelings had driven me with a delight that was full of
despair. Still, I did not wish to leave my wife helpless in
Dresden, and I rapidly devised a means of drawing her into the
path which I had chosen, without immediately informing her of
what my resolve meant. During my hasty return to Friedrichstadt I
recognised that this portion of the town had been almost entirely
cut off from the inner city by the occupation of the Prussian
troops; I saw in my mind's eye our own suburb occupied, and the
consequences of a state of military siege in their most repulsive
light. It was an easy job to persuade Minna to accompany me on a
visit, by way of the Tharanderstrasse, which was still free, to
Chemnitz, where my married sister Clara lived. It was only a
matter of a moment for her to arrange her household orders, and
she promised to follow me to the next village in an hour with the
parrot. I went on in advance with my little dog Peps, in order to
hire a carriage in which to proceed on our journey to Chemnitz.
It was a smiling spring morning when I traversed for the last
time the paths I had so often trod on my lonely walks, with the
knowledge that I should never wander along them again. While the
larks were soaring to dizzy heights above my head, and singing in
the furrows of the fields, the light and heavy artillery did not
cease to thunder down the streets of Dresden. The noise of this
shooting, which had continued uninterruptedly for several days,
had hammered itself so indelibly upon my nerves, that it
continued to re-echo for a long time in my brain; just as the
motion of the ship which took me to London had made me stagger
for some time afterwards. Accompanied by this terrible music, I
threw my parting greeting to the towers of the city that lay
behind me, and said to myself with a smile, that if, seven years
ago, my entry had taken place under thoroughly obscure auspices,
at all events my exit was conducted with some show of pomp and
ceremony.

When at last I found myself with Minna in a one-horse carriage on
the way to the Erzgebirge, we frequently met armed reinforcements
on their way to Dresden. The sight of them always kindled an
involuntary joy in us; even my wife could not refrain from
addressing words of encouragement to the men; at present it
seemed not a single barricade had been lost. On the other hand, a
gloomy impression was made upon us by a company of regulars which
was making its way towards Dresden in silence. We asked some of
them whither they were bound; and their answer, 'To do their
duty,' had been obviously impressed upon them by command. At last
we reached my relations in Chemnitz. I terrified all those near
and dear to me when I declared my intention to return to Dresden
on the following day at the earliest possible hour, in order to
ascertain how things were going there. In spite of all attempts
to dissuade me, I carried out my decision, pursued by a suspicion
that I should meet the armed forces of the Dresden people on the
country highroad in the act of retreat. The nearer I approached
the capital, the stronger became the confirmation of the rumours
that, as yet, there was no thought in Dresden of surrender or
withdrawal, but that, on the contrary, the contest was proving
very favourable for the national party. All this appeared to me
like one miracle after another. On this day, Tuesday, 9th of May,
I once more forced my way in a high state of excitement over
ground which had become more and more inaccessible. All the
highways had to be avoided, and it was only possible to make
progress through such houses as had been broken through. At last
I reached the Town Hall in the Altstadt, just as night was
falling. A truly terrible spectacle met my eyes, for I crossed
those parts of the town in which preparations had been made for a
house-to-house fight. The incessant groaning of big and small
guns reduced to an uncanny murmur all the other sounds that came
from armed men ceaselessly crying out to one another from
barricade to barricade, and from one house to another, which they
had broken through. Pitch brands burnt here and there, pale-faced
figures lay prostrate around the watch-posts, half dead with
fatigue, and any unarmed wayfarer forcing a path for himself was
sharply challenged. Nothing, however, that I have lived through
can be compared with the impression that I received on my entry
into the chambers of the Town Hall. Here was a gloomy, and yet
fairly compact and serious mass of people; a look of unspeakable
fatigue was upon all faces; not a single voice had retained its
natural tone. There was a hoarse jumble of conversation inspired
by a state of the highest tension. The only familiar sight that
survived was to be found in the old servants of the Town Hall in
their curious antiquated uniform and three-cornered hats. These
tall men, at other times an object of considerable fear, I found
engaged partly in buttering pieces of bread, and cutting slices
of ham and sausage, and partly in piling into baskets immense
stores of provisions for the messengers sent by the defenders of
the barricades for supplies. These men had turned into veritable
nursing mothers of the revolution.

As I proceeded further, I came at last upon the members of the
provisional government, among whom Todt and Tschirner, after
their first panic-stricken flight, were once more to be found
gliding to and fro, gloomy as spectres, now that they were
chained to the performance of their heavy duties. Heubner alone
had preserved his full energy; but he was a really piteous sight:
a ghostly fire burned in his eyes which had not had a wink of
sleep for seven nights. He was delighted to see me again, as he
regarded my arrival as a good omen for the cause which he was
defending; while on the other hand, in the rapid succession of
events, he had come into contact with elements about which no
conclusion could shape itself to his complete satisfaction. I
found Bakunin's outlook undisturbed, and his attitude firm and
quiet. He did not show the smallest change in his appearance, in
spite of having had no sleep during the whole time, which I
afterwards heard was a fact. With a cigar in his mouth he
received me, seated on one of the mattresses which lay
distributed over the floor of the Town Hall. At his side was a
very young Pole (a Galician) named Haimberger, a violinist whom
he had once asked me to recommend to Lipinsky, in order that he
might give him lessons, as he did not want this raw and
inexperienced boy, who had become passionately attached to him,
to get drawn into the vortex of the present upheavals. Now that
Haimberger had shouldered a gun, and presented himself for
service at the barricades, however, Bakunin had greeted him none
the less joyfully. He had drawn him down to sit by his side on
the couch, and every time the youth shuddered with fear at the
violent sound of the cannon-shot, he slapped him vigorously on
the back and cried out: 'You are not in the company of your
fiddle here, my friend. What a pity you didn't stay where you
were!' Bakinin then gave me a short and precise account of what
had happened since I had left him on the previous morning. The
retreat which had then been decided upon soon proved unadvisable,
as it would have discouraged the numerous reinforcements which
had already arrived on that day. Moreover, the desire for
fighting had been so great, and the force of the defenders so
considerable, that it had been possible to oppose the enemy's
troops successfully so far. But as the latter had also got large
reinforcements, they again had been able to make an effective
combined attack on the strong Wildstruf barricade. The Prussian
troops had avoided fighting in the streets, choosing instead the
method of fighting from house to house by breaking through the
walls. This had made it clear that all defence by barricades had
become useless, and that the enemy would succeed slowly but
surely in drawing near the Town Hall, the seat of the provisional
government. Bakunin had now proposed that all the powder stores
should be brought together in the lower rooms of the Town Hall,
and that on the approach of the enemy it should be blown up. The
town council, who were still in consultation in a back room, had
remonstrated with the greatest vehemence. Bakunin, however, had
insisted with great firmness on the execution of the measure, but
in the end had been completely outwitted by the removal of all
the powder stores. Moreover, Heubner, to whom Bakunin could
refuse nothing, had been won over to the other side. It was now
decided that as everything was ready, the retreat to the
Erzgebirge, which had originally been intended for the previous
day, should be fixed for the early morrow. Young Zichlinsky had
already received orders to cover the road to Plauen so as to make
it strategically safe. When I inquired after Rockel, Bakunin
replied swiftly that he had not been seen since the previous
evening, and that he had most likely allowed himself to be
caught: he was in such a nervous state. I now gave an account of
what I had observed on my way to and from Chemnitz, describing
the great masses of reinforcements, amongst which was the
communal guard of that place, several thousands strong. In
Freiberg I had met four hundred reservists, who had come in
excellent form to back the citizen army, but could not proceed
further, as they were tired out by their forced march. It seemed
obvious that this was a case in which the necessary energy to
requisition wagons had been lacking, and that if the bounds of
loyalty were transgressed in this matter, the advent of fresh
forces would be considerably promoted. I was begged to make my
way back at once, and convey the opinion of the provisional
government to the people whose acquaintance I had made. My old
friend Marschall von Bieberstein immediately proposed to
accompany me. I welcomed his offer, as he was an officer of the
provisional government, and was consequently more fitted than I
was to communicate orders. This man, who had been almost
extravagant in his enthusiasm before, was now utterly exhausted
by sleeplessness, and unable to emit another word from his hoarse
throat. He now made his way with me from the Town Hall to his
house in the suburb of Plauen by the devious ways that had been
indicated to us, in order to requisition a carriage for our
purpose from a coachman he knew, and to bid farewell to his
family, from whom he assumed he would in all probability have to
separate himself for some time.

While we were waiting for the coachman we had tea and supper,
talking the while, in a fairly calm and composed manner, with the
ladies of the house. We arrived at Freiberg early the following
morning, after various adventures, and I set out forthwith to
find the leaders of the reservist contingent with whom I was
already acquainted. Marschall advised them to requisition horses
and carts in the villages wherever they could do so. When they
had all set off in marching order for Dresden, and while I was
feeling impelled by my passionate interest in the fate of that
city to return to it once more, Marschall conceived the desire to
carry his commission further afield, and for this purpose asked
to be allowed to leave me. Whereupon I again turned my back on
the heights of the Erzgebirge, and was travelling by special
coach in the direction of Tharand, when I too was overcome with
sleep, and was only awakened by violent shouts and the sound of
some one holding a parley with the postillion. On opening my eyes
I found, to my astonishment, that the road was filled with armed
revolutionaries marching, not towards, but away from Dresden, and
some of them were trying to commandeer the coach to relieve their
weariness on the way back.

'What is the matter?' I cried. 'Where are you going?'

'Home,' was the reply. 'It is all over in Dresden. The provincial
government is close behind us in that carriage down there.'

I shot out of the coach like a dart, leaving it at the disposal
of the tired men, and hurried on, down the steeply sloping road,
to meet the ill-fated party. And there I actually found them--
Heubner, Bakunin, and Martin, the energetic post-office clerk,
the two latter armed with muskets--in a smart hired carriage from
Dresden which was coming slowly up the hill. On the box were, as
I supposed, the secretaries, while as many as possible of the
weary National Guard struggled for seats behind. I hastened to
swing myself into the coach, and so came in for a conversation
which thereupon took place between the driver, who was also the
owner of the coach, and the provisional government. The man was
imploring them to spare his carriage, which, he said, was very
lightly sprung and quite unequal to carrying such a load; he
begged that the people should be told not to seat themselves
behind and in front. But Bakunin remained quite unconcerned, and
elected to give me a short account of the retreat from Dresden,
which had been successfully achieved without loss. He had had the
trees in the newly planted Maximilian Avenue felled early in the
morning to form a barricade against a possible flank attack of
cavalry, and had been immensely entertained by the lamentations
of the inhabitants, who during the process did nothing but bewail
their Scheene Beeme. [FOOTNOTE: Saxon corruption of schtine
Bourne, beautiful trees.--EDITOR.] All this time our driver's
lamentations over his coach were growing more importunate.
Finally he broke into loud sobs and tears, upon which Bakunin,
regarding him with positive pleasure, called out: 'The tears of a
Philistine are nectar for the gods.' He would not vouchsafe him a
word, but Heubner and I found the scene tiresome, whereupon he
asked me whether we two at least should not get out, as he could
not ask it of the others. As a matter of fact, it was high time
to leave the coach, as some new contingents of revolutionaries
had formed up in rank and file all along the highway to salute
the provisional government and receive orders. Heubner strode
down the line with great dignity, acquainted the leaders with the
state of affairs, and exhorted them to keep their trust in the
righteousness of the cause for which so many had shed their
blood. All were now to retire to Freiberg, there to await further
orders.

A youngish man of serious mien now stepped forward from the ranks
of the rebels to place himself under the special protection of
the provisional government. He was a certain Menzdorff, a German
Catholic priest whom I had had the advantage of meeting in
Dresden. (It was he who, in the course of a significant
conversation, had first induced me to read Feuerbach.) He had
been dragged along as a prisoner and abominably treated by the
Chemnitz municipal guard on this particular march, having
originally been the instigator of a demonstration to force that
body to take up arms and march to Dresden. He owed his freedom
only to the chance meeting with other better disposed volunteer
corps. We saw this Chemnitz town guard ourselves, stationed far
away on a hill. They sent representatives to beseech Heubner to
tell them how things stood. When they had received the
information required, and had been told that the fight would be
continued in a determined manner, they invited the provisional
government to quarter at Chemnitz. As soon as they rejoined their
main body we saw them wheel round and turn back.

With many similar interruptions the somewhat disorganised
procession reached Freiberg. Here some friends of Heubner's came
to meet him in the streets with the urgent request not to plunge
their native place into the misery of desperate street-fighting
by establishing the provisional government there. Heubner made no
reply to this, but requested Bakunin and myself to accompany him
into his house for a consultation. First we had to witness the
painful meeting between Heubner and his wife; in a few words he
pointed out the gravity and importance of the task assigned to
him, reminding her that it was for Germany and the high destiny
of his country that he was staking his life.

Breakfast was then prepared, and after the meal, during which a
fairly cheerful mood prevailed, Heubner made a short speech to
Bakunin, speaking quietly but firmly. 'My dear Bakunin,' he said
(his previous acquaintance with Bakunin was so slight that he did
not even know how to pronounce his name), 'before we decide
anything further, I must ask you to state clearly whether your
political aim is really the Red Republic, of which they tell me
you are a partisan. Tell me frankly, so that I may know if I can
rely on your friendship in the future?'

Bakunin explained briefly that he had no scheme for any political
form of government, and would not risk his life for any of them.
As for his own far-reaching desires and hopes, they had nothing
whatever to do with the street-fighting in Dresden and all that
this implied for Germany. He had looked upon the rising in
Dresden as a foolish, ludicrous movement until he realised the
effect of Heubner's noble and courageous example. From that
moment every political consideration and aim had been put in the
background by his sympathy with this heroic attitude, and he had
immediately resolved to assist this excellent man with all the
devotion and energy of a friend. He knew, of course, that he
belonged to the so-called moderate party, of whose political
future he was not able to form an opinion, as he had not profited
much by his opportunities of studying the position of the various
parties in Germany.

Heubner declared himself satisfied by this reply, and proceeded
to ask Bakunin's opinion of the present state of things--whether
it would not be conscientious and reasonable to dismiss the men
and give up a struggle which might be considered hopeless. In
reply Bakunin insisted, with his usual calm assurance, that
whoever else threw up the sponge, Heubner must certainly not do
so. He had been the first member of the provisional government,
and it was he who had given the call to arms. The call had been
obeyed, and hundreds of lives had been sacrificed; to scatter the
people again would look as if these sacrifices had been made to
idle folly. Even if they were the only two left, they still ought
not to forsake their posts. If they went under their lives might
be forfeit, but their honour must remain unsullied, so that a
similar appeal in the future might not drive every one to
despair.

This was quite enough for Heubner. He at once made out a summons
for the election of a representative assembly for Saxony, to be
held at Chemnitz. He thought that, with the assistance of the
populace and of the numerous insurgent bands who were arriving
from all quarters, he would be able to hold the town as the
headquarters of a provisional government until the general
situation in Germany had become more settled. In the midst of
these discussions, Stephan Born walked into the room to report
that he had brought the armed bands right into Freiberg, in good
order and without any losses. This young man was a compositor who
had contributed greatly to Heubner's peace of mind during the
last three days in Dresden by taking over the chief command. His
simplicity of manner made a very encouraging impression on us,
particularly when we heard his report. When, however, Heubner
asked whether he would undertake to defend Freiberg against the
troops which might be expected to attack at any moment, he
declared that this was an experienced officer's job, and that he
himself was no soldier and knew nothing of strategy. Under these
circumstances it seemed better, if only to gain time, to fall
back on the more thickly populated town of Chemnitz. The first
thing to be done, however, was to see that the revolutionaries,
who were assembled in large numbers at Freiberg, were properly
cared for, and Born went off immediately to make preliminary
arrangements. Heubner also took leave of us, and went to refresh
his tired brain by an hour's sleep. I was left alone on the sofa
with Bakunin, who soon fell towards me, overcome by irresistible
drowsiness, and dropped the terrific weight of his head on to my
shoulder. As I saw that he would not wake if I shook off this
burden, I pushed him aside with some difficulty, and took leave
both of the sleeper and of Heubner's house; for I wished to see
for myself, as I had done for many days past, what course these
extraordinary events were taking. I therefore went to the Town
Hall, where I found the townspeople entertaining to the best of
their ability a blustering horde of excited revolutionaries both
within and without the walls. To my surprise, I found Heubner
there in the full swing of work. I thought he was asleep at home,
but the idea of leaving the people even for an hour without a
counsellor had driven away all thought of rest. He had lost no
time in superintending the organisation of a sort of commandant's
office, and was again occupied with drafting and signing
documents in the midst of the uproar that raged on all sides. It
was not long before Bakunin too put in an appearance, principally
in search of a good officer--who was not, however, forthcoming.
The commandant of a large contingent from the Vogtland, an oldish
man, raised Bakunin's hopes by the impassioned energy of his
speeches, and he would have had him appointed commandant-general
on the spot. But it seemed as if any real decision were
impossible in that frenzy and confusion, and as the only hope of
mastering it seemed to be in reaching Chemnitz, Heubner gave the
order to march on towards that town as soon as every one had had
food. Once this was settled, I told my friends I should go on in
advance of their column to Chemnitz, where I should find them
again next day; for I longed to be quit of this chaos. I actually
caught the coach, the departure of which was fixed for that time,
and obtained a seat in it. But the revolutionaries were just
marching off on the same road, and we were told that we must wait
until they had passed to avoid being caught in the whirlpool.
This meant considerable delay, and for a long while I watched the
peculiar bearing of the patriots as they marched out. I noticed
in particular a Vogtland regiment, whose marching step was fairly
orthodox, following the beat of a drummer who tried to vary the
monotony of his instrument in an artistic manner by hitting the
wooden frame alternately with the drumhead. The unpleasant
rattling tone thus produced reminded me in ghostly fashion of the
rattling of the skeletons' bones in the dance round the gallows
by night which Berlioz had brought home to my imagination with
such terrible realism in his performance of the last movement of
his Sinfonie Fantastique in Paris.

Suddenly the desire seized me to look up the friends I had left
behind, and travel to Chemnitz in their company if possible. I
found they had quitted the Town Hall, and on reaching Heubner's
house I was told that he was asleep. I therefore went back to the
coach, which, however, was still putting off its departure, as
the road was blocked with troops. I walked nervously up and down
for some time, then, losing faith in the journey by coach, I went
back again to Heubner's house to offer myself definitely as a
travelling companion. But Heubner and Bakunin had already left
home, and I could find no traces of them. In desperation I
returned once more to the coach, and found it by this time really
ready to start. After various delays and adventures it brought me
late at night to Chemnitz, where I got out and betook myself to
the nearest inn. At five o'clock the next morning I got up (after
a few hours' sleep) and set out to find my brother-in-law
Wolfram's house, which was about a quarter of an hour's walk from
the town. On the way I asked a sentinel of the town guard whether
he knew anything about the arrival of the provisional government.

'Provisional government?' was the reply. 'Why, it's all up with
that.' I did not understand him, nor was I able to learn anything
about the state of things when I first reached the house of my
relatives, for my brother-in-law had been sent into the town as
special constable. It was only on his return home, lute in the
afternoon, that I heard what had taken place in one hotel at
Chemnitz while I had been resting in another inn. Heubner,
Bakunin, and the man called Martin, whom I have mentioned
already, had, it seemed, arrived before me in a hackney-coach at
the gates of Chemnitz. On being asked for their names Heubner had
announced himself in a tone of authority, and had bidden the town
councillors come to him at a certain hotel. They had no sooner
reached the hotel than they all three collapsed from excessive
fatigue. Suddenly the police broke into the room and arrested
them in the name of the local government, upon which they only
begged to have a few hours' quiet sleep, pointing out that flight
was out of the question in their present condition. I heard
further that they had been removed to Altenburg under a strong
military escort. My brother-in-law was obliged to confess that
the Chemnitz municipal guard, which had been forced to start for
Dresden much against its will, and had resolved at the very
outset to place itself at the disposal of the royal forces on
arriving there, had deceived Heubner by inviting him to Chemnitz,
and had lured him into the trap. They had reached Chemnitz long
before Heubner, and had taken over the guard at the gates with
the object of seeing him arrive and of preparing for his arrest
at once. My brother-in-law had been very anxious about me too, as
he had been told in furious tones by the leaders of the town
guard that I had been seen in close association with the
revolutionaries. He thought it a wonderful intervention of
Providence that I had not arrived at Chemnitz with them and gone
to the same inn, in which case their fate would certainly have
been mine. The recollection of my escape from almost certain
death in duels with the most experienced swordsmen in my student
days flashed across me like a flash of lightning. This last
terrible experience made such an impression on me that I was
incapable of breathing a word in connection with what had
happened. My brother-in-law, in response to urgent appeals--from
my wife in particular, who was much concerned for my personal
safety--undertook to convey me to Altenburg in his carriage by
night. From there I continued my journey by coach to Weimar,
where I had originally planned to spend my holidays, little
thinking that I should arrive by such devious ways.

The dreamy unreality of my state of mind at this time is best
explained by the apparent seriousness with which, on meeting
Liszt again, I at once began to discuss what seemed to be the
sole topic of any real interest to him in connection with me--the
forthcoming revival of Tannhauser at Weimar. I found it very
difficult to confess to this friend that I had not left Dresden
in the regulation way for a conductor of the royal opera. To tell
the truth, I had a very hazy conception of the relation in which
I stood to the law of my country (in the narrow sense). Had I
done anything criminal in the eye of the law or not? I found it
impossible to come to any conclusion about it. Meanwhile,
alarming news of the terrible conditions in Dresden continued to
pour into Weimar. Genast, the stage manager, in particular,
aroused great excitement by spreading the report that Rockel, who
was well known at Weimar, had been guilty of arson. Liszt must
soon have gathered from my conversation, in which I did not take
the trouble to dissimulate, that I too was suspiciously connected
with these terrible events, though my attitude with regard to
them misled him for some time. For I was not by any means
prepared to proclaim myself a combatant in the recent fights, and
that for reasons quite other than would have seemed valid in the
eyes of the law. My friend was therefore encouraged in his
delusion by the unpremeditated effect of my attitude. When we met
at the house of Princess Caroline of Wittgenstein, to whom I had
been introduced the year before when she paid her flying visit to
Dresden, we were able to hold stimulating conversations on all
sorts of artistic topics. One afternoon, for instance, a lively
discussion sprang up from a description I had given of a tragedy
to be entitled Jesus of Nazareth. Liszt maintained a discreet
silence after I had finished, whereas the Princess protested
vigorously against my proposal to bring such a subject on to the
stage. From the lukewarm attempt I made to support the
paradoxical theories I had put forward, I realised the state of
my mind at that time. Although it was not very evident to
onlookers, I had been, and still was, shaken to the very depths
of my being by my recent experiences.

In due course an orchestral rehearsal of Tannhauser took place,
which in various ways stimulated the artist in me afresh. Liszt's
conducting, though mainly concerned with the musical rather than
the dramatic side, filled me for the first time with the
flattering warmth of emotion roused by the consciousness of being
understood by another mind in full sympathy with my own. At the
same time I was able, in spite of my dreamy condition, to observe
critically the standard of capacity exhibited by the singers and
their chorus-master. After the rehearsal I, together with the
musical director, Stohr, and Gotze the singer, accepted Liszt's
invitation to a simple dinner, at a different inn from the one
where he lived. I thus had occasion to take alarm at a trait in
his character which was entirely new to me. After being stirred
up to a certain pitch of excitement his mood became positively
alarming, and he almost gnashed his teeth in a passion of fury
directed against a certain section of society which had also
aroused my deepest indignation. I was strongly affected by this
strange experience with this wonderful man, but I was unable to
see the association of ideas which had led to his terrible
outburst. I was therefore left in a state of amazement, while
Liszt had to recover during the night from a violent attack of
nerves which his excitement had produced. Another surprise was in
store for me the next morning, when I found my friend fully
equipped for a journey to Karlsruhe--the circumstances which made
it necessary being absolutely incomprehensible to me. Liszt
invited Director Stohr and myself to accompany him as far as
Eisenach. On our way there we were stopped by Beaulieu, the Lord
Chamberlain, who wished to know whether I was prepared to be
received by the Grand Duchess of Weimar, a sister of the Emperor
Nicolas, at Eisenach castle. As my excuse on the score of
unsuitable travelling costume was not admitted, Liszt accepted in
my name, and I really met with a surprisingly kind reception that
evening from the Grand Duchess, who chatted with me in the
friendliest way, and introduced me to her chamberlain with all
due ceremony. Liszt maintained afterwards that his noble
patroness had been informed that I should be wanted by the
authorities in Dresden within the next few days, and had
therefore hastened to make my personal acquaintance at once,
knowing that it would compromise her too heavily later on.

Liszt continued his journey from Eisenach, leaving me to be
entertained and looked after by Stohr and the musical director
Kuhmstedt, a diligent and skilful master of counterpoint with
whom I paid my first visit to the Wartburg, which had not then
been restored. I was filled with strange musings as to my fate
when I visited this castle. Here I was actually on the point of
entering, for the first time, the building which was so full of
meaning for me; here, too, I had to tell myself that the days of
my further sojourn in Germany were numbered. And in fact the news
from Dresden, when we returned to Weimar the next day, was
serious indeed. Liszt, on his return on the third day, found a
letter from my wife, who had not dared to write direct to me. She
reported that the police had searched my house in Dresden, to
which she had returned, and that she had, moreover been warned on
no account to allow me to return to that city, as a warrant had
been taken out against me, and I was shortly to be served with a
writ and arrested. Liszt, who was now solely concerned for my
personal safety, called in a friend who had some experience of
law, to consider what should be done to rescue me from the danger
that threatened me. Von Watzdorf, the minister whom I had already
visited, had been of opinion that I should, if required, submit
quietly to being taken to Dresden, and that the journey would be
made in a respectable private carriage. On the other hand,
reports which had reached us of the brutal way in which the
Prussian troops in Dresden had gone to work in applying the state
of siege were of so alarming a nature that Liszt and his friends
in council urged my speedy departure from Weimar, where it would
be impossible to protect me. But I insisted on taking leave of my
wife, whose anxiety was great, before leaving Germany, and begged
to be allowed to stay a little longer at least in the
neighbourhood of Weimar. This was taken into consideration, and
Professor Siebert suggested my taking temporary shelter with a
friendly steward at the village of Magdala, which was three hours
distant. I drove there the following morning to introduce myself
to this kind steward and protector as Professor Werder from
Berlin, who, with a letter of recommendation from Professor
Siebert, had come to turn his financial studies to practical
account in helping to administer these estates. Here in rural
seclusion I spent three days, entertainment of a peculiar nature
being provided by the meeting of a popular assembly, which
consisted of the remainder of the contingent of revolutionaries
which had marched off towards Dresden and had now returned in
disorder. I listened with curious feelings, amounting almost to
contempt, to the speeches on this occasion, which were of every
kind and description. On the second day of my stay my host's wife
came back from Weimar (where it was market-day) full of a curious
tale: the composer of an opera which was being performed there on
that very day had been obliged to leave Weimar suddenly because
the warrant for his arrest had arrived from Dresden. My host, who
had been let into my secret by Professor Seibert, asked playfully
what his name was. As his wife did not seem to know, he came to
her assistance with the suggestion that perhaps it was Rockel
whose name was familiar at Weimar.

'Yes,' she said, 'Rockel, that was his name, quite right.'

My host laughed loudly, and said that he would not be so stupid
as to let them catch him, in spite of his opera.

At last, on 22nd May, my birthday, Minna actually arrived at
Magdala. She had hastened to Weimar on receiving my letter, and
had proceeded from there according to instructions, bent on
persuading me at all costs to flee the country immediately and
for good. No attempt to raise her to the level of my own mood was
successful; she persisted in regarding me as an ill-advised,
inconsiderate person who had plunged both himself and her into
the most terrible situation. It had been arranged that I should
meet her the next evening in the house of Professor Wolff at Jena
to take a last farewell. She was to go by way of Weimar, while I
took the footpath from Magdala. I started accordingly on my walk
of about six hours, and came over the plateau into the little
university town (which now received me hospitably for the first
time) at sunset. I found my wife again at the house of Professor
Wolff, who, thanks to Liszt, was already my friend, and with the
addition of a certain Professor Widmann another conference was
held on the subject of my further escape. A writ was actually out
against me for being strongly suspected of participation in the
Dresden rising, and I could not under any circumstances depend on
a safe refuge in any of the German federal states. Liszt insisted
on my going to Paris, where I could find a new field for my work,
while Widmann advised me not to go by the direct route through
Frankfort and Baden, as the rising was still in full swing there,
and the police would certainly exercise praiseworthy vigilance
over incoming travellers with suspicious-looking passports. The
way through Bavaria would be the safest, as all was quiet there
again; I could then make for Switzerland, and the journey to
Paris from there could be engineered without any danger. As I
needed a passport for the journey, Professor Widmann offered me
his own, which had been issued at Tubingen and had not been
brought up to date. My wife was quite in despair, and the parting
from her caused me real pain. I set off in the mail-coach and
travelled, without further hindrance, through many towns (amongst
them Rudolstadt, a place full of memories for me) to the Bavarian
frontier. From there I continued my journey by mail-coach
straight to Lindau. At the gates I, together with the other
passengers, was asked for my passport. I passed the night in a
state of strange, feverish excitement, which lasted until the
departure of the steamer on Lake Constance early in the morning.
My mind was full of the Swabian dialect, as spoken by Professor
Widmann, with whose passport I was travelling. I pictured to
myself my dealings with the Bavarian police should I have to
converse with them in accordance with the above-mentioned
irregularities in that document. A prey to feverish unrest, I
spent the whole night trying to perfect myself in the Swabian
dialect, but, as I was amused to find, without the smallest
success. I had braced myself to meet the crucial moment early the
next morning, when the policeman came into my room and, not
knowing to whom the passports belonged, gave me three at random
to choose from. With joy in my heart I seized my own, and
dismissed the dreaded messenger in the most friendly way. Once on
board the steamer I realised with true satisfaction that I had
now stepped on to Swiss territory. It was a lovely spring
morning; across the broad lake I could gaze at the Alpine
landscape as it spread itself before my eyes. When I stepped on
to Republican soil at Rorschach, I employed the first moments in
writing a few lines home to tell of my safe arrival in
Switzerland and my deliverance from all danger. The coach drive
through the pleasant country of St. Gall to Zurich cheered me up
wonderfully, and when I drove down from Oberstrass into Zurich
that evening, the last day in May, at six o'clock, and saw for
the first time the Glarner Alps that encircle the lake gleaming
in the sunset, I at once resolved, though without being fully
conscious of it, to avoid everything that could prevent my
settling here.

I had been the more willing to accept my friends' suggestion to
take the Swiss route to Paris, as I knew I should find an old
acquaintance, Alexander Muller, at Zurich. I hoped with his help
to obtain a passport to France, as I was anxious not to arrive
there as a political refugee. I had been on very friendly terms
with Muller once upon a time at Wurzburg. He had been settled at
Zurich for a long time as a teacher of music; this I learned from
a pupil of his, Wilhelm Baumgartner, who had called on me in
Dresden some years back to bring me a greeting from this old
friend. On that occasion I entrusted the pupil with a copy of the
score of Tannhauser for his master, by way of remembrance, and
this kind attention had not fallen on barren soil: Muller and
Baumgartner, whom I visited forthwith, introduced me at once to
Jacob Sulzer and Franz Hagenbuch, two cantonal secretaries who
were the most likely, among all their good friends, to compass
the immediate fulfilment of my desire. These two people, who had
been joined by a few intimates, received me with such respectful
curiosity and sympathy that I felt at home with them at once. The
great assurance and moderation with which they commented on the
persecutions which had overtaken me, as seen from their usual
simple republican standpoint, opened to me a conception of civil
life which seemed to lift me to an entirely new sphere. I felt so
safe and protected here, whereas in my own country I had, without
quite realising it, come to be considered a criminal owing to the
peculiar connection between my disgust at the public attitude
towards art and the general political disturbances. To prepossess
the two secretaries entirely in my favour (one of them, Sulzer,
had enjoyed an excellent classical education), my friends
arranged a meeting one evening at which I was to read my poem on
the Death of Siegfried. I am prepared to swear that I never had
more attentive listeners, among men, than on that evening. The
immediate effect of my success was the drawing up of a fully
valid federal passport for the poor German under warrant of
arrest, armed with which I started gaily on my journey to Paris
after quite a short stay at Zurich. From Strassburg, where I was
enthralled by the fascination of the world-famous minster, I
travelled towards Paris by what was then the best means of
locomotion, the so-called malle-poste. I remember a remarkable
phenomenon in connection with this conveyance. Till then the
noise of the cannonade and musketry in the fighting at Dresden
had been persistently re-echoing in my ears, especially in a
half-waking condition; now the humming of the wheels, as we
rolled rapidly along the highroad, cast such a spell upon me that
for the whole of the journey I seemed to hear the melody of
Freude, schoner Gotterfunken [Footnote: See note on page 486.]
from the Ninth Symphony being played, as it were, on deep bass
instruments.

From the time of my entering Switzerland till my arrival in Paris
my spirits, which had sunk into a dreamlike apathy, rose
gradually to a level of freedom and comfort that I had never
enjoyed before. I felt like a bird in the air whose destiny is
not to founder in a morass; but soon after my arrival in Paris,
in the first week of June, a very palpable reaction set in. I had
had an introduction from Liszt to his former secretary Belloni,
who felt it his duty, in loyalty to the instructions received, to
put me into communication with a literary man, a certain Gustave
Vaisse, with the object of being commissioned to write an opera
libretto for production in Paris. I did not, however, make the
personal acquaintance of Vaisse. The idea did not please me, and
I found sufficient excuse for warding off the negotiations by
saying I was afraid of the epidemic of cholera which was said to
be raging in the city. I was staying in the Rue Notre Dame de
Lorette for the sake of being near Belloni. Through this street
funeral processions, announced by the muffled drum boats of the
National Guard, passed practically every hour. Though the heat
was stifling, I was strictly forbidden to touch water, and was
advised to exercise the greatest precaution with regard to diet
in every respect. Besides this weight of uneasiness on my
spirits, the whole outward aspect of Paris, as it then appeared,
had the most depressing effect on me. The motto, liberte,
egalite, fraternite was still to be seen on all the public
buildings and other establishments, but, on the other hand, I was
alarmed at seeing the first garcons caissiers making their way
from the bank with their long money-sacks over their shoulders
and their large portfolios in their hands. I had never met them so
frequently as now, just when the old capitalist regime, after its
triumphant struggle against the once dreaded socialist
propaganda, was exerting itself vigorously to regain the public
confidence by its almost insulting pomp. I had gone, as it were,
mechanically into Schlesinger's music-shop, where a successor was
now installed--a much more pronounced type of Jew named Brandus,
of a very dirty appearance. The only person there to give me a
friendly welcome was the old clerk, Monsieur Henri. After I had
talked to him in loud tones for some time, as the shop was
apparently empty, he at length asked me with some embarrassment
whether I had not seen my master (votre maitre) Meyerbeer.

'Is Monsieur Meyerbeer here?' I asked.

'Certainly,' was the even more embarrassed reply; 'quite near,
over there behind the desk.'

And, sure enough, as I walked across to the desk Meyerbeer came
out, covered with confusion. He smiled and made some excuse about
pressing proof-sheets. He had been hiding there quietly for over
ten minutes since first hearing my voice. I had had enough after
my strange encounter with this apparition. It recalled so many
things affecting myself which reflected suspicion on the man, in
particular the significance of his behaviour towards me in Berlin
on the last occasion. However, as I had now nothing more to do
with him, I greeted him with a certain easy gaiety induced by the
regret I felt at seeing his manifest confusion on becoming
cognisant of my arrival in Paris. He took it for granted that I
should again seek my fortune there, and seemed much surprised
when I assured him, on the contrary, that the idea of having any
work there was odious to me.

'But Liszt published such a brilliant article about you in the
Journal des Debats,' he said.

'Ah,' I replied, 'it really had not occurred to me that the
enthusiastic devotion of a friend should be regarded as a mutual
speculation.'

'But the article made a sensation. It is incredible that you
should not seek to make any profit out of it.'

This offensive meddlesomeness roused me to protest to Meyerbeer
with some violence that I was concerned with anything rather than
with the production of artistic work, particularly just at that
time when the course of events seemed to indicate that the whole
world was undergoing a reaction.

'But what do you expect to get out of the revolution?' he
replied. 'Are you going to write scores for the barricades?'

Whereupon I assured him that I was not thinking of writing any
scores at all. We parted, obviously without having arrived at a
mutual understanding.

In the street I was also stopped by Moritz Schlesinger, who,
being equally under the influence of Liszt's brilliant article,
evidently considered me a perfect prodigy. He too thought I must
be counting on making a hit in Paris, and was sure that I had a
very good chance of doing so.

'Will you undertake my business?' I asked him. 'I have no money.
Do you really think the performance of an opera by an unknown
composer can be anything but a matter of money?'

'You are quite right,' said Moritz, and left me on the spot.

I turned from these disagreeable encounters in the plague-
stricken capital of the world to inquire the fate of my Dresden
companions, for some of those with whom I was intimate had also
reached Paris, when I called on Desplechins, who had painted the
scenery for Tannhauser. I found Semper there, who had, like
myself, been deposited in this city. We met again with no little
pleasure, although we could not help smiling at our grotesque
situation. Semper had retired from the battle when the famous
barricade, which he in his capacity of architect kept under close
observation, had been surrounded. (He thought it impossible for
it to be captured.) All the same, he considered that he had
exposed himself quite sufficiently to make it state of siege and
were occupying Dresden. He considered himself lucky as a native
of Holstein to be dependent, not on the German, but on the Danish
government for a passport, as this had helped him to reach Paris
without difficulty. When I expressed my real and heartfelt regret
at the turn of affairs which had torn him from a professional
undertaking on which he had just started--the completion of the
Dresden Museum--he refused to take it too seriously, saying it
had given him a great deal of worry. In spite of our trying
situation, it was with Semper that I spent the only bright hours
of my stay in Paris. We were soon joined by another refugee,
young Heine, who had once wished to paint my Lohengrin scenery.
He had no qualms about his future, for his master Desplechins was
willing to give him employment. I alone felt I had been pitched
quite aimlessly into Paris. I had a passionate desire to leave
this cholera-laden, atmosphere, and Belloni offered me an
opportunity which I promptly and joyfully seized. He invited me
to follow himself and his family to a country place near La
Ferte-sous-Jouarre, where I could be refreshed by pure air and
absolute quiet, and wait for a change for the better in my
position. I made the short journey to Rueil after another week in
Paris, and took for the time being a poor lodging (one room,
built with recesses) in the house of Monsieur Raphael, a wine
merchant, close by the village mairie where the Belloni family
were staying. Here I waited further developments. During the
period when all news from Germany ceased I tried to occupy myself
as far as possible with reading. After going through Proudhon's
writings, and in particular his De la propriete, in such a manner
as to glean comfort for my situation in curiously divers ways, I
entertained myself for a considerable time with Lamartine's
Histoire des Girondins, a most alluring and attractive work. One
day Belloni brought me news of the unfortunate rising in Paris,
which had been attempted on the 13th June by the Republicans
under Ledru-Rollin against the provisional government, which was
then in the full tide of reaction. Great as was the indignation
with which the news was received by my host and the mayor of the
place (a relative of his, at whose table we ate our modest daily
meal), it made, on the whole, little impression on me, as my
attention was still fixed in great agitation on the events which
were taking place on the Rhine, and particularly on the grand-
duchy of Baden, which had been made forfeit to a provisional
government. When, however, the news reached me from this quarter
also that the Prussians had succeeded in subduing a movement
which had not at first seemed hopeless, I felt extraordinarily
downcast.

I was compelled to consider my position carefully, and the
necessity of conquering my difficulties helped to allay the
excitement to which I was a prey. The letters from my Weimar
friends, as well as those from my wife, now brought me completely
to my senses. The former expressed themselves very curtly about
my behaviour with regard to recent events. The opinion was, that
for the moment there would be nothing for me to do, and
especially not in Dresden, or at the grand-ducal court, 'as one
could not very well knock at battered doors'; 'on ne frappe pas a
des portes enfoncees' (Princess von Wittgenstein to Belloni).

I did not know what to reply, for I had never dreamt of expecting
anything to come from their intervening on my behalf in that
quarter; consequently I was quite satisfied that they sent me
temporarily financial assistance. With this money I made up my
mind to leave for Zurich and ask Alex Muller to give me shelter
for a while, as his house was sufficiently large to accommodate a
guest. My saddest moment came when, after a long silence, I at
last received a letter from my wife. She wrote that she could not
dream of living with me again; that after I had so unscrupulously
thrown away a connection and position, the like of which would
never again present itself to me, no woman could reasonably be
expected to take any further interest in my future enterprises.

I fully appreciated my wife's unfortunate position; I could in no
way assist her, except by advising her to sell our Dresden
furniture, and by making an appeal on her behalf to my relatives
in Leipzig.

Until then I had been able to think more lightly of the misery of
her position, simply because I had imagined her to be more deeply
in sympathy with what agitated me. Often during the recent
extraordinary events I had even believed that she understood my
feelings. Now, however, she had disillusioned me on this point:
she could see in me no more than what the public saw, and the one
redeeming point of her severe judgment was that she excused my
behaviour on the score that I was reckless. After I had begged
Liszt to do what he could for my wife, I soon began to regard her
unexpected behaviour with more equanimity. In reply to her
announcement that she would not write to me again for the
present, I said that I had also resolved to spare her all further
anxiety about my very doubtful fate, by ceasing from
communicating with her. I surveyed the panorama of our long years
of association critically in my mind's eye, beginning with that
first stormy year of our married life, that had been so full of
sorrow. Our youthful days of worry and care in Paris had
undoubtedly been of benefit to us both. The courage and patience
with which she had faced our difficulties, while I on my part had
tried to end them by dint of hard work, had linked us together
with bonds of iron. Minna was rewarded for all these privations
by Dresden successes, and more especially by the highly enviable
position I had held there. Her position as wife of the conductor
(Frau Kapellmeisterin) had brought her the fulfilment of her
dearest wishes, and all those things which conspired to make my
work in this official post so intolerable to me, were to her no
more than so many threats directed against her smug content. The
course I had adopted with regard to Tannhauser had already made
her doubtful of my success at the theatres, and had robbed her of
all courage and confidence in our future. The more I deviated
from the path which she regarded as the only profitable one, due
partly to the change of my views (which I grew ever less willing
to communicate to her), and partly to the modification in my
attitude towards the stage, the more she retreated from that
position of close fellowship with me which she had enjoyed in
former years, and which she thought herself justified in
connecting in some way with my successes.

She looked upon my conduct with regard to the Dresden catastrophe
as the outcome of this deviation from the right path, and
attributed it to the influence of unscrupulous persons
(particularly the unfortunate Rockel), who were supposed to have
dragged me with them to ruin, by appealing to my vanity. Deeper
than all these disagreements, however, which, after all, were
concerned only with external circumstances, was the consciousness
of our fundamental incompatibility, which to me had become ever
more and more apparent since the day of our reconciliation. From
the very beginning we had had scenes of the most violent
description: never once after these frequent quarrels had she
admitted herself in the wrong or tried to be friends again.

The necessity of speedily restoring our domestic peace, as well
as my conviction (confirmed by every one of her extravagant
outbursts) that, in view of the great disparity of our characters
and especially of our educations, it devolved upon me to prevent
such scenes by observing great caution in my behaviour, always
led me to take the entire blame for what had happened upon myself,
and to mollify Minna by showing her that I was sorry.
Unfortunately, and to my intense grief, I was forced to recognise
that by acting in this way I lost all my power over her
affections, and especially over her character. Now we stood in a
position in which I could not possibly resort to the same means
of reconciliation, for it would have meant my being inconsistent
in all my views and actions. And then I found myself confronted
by such hardness in the woman whom I had spoilt by my leniency,
that it was out of the question to expect her to acknowledge the
injustice done to myself. Suffice it to say that the wreck of my
married life had contributed not inconsiderably to the ruin of my
position in Dresden, and to the careless manner in which I
treated it, for instead of finding help, strength, and
consolation at home, I found my wife unwittingly conspiring
against me, in league with all the other hostile circumstances
which then beset me. After I had got over the first shock of her
heartless behaviour, I was absolutely clear about this. I
remember that I did not suffer any great sorrow, but that on the
contrary, with the conviction of being now quite helpless, an
almost exalted calm came over me when I realised that up to the
present my life had been built on a foundation of sand and
nothing more. At all events, the fact that I stood absolutely
alone did much towards restoring my peace of mind, and in my
distress I now found strength and comfort even in the fact of my
dire poverty. At last assistance arrived from Weimar. I accepted
it eagerly, and it was the means of extricating me from my
present useless life and stranded hopes.

My next move was to find a place of refuge--one, however, which
had but little attraction for me, seeing that in it there was not
the slightest hope of my being able to make any further headway
in the paths along which I had hitherto progressed. This refuge
was Zurich, a town devoid of all art in the public sense, and
where for the first time I met simple-hearted people who knew
nothing about me as a musician, but who, as it appeared, felt
drawn towards me by the power of my personality alone. I arrived
at Muller's house and asked him to let me have a room, at the
same time giving him what remained of my capital, namely twenty
francs. I quickly discovered that my old friend was embarrassed
by my perfectly open confidence in him, and that he was at his
wit's end to know what to do with me. I soon gave up the large
room containing a grand piano, which he had allotted to me on the
impulse of the moment, and retired to a modest little bedroom.
The meals were my great trial, not because I was fastidious, but
because I could not digest thorn. Outside my friend's house, on
the contrary, I enjoyed what, considering the habits of the
locality, was the most luxurious reception. The same young men
who had been so kind to me on my first journey through Zurich
again showed themselves anxious to be continually in my company,
and this was especially the case with one young fellow called
Jakob Sulzer. He had to be thirty years of age before he was
entitled to become a member of the Zurich government, and he
therefore still had several years to wait. In spite of his youth,
however, the impression he made on all those with whom he came in
contact was that of a man of riper years, whose character was
formed. When I was asked long afterwards whether I had ever met a
man who, morally speaking, was the beau-ideal of real character
and uprightness, I could, on reflection, think of none other than
this newly gained friend, Jakob Sulzer.

He owed his early appointment as permanent Cantonal Secretary
(Staatsschreiber), one of the most excellent government posts in
the canton of Zurich, to the recently returned liberal party, led
by Alfred Escher. As this party could not employ the more
experienced members of the older conservative side in the public
offices, their policy was to choose exceptionally gifted young
men for these positions. Sulzer showed extraordinary promise, and
their choice accordingly soon lighted on him. He had only just
returned from the Berlin and Bonn universities with the intention
of establishing himself as professor of philology at the
university in his native town, when he was made a member of the
new government. To fit himself for his post he had to stay in
Geneva for six months to perfect himself in the French language,
which he had neglected during his philological studies. He was
quick-witted and industrious, as well as independent and firm,
and he never allowed himself to be swayed by any party tactics.
Consequently he rose very rapidly to high positions in the
government, to which he rendered valuable and important services,
first as Minister of Finance, a post he held for many years, and
later with particular distinction as member of the School
Federation. His unexpected acquaintance with me seemed to place
him in a sort of dilemma; from the philological and classical
studies which he had entered upon of his own choice, he suddenly
found himself torn away in the most bewildering manner by this
unexpected summons from the government. It almost seemed as if
his meeting with me had made him regret having accepted the
appointment. As he was a person of great culture, my poem,
Siegfried's Death, naturally revealed to him my knowledge of
German antiquity. He had also studied this subject, but with
greater philological accuracy than I could possibly have aspired
to. When, later on, he became acquainted with my manner of
writing music, this peculiarly serious and reserved man became so
thoroughly interested in my sphere of art, so far removed from
his own field of labour, that, as he himself confessed, he felt
it his duty to fight against these disturbing influences by being
intentionally brusque and curt with me. In the beginning of my
stay in Zurich, however, he delighted in being led some distance
astray in the realms of art. The old-fashioned official residence
of the first Cantonal Secretary was often the scene of unique
gatherings, composed of people such as I would be sure to
attract. It might even be said that these social functions
occurred rather more frequently than was advisable for the
reputation of a civil servant of this little philistine state.
What attracted the musician Baumgartner more particularly to
these meetings was the product of Sulzer's vineyards in
Winterthur, to which our hosts treated his guests with the
greatest liberality. When in my moods of mad exuberance I gave
vent in dithyrambic effusions to my most extreme views on art and
life, my listeners often responded in a manner which, more often
than not, I was perfectly right in ascribing to the effects of
the wine rather than to the power of my enthusiasm. Once when
Professor Ettmuller, the Germanist and Edda scholar, had been
invited to listen to a reading of my Siegfried and had been led
home in a state of melancholy enthusiasm, there was a regular
outburst of wanton spirits among those who had remained behind. I
conceived the absurd idea of lifting all the doors of the state
official's house off their hinges.

Herr Hagenbuch, another servant of the state, seeing what
exertion this cost me, offered me the help of his gigantic
physique, and with comparative ease we succeeded in removing
every single door, and laying it aside, a proceeding at which
Sulzer merely smiled good-naturedly. The next day, however, when
we made inquiries, he told us that the replacing of those doors
(which must have been a terrible strain on his delicate
constitution) had taken him the whole night, as he had made up
his mind to keep the knowledge of our orgies from the sergeant,
who always arrived at a very early hour in the morning.

The extraordinary birdlike freedom of my existence had the effect
of exciting me more and more. I was often frightened at the
excessive outbursts of exaltation to which I was prone--no matter
whom I was with--and which led me to indulge in the most
extraordinary paradoxes in my conversation. Soon after I had
settled in Zurich I began to write down my various ideas about
things at which I had arrived through my private and artistic
experiences, as well as through the influence of the political
unrest of the day. As I had no choice but to try, to the best of
my ability, to earn something by my pen, I thought of sending a
series of articles to a great French journal such as the
National, which in those days was still extant. In these articles
I meant to propound my ideas (in my revolutionary way) on the
subject of modern art in its relation to society. I sent six of
them to an elderly friend of mine, Albert Franck, requesting him
to have them translated into French and to get them published.
This Franck was the brother of the better-known Hermann Franck,
now the head of the Franco-German bookselling firm, which had
originally belonged to my brother-in-law, Avenarius. He sent me
back my work with the very natural remark that it was out of the
question to expect the Parisian public to understand or
appreciate my articles, especially at such a critical moment.

I headed the manuscript Kunst und Revolution ('Art and
Revolution') and sent it to Otto Wigand in Leipzig, who actually
undertook to publish it in the form of a pamphlet, and sent me
five louis d'or for it. This unexpected success induced me to
continue to exploit my literary gifts. I looked among my papers
for the essay I had written the year before as the outcome of my
historical studies of the 'Nibelungen' legend; I gave it the
title of Die Nibelungen Weltgeschichte aus der Sage, and again
tried my luck by sending it to Wigand.

The sensational title of Kunst und Revolution, as well as the
notoriety the 'royal conductor' had gained as a political
refugee, had made the radical publisher hope that the scandal
that would arise on the publication of my articles would redound
to his benefit! I soon discovered that he was on the point of
issuing a second edition of Kunst und Revolution, without,
however, informing me of the fact. He also took over my new
pamphlet for another five louis d'or. This was the first time I
had earned money by means of published work, and I now began to
believe that I had reached that point when I should be able to
get the better of my misfortunes. I thought it over, and decided
to give public lectures in Zurich on subjects related to my
writings during the coming winter, hoping in that free and
haphazard fashion to keep body and soul together for a little
while, although I had no fixed appointment and did not intend to
work at music.

It seemed necessary for me to resort to these means, as I did not
know how otherwise to keep myself alive. Shortly after my arrival
in Zurich I had witnessed the coming of the fragments of the
Baden army, dispersed over Swiss territory, and accompanied by
fugitive volunteers, and this had made a painful and uncanny
impression upon me. The news of the surrender near Villagos by
Gorgey paralysed the last hopes as to the issue of the great
European struggle for liberty, which so far had been left quite
undecided. With some misgiving and anxiety I now turned my eyes
from all these occurrences in the outside world inwards to my own
soul.

I was accustomed to patronise the cafe litteraire, where I took
my coffee after my heavy mid-day meal, in a smoky atmosphere
surrounded by a merry and joking throng of men playing dominoes
and 'fast.' One day I stared at its common wall-paper
representing antique subjects, which in some inexplicable way
recalled a certain water-colour by Genelli to my mind, portraying
'The education of Dionysos by the Muses.' I had seen it at the
house of my brother-in-law Brockhaus in my young days, and it had
made a deep impression on me at the time. At this same place I
conceived the first ideas of my Kunstwerk der Zukunft ('The Art-
Work of the Future'), and it seemed a significant omen to me to
be roused one day out of one of my post-prandial dreams by the
news that Schroder-Devrient was staying in Zurich. I immediately
got up with the intention of calling on her at the neighbouring
hotel, 'Zum Schwerte,' but to my great dismay heard that she had
just left by steamer. I never saw her again, and long afterwards
only heard of her painful death from my wife, who in later years
became fairly intimate with her in Dresden.

After I had spent two remarkable summer months in this wild and
extraordinary fashion, I at last received reassuring news of
Minna, who had remained in Dresden. Although her manner of taking
leave of me had been both harsh and wounding, I could not bring
myself to believe I had completely parted from her. In a letter I
wrote to one of her relations, and which I presumed they would
forward, I made sympathetic inquiries about her, while I had
already done all that lay in my power, through repeated appeals
to Liszt, to ensure her being well cared for. I now received a
direct reply, which, in addition to the fact that it testified to
the vigour and activity with which she had fought her
difficulties, at the same time showed me that she earnestly
desired to be reunited with me. It was almost in terms of
contempt that she expressed her grave doubts as to the
possibility of my being able to make a living in Zurich, but she
added that, inasmuch as she was my wife, she wished to give me
another chance. She also seemed to take it for granted that I
intended making Zurich only our temporary home, and that I would
do my utmost to promote my career as a composer of opera in
Paris. Whereupon she announced her intention of arriving at
Rorschach in Switzerland on a certain date in September of that
year, in the company of the little dog Peps, the parrot Papo, and
her so-called sister Nathalie. After having engaged two rooms for
our new home, I now prepared to set out on foot for St. Gall and
Rorschach through the lovely and celebrated Toggenburg and
Appenzell, and felt very touched after all when the peculiar
family, which consisted half of pet animals, landed at the
harbour of Rorschach. I must honestly confess that the little dog
and the bird made me very happy. My wife at once threw cold water
on my emotions, however, by declaring that in the event of my
behaving badly again she was ready to return to Dresden any
moment, and that she had numerous friends there, who would be
glad to protect and succour her if she were forced to carry out
her threat. Be this as it may, one look at her convinced me how
greatly she had aged in this short time, and how much I ought to
pity her, and this feeling succeeded in banishing all bitterness
from my heart.

I did my utmost to give her confidence and to make her believe
that our present misfortunes were but momentary. This was no easy
task, as she would constantly compare the diminutive aspect of
the town of Zurich with the more noble majesty of Dresden, and
seemed to feel bitterly humiliated. The friends whom I introduced
to her found no favour in her eyes. She looked upon the Cantonal
Secretary, Sulzer, as a 'mere town clerk who would not be of any
importance in. Germany'; and the wife of my host Muller
absolutely disgusted her when, in answer to Minna's complaints
about my terrible position, she replied that my greatness lay in
the very fact of my having faced it. Then again Minna appeased me
by tolling me of the expected arrival of some of my Dresden
belongings, which she thought would be indispensable to our new
home.

The property of which she spoke consisted of a Breitkopf and
Hartel grand-piano that looked better than it sounded, and of the
'title-page' of the Nibelungen by Cornelius in a Gothic frame
that used to hang over my desk in Dresden.

With this nucleus of household effects we now decided to take
small lodgings in the so-called 'hinteren Escherhausern' in the
Zeltweg. With great cleverness Minna had succeeded in selling the
Dresden furniture to advantage, and out of the proceeds of this
sale she had brought three hundred marks with her to Zurich to
help towards setting up our new home. She told me that she had
saved my small but very select library for me by giving it into
the safe custody of the publisher, Heinrich Brockhaus (brother of
my sister's husband and member of the Saxon Diet), who had
insisted upon looking after it. Great, therefore, was her dismay
when, upon asking this kind friend to send her the books, he
replied that he was holding them as security for a debt of
fifteen hundred marks which I had contracted with him during my
days of trouble in Dresden, and that he intended to keep them
until that sum was returned. As even after the lapse of many
years I found it impossible to refund this money, these books,
collected for my own special wants, were lost to me for ever.

Thanks more particularly to my friend Sulzer, the Cantonal
Secretary, whom my wife at first despised so much on account of
his title which she misunderstood, and who, although he was far
from well-off himself, thought it only natural that he should
help me, however moderately, out of my difficulties, we soon
succeeded in making our little place look so cosy that my simple
Zurich friends felt quite at home in it. My wife, with all her
undeniable talents, hero found ample scope in which to
distinguish herself, and I remember how ingeniously she made a
little what-not out of the box in which she had kindly brought my
music and manuscript to Zurich.

But it was soon time to think of how to earn enough money to
provide for us all. My idea of giving public lectures was treated
with contempt by my wife, who looked upon it as an insult to her
pride. She could acquiesce only in one plan, that suggested by
Liszt, namely, that I should write an opera for Paris. To satisfy
her, and in view of the fact that I could see no chance of a
remunerative occupation close at hand, I actually reopened a
correspondence on this matter with my great friend and his
secretary Belloni in Paris. In the meantime I could not be idle,
so I accepted an invitation from the Zurich musical society to
conduct a classical composition at one of their concerts, and to
this end I worked with their very poor orchestra at Beethoven's
Symphony in A major. Although the result was successful, and I
received five napoleons for my trouble, it made my wife very
unhappy, for she could not forget the excellent orchestra, and
the much more appreciative public, which a short time before in
Dresden would have seconded and rewarded similar efforts on my
part. Her one and only ideal for me was that, by hook or by
crook, and with a total disregard of all artistic scruples, I
should make a brilliant reputation for myself in Paris. While we
were both absolutely at a loss to discover whence we should
obtain the necessary funds for our journey to Paris and our
sojourn there, I again plunged into my philosophical study of
art, as being the only sphere still left open to me.

Harrassed by the cares of a terrible struggle for existence, I
wrote the whole of Das Kunstwerk der Zukunft in the chilly
atmosphere of a sunless little room on the ground floor during
the months of November and December of that year. Minna had no
objection to this occupation when I told her of the success of my
first pamphlet, and the hope I had of receiving even better pay
for this more extensive work.

Thus for a while I enjoyed comparative peace, although in my
heart a spirit of unrest had begun to reign, thanks to my growing
acquaintance with Feuerbach's works. I had always had an
inclination to fathom the depths of philosophy, just as I had
been led by the mystic influence of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony to
search the deepest recesses of music. My first efforts at
satisfying this longing had failed. None of the Leipzig
professors had succeeded in fascinating me with their lectures on
fundamental philosophy and logic. I had procured Schelling's
work, Transcendental Idealism, recommended to me by Gustav
Schlesinger, a friend of Laube's, but it was in vain that I
racked my brains to try and make something out of the first
pages, and I always returned to my Ninth Symphony.

During the latter part of my stay in Dresden I had returned to
these old studies, the longing for which suddenly revived within
me, and to these I added the deeper historical studies which had
always fascinated me. As an introduction to philosophy I now
chose Hegel's Philosophy of History. A good deal of this
impressed me deeply, and it now seemed as if I should ultimately
penetrate into the Holy of Holies along this path. The more
incomprehensible many of his speculative conclusions appeared,
the more I felt myself desirous of probing the question of the
'Absolute' and everything connected therewith to the core. For I
so admired Hegel's powerful mind that it seemed to me he was the
very keystone of all philosophical thought.

The revolution intervened; the practical tendencies of a social
reconstruction distracted my attention, and as I have already
stated, it was a German Catholic priest and political agitator
(formerly a divinity student named Menzdorff, who used to wear a
Calabrian hat) [Footnote: A broad-rimmed, tall, white felt hat,
tapering to a point, originally worn by the inhabitants of
Calabria, and in 1848 a sign of Republicanism.--EDITOR.] who drew
my attention to 'the only real philosopher of modern times,'
Ludwig Feuerbach. My new Zurich friend, the piano teacher,
Wilhelm Baumgartner, made me a present of Feuerbach's book on Tod
und Unsterblichkeit ('Death and Immortality'). The well-known and
stirring lyrical style of the author greatly fascinated me as a
layman. The intricate questions which he propounds in this book
as if they were being discussed for the first time by him, and
which he treats in a charmingly exhaustive manner, had often
occupied my mind since the very first days of my acquaintance
with Lehrs in Paris, just as they occupy the mind of every
imaginative and serious man. With me, however, this was not
lasting, and I had contented myself with the poetic suggestions
on these important subjects which appear here and there in the
works of our great poets.

The frankness with which Feuerbach explains his views on these
interesting questions, in the more mature parts of his book,
pleased me as much by their tragic as by their social-radical
tendencies. It seemed right that the only true immortality should
be that of sublime deeds and great works of art. It was more
difficult to sustain any interest in Das Wesen des Christenthums
('The Essence of Christianity') by the same author, for it was
impossible whilst reading this work not to become conscious,
however involuntarily, of the prolix and unskilful manner in
which he dilates on the simple and fundamental idea, namely,
religion explained from a purely subjective and psychological
point of view. Nevertheless, from that day onward I always
regarded Feuerbach as the ideal exponent of the radical release
of the individual from the thraldom of accepted notions, founded
on the belief in authority. The initiated will therefore not
wonder that I dedicated my Kunstwerk der Zukunft to Feuerbach and
addressed its preface to him.

My friend Sulzer, a thorough disciple of Hegel, was very sorry to
see me so interested in Feuerbach, whom he did not even recognise
as a philosopher at all. He said that the best thing that
Feuerbach had done for me was that he had been the means of
awakening my ideas, although he himself had none. But what had
really induced me to attach so much importance to Feuerbach was
the conclusion by means of which he had seceded from his master
Hegel, to wit, that the best philosophy was to have no
philosophy--a theory which greatly simplified what I had formerly
considered a very terrifying study--and secondly, that only that
was real which could be ascertained by the senses.

The fact that he proclaimed what we call 'spirit' to be an
aesthetic perception of our senses, together with his statement
concerning the futility of philosophy--these were the two things
in him which rendered me such useful assistance in my conceptions
of an all-embracing work of art, of a perfect drama which should
appeal to the simplest and most purely human emotions at the very
moment when it approached its fulfilment as Kunstwerk der
Zukunft. It must have been this which Sulzer had in his mind when
he spoke deprecatingly of Feuerbach's influence over me. At all
events, after a while I certainly could not return to his works,
and I remember that his newly published book, Uber das Wesen der
Religion ('Lectures on the Essence of Religion'), scared me to
such an extent by the dullness of its title alone, that when
Herwegh opened it for my benefit, I closed it with a bang under
his very nose.

At that time I was working with great enthusiasm upon the draft
of a connected essay, and was delighted one day to receive a
visit from the novelist and Tieckian scholar, Eduard von Billow
(the father of my young friend Billow), who was passing through
Zurich. In my tiny little room I read him my chapter on poetry,
and could not help noticing that he was greatly startled at my
ideas on literary drama and on the advent of the new Shakespeare.
I thought this all the more reason why Wigand the publisher
should accept my new revolutionary book, and expected him to pay
me a fee which would be in proportion to the greater size of the
work. I asked for twenty louis d'or, and this sum he agreed to pay
me.

The prospect of receiving this amount induced me to carry out the
plan, which need had forced upon me, of travelling to Paris and
of trying my luck there as a composer of opera. This plan had
very serious drawbacks; not only did I hate the idea, but I knew
that I was doing an injustice to myself by believing in the
success of my enterprise, for I felt that I could never seriously
throw myself into it heart and soul. Everything, however,
combined to make me try the experiment, and it was Liszt in
particular who, confident of this being my only way to fame,
insisted upon my reopening the negotiations into which Belloni
and I had entered during the previous summer. To show with what
earnestness I tried to consider the chances of carrying out my
plan, I drafted out the plot of the opera, which the French poet
would only have to put into verse, because I never for a moment
fancied that it would be possible for him to think out and write
a libretto for which I would only need to compose the music. I
chose for my subject the legend of Wieland der Schmied, upon
which I commented with some stress at the end of my recently
finished Kunstwerk der Zukunft, and the version of which by
Simrock, taken from the Wilkyna legend, had greatly attracted me.

I sketched out the complete scenario with precise indication of
the dialogue for three acts, and with a heavy heart decided to
hand it over to my Parisian author to be worked out. Liszt
thought he saw a means of making my music known through his
relations with Seghers, the musical director of a society then
known as the 'Concerts de St. Cecile.' In January of the
following year the Tannhauser Overture was to be given under his
baton, and it therefore seemed advisable that I should reach
Paris some time before this event. This undertaking, which
appeared to be so difficult owing to my complete lack of funds,
was at last facilitated in a manner quite unexpected.

I had written home for help, and had appealed to all the old
friends I could think of, but in vain. By the family of my
brother Albert in particular, whose daughter had recently entered
upon a brilliant theatrical career, I was treated in much the
same way as one treats an invalid by whom one dreads to become
infected. In contrast to their harshness I was deeply touched by
the devotion of the Ritter family, who had remained in Dresden;
for, apart from my acquaintance with young Karl, I scarcely knew
these people at all. Through the kindness of my old friend Heine,
who had been informed of my position, Frau Julie Ritter, the
venerable mother of the family, had thought it her duty to place,
through a business friend, the sum of fifteen hundred marks at my
disposal. At about the same time I received a letter from Mme.
Laussot, who had called upon me in Dresden the year before, and
who now in the most affecting terms assured me of her continued
sympathy.

These were the first signs of that new phase in my life upon
which I entered from this day forth, and in which I accustomed
myself to look upon the outward circumstances of my existence as
being merely subservient to my will. And by this means I was able
to escape from the hampering narrowness of my home life.

For the moment the proffered financial assistance was very
distasteful to me, for it seemed to forbid my raising any further
objections to the realisation of the detested Paris schemes.
When, however, on the strength of this favourable change in my
affairs, I suggested to my wife that we might, after all, content
ourselves with remaining in Zurich, she flew into the most
violent passion over my weakness and lack of spirit, and declared
that if I did not make up my mind to achieve something in Paris,
she would lose all faith in me. She said, moreover, that she
absolutely refused to be a witness of my misery and grief as a
wretched literary man and insignificant conductor of local
concerts in Zurich.

We had entered upon the year 1850; I had decided to go to Paris,
if only for the sake of peace, but had to postpone my journey on
account of ill-health. The reaction following upon the terrible
excitement of recent times had not failed to have its effect on
my overwrought nerves, and a state of complete exhaustion had
followed. The continual colds, in spite of which I had been
obliged to work in my very unhealthy room, had at last given rise
to alarming symptoms. A certain weakness of the chest became
apparent, and this the doctor (a political refugee) undertook to
cure by the application of pitch plasters. As the result of this
treatment and the irritating effect it had upon my nerves, I lost
my voice completely for a while; whereupon I was told that I must
go away for a change. On going out to buy my ticket for the
journey, I felt so weak and broke out into such terrible
perspiration that I hastened to return to my wife in order to
consult her as to the advisability, in the circumstances, of
abandoning the idea of the expedition altogether. She, however,
maintained (and perhaps rightly) not only that my condition was
not dangerous, but that it was to a large extent due to
imagination, and that, once in the right place, I would soon
recover.

An inexpressible feeling of bitterness stimulated my nerves as in
anger and despair I quickly left the house to buy the confounded
ticket for the journey, and in the beginning of February I
actually started on the road to Paris. I was filled with the most
extraordinary feelings, but the spark of hope which was then
kindled in my breast certainly had nothing whatever to do with
the belief that had been imposed upon me from without, that I was
to make a success in Paris as a composer of operas.

I was particularly anxious to find quiet rooms, for peace had now
become my first necessity, no matter where I happened to be
staying. The cabman who drove me from street to street through
the most isolated quarters, and whom I at last accused of keeping
always to the most animated parts of the city, finally protested
in despair that one did not come to Paris to live in a convent.
At last it occurred to me to look for what I wanted in one of the
cites through which no vehicle seemed to drive, and I decided to
engage rooms in the Cite de Provence.

True to the plans which had been forced upon me, I at once called
on Herr Seghers about the performance of the Tannhauser Overture.

It turned out that in spite of my late arrival I had missed
nothing, for they were still racking their brains as to how to
procure the necessary orchestral parts.

I therefore had to write to Liszt, asking him to order the
copies, and had to wait for their arrival. Belloni was not in
town, things were therefore at a standstill, and I had plenty of
time to think over the object of my visit to Paris, while an
unceasing accompaniment was poured out to my meditations by the
barrel-organs which infest the cites of Paris.

I had much difficulty in convincing an agent of the government,
from whom I received a visit soon after my arrival, that my
presence in Paris was due to artistic reasons, and not to my
doubtful position as a political refugee.

Fortunately he was impressed by the score, which I showed him, as
well as by Liszt's article on the Tannhauser Overture, written
the year before in the Journal des Debats, and he left me,
politely inviting me to continue my avocations peacefully and
industriously, as the police had no intention of disturbing me,

I also looked up my older Parisian acquaintances. At the
hospitable house of Desplechins I met Semper, who was trying to
make his position as tolerable as possible by writing some
inferior artistic work. He had left his family in Dresden, from
which town we soon received the most alarming news. The prisons
were gradually filling there with the unfortunate victims of the
recent Saxon movement Of Rockel, Bakunin, and Heubner, all we
could hear was that they had been charged with high treason, and
that they were awaiting the death sentence.

In view of the tidings which continually arrived concerning the
cruelty and brutality with which the soldiers treated the
prisoners, we could not help considering our own lot a very happy
one.

My intercourse with Semper, whom I saw frequently, was generally
enlivened by a gaiety which was occasionally of rather a risky
nature; he was determined to rejoin his family in London, where
the prospect of various appointments was open to him. My latest
attempts at writing, and the thoughts expressed in my work,
interested him greatly, and gave rise to animated conversations
in which we were joined by Kietz, who was at first amusing, but
evidently boring Semper considerably. I found the former in the
identical position in which I had left him many years ago: he had
made no headway with his painting, and would have been glad if
the revolution had taken a more decided turn, so that, under
cover of the general confusion, he might have escaped from his
embarrassing position with his landlord. He made at this time
quite a good pastel portrait of me in his very best and earliest
style. While I was sitting I unfortunately spoke to him about my
Das Kunstwerk der Zukunft, and thereby laid the foundation for
him of troubles that lasted many years, as he tried to instil my
new ideas into the Parisian bourgeoisie at whose tables he had
hitherto been a welcome guest. Notwithstanding, he remained as of
old a good, obliging, true-hearted fellow, and even Semper could
not help putting up with him cheerfully. I also looked up my
friend Anders. It was a difficult matter to find him at any hour
of the day, since out of sleeping hours he was closeted in the
library, where he could receive no one, and afterwards retired to
the reading-room to spend his hours of rest, and generally went
to dine with certain bourgeois families where he gave music
lessons. He had aged considerably, but I was glad to find him,
comparatively speaking, in better health than the state in which
I had last seen him had allowed me to hope, as when I left Paris
before he had seemed to be in a decline. Curiously enough, a
broken leg had been the means of improving his health, the
treatment necessary for it having taken him to a hydro, where his
condition had much improved. His one idea was to see me achieve a
great success in Paris, and he wished to secure a seat in advance
for the first performance of my opera, which he took for granted
was to appear, and kept repeating that it would be so very trying
for him to occupy a place in any part of the theatre where there
would be likely to be a crush. He could not see the use of my
present literary work; in spite of this I was again engaged on it
exclusively, as I soon ascertained there was no likelihood of my
overture to Tannhauser being produced. Liszt had shown the
greatest zeal in obtaining and forwarding the orchestral parts;
but Herr Seghers informed me that as far as his own orchestra was
concerned, he found himself in a republican democracy where each
instrument had an equal right to voice its opinion, and it had
been unanimously decided that for the remainder of the winter
season, which was now drawing to a close, my overture could be
dispensed with. I gathered enough from this turn of affairs to
realise how precarious my position was.

It is true, the result of my writings was hardly less
discouraging. A copy of the Wigand edition of my Kunstwerk der
Zukunft was forwarded to me full of horrible misprints, and
instead of the expected remuneration of twenty louis d'or, my
publisher explained that for the present he could only pay me
half this sum, as, owing to the fact that at first the sale of
the Kunst und Revolution had been very rapid, he had been led to
attach too high a commercial value to my writings, a mistake he
had speedily discovered when he found there was no demand for Die
Nibelungen.

On the other hand, I received an offer of remunerative work from
Adolph Kolatschek, who was also a fugitive, and was just going to
bring out a German monthly journal as the organ of the
progressive party. In response to this invitation I wrote a long
essay on Kunst und Klima ('Art and Climate'), in which I
supplemented the ideas I had already touched upon in my Kunstwerk
der Zukunft. Besides this I had, since my arrival in Paris,
worked out a more complete sketch of Wieland der Schmied. It is
true that this work had no longer any value, and I wondered with
apprehension what I could write home to my wife, now that the
last precious remittance had been so aimlessly sacrificed. The
thought of returning to Zurich was as distasteful to me as the
prospect of remaining any longer in Paris. My feelings with
regard to the latter alternative were intensified by the
impression made upon me by Meyerbeer's opera The Prophet, which
had just been produced and which I had not heard before. Rearing
itself on the ruins of the hopes for new and more noble endeavour
which had animated the better works of the past year--the only
result of the negotiations of the provisional French republic for
the encouragement of art--I saw this work of Meyerbeer's break
upon the world like the dawn heralding this day of disgraceful
desolation. I was so sickened by this performance, that though I
was unfortunately placed in the centre of the stalls and would
willingly have avoided the disturbance necessarily occasioned by
one of the audience moving during the middle of an act, even this
consideration did not deter me from getting up and leaving the
house. When the famous mother of the prophet finally gives vent
to her grief in the well-known series of ridiculous roulades, I
was filled with rage and despair at the thought that I should be
called upon to listen to such a thing, and never again did I pay
the slightest heed to this opera.

