There was something about Ebenezer's slow manner of approaching the
point that made Young impatient. In the meantime his mind was rapidly
running over the women in the Hayt's congregation.

Waldstricker got up, too, drawing his big frame to its full height.

"We churched--Well, the fact is,--We churched Tessibel Skinner."

When the name fell upon Deforrest Young's ears, every muscle in his body
became rigid, making him taller by inches.

"Tessibel Skinner?" he repeated mechanically, as if he'd heard awry.
"Did you say Tessibel Skinner?"

Waldstricker took a long breath. Deforrest was receiving the action of
the church with better grace than he had anticipated.

"Yes, Tessibel Skinner!" he repeated. "She's with child."

In the awful minute after the torturing words had fallen from the other
man's lips, Deforrest Young felt as if he must tear the lie from the
speaker's throat. For it was a lie! God! What a lie! A lie told against
Heaven's best--the best girl in all the world. Without a word, he
reached for his overcoat.

"What're you going to do?" demanded Ebenezer, a little perturbed. "You
needn't see her.... She's been justly dealt with."

There was no answer from the tall lawyer. Only one thing was in
Deforrest Young's mind--to go to Tessibel Skinner. He gave no thought to
the wild night, no care for his own fatigue and hunger. Disdaining
another glance at Ebenezer, he whirled to go. Helen's pale face
appearing in the doorway made him pause.

"Deforrest," she quivered. "Deforrest, dear, oh, don't go out tonight!
Stay and let Ebenezer tell you about it, do please! The church has done
all it could--it must be all right if the church did it, Forrie."

Then Young's wrath broke loose....

"All right? All right?" he thundered. "The church has done all it can,
eh? Well, by God!" He turned a livid face from one to the other. "What a
cursed outrage!"

Waldstricker cried out, horrified.

"Man, man, what are you saying!... How _dare_ you provoke the wrath of
God!... How dare you question the decision of the church! Besides, I
tell you she's a Magdalene. She's been justly punished. I attended to it
myself."

Then Young saw clearly that the church action had but expressed his
brother-in-law's will. He knew his implacable hatred of the squatters
and particularly of Tessibel. He recognized that revenge had prompted
him. Pushing the protesting elder aside, he ejaculated:

"You pious hypocrite! Get out of my way," and was gone.

The bitter winter wind nipped at Young as he strode down the steps and
battled his way to the stables. Waldstricker's words were pounding at
his brain like a hammer. What had they done to Tess? He remembered
Ebenezer had said that his vote--his own delegated vote--had turned the
tide against his pretty child!

He had no mercy for the stumbling horse as he spurred down the long
drive, into the public thoroughfare, and thence to the shore road. When
he came opposite to his own closed, uninhabited house, he could see by
straining his eyes the dusky shadow of the willow trees shrouding the
Skinner home.

A glimmer of light struggled from the curtained window of the hut. With
desperate haste he tied his horse to the fence post. He could scarcely
stop to spread over the animal the blanket he'd brought for the purpose.

Then as he waded through the snow and rounded the mud cellar a dog's
mournful howling, pierced and punctuated by a girl's shrill,
heart-broken cry, fell upon his startled ears. In another minute he had
flung himself against the shanty door and forced it open. Kennedy's
bulldog greeted him, growling, and beyond him, stretched out upon the
body of her dead father, lay Tess. Hovering over her, chattering, was
Andy Bishop, the dwarf, the condemned murderer of Ebenezer Waldstricker,
Sr.


CHAPTER XXIX

THE VIGIL


During Professor Young's instant of hesitation on the threshold, the
wind gusted sheets of snow into the Skinner shanty. Quieting the dog by
a low-spoken word, Deforrest stepped in and closed the door against the
storm. The acrid smoke drawn from the stove by the back-draft, filled
the room,--a choking cloud.

Andy stared at the intruder for an instant, and then turned again to the
girl lying unconscious upon the body of her father.

Young's vision comprehended the whole tragedy. He pulled off his cap and
gloves and shook the snow from his shoulders. Advanced to the bedside, a
glance satisfied him that the squatter was dead and that Tess had
fainted. He had recognized the dwarf the minute he saw him, and
heartsick with apprehension, he wondered what he was doing there.

"Get up," said he. "Let me look at her."

The dwarf moved aside hesitatingly.

"Air she dead, too?" he whimpered.

"Bring me some water," commanded Young.

Andy went to the pail, dipped a portion of water into a small basin, and
waddled back with it.

"Her daddy air dead," he offered. "Ye can see he air dead."

"Yes!" nodded Young, taking the dish.

He did not speak again until Tess groaned, and opened her eyes. She made
a half struggle to sit up, and Young lifted her to her feet.

"Lean on me," he said gently.

Tess stared at him, incredulously. He had come after all! Relief
crumpled her up in his arms.

"Daddy air dead," she whispered.

"Yes, dear," soothed Young. "There, lean your head on my shoulder, poor
little broken baby."

His tones were so tender, so soft! They went to the heart of the
stricken dwarf, and like a hurt child he burst into tears. Professor
Young turned and looked at him.

"Don't do that," he said huskily. "Sit down--don't cry!"

Without moving from her position, Tess said, "Andy, Andy, dear, git on
up in the garret a few minutes, will ye?"

The dwarf crept to the ladder, and Deforrest let him go. A dozen
questions leapt to the lawyer's lips at the same time, but the girl
against his breast looked so desperately ill he had no heart to ply
them. Tess lifted her lids heavily.

"Ye won't tell nobody he air here?" she gulped.

"How long has he been here?" asked Young, instead of answering her
question.

"Ever since spring," sighed Tessibel.

"Was he here that day when Mr. Waldstricker and my sister--"

"Yep." The girl's whisper was very low.

"And when Burnett came too, I suppose?"

"Yep, I hid 'im ... Daddy loved 'im, Daddy did."

She began to cry softly. Her confession had taken her mind back to the
huge figure on the bed.

"I wanted to go with Daddy," she sobbed. "I didn't know--I thought I
couldn't live without 'im."

Stooping, Deforrest gathered the mourning little one into his arms, and
seating himself in the big rocker, pressed his cheek against her hair in
sympathy. Patiently he waited, holding her thus while the mercy of her
flowing tears dulled the first sharp edge of her grief.

Bye and bye the sobs ceased, and a faint, catchy little voice struggled
up through the red curls to the man's ears.

"Ye air awful good to me, you air. Oh, I needed ye so, and I feared--I
feared mebbe ye wasn't never comin' again!"

"My dear, my dear," Young soothed, much moved. Then he rose and placed
her in the chair. "You sit here and tell me about it."

Bravely she looked into the friendly face, a doleful smile quivering on
her lips.

"The first thing I want to know," she asked, "what air ye goin' to do
'bout Andy?"

Professor Young had anticipated this question.

"Until I've had more time to think about it, and until after the funeral
anyway, I'll keep your secret," he reassured her kindly.

"An' ye won't say anythin' to nobody 'bout 'im till ye talk with me
again?" she queried, fearfully.

"That's what I mean, Tess," Young answered.

"Ye air so good to me, ye air," sighed Tess, satisfied.

"Child," began Young a moment later, "can you bear to tell me about it,
now?"

"About Daddy?" asked Tess, "or about the other--"

The lawyer's nod, responsive to the latter half of her question,
reawakened the suffering girl's memory of the horror of the church
meeting.

"It were so awful," she said after a pregnant pause. "I mean--Mr.
Waldstricker--"

"What about it? Tell me," Young interrupted, as the gentle voice
hesitated.

"See ... this!" she murmured, turning her head.

Young's eyes caught the red of the wound on her neck.

"He did that!... How?" he ejaculated fiercely.

"He hit me with a piece of--coal!" answered Tess, sinking back, very
white.

"No, no; God, no!" he cried desperately. "He couldn't have done that!"

"He said I were ... bad," interrupted Tess, very low. She bowed her
head, and the man, stunned, made no move toward her. His muscles seemed
powerless, and he had no volition to comfort her. He could not erase
from his mind that horrid picture her few direct words had brought
before him. "But ... _you_ air trustin' me!" was the way Tess brought
him back to himself.

"Then it's true what--what--"

His tongue grew parched.

"Yep, but trust me, please!" cried Tess.

Trust her! Believe in her with her confession ringing in his ears. God,
if he did not love her, it wouldn't be so hard to believe, to trust, to
help. But with this fierce jealousy stabbing at his heart, he felt he
must know more--all. His mind went back to that time when she had come
to him with a child in a basket, and her plea had been the same, "Oh,
trust me! Please trust me!"

"If you could only ... tell me ... something," he groaned.

"It air true what Mr. Waldstricker hit me fer," bowed Tess, swallowing
hard, "but I can't say nothin' 'bout it, I can't! I ain't able to tell
nothin' more'n that!"

Young still stood several feet from her.

"I must do something to help you," he implored. "Won't you even tell me
when it--it will be, Tessibel?"

Through her tense fingers the girl murmured a stifled "March."

March--scarce three months away! He would have given five years of his
life to have had her tell him the truth about this thing that had
crushed her. He made a nervous movement with his fingers to his hair.

"You are bound by a promise?" he demanded sharply.

A white, uplifted, pained face was his answer.

"You'll tell me some day, if you can," he said, going swiftly to her.

"Yes," whispered Tess.

And then for a long time nothing was heard in the hut but the winter
without, the growls and mutterings of the bulldog in his sleep by the
stove, and a sob now and then from the dwarf in the garret.

The healing silence of a common love in the presence of a common grief
settled upon the strangely matched couple. The little squatter girl,
with her shameful secret, and the great lawyer and teacher, kept solemn
vigil over the body of Daddy Skinner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daddy Skinner was buried. All the arrangement in connection with the
obsequies devolved upon Professor Young. It was he who brought the girl
back to the shanty in her simple, clinging, black gown, and after the
carriage had delivered them at the hut door, carried her, almost
unconscious, into the house and laid her gently upon her bed. Then he
closed the door and sat down beside her. It was perhaps an hour later
when she lifted her eyes appealingly.

"I air awful glad ye stayed with me," she choked.

"Tess,"--Young's voice shook.... "Will you let me talk to you a little
and not feel I'm intruding upon your sorrows or your secrets?"

"Ye wouldn't do anythin' what wasn't right," murmured the girl, under
her breath.

For some moments he smoothed her burning forehead. Then he lifted her
hand and held it in his.

"Tessibel," he began.

"What?"

"First, tell me about the little man in the garret."

"There ain't nothin' much to tell," she responded, shaking her head.
"When he got out of Auburn, he come here and asked me an' Daddy to take
care of 'im, an' we done it, that air all."

"I see, dear--and--and you didn't think the law required you to give him
up?"

Tess moved her head negatively on the pillow.

"Sure not, or I'd a done it long ago. The law--what do I care 'bout the
law?... It air always puttin' innercent men in jail. That air all the
law air fer."

"But this man is a murderer," Young tried to explain to her.

But Tessibel's gesture, both hands raised, palms outward, expressed her
dissent.

"They said as how Daddy were a murderer, too," she retorted, "but you
found out he weren't, didn't ye?"

Young, not able to gainsay this, nodded his head.

"How long are you going to keep him here?" he asked presently.

Tess sent him a glance pathetically sad and discouraged.

"I don't know. The poor little duffer hain't no friends. He ain't no
other place to go where old Eb won't git 'im."

Young thought of his brother-in-law. He realized immediately with what
joy that stern disciplinarian would snatch the little man back into
Auburn prison. Doubtless, too, he would visit his rage on the girl
who'd shielded him.

"Ye helped Daddy git out o' jail," Tess whispered. "Couldn't ye keep
Andy out?"

Deforrest Young turned his face to the ceiling. A pair of gleaming eyes
were staring down upon him from the square hole.

"Come down here, you," he said peremptorily.

Andy slid down the ladder and squatted himself beside the cot. Young
considered the boyish face some time in silence.

"What made you kill Waldstricker?" he demanded.

Andy shook his head.

"I never done it, mister," he denied positively.

"Tell me how it happened! If I'm going to help you, you must tell me the
truth."

This wasn't what Young had intended to say at all.

"Andy ain't a liar," came from Tess.

"Tell me every word," urged Young.

The dwarf curled himself into a little ball and began.

"Well, us was all in a saloon at the Inlet, an' old Waldstricker, he
come in with a nuther man, an' they both got a drink an' t'uther man
went out. Me an' Owen Bennet were settin' at the table, ... Waldstricker
he says somethin' nasty 'bout squatters an' ... Owen went fer 'im.
Waldstricker pulled 'is gun. I knocked it out o' his hand an' Owen
grabbed it up offen the floor an' sent a bullet right through
Waldstricker's heart. Then us uns beat it, I mean me an' Owen, an' when
they caught us ... he put the shootin' on me. I didn't do it, an' Owen
knows I didn't."

Young was very quiet during this recital. He was considering the eager,
boyish, upraised face.

"I hope ye believe me, mister--sir--please do," Andy pleaded.

Deforrest Young crossed his legs, smoothed his hair with one hand, and
sat back in his chair.

"I think I do," he nodded presently. "Only I am placed in a very
peculiar position. By rights I ought to send you back--then help you
afterward if I can."

Tessibel sat up, her eyes wildly frightened.

"Ye couldn't do that!" she cried. "Ye couldn't do that! Don't ye
remember a day on the rocks, when I was awful sad, an' you said, 'Tess,
if ye ever want me to do anything for ye, come and tell me.' Didn't ye
say it?"

Young bowed his head.

"I air askin' it now," said Tess, throwing out her hand. "I air beggin'
ye not to send Andy back. Let 'im stay with me. I promised Daddy I'd
take care of 'im."

"Lie down again and be quiet, child," urged Deforrest, sadly. "You don't
want to make yourself sick.... Hush, you mustn't cry!... Oh, child dear,
will you please stop shaking that way?"

He had forgotten that when Tess loved any one, she would battle until
her death before she gave him up.

"Then don't send little Andy back, an' I'll be awful good," she pleaded.

Young sat for some time, one hand on Tessibel's, the other beating a
tatoo on the arm of Daddy's wooden rocker.

"I suppose," he said at length, as if speaking to himself, "I'll be
highly criticized if any one finds out about this irregular proceeding.
Nevertheless--" He turned to Tess. "I'll go quietly to work and see what
I can do. In the meantime, dear child, you can't stay here in this
house."

"But I promised Daddy I'd take care of Andy here, an' I air goin' to.
Him and me can live here all right."

Young sighed. There was the same stubborn tone in her voice she had used
in those days when her father was away in prison, and he had argued with
her to leave the settlement.

"Well, at any rate," he said after a while, "I'll take time to consider
it, and then we'll decide something."

Ten minutes later he was riding slowly up the hill, and as the past
panoramied across his mind ... and evolved itself into the present, he
shook his head. Tessibel had separated him from his family, had made him
a stranger to his best friends. Would she now, by holding to
Waldstricker's convicted murderer, deprive him of his honor?


CHAPTER XXX

SANDY COMES TO GRIEF


The Skinner home was resting in its winter calm. Daddy Skinner was gone.
Andy still crept about the dark garret, and Tessibel passed her days in
study, performing the few duties the small shack required.

When Deforrest Young had gone away a few days after Daddy's funeral,
he'd smiled into her eyes and had bidden her to be of good courage.
Henceforth, he said, she was to be his charge. She felt a little lighter
hearted. It made her happier, too, to think he knew about Andy Bishop
and was going to help him.

The only person she feared was Sandy Letts. She'd not seen him since
that day in the church when he had tried to draw her nearer the
minister. Bitterly angry, she knew he must be. That he had delayed his
revenge so long seemed to her rather menacing than comforting.

Her mind was drifting back over all the events of the past few months,
when a shadow passed over the curtain at the window. She stole to the
door and placed her ear to the latch. From that position she could
plainly hear creeping footsteps crawling closer.

With her ear glued to the crack, she listened. There was no sound now of
walking. The outsider was listening, too. Suddenly, he knocked heavily.
Tess glanced to the garret. The dwarf's face was not in sight. Then the
knock came again.

"Who air there?" Tess called, her breath catching.

There was no answer, save another knock.

Tessibel spoke once more. After a pause, Sandy Letts' voice came gruffly
to her.

"Open the door, Tess. It air me, Sandy."

"What do ye want?" demanded Tess.

Sandy growled inarticulately, gave a kick to the floor, and rattled the
latch.

"I want to come in, I said. I air goin' to talk to ye!"

Tessibel thought of Ben Letts and of how he, too, had demanded entrance
to her home in just such a manner as his cousin was doing now. She
glanced about for something with which to protect herself if needed. She
wished with all her soul the brindle bull were with her then in the
shanty.

Sandy gave another rough pull at the latch-string.

"Open the door, Tess," he growled again, "or I'll bust it down."

Tess knew Sandy would carry out his threat, and, if he broke down the
door, his temper would be worse than now. She muttered a prayer to quiet
the terror in her heart, and slipped up the bar. Sandy, gun in hand,
stepped into the kitchen, and Tess closed the door.

"What do ye want, Sandy?" she questioned.

"I want to talk to ye, what do ye 'spose I want?" he flung out,
swaggering his shoulders.

"Well, sit down," invited Tess, seeking to propitiate. "Ye knowed Daddy
was dead, didn't ye, Sandy?"

"I can set down without bein' asked," grunted the squatter, dropping
into a chair. "Sure I knowed yer pa's flew the coop."

"What'd ye want?" Tess asked again after a moment.

"I've come to settle with ye for somethin'," said Letts.

"I ain't done nothin'," replied Tess.

Sandy threw out an angry hand.

"Ye have, too, ye have, too! Didn't I want ye for my woman, and didn't
ye go an'--"

"I said ye couldn't have me," interrupted the girl. "Folks ain't havin'
everythin' they want in this world, Sandy."

"Then ye turned me down in the church afore Waldstricker," went on
Sandy. "Ye might've been glad to marry a decent man after what ye'd
done. But ye ups and says, 'I won't!' An' I've come to ask the reason
why."

Tess walked across the shanty kitchen and sat on the edge of the cot.
Sandy followed her with his eyes, his face growing crimson as he gazed
at her.

"I air here for two things," he continued. "To find out the name of that
man Waldstricker asked ye 'bout--"

Tessibel's low voice stopped his impudent speech.

"I couldn't tell ye that, Sandy, not even if ye killed me," she
murmured. "What was t'uther thing?"

"I air goin' to take ye away with me fer my woman. But ye needn't think
I air goin' to marry ye decent like I would in the church t'uther day,
fer I won't."

Tessibel, weary and aching, grew cold with fear. She knew the squatter
would keep his word, if he could. He would abuse her as Ben had tried to
when her father was in Auburn unless help came. Then remembering all the
days she had lived and suffered and still'd been saved from Sandy and
his like, she breathed a deep sigh.

"I couldn't go with ye, Sandy," she explained.

A cruel expression set Sandy's large, sensuous mouth.

"Ye'll be glad to go with me when I git done with ye." He placed his gun
against the chair and stood up. "First, I want to know what made ye act
like that in the church fer. Don't ye know me well 'nough to think I'd
get ye sooner or later. Ye knowed yer Daddy couldn't always live in the
shack. Ye might better took me while ye could. I would jest have beat ye
a bit fer yer cussedness, then mebbe after a while I'd fergive ye. But
now--"

Tessibel's struggling to her feet broke off the man's volubility. She
was so frightened that almost without thought she circled toward the
door. Sandy got up and placed himself directly in front of her.

"No, ye don't git out o' here," he sneered, "not till I git through with
ye. Jest make up yer mind to that."

Sandy was moving toward her, his eyes gleaming with rage. What could she
do? She threw a hasty glance about the shanty. She knew Andy was under
the straw tick in the garret and could not hear the low conversation
going on in the kitchen.

As if in answer to her agonized prayer, another shadow passed the
curtained window. Sandy had not seen it or he would not have thrust
forth his great arms and snatched her to him. Tess uttered a scream. In
another moment Jake Brewer sprang into the kitchen and was looking from
Tessibel to the angry squatter.

Sandy pushed the girl roughly on to the cot--took two steps toward
Brewer, his manner threatening.

"What ye sneakin' 'bout here fer?" he growled out.

Jake grinned slowly.

"I allers come in to see Tess," he replied. "What were ye doin', Sandy?"

"I air goin' to take Tessibel to be my woman," muttered Letts.

Jake glanced at the pallid girl.

"Oh, well, I swan! So that air it, eh?"

"Nope," Tess got out through her chattering teeth. Then all the pent-up
rage in her body broke loose. "I ain't wantin' to be his woman. I want
to be let alone in my shack! Oh, Jake, won't ye make Sandy go away and
let me be?"

Sandy laughed evilly.

"It'd take a bigger man'n Jake," he remarked.

Brewer, unruffled, seated himself with the slow manner of a squatter.

"I don't say as how I air very big," replied Jake, crossing his legs,
"but I guess no man'll take Tess long's she don't want to go, when I air
here, Sandy."

Letts shook a threatening fist.

"Get out o' here, Jake," he growled, going toward the other man. "If ye
don't, I'll make it worse fer ye! Git out, I say!"

"Shan't do it. Now, Sandy, I ain't no woman to be 'fraid of you, so just
hold yer horses till us uns talk this out. Ye say ye want Tess fer
your'n, an' Tess, she don't want ye, now what ye goin' to do?"

"I air a goin' to take her jest the same," snarled Letts.

But thinking better of placing his hands on the other man, he went to
his chair and sat down. Tess, too, drew a little sigh of relief. Then
the three sat for several quiet seconds looking from one to the other.
At length, Tess broke out.

"Sandy said he'd keep away an' wait till he caught Andy Bishop afore he
come to git me."

Sandy glared at her.

"But I told ye if ye had a nuther man hangin' round I'd fix both of ye,
an' I'm goin' to keep my word," he snapped back.

"Ye can't fix any one but me, Sandy, 'cause ye don't know nobody else
to hurt, do ye," she interrupted him.

"It air easy fer a man like me to choke the name out of ye, brat,"
replied Letts, blinking his eyes at her. "I'd be likin' nothin' better."

Jake moved his big boots back and forth several times.

"I wouldn't try it if I was you, Sandy," he cautioned, "'cause ye know
uther folks might be interferin' with ye."

Sandy's throat emitted a deep, doglike growl as he clambered to his
feet.

"I'll do it now, dam ye both," he barked back in ugly defiance.

Jake was on his feet before Letts could take a forward step and had
placed himself between the big squatter and the girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon when Jake came back to see Tessibel, she threw a quick
question at him.

"Air he dead, Jake?"

"Lordy, no, Tess, 'course not! He's tougher'n cow's tripe.... Sit down,
brat, an' I'll tell ye about it.... Don't be shakin' so. It were like
this! I was stoppin' Sandy from tryin' to git ye an' when I pushed 'im
back, he kicked his own gun an' got a bullet in his big, fat leg, that
air all."

"It was awful," cried Tess, wiping away her tears.

A slight smile played around Jake's lips, and showed a few of his dark
teeth.

"Brat," he chuckled, "Sandy ain't done to his death by no means, an' you
didn't have nothin' to do with it, nuther did I. 'Twere his own
cussedness that put that bullet in his leg. There air one blessed thing,
he won't be comin' round here for a long time yet botherin' you; so
cheer up, an' be glad ye air a livin'."

Then Jake went away, leaving the girl and the little man in the garret,
comforted and happier than they had been in many a day.


CHAPTER XXXI

WALDSTRICKER'S THREAT


Something had happened in the house of Waldstricker. Since the churching
of Tessibel Skinner, everything had been topsy turvy. The criticism
heaped on Ebenezer for his part in it had only served to make him more
arrogant at home and abroad.

One morning at breakfast, Frederick being absent, Madelene was alone
with Ebenezer and his wife.

"Put down your paper a minute, Eb," said Madelene, "will you?"

Scowling, Waldstricker let the paper rattle to the floor.

"What do you want now?... I can't have a minute's peace. What is it?...
More money?"

"_No_, nor nothing to do with it, Ebenezer. I want to ask you something,
and do be quite frank with me. Does Fred ever go to see that Skinner
girl?"

The man's heavy brows drew into a straight dark line above his eyes.

"He'd better not," he gritted between his teeth.

"That isn't the point," answered Madelene. "Does he?"

"I don't believe I'd give myself much concern about that if I were you,"
he said presently. "I understand that man Letts, Sandy Letts, who is
working for me on the Bishop matter, still wants to marry her."

"Of course she won't as long as Frederick--"

Waldstricker interrupted her.

"If Frederick does go there, he won't long when Letts finds it out."

Madelene's eager glance brought the unmatched lips aslant of each other.

"I don't think he'll go often," he repeated. "I'll see to it myself. She
can marry Lysander Letts or--"

"Or what?" Madelene's elbows came to the table, a hand on each cheek.
"Oh, Ebbie, do tell me! I'm so miserable about her. I wish she was
dead!"

"But, Ebenezer," said Helen, "it seems awful for such a refined girl to
marry such a man!"

The elder's uplifted hand came down on the table with a bang, and higher
mounted his proud lip. He ignored his wife's pleading speech, but
answered his sister's.

"So will Miss Skinner wish she were dead before I'm done with her," said
he.

"Why?"

Waldstricker leaned over the table, looking first at his wife, then at
Madelene. Helen shuddered. How relentless he looked when his mouth
turned down at both corners! She had grown so afraid of him of late.

"I've an effective way to keep him from her," said he.

"Goody!" exclaimed Madelene, and "How, dear?" asked Helen.

The man spoke only two words in a low, husky voice, but each woman heard
them.

"Good!" gasped Madelene, standing quickly. "How perfectly glorious!"

"How perfectly awful!" groaned Helen. "Ebenezer, don't do anything so
dreadful."

Waldstricker looked across the table with that strange glitter in his
eyes.

"Helen, must we go over again the same painful ground that women should
not interfere!"

Mrs. Waldstricker rose to her feet.

"No, Ebenezer, no, no! Only I was thinking of Deforrest!"

"Deforrest will not know of it until it's too late," said Waldstricker,
rising too.

"Does he know of Letts' trying to force her to marry him?" asked Helen.

"I've never told him. Possibly the girl has."

"I think not," answered Helen, gravely. "He'd have mentioned it to me, I
think!"

As her brother passed Madelene, he tweaked her ear.

"Just clear your pretty head of further worry, little kitten ... See?"

Madelene caught his hand affectionately in hers.

"Kiss me, best of good brothers," she smiled. "You've made me perfectly
happy! Isn't it dreadful to have to keep tabs on one's husband?"

"You won't have to long," Waldstricker assured her.

Then he kissed her and followed his wife into the library. Mrs.
Waldstricker walked to the window and looked out, her eyes full of
tears.

"Helen," said Ebenezer, gravely, taking her by the shoulders and turning
her face toward him. "You displease me very much."

The drops hanging on the long lashes fell suddenly.

"I'm sorry, dear, but I can't see why you always antagonize Deforrest.
You remember how angry he was after that church affair."

"Your brother's anger doesn't affect me in the slightest," returned
Ebenezer coldly. "When I see my duty to God, I do it, that's all."

"And you're really determined--Oh, Eb dear, for my sake, please--"

The husband made an impatient movement.

"Helen, how many times have I got to forbid your crying this way. You're
always in tears. You'll make yourself sick."

"Lately you've been so cross to me," sobbed Helen, burying her face in
her handkerchief.

Waldstricker put his arm about her.

"I don't want to be cross.... There!... Now lie down here on the
divan.... I'm going out for an hour or two."

Then he put on his cap, took up his riding whip, and went away to the
stables.

A few minutes later Helen Waldstricker sat up straight, and rang the
bell. To the servant who appeared, she said,

"Find Mr. Graves and send him to me immediately."

When Frederick received the message, cold chills chased each other up
and down his back. Dismayed, he desired to disobey but dared not,
besides Helen was the least dangerous of the three. What could she want,
he considered queruously. He hadn't had a minute's peace since he came
home. Madelene was in a state of tears nearly all the time; his
brother-in-law, dictatorial, difficult even in his milder moods, seemed
secretive and suspicious. As far as he was concerned, he kept from the
house as much as possible, but this only provoked to a greater degree
his young wife's tears and complaints. Only this morning, he had been
treated to a spell of hysterics the like of which Madelene had never
before equalled.

His wife would not believe his oft-repeated assertions that he had not
been to the Skinner cabin since the day she had surprised him there.
Frederick had spoken truly. His fear of his powerful brother-in-law and
his own lack of moral courage allowed the days to drift along until now
he felt he could not go into the presence of the girl he had thus
neglected.

He watched until his brother-in-law drove from the stables and
disappeared. Then he turned and went into the library. Helen beckoned to
him to come near her.

"I must tell you something," she breathed.

She pointed to a chair near the divan. For a time she talked in an
undertone, telling him something which sent the blood flying from the
young man's face, and left him faint and sick at heart.

And later by an hour, Frederick Graves was walking the railroad tracks
toward the Skinner shanty.


CHAPTER XXXII

HELEN'S MESSAGE


Tessibel Skinner was sitting in the shanty kitchen. She had a book in
her lap but her mind was far from her surroundings. Andy had been quiet
so long she'd almost forgotten him. Suddenly, his slight cough brought
her back to the present.

"Ye look awful peeked, brat, dear," he said. "I think ye'd ought to see
Young's doctor, hadn't ye?"

A vague smile crossed the girl's face, and she shook her head.

"No, Andy," she answered, "I don't need no doctor, yet."

"I wish ye felt better," sighed the dwarf. "An' the days is gettin'
awful blizzardy for ye to go outdoors."

"But I got to go out, dear, fer wood an' other things. Hark!" She got up
swiftly. "There air some one comin'."

In another instant the little man had crawled away from the ceiling hole
and was under the tick. The garret was as silent as the frozen lake and
the kitchen below, where Tess stood in anxious expectation. Tessibel,
knowing it couldn't be Sandy, put aside her first impulse not to heed
the rap. An instant later, she opened the door. That it might be
Frederick was farthest from her mind, until she saw him standing there
so thin and tired. Surprised and shocked at seeing him, the stress of
her feeling found her faint. She would have fallen if he had not
suddenly seized her.

"Tessibel!... Tess, darling!" he cried, sharply. Lifting her up, he
carried her into the room. She clung to him, crying, her confusion
calmed by his caresses. He placed her in a chair and sat down beside
her. Suddenly, she sat back in her seat, roused from her revery by
mocking memories of her wrongs.

"Couldn't ye let me alone?" she breathed hoarsely, covering her face
with her hands. "Ye might a let me be."

"I had to come, dear," Frederick told her. "I want you to do something
for both our sakes.... Oh, Tess, what terrible days have passed since I
saw you last!"

After a short pause, she dropped both hands and glanced up at him. Then
knitting her fingers together, she pressed them hard until they looked
like the veined stems of a pale flower. He had come to make another
demand of her--and she was so tired--so sick!

"I want you to make me a promise, Tessibel," urged Frederick.

"I said as how I'd help ye all I could," murmured Tess. "Ye're wantin'
me to do somethin' awful hard, huh?"

Her soul in her eyes, she looked at him, but his gaze was on the gloves
he was twisting back and forth between his fingers.

"Ain't ye goin' to tell me?" groaned Tess.

She dropped her chin into her hands with a touching gesture of pathos.
Frederick bent nearer.

"Tess, Mrs. Waldstricker sent me with a message--and you've got to do
what I want you to."

His strangely persistent reiteration that she should do his will served
only to produce another, "Why don't ye tell me, then?" from Tess.

"You must do something to save yourself!" he cried.

To save herself? What did he mean by saving herself? What did any one
intend to do? She'd stayed so alone no one could intrude upon her now.
And then, there was Andy, poor forlorn little man!

"Is anyone goin' to hurt me?" she faltered, faint and frightened.

"Yes, dearest, yes, and you must--"

He was on his feet and Tess struggled up, too.

"What've I got to do?" she breathed miserably.

"Tess," he groaned, "can't you understand how much I love you; that I
would save you if I could?"

With uplifted hand, he tried to raise her face to his.

"Don't!" she cried, pushing him away. "_Tell_ me what Mrs. Waldstricker
said!"

"You've got to do it, dear," urged Frederick, "or they'll take you
away."

"What do ye mean by takin' me away?" she implored, moving a frightened
step backward. "Who's goin' to try to take me any place?"

"Why--why--Mrs. Waldstricker says--"

He paused so long Tess could not bear the suspense.

"Oh, tell me!" she gasped. "Can't ye see ye air killin' me?"

Frederick began again.

"Mr. Ebenezer Waldstricker--"

Tess swayed on her feet.

"What air he goin' to do?" she panted.

Had her enemy discovered she was protecting Andy?

"He's going to take you to a--a--" stammered Frederick.

Tessibel grew faint and dizzy. She uttered a sharp scream.

"A reform school!" she cried.

"Yes."

The blow had fallen at last! She would be dragged from her home, up
before the eyes of the world in all her illness and shame. Then she sank
to the floor in abandoned misery.

"Oh, Frederick, save me!" she wailed. "Don't let him take me away, and
I'll promise never to go outside the shanty. Oh, make him let me stay!
Why can't I stay, oh, why can't I?"

"Waldstricker says you've got to go," said Frederick, sadly.

Tess sat up and flung back her curls.

"Well, he don't own the hull world, does he.... Couldn't you, well
couldn't _you_ say somethin' to make him let me be?"

"I don't know what to say," the boy mumbled.

"Couldn't ye tell 'em?" entreated Tess. "Please listen. Couldn't
ye--couldn't ye tell Mr. Waldstricker 'bout our little baby--our baby,
Frederick?"

He refused by a negative gesture of head and hand.

"Oh, don't shake your head, Frederick!" cried Tess, frantically.
"Please!... Please!... Me an' the baby won't be any bother to you!...
We'll jest love ye always an' forever, me an' the baby will....

"Ye could save us that way! Ye needn't tell 'em anythin' but that!"

Suddenly another thought took possession of her.

"What else did Mrs. Waldstricker say?" she demanded. "What were ye both
wantin' me to do?"

"Mr. Waldstricker told his wife and my--I mean Madelene--that you'll
either be sent away or must marry--marry Lysander Letts."

Tess stared at him wildly as though he were going mad. Or _was_ she
losing her reason! What awful thing had he said. Lysander Letts--surely
she had not heard straight.

"Ye weren't tellin' me what were true, Frederick," she whimpered
overwhelmed. "Oh, ye scared me so!"

"But I am telling you the truth!" he exclaimed miserably. His voice
broke. "I can't save you, Tessibel. Waldstricker can do anything he
wants. Why--why--Waldstricker's hands're stronger--are stronger than
God's."

She heard his words as if in a dream. "Stronger'n God's," echoed through
the recesses of her brain in fearful mockery. She was lost, engulfed in
the hatred of Waldstricker. She saw through the mist over her eyes,
Lysander Letts leering menacingly at her. She sat very still and held
her breath. If she let it go, her heart would break.

"Stronger'n God's," were the only words she remembered. Then, if that
were true, and Frederick had said it--then--then, nothing--nobody--could
take from her this brimming cup of disgrace and destruction. She
struggled to her feet, walked to the door and opened it. Her eyes sought
the dejected looking man.

"I air askin' ye to go now, please, right now," she said quietly. "Tell
Mrs. Waldstricker, I air much obliged."

"And haven't you something to say to me, Tess?... Oh, God, don't send me
away like this!"

She laid one hand on her heart. "Only go," she whispered, "an' never,
never come again!"

Frederick stepped over the threshold, and Tess shut the door behind
him.


CHAPTER XXXIII

HANDS STRONGER THAN WALDSTRICKER'S


Tess stood with swift-coming breath, her back to the door, waiting.
Frederick must leave before she dared speak to Andy. It seemed an
eternity ere the sound of the retreating footsteps died away, and she
knew he was gone.

Then she started across the room, haltingly. Strange, how difficult it
was to walk, and how giddy her head felt! What was it that had happened?
What was going to happen a thousand times worse? Frederick's brutality
left her bruised and broken. His threats twisted themselves through the
tangled tumult of her thoughts and his sinister suggestions stunned and
stupefied her.

Frederick had come and gone! She remembered that. Her skin still burned
where his hot lips had touched her. He had told her he loved her, had
begged her to say she loved him! Love? Yes, she had loved him--she did
love him, but her love lay low, its structure, like a squatter's hut,
she had seen, shattered on the sand by a storm.

Tess put a stick of wood in the stove, and a second later forgot she'd
done it.

Ebenezer Waldstricker came into her mind vaguely ... vindictive and
violent. Her hand went suddenly to her face. He was going to send her to
a reform school, going to take her from the shanty for years! How
powerful he was! Frederick had said Waldstricker's hands were stronger
than God's. What strong hands he must have--those hands descending upon
her defenseless, desolate life.

Andy was peering through the hole. Tessibel collapsed into Daddy
Skinner's chair.

"Brat," he said in a whisper, "I'm comin' down!"

Tess mechanically got up and barred the door.... Then she returned to
her seat. The dwarf was already squatted beside it, his eyes fastened on
the girl in eloquent silence. His chin sank between his knees. Then the
two of them sat.... The crackling of the freshly burning wood and the
ticking of the clock were the only sounds in the room.

"I heard what the man said 'bout Waldstricker's hands bein' stronger'n
God's," reflected Andy, aloud, presently. Then he raised his body a
little from the floor that he might look into the girl's face. "Say,
brat, has old Eb got any marks on his hands?"

Tess shook her head, brown eyes sombrous with suffering.

"No," she denied. "His hands are big an' white an' long an' soft."

Andy pondered a minute.

"They ain't no marks of nails on 'em, air there, kid?" he demanded,
solemnly.

The pursed, hurt lines around Tessibel's mouth softened a little.

"No," she murmured wearily, again. "No, Andy."

The dwarf reached and took one of the girl's hands. It lay on his own
quite limply.

"Look at me, brat, dear."

The red-brown eyes moved toward the upturned face.

"Tessibel, will ye think of this one little thing?

"The Christ's holdin' his hands over the hull world, givin' everybody
peace; you an' me, too, brat-kid. Waldstricker's hands ain't dragged me
back to Auburn, an' God's hands has kept me here.... You showed me that
from the beginnin', eh, brat?... It's sure, ain't it?"

He hunched himself nearer her, his face beautiful with faith.

"Ain't it true, kid?"

"Sure! Sure, it air true!" faltered Tessibel.

"Then if God's hands kept me here in the shanty 'gainst all Waldstricker
could do, can't they keep you here, huh?"

Tessibel's head lifted suddenly. What was Andy saying about
hands--Waldstricker's and--and--With her free fingers she brushed the
dampened curls from her forehead. Waldstricker's hands! Oh,
incomparable memory! How could she have forgotten the hands of the
Christ! They had brought Daddy Skinner from the shadow of the rope. She
had forgotten the power of those hands.... Hands of peace--hands of
love! As shadows fade before the majestic advance of the sun, so under
the inrush of divine light did the agonized expression fade from
Tessibel's eyes. The menacing figure of Waldstricker slipped away like a
gliding night-serpent, and Tess got to her feet.

"Andy," she breathed, bending over him. "Oh, Andy, darling! Ye're
telling me Jesus can keep me from bein' sent to that awful place? Ain't
that what ye're tryin' to show me?"

The dwarf scrambled up, reaching forth his hands.

"And he sure can, brat," he made answer. "Waldstricker can't pull ye out
of this hut when God's holdin' ye in."

Andy was smiling his rare, boyish smile. A large lump rose in Tessibel's
throat.

"I air goin' to ask God to hold me here, Andy," she choked brokenly.

So when night closed the grey eyes of the winter day, and darkness
descended on the Skinner shanty, a red-haired squatter girl and a wee
dwarf knelt in the glow of the hut lamp and petitioning lips framed in
whispers a simple prayer for their protection.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day passed, quiet in the shanty and over the shining span of
frozen water. Waldstricker had not come. Tess crept into bed sighing
with relief. Andy rolled himself in his blankets and slept.

The morning arrived crisply cold, bleakly grey. Tess shivered as she
broke the ice for water. Would this day bring Waldstricker? Then, as
that harrowing thought flitted through her mind, another exultant,
smiling flash took its place. Tessibel's head reared with a proud
uplift. No human power could set aside the majestic promise of Heaven
that she might stay in the hut. Smilingly, she opened the shanty door
and cheerfully answered the dwarf's, "How d'y' do, brat dear?"

But the next few hours were laden with a sense of approaching calamity,
that sense which ties the tongue in apprehension. Andy was perched on
the ladder while Tess sat just below in the wooden rocker.

Suddenly, from far up the lane, the sound of wheels grating on the snow,
could be heard plainly. Both man and girl stared white-faced at each
other for perhaps thirty seconds.

"They're comin', but they can't take ye, Brat," muttered Andy. "You'll
stay in this shanty the same 's if you was nailed to the floor."

Then, he sought his place under the straw tick, and as nearer and louder
came the clatter of the horses hoofs, the more quiet grew the Skinner
hut.

Tessibel stood in the middle of the kitchen, her hand pressing down the
beatings of her heart. Somebody was approaching! There were footsteps on
the dry snow!

Directly the crunching sound ceased, a loud knock fell on the door.
Tessibel lifted the bar, and at her faint, "Come in," the door flung
back on its hinges and Ebenezer Waldstricker stepped over the threshold.
Another man, seemingly by common consent, waited outside. Waldstricker
came to a halt at the sight of the squatter girl. Even in her mourning,
and ashen pale, she looked glorious. Her burnished, unmanageable hair
clung like a golden mantle about her. She had lifted heavy lashes and
was looking him straight in the face.

Ebenezer, suddenly, felt a wild desire to strike, but he dared not touch
her, nor dared he go forward one step. Her advancing motherhood crowned
her with unapproachable dignity, and the man muttered an imprecation
under his breath. To have her appear in court so austerely lovely would
be to lose his case. He had expected she would plead, cry, perhaps
scream. What should he say to break that steady calm? He did not know
what a day and night of communion with the Infinite had done for the
squatter girl. He did not understand that beneath her were everlasting
arms, that her life was held in the hollow of a hand more powerful than
his own.

"I believe, my girl," said he, without preliminaries, "I told you when
the church took action against you, you'd be sent to some place where
girls of your class go, didn't I?"

Tess didn't move by so much as a wink. She seemed simply to have grown
deaf and dumb. How could she answer when she had not heard? She was
staring back into the man's bold, dark eyes. Her silence was like a
spark to his inflammatory temper.

"Aren't you going to answer me, Miss?" His rasping voice aroused Tess
from her trance.

"I didn't hear what you said," she told him, still very calm.

"I said," replied Ebenezer, arrogantly, "you're going to be sent to a
reform school."

"Today?" asked Tess, breathing deeply, now fully possessed of her
senses.

"Yes, today." Then he remembered Madelene.... he had made her a promise.
"But I'll help you to get out after a while, if you tell me who--who
brought you to this condition." He threw out both hands disdainfully
toward her. Waldstricker's white hands, hands stronger than God's! Who
had dared say it?

The girl cast her eyes to the rafters. There, the nets hung in strings
and mingled their tassled ends with the dry herbs. There, somewhere,
were that other pair of hands upholding her. She lowered her eyes again
to the man.

"Don't you hear me talkin' to you?" he grated. "I said you were going
today--but if you tell me--"

He bit off his words, her apparent helplessness shaming him to silence.
Then the import of what he had said flashed over Tessibel and she swayed
backward. This small break in that superb calm brought Waldstricker
forward the step the girl had yielded.

"Are you going to tell me?" he demanded again.

"Nope," said Tess rigidly, "Air I to go with ye now, this minute?"

He inclined his head with a bitter nod. "Yes," he snarled. He strode to
the door, and addressed the officer. "Come in! Come in! She's a hardened
huzzy.... Serve the warrant on her."

Tessibel took the paper but dropped it to the floor without glancing at
it. She didn't care what it contained, for minute by minute came the
sweet assurance from up there among the nets that God had heard and
would answer.

The officer was staring at her, askance. He remembered distinctly when
she had climbed up the ivy on the county jail to see her father. Then
she had been a child. Now she was a woman. Being a good-hearted man, he
hated his task, and a moment later hated it worse than ever. She sent
him one pleading, heart-rending glance, then dropped her lids.

"Ye couldn't let me stay till after March?" she whispered. "If ye only
would--"

It had been an effort to say it; an effort to both inclination and
voice. It was as if her throat were filled with ashes ... nor could she
finish the appeal.

"You can't stay even one day," thrust in Waldstricker, "I told you long
ago what to expect.... Get your things together."

Tess made no move to obey. She was waiting for an answer from out of the
dry nets, even from far behind the snow clouds where the blue slept.

"Get your things on," commanded the man, once more.

Oh, yes, she could do that! Putting on her things didn't say she was
going. She turned mechanically, took down her coat and scarf. These she
put on and went for her rubbers. She stood very near the wall as she
bent dizzily to slip them on. All the time her soul was looking upward
for the eternal answer, an answer from a power stronger than
Waldstricker's.

Then she went slowly to the little box where she kept her hat. After
brushing her hair back, she pinned it on in front of the mirror.
Today--well, now she was dressed, ready to go. She turned and came
forward. The constable stared from Waldstricker back to her. Was this
the girl who had stamped and screamed when Daddy Skinner had been taken
to Auburn?

"Are you goin' without any fuss, miss?" he asked dully.

"If I go at all," was all Tess said.

At the door she flung back her head, her eyes searching the rafters.
Straight as knife cuts hung the broken strings of the unused nets,
threaded here and there with wheels of silken cobwebs. Up through these
Tessibel stared. Up and up, above the curling of the chimney smoke, up
among the stars, up where the hands of love--God's hands, were ever
spread in benediction over her own wild, beautiful world. She smiled as
if responding to a smile. Waldstricker touching her made her turn
suddenly.

The cold wind from the door just opened by the officer, swept her hot
face. She flashed her eyes past him to the vast open stretches of
winter, and there, standing in the lane, smiling directly back at her,
was Deforrest Young. God in his own good time had sent her hands
stronger than Waldstricker's.


CHAPTER XXXIV

LOVE AIR EVERYWHERE THE HULL TIME


The moment the red-brown eyes fell upon Professor Young, the pale face
of the girl lit with a radiant smile.

"Oh, ye've come!... God sent ye, didn't He?"

At the sight of the tall, commanding lawyer, the officer and his
powerful principal stepped each to one side of the path in front of the
house and left Tess standing in the doorway, with trembling arms
outstretched to her approaching friend. Young came directly to her,
ignoring his brother-in-law.

"My dear," he murmured, snatching her hands, "you needed me! Poor child,
you certainly did!"

"Are you coming in," pausing on the threshold, he spoke to Waldstricker,
"or are you going on to Ithaca, Ebenezer?"

A smile passed over the elder's lips. He was secretly much amused at the
professor's assumption of authority.

"I'm coming in," said he. "I've something to show you."

Evidently not impressed by his brother-in-law's statement, Deforrest led
the passive girl back from the threshold of the shanty into the kitchen.

"Let me take off your wraps, dear child," he said tenderly.

Waldstricker's growing amusement found audible expression in a
condescending laugh.

"Wait a minute, Forrie," he commanded, spreading his feet pompously.
"She can't take 'em off. She's coming with us."

"And why with you?" Young asked, in simulated surprise.

Waldstricker fairly gloated with joy. Never had he felt so righteous and
uplifted. By his brother-in-law's actions, he was assured he did not
know of the warrant for Tessibel Skinner. But the girl's attitude
amazed him. To the quiet dignity with which she had submitted to arrest,
there had succeeded an air of complete detachment as though her
responsibility, even her interest in the matter, had wholly ceased.
Mutely watching the two strong men, she seemed like some small prey over
which fierce forces fought. Young began to remove the hat from her
bronze curls.

"We're going to take her away," cut in Waldstricker, putting one hand in
his pocket.

"Where to?" demanded Young, laying the hat on the table.

"To a--to a--" Waldstricker hesitated.

The frown on Young's brow deepened. He had paused for the other's
explanation, his under lip gathered between his teeth. Then, he laid his
hand protectingly on that of the silent, white-faced girl. Tessibel's
fingers turned upward and closed over his, and they stood thus a moment,
Waldstricker contemplating them through half-closed lids, one corner of
his mouth superciliously curled.

"You haven't told me where you were going to take her," Deforrest
insisted.

Bitter anger rose in Eb's throat. He had been balked at every turn he'd
taken against this red-headed girl, and instead of helping him,
Deforrest was aiding her. He did not intend that Madelene should suffer
any more, and he imagined his own home life would be more peaceful when
Tessibel Skinner was wiped from its horizon.

"If you'll have it plain," he cried triumphantly, "she's going to be
sent to a reform school! If ever a girl needed correcting, she does.
She's already been served with the warrant."

Young muttered under his breath. Holding out his hand, he said,

"Let me see the warrant."

Ebenezer pointed to the paper on the floor where Tess had dropped it.
Stooping, he picked it up.

"Look that over!" he said and handed it to the lawyer.

Professor Young took the paper, and before reading it, looked
reassuringly at Tess with that wide, white-toothed smile of his that
always cheered her heart.

"Sit down," he told her. "You do look tired, child."

With one swift glance at Waldstricker's face, she obeyed him.

Deforrest merely glanced at the paper in his hand.

"Oh, is that all you have?" he asked the constable.

"Yes, sir," the officer replied obsequiously.

"You're sure you haven't anything else?"

"Quite sure, sir," was the answer.

"That being the case," said Deforrest, quietly, "I'll match it
with--with this."

He drew from his pocket another paper which he tendered the officer.
After the man scanned it, he handed it without a word to Waldstricker.
The elder in his turn read it through. It was an order from the court
recalling the warrant obtained by Ebenezer Waldstricker for Tessibel
Skinner's arrest. The constable grinned sheepishly at Waldstricker.

"I guess that ends my usefulness here," he said, smiling admiringly at
Professor Young. "Good afternoon, miss! Goodday, gentlemen!"

Waldstricker, murder in his heart, took one stride toward Young, as the
door closed behind the departing man.

"How'd you find out this was to happen today?" he gritted through his
teeth. "I insist upon knowing."

"A little bird told me," grinned Professor Young. Then, glancing at
Tess, and seeing how white she was, there rose within him a righteous
indignation, and he went on, "You might employ your time to better
advantage than torturing--"

For a moment he didn't know what to call Tessibel. She was no longer a
child, no longer a little girl, although she looked deplorably young and
sick as she sat huddled in the chair.

"Tormenting women," he finished, sharply. "And, Ebenezer, unless you
want to make an enemy of me, you better let Tess alone. You can't do
anything to harm her, for I won't let you. I may as well tell you, too,
that the day after her father's death I constituted myself her guardian,
and I'll move Heaven and earth to prevent any one harming her. Just
remember that when you plot against her next time.... Now go home and
forget there are such people as squatters.... You'll be happier, and so
will I."

"Deforrest," Waldstricker appealed, changing his belligerent tactics,
"if you keep this thing up, you'll rue it! You know very well Bishop is
hidden somewhere in this squatter settlement. I can only get him by
rooting his people out one by one; if you'll have that court order
rescinded and let me send the girl away, I'll make it possible for you
to run for Governor next fall."

For one minute, the lawyer surveyed Waldstricker critically. He reached
one hand toward Tess. She got to her feet, grasping his fingers with
hers.

"Ebenezer," Young said with great deliberation, "if I crawled across
this girl's body into the Governor's chair, I'd be the basest cur alive.
And furthermore, you promise too much! You can't deliver the goods!
What! _You_ name the next Governor! Why you can't even remove this
little squatter girl from her lonely hut!"

Waldstricker shrank from the scorn in his brother-in-law's voice, opened
the door and strode out.

"Tess," Deforrest said, putting an arm around her, "when are you going
to let me take you away from such things as this? I shudder to think
what might have happened if I hadn't come today, and I've got to go away
again."

Tess smiled up at the big man. Drawing herself erect and lifting her
head proudly, she looked into his face, exultantly, full of buoyant joy
at the tremendous proof of Love's protecting power in the hour of her
great need.

"I jest knowed old Eb couldn't get me," she asserted. "Jesus sent ye
jest in the nick of time, didn't he, huh?"

"But, my dear, listen," Young argued, his love making him apprehensive.
"It's awful for you to be here alone and unprotected. Let me take you
away somewhere."

"I ain't alone," Tess insisted confidently, serene courage resounded in
the sweet voice. "Jesus air here an' He keeps me safe all the time. He
got Daddy out of Auburn an' kept Andy an' me in the shanty. Why, He sent
you today. I know He won't let nothin' bad happen to me."

Untroubled, the brave eyes looked into his, conveying a message of
courage and perfect peace that somehow uplifted the man's anxious
thought to catch a glimpse of her exalted faith.

"But you know, Tess," he continued, "you are not so well this winter and
you ought to have some one here to look after you."

Tess shook her head, the bronze curls twisting and falling over her
shoulders and upon the arms embracing her.

"No, siree," she answered. "I can't have any one here, on 'count of
Andy. Oh, ye mustn't worry 'bout me. I air all right an' will be every
minute."

"At least, dear," Deforrest insisted, "let me get a doctor and nurse
when--when--"

The brilliant head suddenly bowed itself forward against Young's rough
coat. For a moment, her high courage faltered, but not for long. Surely,
the same power that had cared for her today would see her through this
other trial.

"Nope, not any doctor or nurse," she refused. "I'll have Mother Moll.
She knows what to do an' she air safe."

Withdrawing herself from Young's arms, she took his hand and kissed it.

"God sure air good to Tessibel," she murmured.

A moment they stood there. Then the lawyer took up his hat and turned to
the door.

"You know, Tess, I love you and want to help you always."

In the doorway, he paused and with bared head heard the girl's parting
speech.

"Sure, ye're lovin' me an' I air lovin' you, too. I know Mr. Young, love
air here an' everywhere the hull time."


CHAPTER XXXV

BOY SKINNER


A pale winter moon nestled among the snow clouds in the storm country.
The shacks of the squatter settlement were dark and silent, save for a
slender little light glimmering from the side of the curtains of the
Skinner shanty. Inside, all was quiet. The squatter girl had been in the
valley of shadows, and had struggled back from its depths, bringing with
her that miracle of miracles, a son, a little son not much bigger than
the hand of a man; and, now, pillowed on her arm, very near her heart,
lay a small head, a baby's head, covered with soft, damp curls.

Mother Moll had come and gone. When the old, old woman had looked down
upon the girl, she'd smiled that senile smile of age that split her lips
like a knife cut.

"Ha! So it air another brat comin' to the shanty," she shrilled. "Holy
Mary! It air the way of the world, the way of woman."

And now she'd gone, leaving the boy baby under the coverlet with
Tessibel.

A weary apathy had settled over the young mother. Strange dreams filled
the small room with haunting, tangible things which she could reach out
and touch if she dared. The rafters, too, were peopled with faces partly
hidden in the dry nets. But she seemed to be staring at something out
and beyond--as Daddy Skinner, too, had stared that never-to-be-forgotten
night.

The past months, where the grey days and sun days had all been the same,
moved vaguely in silent procession before her. She had lived through
them like a pale ghost indifferent alike to sunshine or shadow, and this
night she had drained to the last drop the bitter cup Frederick Graves
had given her to drink. Frederick, her husband, her beloved! She thought
of him indifferently. Even his babe at her breast seemed unimportant.
She considered them without emotion. But the ghostly faces, hovering
among the nets, interested her.

Then, distinctly from among them advanced a figure, a dear, familiar
figure. Daddy Skinner ... the same old adorable daddy--his shaggy,
thready beard hanging over his chest. For one single instant he bent
over her, lovingly laid his hand upon the bronze curls and smiled in the
way he had of doing before he had gone away with mummy. Tess flung up
her hands.

"Daddy! Daddy Skinner!" she cried.

The movement startled the babe from his sleep. The dwarf, roused by the
cries scrambled to the open hole.

"Tessibel--Tess," he called brokenly.

The girl lifted heavy lids.

"Daddy was here, Andy," she wailed in misery. "My own Daddy Skinner. I
want to go with him.... I can't live any longer without him."

"Can I come down, brat?" begged the dwarf, huskily.

"Yep," whispered Tess. "Mother Moll air gone."

"I heard 'er when she went," said Andy, and he slipped down the ladder.

The babe's shrill cry continued as the dwarf went to the bed.

"Yer daddy don't need ye as much as me an' the little feller. Let me
take 'im--I ain't seen 'im yet, ye know."

Andy bent over the cot. Gently he lifted the infant and carried him
nearer the lamp's dim rays. He stood gazing intently into the rosy face.
Then, he raised a tiny hand and spread first one finger, then each baby
fellow out in his own palm.

"Why he's real handsome," he decided at last. "Brat, he air the most
beautifulest in the world!"

At the last words he turned shining eyes toward Tessibel. She lay
gazing, not at Andy or the babe in his arms, but up into and beyond the
nets in the rafters, seeking another glimpse of her father's dear face.
Alarmed by her strange silence, the little man bore his precious burden
back to the cot and knelt beside the passive figure. Holding the baby
close, he breathed,

"Don't, brat, dear! Look at me. I been feelin' yer daddy round all day,
too. He'll always be near to help you an' the little kid."

A pathetic trembling of her lips hushed the flow of his words.

"It seems's if I couldn't live, Andy. I dunno how I can, I dunno how!"

Her voice trailed away into a plaintive moan.

"Let me take hold of yer hand, brat," murmured Andy. "I want to tell ye
somethin'."

He clasped one of her hands in his, while her free fingers shaded her
eyes.

"You got three folks standin' by you, kid," continued Andy, earnestly.
"Me, Young an' Jesus. While I been alone in the garret, all this time, I
been readin' an' a reasonin' out things. Don't ye remember when Mr.
Young come that night how he said he didn't blame ye fer nothin' ye'd
done?"

Beneath the tense fingers, she breathed a simple, "Yes."

"An' me--why me--I know yer heart's if I'd made it, honey, an'
Jesus--Air ye listening Tess?"

"Sure," assented Tess.

"Then I'll tell ye a story. Once a woman loved a man awful much, an' she
loved 'im like all women love men folks. An' a hull lot of righteous
ones dragged 'er right up to Jesus an' says, 'She air a sinner, sir,
what'll we do with 'er?' An' he says, 'Go away an' leave 'er with me.'"

Tessibel's hand clutched at the fingers holding hers.

"An' when he were alone with 'er," went on the dwarf, "an' she were a
kneelin' at 'is feet, he jest touched her lovin' like, an' says--"

"Don't, Andy, you--you hurt me ..." moaned Tess. "Don't!"

"An' I wanted to help ye, sweet," insisted Andy. "But still, I air
askin' ye to listen to the rest. Will ye?"

Tess acquiesced silently, her hand falling away from her white, drawn
face.

"An' Jesus says to the woman in baby trouble like yours, he says, 'Poor
soul, I ain't blamin' ye this day, I ain't!'"

The little man's eyes shone with the sublimity of the truth he was
imparting, and an uplifted expression of faith settled on his features.
The baby whimpered in his arms, and loosening his hold upon the girl's
hand, he rose to his feet carefully. Tessibel was crying now, in low
caught breaths that wrenched and tore at Andy's heart cruelly.

To soothe the child, he pattered to and fro upon the shanty floor; and
when he began to chant in a low, sweet voice that old, old precious
hymn, "Rescue the Perishin';" Tess cried out again. Andy Bishop, the
dwarf, was impressing upon Tessibel Skinner's heart that mysterious
faith she'd known so long, that same sense of God's love which she'd
taught him in those days when the dark doors of Auburn Prison yawned
wide for him.

The state had branded him a murderer, but here, with glistening eyes, he
preached the Christ and Him crucified. In the solitude of the garret, he
had learned his lesson well ... by the dim attic light, he had studied
the story of the forgiveness of sin. Suddenly, he ceased his song, and
as he trotted back and forth, swaying the little child in his arms,
Tessibel caught murmured words, "'Nuther do I condemn thee," said Jesus.
"Nuther do I condemn thee," said he.

And in that next pulsing minute through the eyes of her soul, the
watching girl saw above the squat dwarf the shadowy image of the smiling
Christ, and unspeakable peace descended upon her like a benediction. The
lines of suffering vanished from about her pursed mouth. The hurt within
her heart gave way to the "still waters."

"'Nuther do I condemn thee,' said Jesus Christ," whispered Andy over the
boy's face, and "neither do I condemn thee" sank into the very being of
the squatter girl as warm rain sinks to the heart of a parched flower.

She followed the waddling figure, a gleam of gratitude beaming in her
eyes. Surely, the bread Tessibel Skinner had cast upon the waters of
Andy Bishop's stormy life was returning after many weary days!

"Andy," she called. "Andy, dear, bring me my baby."

The dwarf laid the sleeping child within its mother's arms.

"The man on the cross, your man an' mine, brat," he whispered, "said,
'If ye have burdens, come an' I'll rest ye.' Didn't he say it, kid?"

"Yes, yes, Andy," whispered Tessibel. "Everything'll be all right
fer--you an' me an' the baby," and she ended, ... "Get back in the
garret an' pray for my brat's daddy, too, Andy. He air needin' it
worser'n me an' you."

Then the squatter girl turned her face to the wall, drew the baby under
the coverlet, and the dwarf scuttled up the ladder.


CHAPTER XXXVI

DEFORREST DECIDES


Deforrest Young sat alone in his bachelor apartments, which he'd
obtained after the quarrel with Waldstricker over the churching of
Tessibel Skinner. He was in Ithaca in response to a letter from Mrs.
Waldstricker, stating that she would meet him in his rooms this
afternoon.

His mind was busily at work with many problems. For the past week he had
had no word from Tessibel Skinner. Her silence was significant.
Mischief-making anxiety, which always pictures the worst side of a
situation, tormented him cruelly. He hoped Helen might have news from
the shanty by the lakeside.

When Mrs. Waldstricker finally appeared, his first impulse was to ask
about the squatter girl, but the troubled expression of his sister's
face checked the question on his lips. He drew her tenderly into his
arms, and attempted to comfort her with reassuring pats and caresses.

"You shouldn't have ventured out, dear," he chided. "Sit down here!...
There! Now tell me what's the matter."

"I'm so miserable, Forrie," she wept. "I can't do a thing with
Ebenezer.... He's in such a state of temper all the time!"

"Don't try to talk for a moment, dearest," soothed the lawyer, much
moved.

"But I must--I want to! It seems as if my whole life has been upset in
some unaccountable manner. And it isn't any better since Frederick and
Madelene went away. I was in hopes after they'd gone, I might have some
peace."

"Is it still--" Young's inquiry was broken off by his auditor's
exclamation.

"Yes, it's Tessibel Skinner! He seems perfectly possessed about her. I
can't understand why, either. I always tell him she's nothing to us. He
has even gone so far--Oh, Forrie, dear, tell me it isn't so!"

"What isn't so?" asked Deforrest, puzzled.

"Ebenezer says--he says you'd marry--" The inquisitor's courage oozed
away before she finished her sentence. Her brother turned and strode up
and down the room, while Mrs. Waldstricker's eyes, full of questioning
anguish, followed his tall figure.

"I suppose he said I'd marry Tessibel Skinner. Is that it?" His voice
was low, deep and intense. Wheeling about he looked across at his
sister.

She got up from her chair and went to him. Her desire to placate her
brother supported her determination to know his precise attitude toward
her husband. She placed her hand on his arm and replied hurriedly,

"Yes, that's what he said. I told him it was no such thing; that you did
what you could for the lonely child without a thought--"

Deforrest's hand closed over the speaker's.

"You were mistaken, then," he asserted quietly. "I'd have married
Tessibel Skinner long ago, if she'd consented."

"Forrie, dear, you wouldn't! You couldn't! Especially now! Oh, darling,
you're all I've got in the world.... Can't you see it would break my
heart?"

"You needn't worry about it, sister mine." A sad shake of his head
emphasized his reply. "Tess won't marry me. She knows I love her and
want to care for her, but she won't let me. She sticks there in that
wretched shanty, alone with her trouble and refuses every offer I make.
Her courage is splendid. I love her for it, although I'm torn to pieces
with anxiety."

"And I never knew," Helen mused. "I thought--I thought it was--just you
were charitable and kind."

"No, it wasn't that. I've loved her since the first, but she couldn't
love me, that's all. Then this awful thing happened." The deepening
lines in his face and his twitching lips revealed the intensity of his
solicitude. "Have you heard anything about her?"

"Yes. A man by the name of Brewer, one of the squatters, brought me a
message."

"Yes, yes!" interrupted the man, very impatiently.

Helen pressed her face against his arm. She divined the pain he was
suffering. How was she to soften the hurt her answer would inflict, even
her loving heart couldn't imagine.

"She has a baby boy," she whispered.

"God!" groaned Deforrest.

"The baby was born a few days ago, and every day the squatter's been at
our house, ostensibly to sell something, but really to tell me about
her.... I saw him this morning, and he says they are both doing nicely.
Forrie, don't you think--" There was something in her brother's stricken
face that broke off her question.

"Don't I think what, dear?" He got up and resumed his restless pacing up
and down.

"Oh, I want you to be happy. Couldn't you possibly--forget you've loved
her?"

"No, I can't," and he came to a standstill in front of her. "I might as
well be truthful, dear, as long as you know this much.... If Tessibel
will marry me, I'll take her and the boy--" he choked, paused a few
seconds and went on. "I'll take them both away from Ithaca. It's the
only happiness in store for me, and I believe I could make her happy,
too."

"I can't bear the thought of it," cried Helen, desperately. "Please
don't think I'm meddling, but has she told you anything?"

"No. Some one has mistreated the child shamefully, but she won't tell
anything about it."

"Poor little girl!" sighed Mrs. Waldstricker. "How I wish now I'd done
more for her! I might have, you know."

The lawyer raised his hand deprecatingly.

"What's past, is done with," he answered gloomily. "I don't know how
much she'll let me do, but I am going to help her in spite of herself.
That shack by the lake is an awful place. I swear I'll give her decent
surroundings and a chance to live.... I'm going down today."

"But, Forrie," his sister objected, "I want you to come home with me to
dinner. You haven't been to our house in a long time, not since the
night you came from Binghamton and went off to Skinner's in the storm."

"Helen, dear," Young explained, apologetically, "I can't come to your
house as long as Ebenezer feels toward me the way he does. You see,
don't you?"

"Oh, I suppose I do, but I just can't stand it. Eb has acted badly and
tried to shoulder it all off on you. But can't you overlook it, honey?"

"Why, Helen, how can I? I don't feel any too pleasant toward him, and he
doesn't want to be friends, either. He pays no attention to my wishes
but tries to ride rough shod over me. He regards my interest in Tess as
a personal affront. He persecutes her because he thinks he's annoying
me. But there, don't cry any more. You'll only make yourself ill! I
think you ought to go home and lie down. You've some one else besides
yourself and Eb to think of, dear girl."

"I know it," she sobbed, "and I've tried to show Ebenezer how happy we'd
be if he'd forget those people down the lake and let you do what you
want to. Sometimes I think he's lost his mind. I really don't know what
to do."

Helen rose from her chair.

"Nor do I," replied Young.

"But, Deforrest, don't you think if you talked to Ebenezer, he'd see
things differently?"

"I'm afraid not," said he, adjusting Mrs. Waldstricker's furs. "You see,
Eb's always had his own way in most things, and I can't take any other
position about Tess, and I won't."

"I wish you would come home with me," sighed Mrs. Waldstricker, when her
brother was tucking the sleigh robe about her.

"I'm sorry I can't, Helen. You'll hear from me soon," he promised, as
the sleigh moved away.

Half an hour later found the lawyer astride his horse, his fine face
clouded in sorrowful thought.

He cantered along the hard packed road. Here he noted the shimmering
veil of ice over some brooklet waterfall in a cleft of the hill side.
There the precise punctures of a rabbit track dotted the level snow of
the woods. Beyond a herd of cattle standing placidly around a
straw-stack blew clouds of vapor from their steaming nostrils. The
silent beauty of the hills, glistening in their frosty covering, set off
to advantage the silvery sheen of the ice-laden lake. Through the trees,
he caught occasional glimpses of East Hill winter-wrapped in its white
mantle. Just north of the city shone the resplendence of the ice-cloaked
rocks and waterfalls of Fall Creek Gorge, like a massive garniture
emblazoned on the mantle's skirt. The unbroken calm of the quiet winter
afternoon touched the rider's overwrought heart and awoke in him a sense
of the peace and the dignity of the visible creation. The untroubled
serenity and repose which all nature presented, soothed his troubled
spirit. Something of the unruffled confidence expressed by Tessibel,
when he'd last left her, penetrated his revery. Her words, "I know
Love's everywhere the hull time," had comforted him many times, and now
they came again upon their healing mission.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tessibel's baby was one week old. This afternoon she lay partially
dressed on the cot while Andy was plying his noiseless way about the
kitchen. He stopped a moment on the journey to the stove and smiled at
the young mother.

"I bet he comes today," said he. "You'd better be gettin' that sorrow
offen yer face, brat."

"I ain't right sorryful, Andy," she answered. "I was jest thinkin' of
all the good things Mr. Young air done for me, an' hopin' he'd get you
free, too. Mebbe when Spring comes, Andy, you can run in the woods with
me!"

"I air prayin' for it every day, kid."

"When you ain't afeered of Auburn any more," said the girl, after a
moment's silence, "we'll go away from this shanty, an' mebbe we can both
work. That'd be nice, eh, Andy?"

"Anything'd be nice if I air with you, an' the baby, brat," he choked.

"Oh, you'll stay with us all right," smiled Tessibel. "Daddy left me to
take care of you an' I air goin' to do it!"

Conversation lagged for a time. The dwarf poured out a cup of tea, and
placed a large slice of bread on a plate with some potatoes and meat.
These he took to the bedside.

"I don't know what we'd a done without Jake," he observed, drawing his
chair to the table.

Tess was beginning to eat a late dinner. Between bites she smilingly
assented.

"Jake air a awful good man.... Andy, ain't the baby stirrin' on the
chair?"

The dwarf went to the improvised cradle and carefully drew away the
blanket.

"He wants turnin' on 'is other side, that air all." With deft fingers he
rolled the baby boy over, placed the sugar rag between the twisting
lips, and went back to his dinner.

"Jake was tellin' me this morning," she continued, "Sandy Letts got
three years and a half in Auburn."

"That'll be dreadful for him," the little man responded, thinking of his
lonely years in prison. "But body-snatchin' air an awful thing. Reckon
he won't try it again when he gets out.... Eh, kid?"

"At any rate, he won't be after us for a while," she replied, sighing
contentedly.

"Well, I must slick up a bit," Andy announced presently. "I want to get
the shanty fixed. Young'd think I weren't doin' right by ye, if 'tain't
red up, brat."

"When I tell him all ye've done," she smiled affectionately, "I bet
he'll be praisin' ye."

Then they were silent until the little man'd gathered and washed the few
dishes.


CHAPTER XXXVII

THE NEW HOME


WHEN Professor Young arrived at the end of the lane near the Skinner's
shack, he dismounted, blanketed the horse and hitched him to the fence.
The approach to the hut had been shovelled recently and the snow was
banked high on either side. He hurried along the path and knocked at the
door.

A stir in the shanty told the lawyer the dwarf was seeking the attic.
After an instant of quiet, he heard Tessibel's voice.

"Who air there?"

The man's nerves throbbed quick response to the clear young tones that
came sure and strong through the shack boards.

"It's I, Tessibel," he answered.

And at his answer the bar raised from its holder and Young opened the
door and stepped in. The change from the brilliant glare of the almost
horizontal beams of the declining sun on the sparkling snow to the
half-light of the closely curtained room, obscured his vision for a
moment. But by the time he'd removed his cap and rebarred the door, he
could discern the familiar outlines of the shanty kitchen. He saw Tess,
half-risen on the cot. She rested on one elbow and stretched the other
arm out to him. Her face, wreathed in smiles, shone a cordial welcome.
When he'd gone to her and snatched the extended hand in both his own,
she bent moist lips and touched the back of the fingers.

Her spontaneous joy brought him a sudden hope that tingled through his
blood and warmed it. To see her so well, so sparkling and joyous, lifted
his burden of anxiety and warmed in him a glow of profound thanksgiving.

"Tessibel!" he greeted her, relief and yearning compressed into the one
word.

It was some time before either spoke. In Tessibel's heart swelled an
affection such as she held for no other person. In Young's, in spite of
his self-communion on the way, surged the insistent call of the man for
his mate, a hopeless longing which might never be satisfied.

"I'm glad it's over, child," he said softly. "My sister told me--"

"I got my baby!" she broke in. "He air over there. Take a peep at 'im."

There was no embarrassment in the bright smile she sent him, no sense of
shame in showing her friend the dear little being who had come to her
out of the Infinite to be worked for and loved. Young smothered a groan
but he turned obediently and went to the chair in which the baby was
cradled.

Folding back the blanket, he gazed at the sleeping infant. Manlike, he
was experiencing the passionate wish that this small boy were his own.
Jealousy, sudden and violent, assailed him. Hardly could he restrain the
words of interrogation and denunciation that demanded utterance.

The mother's question brought him back to the cot.

"He air beautiful, ain't he?" she breathed, a misty gleam on her lashes.

"Yes," said Young, and he sat down in Daddy Skinner's big rocker.

"Wouldn't ye like to hold him?" Tess hoped he would.

"Not yet," replied the lawyer. "I want to know more about him. You must
tell me now whose son he is, and let me help you decide what to do about
it.... Won't you trust me a little, Tess, dear?"

He hitched his chair nearer the cot and looked earnestly into the dear,
brown eyes she turned fearlessly and unashamed up to his own.

"He air mine," Tessibel told him, and a tender smile played about her
lips, "but I can't tell ye any more.... There ain't nothin' to do about
it. It air all right--huh?"

"Oh, my dear," sighed the man. "I hoped you'd relieve my mind a little.
But--but I'll not speak about it again till you come of your own accord
and tell me.... I've been thinking about something else, though--"

"Air it about Andy?" interrupted Tessibel.

Young looked up and discovered a boyish face smiling down upon him from
the attic.

"Come down," he said to the dwarf.

Andy descended the ladder and trudged across the floor.

The lawyer stood up and extended his hand. "How are you, Andy?" he
enquired pleasantly. "Pretty well, I hope?"

Andy shook hands gravely.

"Yep, thank ye, professor, I air that," he assented. "Hope ye're the
same."

"Andy's been more'n good to me," Tess confided. "Please sit down again,
Mr. Young.... Set on the floor, Andy!"

Obediently the dwarf curled up on the floor and turned eagerly to Young
who had resumed his chair.

"Ain't Tess got the fine baby?" he queried, and as though not expecting
an answer, added, "And she air awful happy."

A fugitive smile trembled on Young's face.

Awful happy! Awful happy! Was it possible? He looked into Tessibel's
joyous eyes and pondered. Yes, she was happy. He could see that! Happy
in a squatter's hut! Happy in the companionship of a condemned murderer,
and happy with a nameless child! His eyes went to the little one on the
chair. Yes, the three of them were happy. Tessibel's love was bound up
in Andy and the baby, and the dwarf had forgotten his own danger to
serve the other two. To help in the same loyal and unselfish way would
be his future work. At that moment Deforrest Young buried deep in his
heart the passion which hurt like nothing else hurts on earth, and
something very like happiness took its place.

He leaned back and crossed his legs. Then he reached into his coat
pocket and produced his cigar case. He bent forward and offered it to
Andy.

"Smoke, Andy?" he queried.

"Nope, thank ye, sir. Hain't smoked since Pal Skinner got sick. Couldn't
smell up the shanty with a pipe, ye see, eh?"

When the cigar was glowing and the fragrant smoke drifted in eddying
clouds through the kitchen, the smoker rocked a few minutes
contemplatively.

"I've seen Owen Bennet," he began presently. "He sticks to the story
that you did the shooting, Bishop, but I knew all the time he was
lying."

"Yep, he lied," interpolated Andy, bobbing his head.

"But as long as he won't tell the truth," Young stated "you're liable to
be taken back to Auburn."

The dwarf cringed as from a blow. Fear of going back to prison killed
the joy in his face instantly, but the speaker's quick assurance
straightened the bent shoulders.

"But no one knows where you are, and perhaps something can be done to
bring a confession from Bennet. Just at this time, though," looking from
the little man to the girl on the cot, "I'm more concerned about your
futures."

Tess didn't speak. She knew wherein her confidence lay and was willing
to await her friend's suggestion. She sat up, punched the pillow, turned
it over, and lay down again.

"It's perfectly evident you can't stay here, either one of you," said
Young, after a pause, "and if you'll be guided by me--"

"We'll do what ye want," murmured Tess, "if ye'll let us stay together
an' keep the baby."

"Yes, that is my plan," he replied.

Andy folded his short legs under him nervously.

"We want to stay together, me an' Tess does," he echoed, "an' the baby's
awful glad to live with us."

Young's lips curled an instant into a smile responsive to the quaint
statement.

"You remember, Tess," he resumed, "I have a lease of the house where
Graves used to live."

She answered only by a little forward bend of her head.

"My idea is this: I'll open the house, and you, Tess, can come there
with the baby. You can keep house in a little way for us all."

"Ye said Andy could live with--"

"Wait," interrupted the lawyer. "There're two nice rooms on the top
floor. You can arrange them for Bishop and he will be as snug as a bug
in a rug."

A sharp cry of joy broke from the young mother. She sat up straight. She
threw back the tangled curls, and leaning forward grasped the hand the
speaker thrust out to support her.

"Oh, what a good, good man!" she rejoiced. "An' me an' the baby'll love
ye forever, me an' the baby will."

Tessibel didn't remember she'd made the same promise to another man when
she'd begged him in vain to help her. She only knew that Deforrest Young
was offering herself and her little child a home, and a safe refuge for
Andy Bishop.

"It won't be all for you, you understand, child," said Deforrest.
"Think! I'll have a home, too, and you can study and work."

"An' some day when I'm earnin' money, and Andy's free, we'll pay you all
back," the girl interjected.

"Well, we won't worry about that now!... As soon as you're well enough,
I'll move you all up to the house. Tomorrow I'll see that coal and
things're sent down from town!"

The reply to his offer was a tighter squeeze from the squatter girl's
hand, and a sob from the dwarf. Unable to restrain his joy, the wee man
bounded from the floor and fled up the ladder into the garret. For a
time the man and girl in the room below sat silent, and all was quiet in
the shanty save the voice of Andy Bishop giving forth a thanksgiving
such as he had never expressed before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two weeks later a light filtered through the closed shutters of Young's
residence on the hill. The old Graves house creaked in the blustery
March gale. The hurtling snow-particles rattled upon the blinds and
against the clapboards like small shot. Deforrest Young came out of the
house and fought his way against the blizzard's buffeting down the hill
to the Skinner shack.

Stumbling, he fell against the door.

"It's I, Tess," he shouted.

The girl lifted the bar and admitted him. Dressed in her outer wraps,
she stood in the kitchen, anxious and expectant. This minute to Tess was
the changing point of her life. Young as she was, she understood what it
would mean to the three of them to leave the shanty, to take up their
abode in a real home.

"Ye said we was to take the baby first," she greeted him, reaching for
the shawl on a peg in the door post.

"Yes, but it's so bad I'll have to take you first, child," the lawyer
replied. "Come down, Andy, and after we're gone, bar the door and stand
by the boy.... I'll come back after you in a few minutes."

Then he flung an arm about Tess and drew her into the winter night.
Wind-blown and snow-covered, Young almost carried the shivering girl up
the steps into her new home. How luxurious the comfortable furnishings
seemed compared to the poverty of the shack! Young helped her off with
her coat and rubbers.

"Get the baby and Andy, quick," she panted.

Left alone her imagination followed her champion out under the
frost-laden trees into the drifted lane. She knew his call would raise
the bar and let him into the shanty. She could see the dwarf's beautiful
face smiling his welcome. The thought that Deforrest would wrap up her
baby, protect him from the keen blasts, thrilled her.

She went to the window in the north room and pressed her face to the
pane. Ah, yes, there in the little path were two figures, one little and
one big, struggling through the drifts. Her two friends! Presently, in
the arms of the tall figure, she could discern a bundle, a small bundle.
She watched them until she heard their steps on the porch. When
Deforrest placed the baby in her arms, and she noted Andy's happy face,
Tessibel's joy was complete.


CHAPTER XXXVIII

DINNER AT WALDSTRICKER'S


Three years and a half had passed since the birth of Tessibel's baby, a
period of growth and security for the squatter girl and Andy Bishop.

Just before Boy Skinner's birth, Frederick and Madelene had gone to San
Francisco. A place had been made for him in Waldstricker's office there
and Madelene felt the continent none too wide to put between her husband
and the Skinner girl, but her efforts to win his affection had been a
complete failure.

Lysander Letts, convicted of grave robbing, had been sentenced to prison
and was still confined at Auburn.

During the weeks after Frederick's departure, Ebenezer Waldstricker had
been unusually busy. In May, just as the tardy promises of the Storm
Country spring, were beginning to be fulfilled by the full leaved
glories of early summer, little Elsie Waldstricker was born. A few weeks
later, the three of them had left Ithaca for a long period of travel.
Mr. Waldstricker had visited all his business friends and correspondents
and established many new connections. Proceeding leisurely around the
world, they'd returned to Ithaca not long after Elsie's third birthday.

During their absence abroad, except for the caretaker, the great house
above Hayt's had been closed. Affairs at the lake side had run along in
their usual way. Tessibel had been able to ameliorate the conditions of
her squatter neighbors and was regarded by the inhabitants of that end
of the Silent City, as their lady bountiful. They put her in a niche by
herself. None prouder than they of the evidences of culture and
refinement she showed, while with characteristic independence, they
called her "Brat" just as in the days, when she ran bare-legged and
dirty on the lake side.

Andy Bishop had occupied the room on the top floor of Young's home. He'd
devoted himself to the same studies Tess pursued and by greater
application had been able to overcome the handicap of the girl's
quickness and greater natural ability. Not so readily had he learned to
speak correctly. The idioms of his boyhood days still slipped out of his
mouth. But no suspicion of uncouth English marred the girl's speech.

Forlorn and abandoned, the Skinner shanty lay moldering under the
weeping willows. Summer heat and winter storms had worked their will
upon it. Thick grasses and tall weeds had driven out the squatter girl's
flowers and the hedge had grown into a tangled thicket.

The brilliant sun of a hot June morning found no more home-like place
than the old Graves house, where Deforrest Young lived with his squatter
friends. On the porch stood Tessibel Skinner. The girl's ruddy curls
fell in the same profusion as of old and shrouded a smiling, happy face.
Professor Young had caught her one day doing up the red hair in a great
ball on her head.

"Tess, it's a sacrilege," he protested sharply, "like wadding up the
petals of a rose or the leaves of a fern. Keep the curls, won't you?"

Below, from the pear orchard, came a joyous shout, the free, careless,
laughing response to the girl's call.

"I'm coming mummy," cried a child's voice.

Tess leaned forward, the better to watch the small boy lightly climb the
terrace. Her face evinced the joy which she found in her baby, and in
the quiet, happy life under Professor Young's care. She held out her
hand to the little one. He danced to her side and she bent and kissed
him.

"Mummy's boy, oh, mummy's little boy! Didn't I tell you, darling, not to
soil your blouse? Uncle Deforrest'll be here soon."

"Boy rolled down the hill," pouted the child. "Boy loves to roll down
the hill, mummy."

His mother kissed him again, diverted by his words, which recalled her
own girlhood frolics. Hadn't she many times tumbled the length of the
lane, while Daddy Skinner had stood and watched her indulgently? Her
arms about the boy, she allowed her eyes to rest for a moment on the hut
at the lake side. Tessibel loved the shanty and always would love it,
but more did she love the home in which she now lived. Her fingers
played idly with the child's dark curls. All that Deforrest Young had
done for her in the past years swept before her mind like a panorama.

How safe he'd made it for Andy! How the little man had improved! How
delightful their studies together! They constantly looked forward to
that day when they should be able to return to their friend some of the
generosity he had shown them.

Now he was coming home after an absence of many weeks, and the three
were awaiting his arrival.

"Run up to Andy, darling," Tess said to the child, "and let him wash
your face and hands, and put on another blouse, my pet. Oh, there 're
grass stains on this one, too."

A trembling, rosy mouth turned up to the speaker. She kissed it quickly
and passionately.

"Never mind, honey, just run along. Mummy doesn't care.... There, kiss
me again."

Two loving arms went quickly around the mother's neck.

"Boy loves his pretty mummy," was whispered in her ear.

"And mummy loves her pretty boy. There! Run along to Andy. I want to
gather some flowers for Uncle Forrie."

Andy was studying at a table, when the door opened and the dark-faced
boy popped into the room.

"Mummy says wash Boy's face and put on clean blouse," said he. "Please,
Andy. I forgot to say 'please'!"

Andy pushed back his chair and waddled to the child. The dwarf was the
same ungainly figure that had moved about the hut four years before. His
face had lost all its tightly strung misery and his expression was more
thoughtful and he seemed more manly.

Boy was a continual joy to him. The little fellow supplied an outlet for
his overflowing love. True, he adored Tessibel, but his care of the
little one had drawn them together so intimately that he and the baby
boy thoroughly understood each other.

He'd have liked to romp with the child under the trees and to row him up
and down the quiet span of blue water, but grateful for the love and
protection he'd found in Young's home, he seldom permitted his mind to
dwell upon the hardships necessarily incident to his secluded life. Just
now a little sense of discouragement touched his thought and clouded his
face. While he was washing Boy's chubby fingers, the little one observed
him closely.

"There's tears in your eyes," he burst out suddenly. "What for, Andy?"

"I was just thinkin,' pet."

The child thrust his feet apart and flung up an entreating face.

"I don't want you to think if it makes you cry."

"All right, sir!" Andy replied promptly, tickling the youngster till he
laughed and shouted, "I won't think any more if you don't like it."

When Deforrest Young came around the corner of the house, Tessibel was
standing on the lower step of the porch, her hands full of flowers. To
his adoring eyes, the girl typified the unfolding life of the spring.
Strong was she, like the sturdy trees, dainty as the flowers she held in
her hands. To his passionate desire as unresponsive as the sullen lake
on dark days, yet grateful for his kindness as the field flowers to the
sun after a hard rain. She was a child with a woman's heart, but the
woman's heart closed to him by the secret of Boy's paternity. Her
smiling lips greeted him. She dropped the flowers and two arms stole
around his neck. Young drew her very close. How dear, how very dear, she
had grown in these last studious years!

"It seems ages since you went away," she said, and pointing to the
flowers, "I hoped to get these all on the table."

"My dear," interjected Young, "you're the rarest blossom of them all."

Tess was used to his compliments, and she loved them, as she loved the
birds and the friendly sunshine.

"For that, sir," she laughed, "you'll have to help me pick 'em up."

While they were gathering together the scattered bouquet, they heard a
stamping down the stairs.

"Boy couldn't hardly stand it till you came," smiled Tess, opening the
hall door.

A small avalanche of concentrated eagerness piled out of the house.

"Uncle Forrie! Uncle Forrie!" cried Boy, swarming upon him. "I'm awful
glad you're home."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now, then," said the lawyer after dinner, "I think our little mister
here ought to crawl into bed.... Well, one more romp, then bye-bye. Eh?"

"One more romp!" screamed the child.

His mother carried him away half an hour later, and when she went to
Andy's room, she found Young there talking to the dwarf.

"I've such a lot to tell you two," said he. "Now we're all comfy, I'll
begin."

"Will it please Andy?" asked Tess.

Deforrest shook his head.

"I'm afraid not!... Bennet won't have to stay long in prison and he
still insists he didn't do the shooting and that Andy did."

The latter groaned, and a shadow fell over Tessibel's face.

"I wish something could be done," said she.

The lawyer considered the end of his cigar.

"Well, I can't think of anything right now," he sighed.... "I suppose
you've heard Lysander Letts is out of prison?"

Young asked the question as though it amounted to little, but he knew by
the sharp cry from the girl and the upward lift of the dwarf's head that
they both dreaded Sandy's return to Ithaca.

"But I don't want you to worry. I'll send him back if he comes around
here."

Tess shook her head despondently.

"Oh, I hope he'll let me alone!"

"I'll see that he does," said the professor, rising and straightening
up. "Well, I'm going down to write some letters. Cheer up, Andy! Maybe
something'll turn up."

"Kid," began Andy, when the lawyer had gone. "I been thinking, we don't
have to worry 'bout Sandy Letts. Ye know the lots of times when we
didn't have Boy's Uncle Forrie to do things for us, how we prayed for a
helpin' hand and got it?"

"Yes, Andy dear," Tess answered, thoughtfully.

"Then let's do it now. Let's get busy prayin' so Sandy can't hurt ye an'
I get out of my pickle.... Huh?"


CHAPTER XXXIX

FATHER AND SON


After an absence from his native city of three years and a half,
Frederick Graves was returning to Ithaca, a very sick man. He had
learned from Helen's letters to Madelene that Tessibel Skinner had a
small son. His brother-in-law's exasperation at Young for giving the
squatter girl and her little son a home at the lake had also been
reflected in the correspondence. He had been able to glean but the bare
outlines of the story, because Ebenezer and Helen had been abroad most
of the time, and his impatient spirit chafed to know the intimate
particulars of Tessibel's life. Jealousy of Young tormented him.
Hopeless brooding over his situation, and Madelene's continual nagging
had made him a neurasthenic wreck. Worn by insomnia and almost starved
by a nervous dyspepsia, he could no longer maintain even a pretense of
usefulness in the business. Madelene, thoroughly disillusioned, herself
worn out by his sullen and savage temper, had brought him back to
Ithaca, hoping the familiar sights and sounds of the home-land might
help him.

They arrived one rainy night at the station, where Ebenezer met them
with the carriage. He greeted both effusively, and his manner perhaps
was more cordial because of his brother-in-law's death-stricken face.

"You'll buck up now you're home, Fred," he said, after he had kissed his
sister and helped them into the carriage.

"Maybe, but I doubt it," the invalid replied wearily.

"Nonsense, Fred," his wife broke out. "You make me tired. You're always
whining. Of course, you're going to get well."

Too fatigued to argue, Frederick leaned back upon the cushions. Except
for an occasional word, they were silent during the long drive through
the rain.

Home at last, they found Helen waiting in the great hall. To Madelene,
who preceded the men into the house, she looked much older, more
dignified. Lines of worry around her eyes and mouth told the girl that
her sister-in-law's life with Ebenezer had not been entirely easy.

After kissing Madelene, Helen extended her hand to Frederick.

"I hope you'll be better soon, Fred," she encouraged. "Our country
fare'll put some flesh on your bones.... You look after the invalid,
Ebenezer, and I'll take Madelene upstairs."

The two women walked upstairs together. Waldstricker gazed after them,
pride and joy in his eyes. His wife and his sister reunited brought him
a feeling of content. Frederick, fussing with his coat and rubbers,
seemed hardly aware of their going.

"I'm glad to have you back, Fred," began Waldstricker, anxious to
express the gratification he felt.

"We're glad to get back, of course," Frederick responded coldly. He
followed the elder into the library and threw himself on a lounge to
rest until dinner.

In the room above, Helen helped Madelene off with her things and
listened to her chatter about the journey. She could detect a sullen
dissatisfaction with Frederick running like a dark thread through the
current of her talk. It was clear to Helen that Madelene had lost her
regard for her husband. Apparently, she cared so little that she didn't
feel it necessary to hide or explain her feelings.

"And, now I want to see little Elsie," gushed Madelene. "I've been crazy
to see her ever since she was born."

"She's such a darling," smiled Helen, "and is the very joy of her
father's heart.... Come on in the nursery."

For a few seconds Madelene leaned over the sleeping child, a rosy child
with thick blonde curls. A keen sense of the emptiness of her own arms
stirred in her an envy of the complacent young matron standing at the
foot of the little white bed. Perhaps Fred would've been different if
they'd had a little one.

"I'd love to have a baby," she breathed discontentedly. "But--"

During the significant pause, Helen linked her arm through the
speaker's.

"Let's go down to dinner," she suggested. "You must be famished after
your long ride."

At the table, the conversation touched many matters relating to the
happenings in the lives of the long separated families. Madelene plied
her knife and fork industriously, and jumped from topic to topic,
expressing a lively interest in all the events in Ithaca.

"And your brother, dear?" she asked her hostess. "Is he still at the
lake place?"

Helen threw a quick glance at her husband, whose lips sank at the
corners, his face coloring to a deep red.

When his sister asked the question, the glass from which the elder had
been drinking struck the table sharply, as though he wished to emphasize
his displeasure.

"Yes, he lives there," he broke in. "In your father's old place, Fred.
His lease is not up for almost a year."

"Helen wrote me he had the Skinner girl and her baby with him," said
Mrs. Graves. "Wasn't that a funny thing for him to do, Ebbie?"

Waldstricker pushed back angrily.

"Funny! Funny!" he ejaculated. "It isn't decent, and I've told him so,
too."

Frederick's face flushed, and he toyed nervously with the silver at the
side of his plate.

"But, Ebenezer, you don't mean she's living with him, do you?" he
faltered, leaning forward.

"They live there together, Young and the girl and her--" Ebenezer's
anger almost made him forget the conventional respect he owed his wife
and sister, "--her son," he concluded lamely. "That's all I know, and
it's enough. He's had the best houses in Ithaca closed to him on her
account."

Indignation at her husband's injustice burnt a red spot in Helen's
cheeks and kindled a flame of unusual animation in her placid blue eyes.

"You know better, Ebenezer," she retorted. "Forrie's given her a
father's care, and every one worth while honors him for it."

Frederick, kept in his attitude of tense attention by a sudden revival
of his jealousy of Young, sighed audibly and settled back in his chair.

"I'm glad to hear you say that, Helen," he said earnestly.

"Oh, are you, Fred?" cried Madelene. "So your old interest in that girl
isn't dead, yet? Well, all I can say is, I am sorry she didn't get you,
but I'll bet she's glad, now, she didn't."

Waldstricker looked keenly from the speaker to her husband. But
Frederick had again put on his mask of apathetic indifference and
answered his wife's gibe only by a shrug of his shoulders. Noting her
brother's scowling face, she went on maliciously.

"You'd better keep away from the lake place, my dear husband, or you'll
have both Ebbie and Forrie after you."

"Will you have your tea now, Madelene?" Helen was alarmed at the
threatened tempest, and hoped to change the subject.

"Yes, thanks, dear," and to her brother, "After all, Ebbie, Forrie
probably knows his own business best. You know he's quite partial to the
squatters and always did things for 'em."

Mrs. Waldstricker summoned the servant, and while the dishes were being
removed, Ebenezer sat and glowered from Frederick, white and distrait,
to his wife, who was explaining to Madelene the way she'd made the salad
dressing. When the servant had gone, Waldstricker began again.

"I'm out of patience with Deforrest! If he'd let me alone, I'd had all
the squatters off the lake side before this and probably would have
located Bishop."

"You've heard nothing of him, Ebbie, I suppose?" asked Madelene. "It
does seem queer a dwarf could disappear like that and not a word about
him from any part of the world."

Waldstricker's powerful hand clenched the teaspoon in his fingers so
violently as to bend the handle.

"No, I haven't," he growled. "I've a notion he's being harbored by some
of the squatters. But I want Deforrest to understand this--"

"Oh, let's talk of something else besides squatters," cried Madelene.
"Helen, your salad was divine.... Tell me, Ebbie, how you enjoy little
Elsie. I think she's lovely."

"Lovely!" he repeated in a very different tone. "Lovely is no word for
that child. She's an angel, isn't she, Helen?"

Helen smiled dubiously.

"An angel, very much spoiled, I fear."

"No such thing," argued Waldstricker, glad of an opportunity to air his
favorite theory. "Now Helen thinks the child's spoiled because she drops
on the floor and kicks and cries until she gets what she wants. I tell
her it's human nature, and perfectly right for my child to have her own
way. Thank God, there's nothing in the world she can't have."

Then looking from Frederick to his sister, he made a heavy attempt to be
humorous.

"What's the matter of you two? You've been married longer than Helen and
I. When are you going to start your family?"

Frederick maintained his pose of bored unconcern and an angry flush
mounted to Madelene's face.

"You think you're smart, Eb," she retorted. "Fred's all the baby I can
look after, and goodness knows he's trouble enough!"

"But, now, you're here, dear," Mrs. Waldstricker extended the olive
branch again, "we'll help you look after him.... I do hope the
weather'll clear so we can get out. The lake's been simply beautiful
this summer."

"Just after I returned from Europe, I tried to dispossess Deforrest,"
Ebenezer told Fred, "but he beat me in court. I wanted to clean up the
scandalous mess. I felt he was breaking God's law in harboring a woman
of that kind. But I'm only biding my time." His voice sank as he cast
his eyes slowly from one to another, at last, fixing them ominously upon
his wife. "Biding my time," he growled deeply, laying his napkin on the
table.

The gloom of his manner spread over the diners like a cloud. Helen's
face expressed consternation; Frederick's discouragement, and Madelene's
impatience.

"I must say this is pleasant," snapped Mrs. Graves. "Ebbie, I forbid you
to speak of those people again tonight."

Helen made a little move as though to rise. In her capacity as
peacemaker, it seemed advisable to change the scene of hostilities.

"Let's go to the drawing room," she invited.... "Fred, don't you think
you'd better go to bed?"

"Yes, I'm all tired out. I think I will."

At the drawing room door, he turned to the stairs.

"Good-night, all," he added, and went slowly up to his room.

Reclining in a big chair, Frederick recalled the talk at the supper
table and let his fancy rove in dreams of Tessibel and his son.

What a cruel persecutor Ebenezer was! How Helen had suffered during his
outrageous harangue! The young man ground his teeth. So Ebenezer was but
biding his time to do some terrible harm to Tessibel and her little boy,
his boy! Frederick breathed deeply, and pressed his hand upon his heart.
Would the thing never stop beating that way! Would it never in this
world quit that awful hurt when he thought of the squatter country! He
undressed hastily and went to bed, nor did he speak when Madelene crept
softly in beside him.


CHAPTER XL

HUSBAND AND WIFE


The next morning found Frederick Graves more nervous than ever. The
weather had cleared. The air, washed by yesterday's downpour, came
through the open window sweet to his nostrils. The countryside sparkled
in the morning sun and the greens of the woods and fields were deeper
and richer; but the beauty of the landscape touched him not. He'd
scarcely slept, and when weariness had at last overcome him, his dreams
had been filled with visions of a red haired girl, and a sturdy,
handsome boy playing about upon the ragged rocks. When he came down to
breakfast, Ebenezer told him he'd better see the doctor that day.

"You might go while Madelene and I are out this morning," suggested
Helen. "Ah," hearing a child's voice in the hall, "here comes my baby!"

When the door opened, a little girl of three bounded in. Ebenezer held
out his arms and Elsie sprang into them.

"Listen to Mrs. Waldstricker," he laughed. "She said, 'my baby,' and I
say, she's mine.... Aren't you my baby, pet?"

Helen smiled indulgently. This wee bit of femininity was the one
creature who could keep her father amiable from one end of the day to
the other.

"My girlie wants to eat with daddy?" Ebenezer went on, his face buried
in the flaxen hair. "Then she shall."

"Elsie wants to eat with daddy," parroted the child.

"That's why I say she's spoiled," offered Helen, shrugging her
shoulders. "Now her place is in the nursery, but what can I do?"

"Her place is right here on her father's knee," replied Waldstricker,
"where I always want her, bless her."

During the discussion about the child, Frederick got up from the table
and went out of doors.

As he left the dining room, he had no definite plan; but no sooner had
he walked across the front lawn and taken a view of the long road--the
way that led to Tessibel and his boy--than his feet, seemingly of their
own volition, led him along the grassy path up the hill. If he could
only see the two of them without his family knowing! One kiss from his
boy, one loving look from Tess, and he felt he could start again to
live!

To the sick man the distance was considerable, but minute by minute he
grew stronger, restored by revivifying hope. An hour, only a short hour,
only a little distance further and he would be at the lake; in sight of
the willow trees around the shack. He went down the hill to the top of
the lane. Here Tess had come to him that long ago night he'd married
her. Every familiar spot stung him with bitter memories of the squatter
girl.

He went slowly down and stopped under a great tree opposite the house
where he'd formerly lived. Young had the place now, and Tess lived there
and his boy. Ebenezer's insinuations hurt him. His jealousy of Deforrest
revived. Remorse for his criminal selfishness burned him, an
unquenchable fire.

Shaken by conflicting emotions, he went on by the deserted hut under the
willows to the lake shore. He'd go out to the ragged rocks and rest, and
then he'd try to see Tessibel and the boy.

He came to the great gray slab where he'd left Tess the night he told
her of Madelene, and sank down in the shade of the overhanging rocks.
Screened from the blazing sun, his hot skin rejoiced in the coolness of
the damp grotto. With unseeing eyes, he glanced out over the glassy
mirror of the placid water. Unheeding, he heard none of the bird-calls,
and paid no attention to the intimate little sounds of the lake side.

What should he do when at last he saw Tess and the boy? Would he dare
claim them?

Suddenly, something made him sit up straight and listen. It was a
child's laugh. He got up and stepped behind the hanging shoulder of the
rock and waited. He looked cautiously around the jutting-rock, and
there, racing toward him through the brilliant sunshine, was a little
boy, a handsome, sturdy boy, and bounding along beside him, Kennedy's
bulldog.

Then, instinctively, Frederick knew this was his son. He would speak, he
must speak! He stepped from his hiding place and came face to face with
the little fellow and his companion. The dog, uttering a great growl,
crouched on his hind quarters in rage. A stranger had ventured upon
ground belonging to his dear ones, and Pete was demanding, in his
doglike way, the reason thereof.

"Pete, Pete," called Frederick, soothingly, and Pete dropped his head
and came forward, as if to a friend. The boy stood, feet wide-spread,
staring fixedly at this man whom Pete knew and he had never seen before.

Frederick patted the dog and smiled ingratiatingly at the boy. He was
looking down into a pair of dark eyes, eyes like his own, into the grave
face of a child asking why he was there.

The dog nuzzled the man's hand and fawned upon him, making in his throat
little noises of welcome.

Frederick held out his other hand.

"Won't you come, too, little boy?"

"I can't!... Mummy wouldn't like it. I don't know you."

"She won't mind, I'm sure," replied Frederick, his heart beating so hard
he could hear it. "Pete knows me, and I know your mother. Her name
is--is Tessibel.... Isn't it?"

The man could scarcely get that beloved name from between his lips.

"Yes, Tessibel is my mummy," said the boy. "You know my mummy, and my
Uncle Forrie?"

"Yes," assented Frederick, sitting down. "Come here and let me tell you
all about your mother's beautiful curls."

Boy hitched nearer the tall stranger. He was drawn in some unknown way
toward this man whose arms were out-held to him. Then, suddenly, he
walked straight into them, his eyes still very grave, still very
questioning.

The moment Frederick touched the little one he felt the world was his.
He forgot Waldstricker, forgot Madelene, forgot everything, but his
elf-like son within his cuddling grasp. He touched his lips to the
little face.

"Oh, I've wanted to see you so," he murmured.

"Why didn't you come, then?" demanded Boy.

"I was away," said Frederick.

"My Uncle Forrie goes away, too. When he came home yesterday, he brought
me a beautiful engine--it goes on wheels. I love my Uncle Forrie."

"Could you love me, dear?" breathed Frederick.

"Yes, oh, yes. I love everybody. God, too. So does Mummy. And Deacon,
he's my owl, and An--"

Boy's lips closed on the nearly spoken word. He suddenly remembered the
daily lessons he'd had from his mother never to mention Andy's name to
any one; that, if he did, a big man would come and take his darling Andy
away. No, Boy couldn't stand that. He wouldn't say anything about Andy,
not even to this strangely attractive man.

"What were you going to say, boy?" petitioned Frederick.

"Nothin'. Just nothin'."

And the father was satisfied, satisfied not to talk, glad to have his
son so heavenly close. The long years of his exile were slipping away.
The nerve-racking yearning of tedious days and yet more tedious,
sleepless nights was partially quieted. His son, so long, merely, the
pulseless image of his dreams, had become a breathing reality, and the
child was the living link between its mother and himself. The longer he
held the little one, the more intense grew his desire for Tess. At
length this demand urged him to ask,

"Where's your mother?"

"She's home, just up there in that house. She's working."

"You haven't any father?" the man queried at last. A lump rose in his
throat and choked him. What had the child been told about him, he
wondered.

"Oh, yes, I have somewhere's, but I got another up in the sky, away back
in the clouds, Mummy says. And he's awful glad when I'm good, and he
cries like anything, when I'm bad. So I try to be good, and sometimes
I'm gooder'n gold."

To hear a name from the child's lips, the name he had dreamed of, was
the one thought filling his mind.

"Let me be your father?" he said, his voice breaking.

"Sure I will," he answered. "There's my mummy, now!"

Around the jutting rocks came Tess. The red curls hung about her
shoulders like a vivid velvet mantle, just as Frederick always dreamed
of them. But her figure, in her simple morning dress, was fuller and
more womanly. Upon her face was an expression of serenity and peace. Ah!
The woman was even more lovely than the girl he'd married, and to the
love-hungry man, on the great, gray slab of rock, she was infinitely
desirable.

"Mummy," shouted the child, joyfully, "I've found a daddy for us. Petey
and me found him."

Tess stared at the man, undisguised horror and dismay written in her
eyes. She'd not seen Frederick since that day he'd urged her to marry
Sandy Letts to escape Waldstricker, whose hands, he'd described, as
stronger'n God's. She'd hardly heard of him after he and Madelene had
gone West. She had long ago ceased to feel any desire for him. Indeed,
she scarcely thought of him. During the full happy years since she left
the shanty, under the loving tuition of Deforrest Young, the disgrace
this man on the rocks had heaped upon her had covered its claws and
lacerated her no more. But, at the sight of him, visions of the past
reared themselves in her imaginative mind. Memory, suddenly, flung all
the cruelties of his treatment of her into a kaleidoscopic jumble, and
meddlesome fear presented numerous suggestions of calamity. A moment she
stood as if turned to stone.

"Come on, come," Boy cried, tugging at her dress.

Frederick struggled to his feet, and held out his arms.

"Tessibel, oh, my Tess, be kind," he supplicated.

But she'd taken the child's hand and without answering, was making her
way swiftly backward to the rock-path.


CHAPTER XLI

TESSIBEL'S DISCOVERY


Frederick stood for one tense minute watching Tessibel hurry over the
rocks. Many times he had pictured this interview, ... even framed the
sentences in which he would express his remorse and win her forgiveness.
It had never occurred to his brooding thought that the years of absence
which had increased his own ardor, might have lessened the squatter
girl's regard for him. But the meeting wasn't working out as he'd
planned. He'd been almost paralyzed at her coming, speechless except for
the few halting words of entreaty. Now, it dawned upon him that she was
going away without a word, that she was taking the child with her, and
that he might never see either of them again.

"Tessibel," he called hoarsely. "Stop, or ... I'll tell Waldstricker."

His words brought Tess to a standstill. The threat filled her with fear,
for well she knew the elder's power. Still keeping hold of Boy's hand,
she retraced her steps.

"Why did you come here?" she asked, fear and distaste making her voice
cold and hard.

"To see you and ... him." Frederick pointed to the child, who was now
hiding behind his mother's skirts.

"Well, now you've seen us."

Frederick stared at the speaker, his lips pursed with surprise. Was this
Tess Skinner, the squatter girl? The voice was hers, but its tones were
resonant with contempt! Face and form he recognized, but not the new
poise, the dignity of her motherhood. The brown eyes he remembered as
lighted by love, now expressed unutterable abhorrence.

"Tess, dear Tess," he pleaded, "let me talk to you."

Tess stooped over the child, rearranged his little waist, and pushed
back the curly hair.

"Boy go home now, and mother'll come directly."

She kissed the bewildered upturned face. The baby couldn't understand
what was going on.... Mummy seemed sad, and the nice man, who was so
white and sick looking, had spoken angrily to his beautiful mother.

"I'd rather stay wif you," he lisped.

"But Mummy asks Boy to go," said Tess, and to the dog, "Here, Petey, go
home with Boy."

Placing his hand on the dog's collar, the child turned slowly and
unwillingly toward the house. He'd taken but a few halting steps along
the rocks before Frederick's voice rang out.

"Tess, Tessibel, let me hold him ... kiss him once more. Don't shake
your head! Don't say no! I've wanted him so all these years. Oh,
Tessibel!"

His pitiful pleading touched the listening girl. At last, face to face
with the man whose cowardice and selfishness had brought her so much
trouble, her one desire was to escape ... to run away. But he was
begging for her to be kind, to allow him to hold her baby!... What right
had he to kiss him?... To be sure, the child was his, too, but--but--

"Oh, No! No! I don't want you to!" she cried, protesting. "You can never
be anything in his life. Why don't you let us alone?"

Frederick had walked very close to her side by this time, his white face
twitching.

"I must kiss him once more," he persisted.

Tess turned to the loitering child. She could see that at a word of
assent from her, Boy would rush into the outstretched arms Frederick
held toward him. The mother, with a twist at her heart, recognized the
tie which drew together this man and her son. A dreadful fear clutched
her. Would Frederick do as he had threatened, hoping that he might thus
come in contact with his son? Her mind flew to Deforrest Young.... He
must never know the name of Boy's father. She could feel the blood
coursing madly through her temples, and her head ached dully.

Nevertheless, she went back and took hold of the child's hand.

"You may kiss the gentleman ... good-bye," she said in a constrained
voice.

"The pretty man was goin' to be my faver," said the child, pleadingly.
"I want a daddy awful bad."

"Yes, yes, I know," Tess returned tremulously. "Now hurry, dear, and
then run home."

Only too gladly did the child jump away and bound into his father's
extended arms.

"Mummy says I has to go home," he whispered.

While the tall man silently caressed the dark curls of her boy, Tess of
the Storm Country endured such pain as she'd never known before. The
mutual attraction between the two, so differently related to her, seemed
anomalous and impossible.

Frederick unwillingly allowed the child to slip to the rocks and after
Tess'd started Boy and the dog on their homeward way, she stood before
him, her lips quivering. She knew he, too, suffered, and she waited
quietly as he dried his eyes and recovered his choking breath.

She was sorry he'd come. She'd hoped never to see him again. But, now,
she must be assured that he would continue the deception in regard to
the past. As anxious as she had once been to have him claim her as his
own, to tell the world she belonged to him, she, now, wanted to keep
silent.

"It was useless for you to come," she chided presently.

Frederick made an impetuous movement with his hand.

"Oh, no, it wasn't.... Won't you let me atone, let me make up for all
the things I've done ... and haven't done? I want--oh, how I want--"

"It's too late," interrupted the girl. "Much too late."

"But, Tessibel, I know you love me. You can't have forgotten. And I'll
make the boy love me. He does now! Didn't you hear him call me father?"

"He has no father," she responded coldly. "And I--I haven't any love
left for you."

The words were low but distinctly spoken.

"I don't believe it!... I won't!... You shall love me!... I won't have
you with Young. ... He can see my boy every day ... be with you hour
after hour.... I hate him!"

"You hate him!" Tessibel's eyes burned and flashed with indignation.
"When you should be grateful, because he's done everything you should've
done.... You've said all you can. You can't make up to us ... the baby
and me.... Won't you please go?"

Frederick felt he was losing his reason. The love he'd nursed in secret,
the passion that had wasted him away, shook his frail frame. He wouldn't
be denied!

"God help me, I won't go!" he gritted, the words carrying on his
thought.

With one sweep of his arms, he encircled Tess in a close embrace. She
made frantic efforts to free herself, but Frederick, strong under the
emotion consuming him, only hugged her closer.

"Let me go!" Tess almost screamed the words. Then, her voice changed to
a tense whisper, hoarse with loathing. "How can ... oh, how dare you!"

But she could not protect her face from the searching mouth. Violently,
Frederick twisted her around and for one moment his lips fell upon hers.
Deep groans came between the kisses he thrust upon her.

A moment later the sound of advancing steps lifted Frederick's face from
hers. Muttering an oath, he threw Tess forcibly from him, for there in
the path was Ebenezer Waldstricker, about whose sagging lips played a
supercilious smile.

"So I was not mistaken," he sneered, looking his brother-in-law full in
the face. "If Madelene doesn't care, I do."

"Well?" growled Frederick. "You've found me here, now do what you cursed
want to, I don't care."

"Perhaps you'll care before I finish," said the elder grimly, and he
included the girl in his baleful glare. "I think you both will."

Tessibel's mind flew to Boy. What could these two men do to her darling?

She went forward toward Waldstricker, her eyes raised appealingly to
his.

"Won't you make Mr.... Mr. Graves keep away?" she petitioned. "I don't
want him here."

"Yes, it looked, when I came around the corner, as if you didn't want
him, miss," scoffed the elder. Then he laughed, and the laugh cut the
throbbing girl to the quick. "Very much as if you wanted him to go....
Now, then, sir, what's this girl to you?"

"I'm nothing to him, Mr. Waldstricker," she asserted, without giving
Frederick a chance to speak.

Graves still felt that maddening passion, that demand for his own.

"She lies," he said in low tones.

Tess turned to him passionately.

"You know what I say is true. You came here without my desiring it! I
don't want anything to do with you.... Haven't you both harmed me
enough?... Do I ever come around and hurt you?... Why don't you tell the
truth?"

"All right," he shouted, his irritation at her resistance overcoming his
fear of the elder. "If you want the truth, here it is. I'm----"

"Don't! Don't!" screamed Tess.

"Ah!" hissed Waldstricker's lips like a jet of steam.

He'd caught within his powerful net the girl he wanted. He'd bring to
light the secret that'd preyed upon his sister's spirits so long. For
the squatter girl he felt no pity, for Frederick only contempt. They
were both weaklings that he'd sweep away in his pursuit of Young and the
squatters.

"He's sick," said Tessibel, trying to discount Frederick's confession.
"Your brother-in-law's sick. You can see that!... He thinks ... why,
he's mad!"

"I'm not mad!" Frederick turned upon her fiercely, then back to the big
man whose eagerness bent him forward. "I'm the father of her boy."

The blood left Waldstricker's face, so that it looked like carved
marble.

"So 'tis so," he got out, "and you admit it, you cur, and you dared to
marry my sister? Now, as God lets me live, you'll both suffer for this,
and as for you, Tessibel Skinner, look out for that bastard of yours!"

The squatter girl uttered a heart-broken cry, and turning, fled around
the rocks into the lane and up the hill.


CHAPTER XLII

A MAN'S ARM AT THE WINDOW


It seemed to Tess that her feet were leaden, as if she could never
traverse the distance between the ragged rocks and the house. The
interview with Frederick had been a terrible ordeal, and she was sick
with disgust from his odious kisses. Waldstricker's untimely appearance
and his stinging taunts hurt and frightened her. She knew he would do
his worst and that Frederick wouldn't or couldn't help it. The desire to
get Boy into her arms, to keep him from the men below urged her on.
Wildly, she fled through the orchard, crying as she went.

"Boy! Mummy's Boy! Where's Mummy's Boy?"

Gasping for breath, her voice ejected the words explosively. Exhausted,
she sank upon the top step of the porch. The long run up the hill had
been almost too much, but in a moment, she lifted herself, still calling
and panting, and stumbled into the house.

"He's upstairs with Andy," said Young, looking up from his book. Then,
alarmed by her appearance, he jumped up and hurried to her. "What's the
matter, Tess? Tell me."

"Where's the baby?" she demanded hysterically, clinging to him.... "Tell
me where my baby is."

Drawing her into an easy chair, Deforrest attempted to quiet her.

"Boy's upstairs with Andy. Hush, hush, child! Don't cry like that!...
Oh, my little girl!... What is it?... What's happened? Tell me ...
quick!"

But Tess couldn't speak. She only clung to his arms, trying to stifle
her gasping cries.

Just then Boy's clear laugh came pealing down the stairway, a conclusive
comfort to his mother's heart. When her extreme agitation had subsided.
Professor Young sat down and called her to him. As of old, when first
he had heard her lessons in his home, she dropped at his feet, resting
her curly head against his knee.

"Now I want to know what's frightened you," said he, softly.

The girl made a gesture of refusal. "I can't tell it," she replied,
under her breath. "It's too terrible! It's too awful!"

"There's nothing too terrible for me to know," answered Young. "What
happened while you were out?"

"Don't ask me to tell you, Uncle Forrie," pleaded Tess. "I can't! I
can't!"

"Tessibel," demanded the lawyer, "was it Sandy Letts?"

"Oh, no, no, not him!"

The man pondered a moment.

"Was it--"

"Please don't ask me any more questions." She lifted a crimson face. "I
was foolish, I suppose, but I thought, I thought the baby--"

"Some one threatened Boy! Was that it, Tessibel?" he cross-questioned.

"Yes." The murmured answer was scarcely audible.

"One of the squatters, then?"

The red head sank again. This time a decided shake of the shining curls
made the denial.

Hoping to avoid further examination, the girl tried to rise to her feet,
but the questioner's hand pressed her back.

"Don't ask me," she entreated. "I'm better now."

She tried to smile, but the sweet lips trembled. Young hadn't seen her
so stirred in all the years of her residence in his house. He'd been
able to hold his love in check while he saw her happy and content, but
her present pitiful state broke down the barriers he'd erected and
hardly conscious of the change in his attitude, he kissed her.

Tess drew away sharply. The strange new quality in his caress aroused an
answering thrill the length of her body. In that moment she discovered
how deeply she loved Deforrest Young.

"Don't ... don't kiss me! Never, never kiss me again."

What was it she had said? The man felt his heart contract with a
shooting pain.

"Why, child, I've kissed you since you were a little girl.... Why
shouldn't I?"

"I don't know, I don't know," she faltered. "Somehow it's different,
now."

Something in her tones, some dejection in the bowed head brought the
man's hand from the shrouding curls. His heart began to live again, to
come forth from beneath his stern will and make known its own desire.

"Tess," his voice tense with emotion, "will you marry me?... Will you,
Tess?"

The girl got to her feet, swaying. Marry him? Her fingers twisted
together as her eyes dropped before the expression of his. He, too, was
on his feet, holding out his arms.

"I'd ... marry you," she confessed haltingly, "but I can't."

"Is it Boy?" demanded Young. "Why, child, don't you know I love him
almost as if he were my own?"

"I can't," wailed Tess, again. "How I wish I could!"

"You saw some one today, didn't you, Tessibel?"

She nodded affirmatively, but volunteered nothing further.

"I must know," cried the man. "Don't you see, child, you've just told
me--Tess, look at me."

The drooping lids raised slowly.

"Tess, when you said you desired to marry me, did you mean--oh, you
meant you love me, child dear, didn't you?"

"Yes," she breathed.

"Then, can't you see your love for me and mine for you makes it
necessary I should know everything? Some one today--tell me, dear."

"Waldstricker came down--" Tess paused, but trembled on. "I was talking
to--"

"Who?" ejaculated Young, fiercely. "Who?"

"The baby's father."

Shocked by her unexpected answer, he dropped into his chair and covered
his face with his hands.

"Don't feel that way," she whispered. "Listen, I'll tell you about
it.... Boy ran to the rocks with Pete, and I went after him. I found him
there with--with--"

"Oh, Tess," groaned Young.

"His father's been away a long time," the girl went on, "and now he's
back, and he wanted to see the baby, and then I sent Boy home and
Waldstricker came--"

"My God! won't you ever tell me who was there with you?"

Boy's mother bowed her head, and through the red hair came two trembling
words, just one whispered name that seared the man's heart like flames.

"Frederick Graves."

Only one long shudder showed the listener's agony. Tess, too, remained
quiet, her veins bursting with pulsing blood. She could not tell him the
rest, Frederick hadn't told, neither could she. Her promise on the
rocks, so many years ago, still bound her.

The lawyer lowered his hands, and the whiteness of his face drew
Tessibel to her knees beside him.

"I've always made you sad," she murmured. "I'm sorry, forgive me."

"Just tell me ... all," he insisted.

Then she began at the beginning and told him over again how Boy had gone
to the rocks with Pete and she went after him. At the part where
Frederick had taken her in his arms, she faltered. In the light of the
wonderful, new love for Deforrest, she couldn't go on!

"Won't you let me ... keep the rest?" she implored.

"No, I will not!" groaned the man. "I will not!"

"Then, let me stand up."

She got up slowly and stood looking out of the window.

"He kissed and kissed me," she said, choking, "and just then
Waldstricker came and ... saw."

"Oh, God help me!" the heavy voice pleaded.

Tess knelt again. His supplicating cry aroused her faith to vivid
activity. Deforrest had prayed, "God help me!" and, oh, so differently
than the same words used by Frederick a short time previous. He was
bearing pain for her. Hadn't she suffered, too, and time and again
called into the heart of the Infinite for help? And always at the times
needed, it had come. God would surely help her friend. Tess forgot
herself in her ardent desire to comfort him.

"He will help you, dear," she whispered. "He'll always help when you ask
Him. Didn't He get Daddy Skinner out of Auburn and He kept Andy with me
in the shanty till we came to you? Oh, I know He'll help you and me,
Uncle Forrie."

The loving appellation, taught Boy when first he could lisp, roused the
man as perhaps nothing else would have done. The three of them still
needed him, needed him more than ever. He was there at their sides like
a wall of stone, to defend, to love and protect. And whatever happened,
Tess loved him!

He drew her to her feet and smiled a twisted smile into the lovely face.
This day had started another epoch in their lives. She had said God
would help, and he had learned many lessons from the squatter girl. For
the first time in his life he understood something of the overwhelming
faith of Tessibel Skinner. Yes, he would be helped!

The girl's next words cut off his thought.

"Waldstricker said he'd hurt Boy," she said, flushing, "but, but--"

"But you have faith he can't, haven't you, Tess?"

"Of course!" she nodded. "I know he can't! You remember the day
Waldstricker tried to get me and you came and stopped him, how I told
you I knew he couldn't," and more softly, "do you remember what I said
when you went away that day?"

"Yes, indeed, I do, dear! I've often thought of it. 'Love is everywhere,
the hull time,'" and, he smiled.

Radiantly she told him, "And, now, somehow, I know that Love will let me
be all yours some day."

Young turned swiftly, and going to the door, swung out without another
word, and Tess hurried upstairs to Boy.


CHAPTER XLIII

SANDY'S JOB


Tessibel Skinner's flight left Ebenezer Waldstricker and Graves together
on the ragged rocks. The bigger man turned and surveyed the other,
scorn, anger and disgust struggling for expression in his face. The
latter, paying no apparent attention to the enraged elder, leaned
against an outcropping gray rock and fixed his gaze on the lake, noting
mechanically the play of sunshine and shadow upon its dazzling bosom.

Through the elder's seething mind thoughts tumbled tumultuously. Could
this moody, pale-faced man be the same nice young fellow that had
married Madelene? How had he dared to marry her, and having done so,
what had compelled him, after all this time, to acknowledge the Skinner
brat?

He walked forward a step or two, coughed and began to speak. Frederick
seemed not to hear him.

"I said," repeated Waldstricker, "I've discovered what I've suspected
for four years."

Frederick allowed his eyes to rest an instant on his brother-in-law's
dark, passionate face. Then, again, he turned his attention to the lake.

"And I don't intend to allow my sister to suffer by this," went on the
elder.

"I suppose you'll tell her, won't you?" questioned the other, foreseeing
unpleasant complications and already regretting the rashness that'd
betrayed him.

"She won't learn it from me," promised Ebenezer.

"Nor from me," agreed Frederick. "I've no wish to have a whining woman
hanging to my neck."

Waldstricker muttered an oath under his breath.

"Well, of all the contemptible pups in the world!" he snorted. "Talk of
ingratitude! Here's a girl, a good girl, too, and Madelene's that--"

"No one said she wasn't," snapped Graves. "But her goodness doesn't keep
her from nagging, my dear Ebenezer."

"Shut up!" snarled his opponent, the last atom of his patience exhausted
by the speaker's flippant criticism. "You cur, you deserve a good
thrashing, and I'm going to give it to you, now!"

Jumping for him, he lifted his arm to strike, but before the mighty fist
descended, Frederick, outworn by his long walk and the excitement of the
morning, slumped upon the rocks, a limp form at his assailant's feet.
Stunned, the tall man gazed down at the crumpled figure, and
mechanically lowered his arm. Then, he stooped, examined his fallen foe
and stretched him out upon the rocks. Leaving him there, Waldstricker
hurried to the lake and filled his hat with water, and returning, bathed
the stricken man's face and neck. In a few moments, the faintness
passed, and Frederick drew himself to a sitting posture against the
rocks.

"You great brute! It's like you to strike a sick man," the white lips
taunted, as soon as their owner could speak.

The slurring words brought a hot blush of shame to Ebenezer's face.

"I'm sorry, Fred," he stammered at length. "I was so angry I must've
forgotten you're not well. I'm glad I didn't strike you. But what are we
going to do, now?... If we don't tell Madelene, how about the Skinner
girl?... Won't she make trouble for us?"

"No, she won't say anything, I'm sure!" Frederick's voice was low, but
positive. "She doesn't want to have anything more to do with me. What
she said about not wanting me was true. She wouldn't stop to speak to
me, even, until I threatened to tell you.... I suppose Young's made her
so happy she's glad to forget me."

"What gets me is how you and Young, decent fellows, got mixed up with
such a girl," Ebenezer growled meditatively.

"If you knew Tess as I do, ... you'd understand," wailed Frederick.
"She's the dearest, bravest, sweetest girl in the world."

"Bosh!... Now, the question is about getting you home. My buggy's up in
the road. Do you think you can walk there?"

"I guess so."

With his brother-in-law's help, Frederick got to his feet. Slowly,
leaning on the big man's supporting arm, he made his way, with many
pauses for rest, to the waiting vehicle.

Waldstricker put his companion into the carriage and unhitched the
horse. Instead of getting in beside him, he handed him the reins, saying
as he did so,

"You can drive all right, can't you? Old Ned knows the way back and will
go home if you let him alone. I want to see Young."

Before turning away, the speaker chirruped to the horse, which started
obediently up the hill toward Ithaca, drawing after him what cowardly
selfishness had left of Frederick Graves.

The elder walked slowly up the path to Young's house, turning over in
his mind to what advantage he could best use his newly acquired
knowledge.

Coming out of the door hurriedly, Deforrest Young met his brother-in-law
face to face as the latter rounded the corner of the house. At the sight
of this pompous person, whose meddling threatened so much trouble to his
dear ones, the indignation which Tessibel's words had in a measure
quieted, flared up anew. He wanted to fight, to pound, and if possible
to kill with his hands the man in front of him.

"You'd better come no farther," he said between set teeth. "Just stay
where you are!... I shan't be responsible for my acts if you don't."

"So she's told you," said Waldstricker, laughing loudly. "And it hurts,
eh? Now, you know what you're keeping?"

Trembling with suppressed passion, the lawyer walked deliberately to the
steps, his face waxen-white.

"I told you to come no nearer. I'd advise you to go away," said he. His
low voice, contrasting sharply with his flushed cheeks and blazing eyes,
testified eloquently of the tremendous curb imposed upon his temper.

"Yes, she told me, ..." he continued in the same tone, "and the more she
told me, the more heartily I pitied her. She told me of your threats,
too, but I want you to understand, the moment you turn your hands
against her, I'll fix you."

"Don't forget my wife's your sister. I'll see our family's honor upheld
even if you've forgotten it." Waldstricker simulated a confidence he
didn't quite feel.

Young's fists knotted.

"You mind your business, Ebenezer, and let my house alone."

Waldstricker, kicking uneasily at a stone in his path, thought a moment.
At last he looked up.

"I'll let your house alone all right, if you'll get rid of that girl,
and that--"

He didn't use the word he'd intended. Deforrest didn't give him time.

"My house is my own," he interjected. "If you watch yours, you'll have
all you can 'tend to."

"I'll go," said the big man, hoarsely, "but I don't say I won't come
again, and I warn you, as I warned that squatter girl, when the time
comes--"

"Get out!" snarled Deforrest, starting down the steps, "and get quick."

And the elder, not daring to stay, turned and went toward the pear
orchard. It was then, that he glanced up and saw Tessibel and her little
one at an upper window, watching with startled eyes for his departure.
The baby turned from the window and raised his arms to some one within,
and a hand below a man's rough coat sleeve clasped the boy and lifted
him up out of Waldstricker's sight.

Walking along the road to Ithaca, he reviewed the exciting events of the
morning and tried to consider and determine the complications they
involved. He was unable to find a motive for Frederick's dramatic
announcement, although he did not for a moment doubt its truth. It was
queer though that, after having kept still so long, he should blurt out
his secret in that fashion. He considered his promise not to tell
Madelene and concluded he'd been wise. Probably Frederick wouldn't live
long anyway, and in the natural course of things, Madelene would soon be
free and the Graves chapter ended. He wondered what had kept Tess silent
all these years. How had she withstood his persecution even in her
betrayer's presence and made no sign? He was glad she had, but he
couldn't understand why. Evidently the girl's disclosure to Young wasn't
going to make any difference in his brother-in-law's conduct. Suddenly,
like a bolt shot into the midst of his revery, rose the question. Whose
arm was that? Young was on the porch, the girl and the baby in plain
sight at the window. But there was some one else, a man. He had seen his
arm and coat sleeve.

"That's certainly peculiar," he ruminated. "I didn't know Young had any
one else there. It may be all right, of course, but it seems mighty
suspicious."

All the way home and all the evening, the thing bothered him. In every
way imaginable he tried to account for that other man in Young's house.
He canvassed the neighborhood. A chance visitor wouldn't be upstairs,
and anyhow he'd have looked out to see the row with Young. But this man
kept away from the window. He'd only shown his hand and arm. Whoever he
was, he was hiding in Young's home.

Was his brother-in-law a party to it? A man couldn't be kept for any
length of time in the house without his knowing it. Young and Tess were
hiding someone! At bed time he decided that the next day he would find
out who was the other man in Young's house. It might give him a hold on
his obstreperous brother-in-law and the hateful squatter girl.


CHAPTER XLIV

SANDY'S VISIT


The next day, Ebenezer Waldstricker met Lysander Letts, just back from
Auburn, loitering along Buffalo Street near the Lehigh Valley station.
The prison-pallor of the squatter's face and hands and the ill-fitting,
cheap prison clothes on his big body made him conspicuous among the men
on the street. Waldstricker pulled up his team.

"Sandy," he called, "come to the office when you're uptown. I want to
see you."

An hour or so later, the squatter slouched into Waldstricker's private
room.

The elder rose and greeted him.

"So you're out again?" The question was really a statement.

"Yes," assented Letts, sitting down on the edge of the chair, "an' I
wouldn't a been if I hadn't been let out on good behavior. I made up my
mind I wouldn't stay a minute longer'n I had to."

"I guess after this you won't be stealing dead bodies, will you?" asked
the rich man.

"Nope, you bet I won't! I've enough of Auburn. It ain't like the Ithaca
jail!... Heard anythin' of Tess Skinner?"

"Yes, she's got a boy over three years old."

Lysander nodded his head slowly, as if he'd received confirmation of a
conclusion previously formed.

"Thought likely," he muttered. "Where air she livin'? I met Jake Brewer
on the street an' he says she air left the shack."

"So she has, but not very far away.... Letts, I want you to do something
for me. Are--or I might put it--do you still want to make up to the
Skinner girl?"

Sandy's face grew dark with uncontrollable anger.

"I want to rip the skin offen her inch by inch," he snarled.

The other man gave a low, mirthless laugh. The picture of the girl he
disliked so intensely, writhing in the great hands of the brute opposite
him, appealed to the elder's sardonic humor.

"That wouldn't be a bad idea," he averred. "But she's got some one who
won't see her hurt."

Letts jumped up and stepped close to the desk where the other was
sitting. Here was a complication he hadn't anticipated. He moistened his
dry lips with a tobacco stained tongue and demanded,

"Who air he?... Air she married?"

"No, she's living in Graves' old place, the house I, now, own, with
Deforrest Young."

"Ye mean, your wife's brother, the lawyer?"

Waldstricker nodded.

"An' ye say she air livin' with him?"

"Well not exactly that, I suppose, but she's keeping house for him.
She's got her child there, too."

"Has, eh?" said Sandy, dryly.

A wicked look came over his face and he slouched back into his chair.
Ebenezer went to his office window and looked into the street.

"Want to earn some money, Letts?" he demanded, without turning around.

"You bet! Ye bet I do!"

Ebenezer returned to his desk and sat down again facing his visitor.

"You'll have to go about this business carefully."

"Trust me," promised the squatter.

"I am. There's a mystery about Young's house--I mean, there's some one
in it beside my brother-in-law, the Skinner girl, and the boy."

"Who air it?" The question was no perfunctory expression of interest.
Anything relating to Tess was vitally important.

"That's what I want you to find out. It's a man!"

"Mebbe it's the brat's pa," offered the other.

"No, it isn't, and by the way, you let up trying to find out about
that."

"What do ye mean?" interjected Sandy, sullenly.

"I mean I want that matter dropped."

Letts merely grunted, for to acquire that information was one of the
first things he intended to do, but there was no use telling the elder
so.

"What ye want?" he muttered.

"I'll give you a hundred dollars to find out the name of the other man
living at Young's."

"Done!" cried the squatter. "Do I get any of the dough, now?"

"Part of it, if you like," replied Waldstricker, slipping his hand into
his pocket. "But listen to me. You're to come directly back here and
tell me, when you find out. Discover his name, if you don't know the
man. Do you understand?"

"I does that. You leave it to me. Then, I'll settle with Tess Skinner."

"As you please about her," consented Waldstricker. "Go along now. I'm
busy."


CHAPTER XLV

ANDY VINDICATED


Lysander Letts left Waldstricker's office highly pleased. He was going
to see Tess, and he had twenty-five dollars in his pocket. In the long
hours of silent meditation in prison, he'd tried to outline that
meeting, and to figure out how he could work Waldstricker. His errand
provided for both contingencies.

He swaggered along the street, bumped into people roughly, and for his
rudeness gave them oaths instead of apologies. At an inlet saloon, he
displayed his money ostentatiously, and bought many drinks for himself
and the "setters." The squatter's capacity for the Rhine whiskey had
been impaired by his imprisonment, and it was not long before he began
to feel the effects of his liquor. A full pint in his hip pocket, Sandy,
finally, broke away from his companions and started up the railroad
tracks for the Silent City. Staggering a little, he meditated with
drunken seriousness what he had done and was going to do.

Famished by his detention in prison, he hungered for the sight of Tess.
All the fierce passion of his undisciplined nature clamored for her. And
when he had her, he'd carry out all the brutalities conceived in the
long nights in his cell. He'd find out the father of her boy. If that
duffer, Waldstricker, could discover it, he could. He'd make Tess tell.
He'd show Young, too. He'd get even with the lawyer for helping send him
to Auburn. His grievance grew more active every step he carried his load
of liquor through the broiling sun, the long four miles from Ithaca.

"Wait till I get 'em," he muttered over and over, "I'll show 'em what's
what."

Before he reached the lane leading past Young's place to the Skinner
shack, he left the tracks and climbed the fence. Throwing his legs over
the top, he sat down to enjoy the breeze which blew from the green
lake, and, vibrating the leaves and bowing the shrubs and grasses, swept
up and over the hill into the illimitable space beyond. Sandy wanted
another drink, and reached back to his hip for it. The bottle stuck in
the pocket and he jerked at it savagely. He pulled it out, but he, also,
lost his balance, and in his efforts to save himself from falling,
smashed the bottle on the top rail of the fence. The whiskey ran down to
the ground and the thirsty moss drank it up.

Letts gazed at the jagged-edged glass in his hand, stupefied by the
magnitude of his calamity. Then he drew a long breath and cursed his
luck. He cursed the bottle, the fence, the whiskey, Waldstricker, who'd
sent him, and Tess and the unknown man, on whose account he'd been sent.
His maledictions included everything except his own drunken clumsiness.

Bye and bye, he got down from the fence, muttering and grumbling to
himself. Cautiously, in spite of his inflamed temper, he worked his way
through the trees. There was no sign of life about the house, but large
hammocks swung in the breeze on the porch. The squatter walked around
and around, keeping far enough away so his movements could not be
noticed. He stopped under a large tree to look up at the windows
Waldstricker had described.

Attracted by a sound to his right, he wheeled about and saw Tessibel
coming down the hill. His breath came sharply through his dark teeth.
Never had the girl been so desirable, and for the instant, he felt
possessed to rush upon her, to take her in his arms, to hold her close.
Then, Waldstricker came into his mind. Before he worked his will on the
squatter girl, he must find out the name of the unknown man. He had to
please the elder to get the rest of the money. But to speak to her would
be all right. He might discover something. He walked stealthily through
the trees and placed himself so that when the girl turned toward the
house, she would meet him face to face.

Tess was humming happily. When her eyes rested upon Lysander Letts, she
stopped.

"Hello, brat!" grinned Sandy.

The girl didn't answer. His prison pallor fascinated her. It contrasted
so sharply with the wind-tanned brown of the swarthy skin she
remembered. All the accumulated horror of him, which had been forgotten
while he was safely restrained at Auburn, swept over her.

"I said hello!" sniggered the other, once more. "Ain't ye glad to see
me?"

Ignoring his question, the frightened girl assumed a haughtiness quite
unusual, and in her turn questioned coldly,

"What do you want?"

"What do I want?" mocked Letts, not a whit disturbed by her manner. "I
want you!"

Tessibel stepped to one side, but the squatter put himself in front of
her, again.

"Now none of yer foolin'," he growled, and he added to his remarks a
collection of sulphurous epithets.

"Sandy," commanded the young woman, still in her grand manner, "step out
of my way! Right now! Do you hear?"

Unmoved, her drunken tormentor flung up his arms, hands open in assumed
disgust.

"Well, hark to the way the squatter girl's talkin', will ye?" he
sneered. "I'll take that outten ye, kid, afore I've had ye long. Where
air yer brat?"

The brown eyes, responsive to his suggestion, glanced toward the house.
There was Boy coming slowly up the little path toward her. He dearly
enjoyed the rare occasions when visitors came, and his face lighted up
when he saw the man talking to his mother.

"Boy, run back home," she called.

Sandy made a dash down the hill toward the child, shouting curses and
commands to him.

"Wait, kid! Don't ye move! I want ye."

The young mother instantly flew after him. Her swift feet took her on
and on, up to and past the squatter whose speed was impaired by his
years of confinement and the whiskey he'd swallowed. Then, she flung
herself in front of the child and held out her arms.

"Stop, Sandy! Wait!" she panted. "I'll talk to you. Let the baby go
home."

The race which had flushed the girl's cheeks and deepened her breathing,
left the fat squatter wind-broken and exhausted.

"Let 'im go, then," gasped Sandy.

"Go back, Boy dear," urged Tess.

Boy didn't move. He seemed mesmerized by the strangely white face of the
drunken man.

"Mummy, come home, too," he hesitated.

"Yer mummy can't. Git out, ye beggar, afore I kick ye!" threatened
Sandy.

His breathing was easier but the discomfort he felt aggravated his ugly
mood. He reached forth one of his great arms and, seizing the child by
the shoulder, threw him roughly to the ground. The little one, more
frightened than hurt, cried loudly. His shrill shriek of terror reached
the ears of the dwarf. Alarmed, Andy sprang to the window and looked
out.

The scene on the lawn below petrified him. Tess was picking up the
child, and standing over her, fists doubled menacingly, was--Lysander
Letts. Andy thought the enraged squatter was going to kill her and Boy.
Wholly forgetful of his own danger, he continued to watch.

His small boyish face was still at the pane, when Lysander looked up.
Andy saw the upturned glance and flung himself back out of sight. Had
Letts seen him? Impelled to look out again, he drew a long breath of
relief. Tess and the child were slowly coming, hand in hand, toward the
house, and the man they feared was making his way through the orchard.

"I saw Sandy," was the dwarf's greeting. "What was he a botherin' you
about, honey?"

"I thought he was going to kill Boy. But suddenly he said good-bye and
went away. Were you at the window, Andy?"

"For just a minute, kid. I don't think he saw me. I heard Boy cry, an'
that's why I went."

A frightened feeling took possession of the girl.

"I hope he didn't see you. Did he, Andy?"

"Sure not. I was watching him all the time. I dodged back before he
looked up."

Tess considered the little man a minute.

"If you saw him look up," she argued, "maybe he saw you looking down.
Oh, I hope he didn't, but I'm afraid he did," and she sighed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandy Letts had recognized the dwarf. The shock of the discovery sobered
him. He couldn't bother with Tess and her brat any longer. He had
business in Ithaca! Waldstricker's five thousand dollars, so long sought
and so eagerly desired, summoned him. All the way to town, he built
castles in Spain with the money. Through every dream, like a thread of
hate, ran the purpose to get Tess, and when he had the girl, to torture
her through her child.

When he arrived at Waldstricker's office, he found the elder absent. An
evil leer on his face, he swaggered up and down the street, his hands
thrust deep into his pockets.

He had made the great discovery of his life. He had lined his pockets
with gold, and more than that, he had made a lifelong friend of one of
the powerful men in Ithaca.

He saw Waldstricker when he turned the corner from State and made his
way down Tioga. The squatter turned into the large building, slunk in an
alcove, and waited. He heard the heavy tread of the elder on the stairs,
heard him pass and go higher up. A few minutes later, he followed.

When he opened the door, Waldstricker greeted him.

"Back again?"

"Yep," chuckled Letts.

"With news, I hope," stated the other.

"Sure," replied Sandy.

"Then tell me," answered Waldstricker, peremptorily. "I'm busy today."

"Did ye ever hear anything of Bishop?" asked the squatter.

"No, I never did."

"Want to?"

"Yes."

"Air that reward up, yet?"

"Certainly. But why all this talk? If you know anything speak out!"

Sandy walked very near the rich man, lowered his voice, and said,

"I found 'im, mister."

Ebenezer's nose was offended by the rank odor of liquor Sandy exuded.

"You're not telling me the truth," he asserted. "You've been drinking.
You're drunk now."

"Yep, I air drunk some, but I air tellin' ye what's so," insisted Letts.
"Andy Bishop air the man ye saw t'other day."

"In my brother-in-law's house!" gasped Waldstricker, beginning to
comprehend all that Sandy's discovery meant.

"Yep, that air it," replied Sandy.

"My God, oh, I thank thee!" ejaculated the elder, falling into his
chair.

"How long he air been there, I don't know," continued Sandy.

"And that doesn't matter.... Now, then, to get him back to Auburn. I
want it fixed to hustle him there quick, so Young can't put a stay on
the proceedings."

Breathing hard, he took out his watch.

"It's half past four. Do those people have the least idea you saw
Bishop?"

"Nope, but I saw 'im all right," said Letts, an expression of satisfied
malice animating his ugly white face. "Maybe we can't make it hot for
that dum lawyer who air got my girl, now."

Towering over Waldstricker's desire to lock up his father's murderer,
was the wish to get even with Deforrest Young and Tessibel Skinner. If
they'd had the dwarf all this time, they were all in his power. Now, he
would wring their hearts! He'd show them no mercy.

"We'll even up some old scores, eh, Sandy?" he agreed.... "You get sober
and be here tomorrow morning at nine o'clock, sober--cold sober,
understand?"

"Sure, Mr. Waldstricker, sure, I get ye. I ain't tight now, not real
soused."

Moving to the door, he stopped. "But I air not goin' to swig any more
booze till we gets Andy Bishop an' I finger that reward."

More intoxicated by his dreams of affluence than by the liquor he'd had,
the pale-faced graduate of Auburn swung out of the room and clattered
down the stairs.

After Waldstricker'd written and despatched a letter and a telegram, he
closed the office and went home.

Helen met him smilingly.

"Elsie's asleep," she announced, taking his hat.

He snatched it from her slender fingers, and his wife moved back. She
looked more closely into his face and the exaltation shining in his eyes
frightened her.

She followed him into the drawing room and closed the door. Patiently,
she waited until her husband had thrown himself into a chair and was
looking at her.

"What is it, dear?" she murmured.

"I have your brother just where I want him," fell from his lips.

"Now, what's Deforrest done to displease you?"

"I've found Andy Bishop in his house!"

The woman couldn't believe her ears. It could not be! She mustn't take
him seriously.

"Oh, how perfectly ridiculous!" she said, relieved.

"It's true enough," replied Ebenezer, getting up. "There's no doubt
about it, and the prison yawns for him and for that Skinner girl,
too.... No! no!... You needn't beg for 'em. I won't hear it!... They've
done enough to me.... Now, it's my turn!"

"Ebenezer," gasped Helen, "don't do anything you'll be sorry for. If
Forrie has had the dwarf there, let him tell you why. If you put him in
prison for it, I couldn't--I couldn't live with you!... Can't you
understand that?"

"As you please, madam. I shall do my duty, even if the criminal is your
brother."

"But you couldn't get along without Elsie and me."

She was very near him now, having taken little steps while she was
speaking.

"Without Elsie!" he mocked. "I don't have to live without Elsie. You can
do as you please, but my daughter stays with me, and your brother, my
dear, and the woman he's living with--go to jail."


CHAPTER XLVI

SANDY'S COURTING


Sitting on the porch late that afternoon, Professor Young heard from
Tess of the coming of Sandy Letts.

"And, Uncle Forrie," she continued. "I can't understand why he went away
so quickly."

"Perhaps he thought I was around somewhere."

"Perhaps," meditated Tess. "But I don't think so. You see, Andy was
looking out of the window. Oh, dear, I've told him not to, but he's
always trying to see what Boy's doing. You don't think Sandy saw him, do
you?"

The unpleasant consequences of Andy's discovery rushed through the
lawyer's mind. To be sure, he'd lived with this possibility ever since
he'd brought the squatters from the shack, but the lapse of time had
developed a sense of security which the girl's question rudely
shattered.

"I hope not. What time did you say that Letts was here?"

"About dinner time," said Tess.

"Well, now it's after five. If he'd seen him, they'd have been back
before this. What does Bishop think about it?"

"Oh, Andy's quite sure Sandy didn't see him, ..." Tess explained,
shaking her head.

"Anyhow, it's no use to worry, honey," smiled Young.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning three men in a wagon passed the Kennedy farm. Ebenezer
Waldstricker was driving and beside him sat Lysander Letts. Alone on the
back seat sprawled the big sheriff, a half-smoked cigar between his
teeth.

When they reached Young's barn, they left their rig and walked quietly
toward the house.

"You don't want to give 'em any chance to get the dwarf out of the way,
sir," said the sheriff. "We'd better get in without their knowing we're
here."

"Yes," agreed Waldstricker.

They'd rounded the porch and were in the living room before Deforrest
Young and Tessibel Skinner were aware of their coming. The officer held
a revolver in his hand. Leering triumphantly, Waldstricker spoke to
Young.

"We want Andy Bishop."

The lawyer turned to the sheriff.

"Put up your gun, Brown, you won't need it," he ejaculated. "Here,
child," to Tessibel, who had risen from her chair and started for the
stairs. "Wait a minute. Sit down."

Tess sank into a chair, white-lipped and silent.

"I suppose there's no use trying to hide him any longer?" continued
Deforrest, turning back to the officer.

"No, I reckon not, Mr. Young.... Where's the dwarf, Professor?"

"Upstairs. I'll call him," replied the lawyer.... Then glancing at the
girl, "You go and get him, Tess."

"Let me git 'im, sheriff," Sandy thrust in. "I'd like the job, sir. Eh?"

"Mebbe I better myself. It's my duty to take him."

Tess smiled at the speaker and getting up moved a step toward him.

"Let me bring 'im, sir," she entreated. "I'll get 'im. Please let me!"

Charmed by her beauty and the sweetness of her voice, the sheriff
glanced doubtfully from the frowning elder to the lawyer.

"Mebbe it isn't quite regular, but if Mr. Young says it'll be alright,
I'm willing," he decided finally.

Young nodded, and Tess rose and started toward the stairs. Passing Sandy
and Waldstricker, she had to draw aside her skirts to avoid touching
them.

The dwarf, seated on the floor beside Boy, was mending a train of cars
when Tessibel's white face appeared at the door.

"Andy," she said, trying to speak calmly. "Remember about the hands
stronger'n Waldstricker's? Nobody can hurt you. But--but--"

At her hesitation the little man scrambled to his feet. He'd heard men's
voices from the room below but had paid no particular attention. Now, he
knew the long-dreaded calamity'd happened. He looked pitifully up at the
speaker.

"They've come for me?" he gasped.

"Yes, dear, and you must go. But remember all the time, God's hands're
stronger'n Waldstricker's," repeated Tess. "Nothing can hurt you....
Come, dear."

A few moments later, the three of them entered the living room, but
stopped short at the sound of the elder's angry voice.

"I'll send you and your squatter woman to Auburn with him, if you don't
look out," he said.

"Do what you please," snapped the lawyer.

Holding the dwarf's hand, Tess went directly to the sheriff.

"Here's Andy, sir," she faltered. "Be awful kind to him, please, sir.
He's so little!"

Still dry-eyed and showing a quiet dignity, she stepped to Young's side
while the sheriff adjusted the handcuffs to himself and to Andy and led
him out into the sunshine.

At the door, Waldstricker allowed Letts to precede him, then turned.

Shaking his fist, he threatened, "I'll get you two, next."

"Very well," Young answered. "Do anything you like, only get out ...
now."

The sound of retreating footsteps had hardly died away when Tess dropped
into a chair and began to cry, the baby wailing in sympathy. Deforrest
put his hands on her shoulders.

"There, there, Tess, you musn't do that! Dress yourself and Boy quickly.
We're going to Auburn, too."

       *       *       *       *       *

The gates of Auburn Prison swung slowly back and admitted a party of
six people and, clanging, closed together again. Large-eyed with wonder,
Boy clung to Professor Young's right hand, at whose other side walked
Tessibel Skinner. In front of them between two officers was little Andy.
Once, Tess caught his eyes and smiled at him. Both were certain that
somewhere up and beyond were the hands stronger'n Waldstricker's, but
they'd hoped those pitying hands would have lifted them up before this.
Still they clung to their faith and all the long ride from Ithaca had
bolstered each other up with wan smiles and comforting promises.

The business in the warden's office was simple and quickly dispatched.
Once in the room, Andy was permitted to stand with his friends. The
officers made their report and the clerk wrote some entries in his books
and gave them a receipt. Then, he rang a bell.

Professor Young was talking to the warden when a guard came through the
iron door from the interior of the prison.

"Take Bishop in," the clerk directed briefly, without looking up from
his books.

Andy turned to Professor Young, took his hand and tried to stammer out
some words of gratitude.

"There, there, old man, brace up!" said the lawyer, patting him on the
shoulder. "Hope it won't be for long!... Here, Boy, say good-bye to
Andy."

Troubled, the baby clung to his friend.

"I don't want Andy to go. I want 'im to come home," insisted the child.

Kissing the little fellow passionately, the dwarf gave him to Deforrest
and turned to Tessibel. She took his hands firmly in her strong ones and
looked earnestly into his face.

"Remember the hands stronger'n Waldstricker's," she whispered. "They'll
bring you right back home, dear. They did Daddy Skinner, Andy, darling."

Shaken by suppressed emotion, the little man sank to the floor.

"Oh, God help me to come back to ye!" he moaned dully.... "God help me!"

A moment, Tess fought the uprushing tears.

"You are coming back, Andy, remember that," she said quickly. Then, she
lifted her friend to his feet and kissed him.

"Here, sir," she said to the officer, "take him!"

Infected by Tessibel's faith, Andy ceased to weep. He flashed a last
loving glance at her and the boy, and preceded the guard through the
iron door into the prison.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some time later, after what seemed an eternity of waiting, the warden
came to Professor Young.

"The lady can see Bennet now," he said.

Silently, an attendant conducted Tessibel through the long stone
corridors to the prison hospital.

As she passed, eager eyes watched her from the rows of cots against the
wall. She was piloted to a bed near the end of the room.

"Here's your company, Bennet," said the officer.

The figure on the bed turned and pain-ridden eyes peered up. Tess felt
her throat throb with sympathy.

"What do ye want, miss?" growled a weak voice.

Tess smiled and bent over the bed. "I want to talk to you," she said.
"May I?"

Bennet's face softened immediately. He thought a beautiful angel had
dropped from Heaven to the side of his prison bed.

"Yep," he whispered, blinking at her. "There air somethin' under the bed
to set on, ma'am."

Drawing forth a stool, Tess raised the lowered back and sat down.

In the presence of such misery, she had almost forgotten her little
friend in the cell outside. Just then, she wanted to comfort Owen
Bennet, to say something which would take away that writhing expression
of suffering.

"You're very sick," she murmured. "Poor man, I'm sorry!"

Bennet kept his watery eyes on the pleading young face.

"Yep, I'm sick enough," he muttered.

"What can I do for you?" asked Tess. "Can't I do anything to make you
feel easier?"

"Nope," was the answer. "I'll be dead, soon. Mebbe, I'll get out time
nuff to die."

Then, Tessibel _did_ forget Andy. And, even, Deforrest and the baby left
her mind. She stretched forth her hand and touched the man's arm.

"Would you like me to sing to you, a little?"

Bennet bobbed his head.

"I like singin'," he mumbled.

In a low voice, Tessibel began to sing; nor did she take her hand from
the thin arm lying inertly on the sheet.

    "Rescue the Perishin';
    Care for the Dyin'."

came forth like the chanting of the chimes.

When the words, "Jesus is merciful," followed, Bennet put up his hand
and touched the girl's fingers. Tessibel closed her own over his. There
was no thought then of her errand, no remembrance that the man before
her was a murderer and had sworn his crime on little Andy.

"Jesus is merciful, Jesus is kind," sang Tess, and Bennet began to cry
in low sobs that made the singer finish her song in tears.

"Oh, He _is_ kind," she whispered. "He is merciful. Won't you believe
that?"

"Sing it again," entreated Bennet, huskily.... "Sing it again, will ye?"

Tess scarcely heard the words they were so low, so sobbingly spoken. She
cleared the tears from her voice, and "Rescue the Perishin'," and "Jesus
is kind," echoed once more through the long room. From here and there,
suppressed weeping came to the girl's ear; but she did not turn to look
at the weepers. Here, before her, was a man who was watching as Daddy
Skinner had watched the slowly opening gates of eternal life, through
which he must pass, alone and afraid. Ah, if she could make him less so!
If she could give him a little faith to grope on and on and up and up
into the freedom of the life beyond.

Bennet's hand was clasped in Tessibel's; the other covered his eyes.

Suddenly, he dropped his fingers.

"Ye say he's kind?" he gasped. "Jesus air kind, ye say?"

"Yes, yes," breathed Tess.

"But I air such a wicked man, awful wicked. I've done things God'll
never forgive."

"But he will," murmured Tess. "Don't you remember what I sang?" and
again,

"Jesus is merciful," brought a fresh rush of tears from the dying
squatter.

A hoarse rattle sounded, suddenly, in his throat.

"Be ye knowin' Andy Bishop, missy?" he muttered, when he could speak.

"Yes," said Tessibel, aghast. She'd forgotten Andy!

"Yes!" she said again, almost in a query.

"He were up here five years ... innercent," wailed Bennet, "an' they
just telled me he air been brought back again for shootin' Waldstricker.
I were glad at first, but, now, I--"

He coughed spasmodically, and Tessibel closed her fingers more tightly
over the thin hand.

"Tell me about it," she implored. "Don't you want to?"

"Yep, an' I air wantin' to write it.... Bring a paper." Bennet gave the
last order to the silent attendant. The latter left the room but almost
immediately returned with the warden. Tess relinquished the stool and
stood near the head of the bed. In silence the officer wrote the story
Bennet told them.

"It were like this," he stumbled. "Andy didn't have nothin' to do with
shootin' Waldstricker. He were a tryin' to stop me from doin' it.... I
done it!... Let Andy go!... Don't keep him in the coop."

The sunken eyes closed wearily.

"Sing about Him bein' kind, miss," he whispered.

Low, solemn and beautiful, the sweet soprano brought him back from the
brink of the grave.

Leaning over him, Tess whispered, "Jesus is always kind."

"I done the murder," repeated Bennet. "Let Andy go, and tell 'im I'm
sorry.... Here, let me write my name to the paper."

It took many efforts for the cramped fingers to scrawl the words, but
"Owen Bennet" was legibly written when the man dropped back, exhausted.

The warden folded the paper and, smiling, put it into his pocket.

"I've always believed he did it, Miss Skinner," he confided to Tess.
"Now, come away."

Bennet's ears caught the last words. In dying effort, he lifted an
imploring hand.

"Don't go, lady!" he mourned. "Stay a minute!... I air a needin' ye....
I air afraid, so awful alone!"

Tess spoke to the warden.

"Tell Mr. Young I'm staying for a while," said she, "and will you please
let Andy know about it?" And she sat down again.

Through the rest of the afternoon, until the long shadows of Auburn
Prison were lost in the gathering gloom, Tessibel sat beside the dying
man. Sometimes, she whispered to him, sometimes, she sang very softly,
and, when Deforrest Young and the warden came through the hospital ward
to her side, Tessibel had piloted Owen Bennet through the darkness into
a marvelous light.


CHAPTER XLVII.

WALDSTRICKER'S ANGER


Lysander Letts wanted to get married and settle down in a home of his
own. He had received and banked the five thousand dollars for
discovering the dwarf, and was, now, looking forward confidently to his
marriage with Tessibel Skinner. He was quite sure his wealth would
overcome the objections the squatter girl had hitherto opposed to his
suit.

He grew quite sentimental thinking of her. He'd buy a real house, and
put some fancy furniture in it, plush sofas in the parlor and lace
curtains at the windows,--not any squatter's shack or pecking-box hut on
the Rhine for him. His face darkened at a disturbing thought. He'd make
the girl give up that kid! He wouldn't tolerate another man's brat in
his home. But Lysander had a wholesome fear of Deforrest Young, and he
didn't venture down the lake until the second day after he'd heard Tess
had returned from Auburn.

On his way along the railroad tracks, he concluded he'd better go to
Brewer's and find out just how the land lay. The talk in the Rhine
saloons, the night before, had been that the dwarf'd returned from
Auburn, pardoned. He wanted to know the details, and was sure Jake
Brewer would be able to tell him. He passed through the woods and
scrambled down the steps the fisherman had cut roughly in the cliff
side. Mrs. Brewer answered his knock and invited him into the house.
Recognizing Sandy's voice, Jake shouted from the back room:

"Heard about Andy Bishop gettin' free?"

When Brewer came into the kitchen a moment later, Letts had taken a
seat. Beside him on the floor lay a large tissue-wrapped package and in
his hands he held a shiny new hat.

"Sure, I've heard he's back," he grinned, brushing a little
flower-pollen from a very loud trouser leg. "How'd it happen?"

Sandy handed Brewer a cigar and stuck one, jauntily, in his own mouth.

"Smoke that, while ye're tellin' me 'bout Andy," he suggested. "It air
the best money'd buy."

When the cigars were burning satisfactorily, Brewer sat down on the
doorstep and cleared his throat loudly. His news was the biggest thing
that'd happened in the Silent City since Orn Skinner escaped the rope.
Glad of another opportunity to recount the story of the dwarf's
liberation, he began:

"Well, ye see, Sandy, in the first place, yer tellin' old Eb, an'
gettin' the little feller sent back to Auburn air the best thing ever
happened to the kid. Tess and the Professor went with 'im. When they got
to the prison, Owen Bennet were dyin' in the horspitle. The brat seen
'im, an' sung to 'im an' talked to 'im, an' he confessed; said Andy
didn't do the shootin' but was tryin' to stop it, just as the kid allers
claimed."

"Yep," interrupted Letts, earnestly. "That air the way it were."

Jake nodded and continued:

"Sure, Sandy, us-uns all knowed ye swore false on the trial.... Well,
next day, Young an' the brat went to Albany to see the guvener."

The ex-convict's eyes widened at the thought of the squatter girl in
such august company.

"He were fine to Tess. Seemed kind a stuck on her, the Professor says.
The brat told 'im all about how she'd looked after Andy, an' how he were
in prison five years innercent, an' then, he give 'er a free pardon for
'im. Day before yesterday, they brought 'im home. Some happy they air, I
tell ye!"

"Well," commented Sandy, "I air glad he's out. I never did feel jest
right 'bout his bein' shet up, but I were needin' the money."

Jake rose, and coming into the room, took up a broken fishing tackle and
sat down again.

"That ain't all the news, nuther, Sandy. While the Professor was to
Auburn, some skunks tore down old Moll's shack. She come down here in
the rain madder'n a settin' hen. The old woman's going to stay with
us-uns."

"It air a fine thing fer old Moll," added Mrs. Brewer. "I been thinkin'
fer a long time as how she were too far 'long in years to be alone in
the shanty."

"Well," said Sandy. "I'm glad to hear it."

"What air ye doin' down here, Sandy?" inquired Mrs. Brewer.

"Me? oh, me!" He paused to choose his words. "I got some news for you
folks. I air goin' to get married."

"Air that why ye're all togged up?" Jake queried. "Gosh, but ye air some
beau, Sandy.... Ain't he, ma?"

"Yep, I air on my way to get my girl. I been waitin' over three years
for this here day, an' now--I air got flowers in this bundle."

"Who ye goin' to marry, Sandy?" demanded Mrs. Brewer.

Letts grinned again, straightened his shoulders pompously, and lined his
feet together on a crack in the floor.

"Tess Skinner," he answered, looking from the man to the woman.

Mrs. Brewer dropped on a stool, and her husband's jaws fell apart in
astonishment.

"Tess Skinner?" he repeated dully. "Pretty little Tess Skinner?"

"Well, I swan!" gasped the squatter woman. "Did she say she'd have ye,
Sandy?"

"Well, it air like this. I been askin' 'er to marry me ever since she
were sixteen year old, but she wouldn't while her daddy were alive. Then
once she says to me, 'Sandy, you go git Andy Bishop an' git that five
thousand, an' come back here.' Now I got the cash. I air a goin' to git
the girl."

"Mebbe she's foolin' ye," suggested Brewer. "Ye see, she had the dwarf
the hull time! Looks to me as if she'd put one over on ye."

"She'd better not try anythin' on me," returned Letts, snapping his
teeth.

"I heard 'er tell ye once," put in Brewer, "she wouldn't marry ye ...
the day ye shot yer leg up."

Sandy cocked the new hat on the side of his head, picked up his bundle,
and went to the open door.

"I'd a had 'er afore now if ye'd kept yer hands to hum, Jake," he
stated. "But I ain't holdin' up anythin' against ye for what ye done.
Now I got money, Tess'll be all the gladder. I air goin' to take 'er
over to Seneca Lake. I got a job on there. Good-bye, folks. Mebbe me an'
my woman'll drop in an' see ye some day."

The husband and wife watched the big squatter going down the rock path,
the tissue-wrapped flowers in his hand, then looked at each other and
laughed in perfect comprehension.

"I wonder if he gets 'er," chuckled Mrs. Brewer.

"I'll bet a bullhead he don't," grinned Jake.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandy Letts wasn't anxious to meet Deforrest Young, but just how to
avoid it he hadn't figured out. It took him a long time to consider just
what was best to do. Perhaps the lawyer had gone to Ithaca. He hoped so.
At any rate, he could go to the house and if the professor were there
he'd give the flowers to Tess, and if he had to, come another day when
she was alone.

Strutting along, supported by his fine clothes, and the consciousness of
doing the right thing in the right way, the newly-rich man walked up the
path to Young's house and ascended the steps quietly. The door stood
open. Without knocking, he stepped across the threshold into the sitting
room.

Tessibel was working at a little table, cutting out a blouse for Boy.
She looked up, and recognizing her visitor, got quickly to her feet.

"Hello, Tess," said Sandy, coming forward a little. "Nice day, ain't
it?"

Tessibel's fear of him since his roughness to Boy was very active. She
had suffered in anticipation, for he'd threatened to come again, and she
knew he would. Now he was here she didn't know what to do. Deforrest
wasn't home and Andy was out with Boy.

"Yes, it's a nice day," she assented.

"Ain't ye goin' to ask me to set down?" demanded Sandy, at the same time
helping himself to a rocking chair. "I brought ye somethin', brat." He
unwrapped the bundle and took out a huge bunch of flowers.

"Ye want to nurse 'em a long time, 'cause they cost money, them flowers
did. They ain't no wild posies!"

"They're awful pretty," she thanked him. "I'll put them in water right
away."

While she was arranging the flowers, Sandy got up.

"How do ye like my new togs, kid?" he asked, pivoting around and around
on one heel.

"You look very nice," replied Tessibel, gathering courage from his good
nature.

"Ye bet I do," grinned Letts. "I air some guy when I air all flashed out
in new things. Got all this with Waldstricker's money. Lord, brat--"
Here the man reseated himself. "Ye ought to hear that bloke bluster when
he found out ye'd got Andy back. Now for me--I were glad, for I knowed
all along the dwarf didn't kill Eb's daddy. But in this world I find ye
got to look out for yerself first. That air how I got the five
thousand."

"I see!" flared Tess, her disapproval of his spying getting the better
of her fear. "But your blood money won't do you any good."

"Won't do me no good? My five thousand won't do me no good? What do ye
mean, brat? 'Course it'll do me lots of good. I air a rich man, I air.
It's goin' to buy us a real home, kid, frame house with plastered walls
an' shingled roof, painted red an' yeller. All what I want now air my
woman, an' I've come fer ye, Tess."

The girl's heart sank. She glanced about helplessly. What could she say
or do? There was no other human being within call. In hasty
retrospection, her mind swept back to Ben Letts. She shuddered as she
remembered the many times he'd made the same demand upon her. And then,
she as suddenly remembered how, during those days, she had been saved
from men like Ben and Sandy, and courage came again in response to her
silent call for help.

"Ye heard what I said, brat, didn't ye?" demanded Sandy, leaning back
and throwing one leg over the other. "I air here fer ye."

"Yes, I heard."

"An' ye're comin', ain't ye, kid?" ... His voice was deep and persuasive
by reason of the passion that surged through him.... "I air a little
sorry fer bein' mean to ye afore, brat, an' now I air rich ye can
forgive it, can't ye?"

He bent forward and held out his heavy hands, palms up, ingratiatingly.

"Yes, I forgive you, Sandy, certainly. But--but--"

"Now, there ain't no 'buts' in this matter, kid! Ye said as how ye'd
marry me when I got Andy's reward money. Now I got it ye got to keep yer
word."

Tessibel shook her head.

"I didn't say I'd marry you," she answered. "I said, away back there,
when I was only a little kid, you could come back and ask me again. But
I'm a woman, now, and I'm never going to marry anyone."

The squatter leaned his elbows on his knees, cupped his white face in
his hands, and glared at the girl steadily.

"Ye're goin' to git married to me today," he growled. "Ye can't play
fast and loose with me, kid, an' don't ye think ye can, uther. Get on
yer togs. I air goin' to give ye the time of yer life."

Tessibel stood very still. She could hear plainly, through the silence,
the lap of the waves on the shore below, and the soft chug-chug of a
lake steamer. A bee flew in at the door, lighted on the lace curtain and
clung there, making sprawly motions with his thread-like legs. She
remembered without effort the day the squatter alluded to--remembered
also Daddy Skinner's telling him to go. Perhaps he _had_ thought she
meant to marry him if he were rich.

"Sandy," she said, dragging her eyes to the man's face. "When I tell you
I can't marry you, I mean it. Please don't ask me any more.... Would you
like a piece of cake?"

"Cake?..." snarled Letts. "Hell! What do I want with cake? No, ma'am, I
don't want no cake nor nothin' but you, an' I air goin' to have ye,
too!"

He got up slowly, as if to make more effective his menacing words.

"If ye put on yer things like I says," he continued, "there won't be no
trouble, brat. But if ye don't--" he moved toward her, "ye'll wish ye
had."

To this Tessibel couldn't reply. Insistent, in her panting heart, was a
constant call for rescue. She looked steadily at Lysander and he glared
back at her.

"Tess," he threatened, "ye know me well 'nough not to come any monkey
shines on me. I says again, get yer hat, fer I'm goin' to take ye one
way or t'other."

"I told you I couldn't," she answered. "I'm not any longer a little
girl. I've got to work. I want to learn things and take care of my
baby."

She couldn't have said anything that would have fired the squatter's
rage any quicker. Her baby! What did he care about the brat?

"Ye don't have to work no more fer Young," he retorted. "I ain't goin'
to have my woman keepin' house fer no professor, an' ye can make up yer
mind to it 'out no further clack." In one bound, Sandy rounded the
table. "If ye won't do what I tell ye, then, I'll make ye wish ye had.
Ye throwed up at me once, ye brat, ye, I never had no kisses from ye!
After today ye won't be able to say that."

A strong hand shot out, guided by a powerful arm. Fingers clutched for
her, but Tess, eluding them, slipped to the window.

"Sandy!" she implored. "Sandy, don't touch me, don't! Wait!"

"I won't wait," snarled Letts. "I air waited years an' years, an' I
won't wait no longer."

At that moment there seemed no escape for the girl, who was holding out
her hands to keep off the brute facing her. The very quiet of the day,
the singing of the birds, and the shrill chirping of the crickets, only
added to her sense of isolation. She glanced hopelessly from the huge
squatter out into the summer air.

"Ye can't get no help," said Sandy. "Ye might's well give up!... God,
ye're all the sweeter fer havin' to fight like I been doin'!"

By a motion, extraordinarily quick for so big a man, he clutched her
bodily, and dragged her to him. She lowered her face against his chest
and buried it under her curls.

"I air goin' to kiss ye, my pretty wench," muttered Letts. "Gimme yer
lips, gimme--"

In the scuffle neither heard the step on the porch and neither saw the
tall form loom in the doorway. Sandy wrenched at the red hair, drawing
Tessibel's face upward. Then Deforrest Young grappled with him, and in
the one blow he landed under the squatter's chin, the angry lawyer
concentrated the vim of years of exasperated waiting. Sandy slumped to
the floor. Kneeling beside him, Young's leg pressed against something
round and hard in Letts' pocket.

A quick investigation brought forth a small revolver.

"Are you hurt, child?" he inquired, getting up. "Did he hurt you?"

"Not a bit, Uncle Forrie, but he scared me awful."

The prostrate man groaned, moved his limbs and sat up, slowly. He
glanced around as though trying to figure out what'd happened. The sight
of Young, holding the gun Waldstricker's money bought, told Sandy the
whole story of his downfall.

"Get up, Letts, and get out of here quick!" Young ordered, prodding him
with his foot.

Sandy scrambled to his feet unsteadily.

"Now, take your hat and get out," said Young, "and don't stay in Ithaca,
or I'll have you locked up again."

Sandy didn't wait for any further advice. He grabbed his hat and flung
out of the door. Deforrest followed him down through the pear orchard to
the lane, and there he stood for a long time watching the ex-convict
struggle up the hill to the railroad tracks.

When he returned to Tess he found her leaning on the table, her face
buried in her hands. She did not lift her head, nor make a move at
Deforrest's entrance.

"Child," he said, taking a chair at her side, "Letts won't bother you
any more. If he doesn't go away, I shall have him arrested tomorrow....
I won't have you insulted like this.... And, dear, I believe I'd better
send you and the boy away for a spell. A change will do you both good."

"Yes, yes, do!" pleaded Tess. She snatched his hand and pressed it to
her cheek hysterically. "Let me go somewhere, please!"


CHAPTER XLVIII.

THE SINS OF THE PARENTS


A few days after Sandy's tempestuous courting, Tessibel Skinner and her
son left Ithaca to spend the remaining part of the summer in the North
Woods. In September Young joined them for a few days and then brought
them back to the hillside above Cayuga Lake.

Later in the fall, when the cold winds and driving rains of the lake
began to find out the cracks in the shanties, Tessibel asked, and the
lawyer consented, that old Mother Moll come from Brewer's to them. Tess
gave her one of Andy's rooms. The dwarf had entered a school on College
Hill and lived in the city most of the time, but was home now for the
Christmas vacation.

The day after his return dawned bright and cold--one of those beautiful
winter days occasionally seen in the Storm Country. Heavy snows had
already fallen and made certain a white Christmas. Andy was helping
Tessibel in order that she might have time to complete her Yuletide
preparations. She'd filled her son's heart with delightful anticipations
of the holiday, now but a few days distant, and he was eagerly looking
forward to the Santa Claus who came to visit good little boys and fill
their stockings with goodies.

At the north of the house Deforrest had made a little snow-hill for Boy.
Many a happy hour the little fellow spent upon it with his sled. Oftimes
his mother joined him in the sport, and the joyous laughter of the two
children of nature rose high and clear in the winter air.

The morning's work finished, Tessibel wrapped up Boy and sent him out to
play. She stood for some moments on the porch watching the sturdy little
figure arrange the sled at the top of the hill.

How she loved him, and how good he was! Never since the day of his birth
had he given her one sorrowful moment. She turned her eyes from Boy to
the lake, and allowed them to rest upon the shanty near the shore. A
disturbing thought pressed into her mind. They would not be long there
now.

Deforrest had told her that his lease of the house expired the first of
January, and Waldstricker had refused to renew it. If they moved away,
she'd be lonely for the sight of her old friends and all the dear,
familiar things that had met her eyes every day since she could
remember.

She hoped her new home might be in the Storm Country. She loved the lake
in its every mood. Dark and sullen, visitors had called it. But she'd
seen it on summer days, a band of burnished blue cementing the harmonies
of greens and browns into a picture of perfect beauty. She knew its
deep, brooding peace when the light was fading and the evening breeze
gently ruffled its surface. She'd skated over its shining bosom in the
blinding glare of the unclouded sun and in the soft radiance of the
shadow-filled moonlight. She knew the soft spots in the ice caused by
flowing springs in the lake-bottom and had drunk their pure, cold water.
Her lifelong intimacy had wooed from rockbound lake its inmost secrets.
Today the water lay a gleaming jewel, huge by contrast to the myriad
sparkles the sunbeams pricked out of the snow. She looked across to East
Hill at the frosty veil of a ravine waterfall and sighed.

At a shout from Boy, she went to the far edge of the porch to watch him
slide swiftly through the pear orchard toward the lane. Glancing along
the line of his flight, she saw Waldstricker on his horse directly in
Boy's path. Fear and horror held her dumb and motionless. Evidently the
rider hadn't seen the swift-coming sled--but the horse had.

He reared and attempted to turn. At that point the ditches were deep and
the rounded crown of the road covered with ice. The animal slipped and
fell. At the proper moment the horseman jumped off and pulled the bridle
rein over his mount's head.

Her muscles taut with fright, Tess jumped from the porch and ran down
the hill to the scene of the accident. When she arrived Waldstricker was
jerking his steed savagely.

"Get out of the way you little imp," he shouted, in the midst of his
struggles with the animal. "What do you mean by riding in a public road
scaring horses this way?"

"Mummy said Boy could ride down hill," answered the child, holding his
ground staunchly.

"I'll mummy you!" The man's exasperation was increased by the child's
resistance. "Get out of the way!"

"Boy, come straight here to me," Tess called, trying to pass the excited
animal.

The child picked up the rope fastened to his sled, gave it a jerk and
started toward his mother. Frightened by the flash of the sled in the
snow, the horse reared and plunged anew.

"Drop that sled and get out of here!" Ebenezer thundered. "How many
times must I tell you? Get out!"

Tess called again, but Boy flung up a red, angry face to the elder.

"Mummy said I could slide," he repeated stubbornly.

"I'll teach you to argue with me," snapped Waldstricker, and before Tess
could reach him, he'd raised his arm and given the child a sharp cut
with his riding whip. "Get out, I tell you!"

"Mover!" screamed Boy, jumping back and falling over the sled. "Oh,
Mover! Mover!"

Like an enraged tigress, Tess threw herself upon Waldstricker, and tore
at the upraised whip in his hand. The frantic horse, fairly beside
himself with fear and excitement, pulled them both down the hill through
the snow. By a strenuous effort Ebenezer threw off the girl's grip, and
when he finally conquered the steed he was below the top of the lane
near the Skinner hut.

Before Waldstricker could mount and ride back up the lane, Tess had
picked up the boy from the snow where he had fallen. Without waiting an
instant, she fled frantically toward the house.

"Andy! Andy!" she screamed.

Andy came downstairs as fast as his little legs could carry him.

"Waldstricker's killed Boy!" gasped Tess. "Andy, get something.... Tell
Mother Moll.... Some water!"

She laid the baby on the divan in the sitting room and stood over him
until old Moll came.

"He air got a spasm," croaked the old woman. "Poor little brat! Get some
hot water."

For hours the child passed from one convulsion into another. When
Deforrest came home, Tess was in a state of frantic despair.

"Waldstricker struck him," she explained. "He's going to die."

In response to his questions, the girl gave him the details, and hotter
and hotter grew the listener's anger. He attempted to quiet Tessibel's
fears while he got ready to go for the doctor, but she persisted in her
claim that Boy wouldn't recover.

       *       *       *       *       *

On his way home, the elder tried to make peace with himself. He was
rather sorry he'd struck the boy; that he'd hurt the little imp, he
poofed at. Anyway, he had taught Tess Skinner to keep her brat out of
his way. His efforts to discipline her had resulted in an open breach
with his brother-in-law and caused discord between himself and his wife.
His disputes with Deforrest about the squatters had not turned out to
his satisfaction. His efforts to drive the old witch off his lake-land
by tearing down her shack had opened to her the house that he himself
owned. He had had to pay Sandy Letts the $5,000 reward for the capture
of Andy Bishop, and the whole city had laughed at the price paid for the
little man's short imprisonment. He'd tried every way he knew to put an
end to the situation. Helen ought to be able to do something with her
brother. She should have saved her husband from the gossip Forrie was
causing.

When he entered his home, Helen perceived that he'd acquired a new
grievance and discreetly remained silent while he was preparing himself
for dinner.

After a quiet meal, when they had seated themselves by the log fire in
the library, Mrs. Waldstricker took up a doll's dress she was finishing
for Elsie's Christmas. Her husband, stretched in an easy chair, glowered
sullenly into the grate flames. The meditations of husband and wife were
quite different. Helen wondered what was bothering Ebenezer now. She
wished they were more companionable; that things were pleasanter, more
as it used to be when they were abroad. Since their return, he'd sit for
hours in gloomy meditation. His fits of complete abstraction filled her
with dread.

She brought back in sequenced retrospection the happy years of
travel--how proud she'd always been of her handsome husband and of his
courtly deference to her. She had never ceased to be grateful that
Heaven had given her this man to love and cherish her. She couldn't tell
how or when the change had come, but somehow they weren't happy together
any more. He was so moody and quarrelsome lately. She missed her
brother, too. Why those two men should get by the ears over the
inhabitants of the Silent City she couldn't understand. But her thoughts
were soon concentrated upon the work at hand and contemplating the joy
she would have in Elsie's pleasure, she began to hum to herself.

Two or three times she peered at Ebenezer through her lashes. How
moodily quiet he was! She wished Elsie were awake--the little girl
always succeeded in dissipating the frown from her father's brows.

Suddenly, she held up the doll in all its newly-adjusted festive attire.

"There, now, dear, isn't the doll baby pretty?" she smiled.

Ebenezer didn't take his gaze from the burning logs.

"I'm not interested in dolls tonight." His tone was harsh and his manner
studiously rude. Then, as though he'd finally determined to say
something else, he looked around at her.

"I taught Tess Skinner a lesson today I don't believe she'll forget," he
burst forth savagely.

The doll dropped from Helen's hands, its head striking sharply against
the arm of her chair.

"What do you mean?" she gasped.

"You needn't get that expression on your face, my lady--"

"Oh, Ebenezer!" interjected Helen, drearily. "What makes you act so? One
would think you spent your whole time trying to get even with
somebody."

"I got even with my lady Skinner," smiled Waldstricker. "I gave her brat
a whipping." The words came slowly, and the man watched their effect.

Helen was not able to sense the full meaning of his statement at first.
Mechanically, she rescued the doll and laid it on the table. Beginning
to see the picture he'd suggested, she opened her mouth, closed it again
and at the next attempt spoke.

"Why, Ebenezer, Tessibel's baby is only a month or so older than Elsie!"

"Well, what of it! He's an impudent little whelp. Takes after his
mother, I suppose."

"But you don't really mean you whipped him!" Helen exclaimed, still
incredulous.

"That's just what I do. With my riding whip. What do you think of that?"

His words brought to Helen's recollection that other time he'd used his
riding whip. Then it had been upon Mother Moll, and the old woman had
screamed at him, "It air like ye to hit the awful young and the awful
old." She recalled, too, the other mysterious words the witch woman had
uttered. "Curls'll bring yer to yer knees--the little man air a settin'
on yer chest!" The prophecy addressed to herself, that he'd make her
life unhappy and that she'd leave him, she'd never before taken
seriously. But the question hammered at her consciousness. Could it be
that Moll had a second sight or something of the sort? Ebenezer's
trouble about the squatters centered about Andy Bishop and the Skinner
girl; the dwarf was certainly a little man and Tessibel had wonderful
red curls. Her husband had made her life unhappy and his mood tonight
was unusually ugly. She was touched with a superstitious half-conviction
that the old woman's words would be fulfilled.

"I asked you a question, Mrs. Waldstricker," the wrathful voice
interrupted her meditations. "Answer me, if you please."

Perhaps it was the recollection of Mother Moll's sibylline utterance;
perhaps merely that her husband's hostile attitude aroused a
corresponding feeling of animosity. At any rate, she sat erect in her
chair and fixed her eyes upon his scowling face. Never had he seen her
rounded chin so squarely set; never the red lips drawn into such
determined lines.

"I think you're a brute, that's what I think!" she responded
deliberately, as though stating a conclusion arrived at after due
consideration. "Yes, worse than a brute!" The answer was as unexpected
to the elder as though a lump of ice had suddenly boiled over. A quick
fury took possession of him.

"Think I'm a brute, do you?... What's the matter with you? Are you
getting soft on the squatters, too?"

Helen made a hasty gesture, indicative of denial.

"Well, you better not!" warned Ebenezer, angrily. "Your brother's
conduct is disgraceful enough. I'm sick and tired of having my own
townsfolk winking at each other every time his name's mentioned. Lawyer
Young and his squatter women! Sounds nice, doesn't it?"

To be loyal to herself and Deforrest, she could not help but disagree
with him.

"Now, Ebenezer, you oughtn't to say such a thing," she expostulated.

A flame of anger shot into the elder's steady stare.

"Don't you 'Now Ebenezer' me!" he snorted. "Young's making my lake
property a disorderly house. It's positively indecent! I won't stand it
any longer. I won't have those squatters there, and your brother can
make up his mind to that!"

Helen tried to interrupt but her husband waved her to silence.

"Mother Moll and Andy Bishop!" he mocked. "An old witch and a jail-bird!
Wouldn't it make a man tired?"

Helen leaned forward. An angry red spot burned on either cheek and her
eyes flashed. Her gentle temper didn't take fire easily, but even to her
endurance there were limits.

"You seem to forget, Mr. Waldstricker," she retorted sharply, "that your
men tore down the old woman's home and your money procured the perjury
that sent the dwarf to Auburn. It strikes me you'd better not throw
stones at Forrie."

Waldstricker jumped to his feet and rushed to his wife's side.

"What!" he roared. "You dare that to my face! Some more of Deforrest's
influence, I suppose. Nice family I married into, I must say."

Helen got up from her chair. The one thing that stirred her quickest was
an attack upon her brother.

"Ebenezer Waldstricker, you ought to be ashamed of yourself. Forrie
minds his own business and you should mind yours." An hysterical sob
brought her to a pause, but she struggled on. "I don't know how I've
stood your temper so long. You must have lost your mind."

In view of the grievances he'd been nursing, his wife's sudden rebellion
seemed almost too unreasonable to be credited. She'd joined his enemies!
She was making common cause with her notorious brother and the
squatters! Very well, he'd use her the same as he would them.

"You think rather well of me, don't you Mrs. Waldstricker?" he rasped.
"Nice names you call me. Brute! Home destroyer! Procurer of perjury!
Liar! Crazy!" His voice grew louder as he hurled the epithets at her and
broke into a shriek upon the last one. "Get out of here before I teach
you the same lesson I taught Tess Skinner!" He lifted his arm above his
head; the great fist was clenched, and the cruel mouth was drawn at both
corners. "Get out of here before I hit you!"

Helen stood petrified. The blow had fallen. Mother Moll was right! She
retreated before his menacing gestures, but stopped near the door and
held up her hand in entreaty. She'd make one more effort.

"But, Ebenezer," she began, "where shall I go?"

Advancing toward her, he fairly shouted:

"I don't know and I don't care. Go down and help your brother take care
of his squatter baggage!"

He seemed fairly beside himself. Helen realized the hopelessness of
further resistance.

"Then I'll go and take my baby," she cried. "Perhaps when we're gone--"

Her words only added fuel to the flame of his wrath.

"You'll not touch my daughter," he interrupted. "She'll stay with me."

He rushed at her, pushed her rudely aside, and hurried up the stairs to
the nursery.

His wife followed as quickly as possible. At the nursery door Ebenezer
met her and blocked her way.

"You needn't wake her up," he hissed. "Go on! Get out of here! You're
worse than the Skinner woman!"

She could not go into the nursery. The angry man on the threshold
effectually prevented her. Mrs. Waldstricker turned down the hall and
went to her own room. She could hardly comprehend the untoward disaster
that had destroyed the whole fabric of her life at one stroke. The blood
was throbbing at her temples and pounding through her body. Her ears
rang; her face burned and she was trembling all over. Mechanically, she
fumbled for the matches on a nearby table, found one and struck it. She
attempted to light the lamp but dropped the chimney and it rolled away
under the bed.

Drearily, she tried to consider her course. Ebenezer had ordered her to
go. Then she must go. She'd always done as he directed. But where? Her
cheeks burned more fiercely as she recalled the brutal answer he'd given
that question. No, she wouldn't go to Forrie! It would only make
Ebenezer more angry and make more trouble for her brother. It didn't
make much difference where she went anyway. Life without her husband and
her baby wouldn't be life at all. She couldn't visualize her days
without Elsie, the little one they'd both longed for and prayed over.
Slowly, because each little act required a separate effort of volition,
she dressed herself. Prepared at last to depart, she took a long look
through the rooms. Past events went in giddy rapidity across her vision.
How she'd loved and still loved Ebenezer! They'd been so happy together.
She sighed and went through the hall to the nursery. Her movements had
evidently been heard. When she approached the door, her husband stepped
out and pulled the door to behind him. For a moment their eyes met. In
his she saw the dull smoldering coals of hate. She bowed her head and
silently went through the baleful glare he cast upon her down the stairs
and out of the mansion to which she had been brought a happy bride.


CHAPTER XLIX

TESSIBEL AND ELSIE


Gloom lay over the Silent City. Bitter hatred burned in the simple heart
of every squatter. Waldstricker's open enmity had expressed itself in a
series of injuries, calculated to enrage them. The shanty folk resented
his cruelty to Mother Moll. The destruction of her shack promised a
similar fate to their homes. When the story of Waldstricker's attack
upon Boy Skinner spread among them, fierce threats were muttered at the
fishing holes and by the firesides. The wintry winds of the Storm
Country, shrieking over the desolate masses of ice and snow, were not
more fierce and cruel than the squatters' demand for vengeance. The
daily bulletins of the little one's illness kept the interest alive and
added to the growing excitement and indignation.

Day after day, the doctor had come to the Young home, each time shaking
his head more gravely. To Deforrest, the helpless witness of the
unfolding tragedy, the days and nights were but a continuing torture.
Andy Bishop stole about the house like a small white ghost, waiting upon
Tessibel and Mother Moll. One morning, a few days before Christmas, the
doctor told Deforrest Young he considered Boy beyond earthly help. And
now it devolved upon the lawyer to tell Tessibel she must lose her baby.

He went softly to the sick room. Whiter than the pillow upon which his
cheek rested, Boy lay relaxed, breathing rapidly. Tess stood at the foot
of the bed, her hands clasped loosely in front of her. Anxious eyes
turned to greet Young. At the bedside the man stopped a moment and
looked down upon the little figure. Shocked by the imminent signs of
approaching dissolution, he went over and placed an arm around the girl.

"He's awful sick," Tess whispered. "What'd the doctor say?"

"I'm afraid, Tess--I'm afraid," he answered, unable to frame the medical
man's decision.

Dawning comprehension and dismay struggled in the young mother's eyes,
for the agonized tones of the well-loved voice and the tender solicitude
of the supporting arms had put into Young's halting words the dread
import of his message.

"You mean--you mean--?" she questioned.

"Tess, darling; my pretty child," Young murmured helplessly.

The red head dropped upon his chest and for a moment Tess clung to him
as though to find protection from the menacing horror. Then she freed
herself, dropped on her knees by the bedside, and rested her head on
Boy's little hand. During the hours of watching she had striven to steel
herself against this possibility. But she couldn't understand. Boy, her
cherished bit of living joy and sunshine! What would become of him?
Separation? Yes, but where was he going? She didn't know. She couldn't
think. A sudden shudder, a kind of voiceless sob shook her.

Young stood quietly by the bedside, watching and waiting. His love for
mother and son centered all his thoughts in them. He shared his
darling's grief and desired above everything to console her; but the
very depth of his sympathy prevented him. Hopeless himself, in this grim
crisis, every human effort seemed futile.

Placing a tender hand on her shaking shoulder, he bent down.

"My poor little girl!" he breathed. "I wish I could help you some way."

"Nobody ... can." The hopeless despair of her voice made vocal the utter
desolation she felt.

A gentle movement of the little hand against her face commanded
Tessibel's immediate attention. She smoothed the pillow the while she
whispered softly little words of love to Boy. Then she looked around at
Young.

"Please tell Andy to fix the kitchen fire," she said, even at this time
mindful of her domestic duties.

"I'll see to it myself," and he went out softly and down the stairs.

He found Andy in the sitting room.

"The doctor--what'd the doctor say?" the dwarf demanded.

"Go to 'er," trembled Young. "Brace her up all you can."

The little man went slowly upstairs and entered the sick chamber.
Through the tears in his eyes, he saw the dying babe in the white bed
and the young mother kneeling on the floor, the flaming red of the
clustering curls an incongruous note of brilliant color.

Andy waddled across the room and knelt down beside Tessibel. Lifting his
arm he let it fall across the girl's shoulders. His silent sympathy,
always unselfish, never intruded. Tess stared at Andy a moment, and then
buried her face in her hands upon the coverlet.

"He's going away," she got out through her fingers. "Andy, I can't let
'im go!"

"I've been prayin' for 'im, Tess," choked the dwarf.

The girl made no response, but to show her friend she'd heard, one of
her hands sought and held his.

"If it air right for 'im to stay, dear," murmured Andy, "the good God'll
help 'im.... Don't ye think so, Tess?"

"I don't know, Andy.... I'm afraid!... It's too awful!"

"Kid, ye know it air true. You've only to ask him," Andy insisted.

A hopeless shake of the bowed head accompanied the whispered answer.

"I can't, Andy! I can't!... I'm so afraid!"

"What you 'fraid of, brat, dear? Jesus air loving you same's He did in
the shack. He got Daddy Skinner out of prison, an' he took care of me,
didn't he, huh?"

Maddened by suffering, she drew herself impatiently, away from the
dwarf.

"Don't, Andy! I don't want to hear! He let Waldstricker whip my baby."

Although the young mother could hear the muttered prayers of the dwarf,
no answering faith came into her soul. Hot hatred of the man who'd
struck her son surged through her. Never again would she think of him
without the raging cry within her for revenge. Her anger barbed the
shafts of his rancor and dulled her own understanding of Life and Love.
Resentment inhibited every constructive effort. The courage, even the
desire to fight against death's coming, was wanting.

"I hate 'im worse than anything in the world," she muttered.

"Yes, darlin'," soothed the dwarf.

"I'd like to kill him. Oh, I must do something--" She tried to get to
her feet, but Andy held her tightly.

"Stay here!" was all he said, and Tess ceased to resist.

At midnight Boy died. He went away very quietly, without a cry or
struggle. At the very last, he turned upon his side, looked into his
mother's face, his eyes unshadowed and joyous. He smiled a little,
sighed with the passing breath, "Mummy," and sank to sleep. So dazed was
Tessibel that without protest she allowed Deforrest to pick her from her
knees and carry her out of the room.

Mother Moll and Andy performed the necessary services to the mortal clay
that'd been their darling. Loving fingers, tenderly touching the
delicate body, made Boy ready for the grave. Through the stillness of
the night, the sighing of the ceaseless wind of the Storm Country,
soughing of death and desolation, called to their minds the weird
superstitions of squatter lore. The old witch mumbled of signs, portends
and warnings, and uttered dire prophecies in which her wrath at
Waldstricker found expression.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Tess and her squatter friends were carrying Boy through the sullen
cold to God's wind-swept half-acre, Ebenezer Waldstricker sat before the
glowing hickory logs in his sumptuous library. Several letters in his
morning mail required his presence in the city. On the table before him
lay a list of things he intended to buy for little Elsie's Christmas.

Since the day he'd whipped Tessibel's son and forced his wife from his
home he'd devoted himself to the little girl. In spite of his best
efforts, the child's grief for her mother had driven him almost to his
wits' end. He'd made up his mind to spare no expense to bring joy back
to his darling.

Whenever his mind reverted to the scene at the lake he tried to justify
his act in striking the little fellow, but the news of Boy's death had,
for a moment, given him an uncomfortable turn. He hadn't intended
anything like that. He wasn't to blame! Probably the little imp would
have died anyway!

Helen had sent every day to ask after Elsie, and the thought of his
wife's anxiety pleased the elder. Perhaps, after a while, the squatters,
as well as the members of his own household, would learn his word was
law; that he would not allow any of them to go against his will. Again
and again the corner curl of his lips showed his satisfaction.

Hearing the jingle of sleigh bells at the door, he rose from his chair
and slipped on his great coat and cap.

"Daddy, bring mover back," quivered Elsie, when he kissed her good-bye.

Waldstricker stooped and gathered her into his arms.

"Daddy'll bring Elsie lots of pretty things, and so will Santa Claus.
He's coming down the chimney tonight--"

"Elsie wants mover," sobbed the little one.

Ebenezer surrendered her to the nurse.

"Get her mind off crying," he said morosely. "Give her everything she
asks for."

"I can't," muttered the woman, and when the door had closed, "There,
there, child, don't cry! Your mother'll be comin' back some of these
days."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early afternoon Waldstricker bought and packed into the sleigh
all kinds of presents for his daughter. His spirits rose when he thought
that her demands for her mother would be quieted on Christmas Day.

It was quite dark when his powerful team fought their way through the
storm up to the porch of the house. While the man was coming for the
horses he took the bundles from the sleigh. At the door he met several
white-faced servants.

"What's the matter?" he queried, relieving his arms of their load.

"The baby!... We can't find her.... She's gone," said a voice.

"Gone! Gone where?" roared Waldstricker.

"Nobody knows, sir," gasped the nurse. "She was in the library looking
at the pictures--"

Waldstricker brushed past the speaker. He rushed through the house
calling his child frantically. In his wife's sitting room he stopped,
arrested by an illuminating thought.

Helen had stolen the baby! He drew a long breath that hissed through his
teeth. Of course, that was what had happened. Instant anger filled his
mind. He'd show her. He wouldn't stand it. He went below and called the
servants into his presence.

"Who was here this morning?" he questioned.

"Nobody." Not one of them had seen a person.

"Mrs. Waldstricker was here, wasn't she?" he insisted.

"No, Mrs. Waldstricker hasn't been home today."

The elder set his grim lips and went out again. Elsie was with her
mother! That Helen hadn't been to the house didn't prove anything. She'd
sent some one. Elsie wouldn't have gone away of her own accord.

When Ebenezer appeared at Madelene's home he was fuming with fury. His
sister greeted him cordially and ushered him into the drawing room.

"I'm glad you've come, Ebenezer. Helen's been crying ever since she's
been here."

"I'll make her cry more before I'm done with her," gritted Waldstricker.

"But, Ebenezer, she's sick. And you were so cruel to send her away like
that."

Waldstricker turned savagely upon the speaker, hands working
convulsively and face and eyes ugly from fear and anger.

"Never mind about that now--Where's Elsie?" he demanded. "I want her and
I want her right away."

Madelene fell back a step, wax-white.

"Elsie!" she echoed. "Isn't she home?"

"Madelene," Ebenezer began in a deadening voice, "you know me well
enough not to play with me like this. Where's my daughter?"

Madelene's hands came together.

"She's not here!... She's home, Ebbie, dear, she must be!"

"She's not!" fell from Waldstricker. "Call Helen!"

"Helen can't come down, Ebbie, she's in bed!"

"I'll see her." Low thunder rolled in his tones. His sister grasped his
arm.

"Be kind to her, Ebbie, dear--"

"I'll see her," repeated Ebenezer, not changing the tone of his voice.

Without another word, Madelene whirled and went toward the stairs, the
church elder following his sister with slow tread.

Helen turned her tired, white face to the visitors. At the sight of her
husband she sat up straight.

"Where's Elsie?" the man shouted harshly from the door.

Something had happened to her little girl! Her husband was asking for
the child! Mrs. Waldstricker jumped out of bed quickly.

"I haven't seen her," she answered. "Isn't she home?"

Then Waldstricker believed. Elsie had disappeared. She was not with her
mother!

"She's gone," was all he said, and, wheeling, went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not one of the servants could tell Madelene or the distracted mother any
more than they had told the father.

The search began without the slightest clue of the child's whereabouts.
Elsie had disappeared, as if she had been snatched into the sky. The
storm, already very severe, had thickened the early twilight into dense
darkness. The light snow that had fallen earlier in the day to the
depth of several inches drove in swirling clouds before the wind and
piled in deep drifts, while the congealed air pelted icy particles of
frozen moisture into the confused uproar upon forest and field. Fear
that the child had started out to find her mother and had been overtaken
by the blizzard obsessed Waldstricker. He sent messengers in all
directions, and himself rode furiously through the snow inquiring
everywhere. Finding no trace of her at the neighboring houses, he
instituted a systematic search of the locality.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the afternoon Young had sat with Tessibel, most of the time in
silence. She showed no desire to talk, and he knew not what to say.
Watching from the sitting room window, Tess seemed to find diversion in
the wind-driven snow, as though the blizzard's riot met and matched the
aching bewilderment in her own breast.

Nor did she pay any attention to a knock which resounded above the
beating of the storm. Deforrest went to the door and carried on an
undertoned conversation with some one outside. Then after dispatching
the caller, he went back to the girl.

"Tess," he hesitated, but his voice broke and he was unable to complete
his sentence. In responsive inquiry, she turned from the window and
looked up at him. The deep dejection of her attitude depicted her
despondency and despair. The brown eyes, dull and lustreless, staring
out of the drawn white face, expressed the hopeless wonderment the man
had seen in the glazing orbs of a stricken deer. A great wave of pity
welled up in him. How could he break this frozen composure and bring to
the overwrought heart the healing blessing of flowing tears?

"Tessibel," he continued, sitting down, "what were you thinking about?"

"I was wondering what I could do to ... hurt Waldstricker," she replied,
gripping the arms of her chair. Then she rose suddenly, throwing up her
head. The intensity of her emotion fanned the dull coals of hate in her
eyes to a hard brilliance and touched her white cheeks with vermilion.
Vivid, active, her beautiful face, passion-drawn and cruel, red curls
writhing and twisting upon her shoulders, Tess seemed a veritable fury
crying for vengeance. She lifted clenched hands.

"I'll hurt Waldstricker," she vowed. "God help me to do it!"

Springing to his feet, Young ejaculated:

"Don't, Tess! You mustn't!"

Turning away, she paced up and down the room, muttering imprecations.
Her companion stood silent, unable to assuage her agony or rebuke her
vindictive words.

At length Tess stopped directly in front of him.

