"In the administration of this Reserve the government adopts a policy
which has shown admirable results; and as this policy is in direct
contrast to the one pursued in the Algonquin Park it may be
interesting to explain and discuss it. It can be admitted, as a matter
of theory, that a 'public park and pleasure ground' should be
maintained by the people for the people, and that no individuals
should have exclusive rights conferred upon them to fish or shoot
within it. This ideal conception takes no account of human nature, and
a scheme that has to do with the control and conduct of men should not
disregard their weaknesses, or the powerful motive of self-interest.
The greater part of the Laurentide Park is free to anyone who takes
out a license and complies with certain regulations. But, at the
points most threatened by poachers, the practice is followed of
granting five-year leases of moderate areas to individuals and to
clubs. The first requirement of these grants is that the lessee shall
appoint a guardian, approved by the Department, and shall cause the
conceded territories to be protected in an adequate manner. The
guardian, for his part, is immediately answerable to an individual who
pays his salary. He contrasts his former precarious living as a
trapper or poacher with the assured competence which he now earns more
easily, and makes his election in favor of virtue. Thus he becomes a
faithful servant both of the Government and his employer, and a
really effective unit in the protection of the Park. The lessee, in
turn, will neither practice nor tolerate any infringement of the laws
which would imperil his lease, nor deplete of fish and game a country
which he intends to revisit. He would not necessarily be actuated by
these motives if he entered the Park casually and considered nothing
but his own sport or pleasure. It may be added that the lessee has
reasonable assurance of the extension of his privileges if they are
not abused and knows that he will be compensated for moneys properly
expended if the Government sees fit not to renew his term. The
guardians co-operate with one another under the general guidance of a
most competent inspector, and the striking increase in fish, fur and
feather is apparent not only in the region immediately protected but
also ouside its boundaries. Trappers who fought bitterly against being
excluded from this part of the public domain now find that the
overflow of wild life into the surrounding country enables them to
bring more pelts to market than they did in the old days, and have
become reconciled. Guardians, gillies, carters, porters and canoemen
live in whole or in part, on providing fishing and shooting. Under no
other arrangement could the conceded territory afford sport and a
living to so many people, and in no other way could the balance
between resources and their exhaustion be so nicely maintained."

On page 47, Mr. Blake corroborates the statement of the shameful act I
mentioned at the bottom of page 18 of my _Address_. "On sighting a
band of six caribou he bade his man sit down to give him a rest for
his rifle. He then fired and continued firing till all were killed.
When his companion made to walk towards the animals, Sir ---- said to
him roughly:

"'Where are you going?'

"'To cut up the caribou.'

"'... I don't want them.'"

This game murderer killed three times as many as the prescribed limit
on this one occasion. Yet nothing was done to him!


SANCTUARIES

However desirable they are from any point of view leaseholds are not
likely to cover much of Labrador for some time to come. They should be
encouraged only on condition that every lessee of every
kind--sportsman, professional on land or water, lumberman or
other--accepts the obligation to keep and enforce the wild-life
protection laws in co-operation with the public wardens who guard the
sanctuaries, watch the open areas and patrol the trade outlets.

I have very little to add to what I said about sanctuaries in the
_Address_. Most of the information received since it was published has
only emphasized the points it made. And as no one has opposed and many
have supported the establishment of the Harrington sanctuary I again
recommend it strongly. The 64 miles in a straight line between cape
Whittle and cape Mekattina should be made into an absolute sanctuary
for all birds and mammals. If some more ground can be taken in on
either side, so much the better. But the 64 miles must be kept in any
case. The Bird rocks and Bonaventure island, one of the Mingans, the
Perroquets, Egg island and The Pilgrims, are all desirable in every
way. There are plenty of islands to choose from along the Atlantic
Labrador and round Hudson and James bays. It is most important to keep
the migratory birds free from molestation during the first fortnight
after their arrival; and the same applies to migratory mammals, though
not quite in the same way. Inland sanctuaries should be made near
Hamilton inlet, in the Mingan and Mistassini districts and up the
Eastmain river. Ultimately an Arctic sanctuary might be made on
either Baffin or Melville islands. A meteorological station in the
Arctic, linked up with Labrador by wireless, would be of great benefit
to the weather forecasts, as we now have no reports from where so much
of our cold or mild winters are affected by the different drift of
enormous ice-fields; and whenever one is established, a wild-life
protection station should accompany it.

Sanctuaries should never be too big; not one tenth of the whole area
will ever be required for them. But they should be placed where they
will best serve the double purpose of being natural wild "zoos" and
over-flowing reservoirs of wild-life. The exact situations of most,
especially inland, will require a good deal of co-operative study
between zoologists and other experts. But there is no doubt whatever,
that they ought to be established, no matter how well the laws are
enforced over both leaseholds and open areas. Civilised man is
appreciating them more and more every day; and every day he is
becoming better able to reach them. By giving absolute security to all
desirable species in at least two different localities we can keep
objects of Nature study in the best possible way both for ourselves
and our posterity.

Only twelve years ago forty mills were debasing the immemorial and
gigantic sequoia into mere timber in its last refuge in California.
But even the general public sees now that this was a barbarous and
idiotic perversion of relative values. What is a little perishable
timber, for which substitutes can be found elsewhere, compared with a
grove of trees that will be the wonder and delight of generations?
What is the fleeting but abominable gratification of destroying the
harmless lizard-like Tuatera of New Zealand compared with the deep
interest of preserving it as the last living vertebrate that takes us
back to Primary times? What is the momentary gratification of wearing
egret feathers compared with the certainty of soon destroying the
herons that produce them altogether; or what can compensate for the
vile cruelty done to mutilated parent birds and starving young, or the
murder of Bradley, the bird warden when trying to protect them?


LETTERS

The following quotations from a few of the many and wholly unsolicited
letters received are arranged in alphabetical order. They are strictly
_verbatim_:

_Australia._ The Animals' Protection Society. F. Montagu Rothery,
Esq., Secretary, 82 Pitt Street, Sydney, New South Wales.

     Here in this State our _fauna_ and _flora_ are both rapidly
     disappearing, there being so many agencies at work for their
     destruction. It will soon be too late to save many of our
     beautiful birds and animals, and I am anxious to bring
     under notice your words for the preservation of animals by
     a system of sanctuaries.

Dr. Robert Bell, late Chief Geologist, Geological Survey of Canada,
who has made many explorations in Labrador and adjacent lands and
waters, and who has always given special attention to the mammals,
writes:

     I approve very heartily of the plan. It will be a humane
     thing to try to protect the animals and will be very
     advantageous in every way. It will no doubt receive the
     sympathy of all classes. There will, however, be some
     difficulties to overcome and much work to be done before the
     plan gets into successful operation.... As to the location
     and dimensions of the sanctuary, the north side of the lower
     St. Lawrence is the most suitable or only region left,
     except where it is too far north to benefit the most of the
     mammals and birds which we should try to preserve. It will
     be desirable to reserve and protect as great a length of the
     shore as possible, but perhaps enough will be found between
     Bradore bay on the east and Great Mekattina island on the
     west, or this might be extended to Natashkwan. To carry it
     up to Mingan, it would become more and more difficult to
     protect the coast the further up you come. Between Mekattina
     island and Natashkwan, there are no attractive rivers to
     tempt trespassers to go inland, those which exist being
     difficult for canoe navigation....

     The animals soon find out where they are safe and come to
     live in even a small area. The Algonquin park is a case in
     point. There the bears have increased immensely in a few
     years and the less noticeable mammals and birds have also
     increased very much. I know of a more conspicuous case of a
     small area, on the Nelson river, where, owing to an
     old-standing superstition of the Indians, the animals have
     not been molested for a long period and they have become
     much more numerous than elsewhere.... Everything that can be
     killed is called Game. Most of it should be called animal
     murder and should be discouraged.

     The Sanctuary should be placed in charge of a committee of
     naturalists. But zoologists are scarce in Canada and those
     who have taken an interest in the animals might be included.
     Faithful men to carry out their instructions I think can be
     found.

The President of the Boone and Crockett Club, Major W. Austin
Wadsworth, Geneseo, N.Y., wrote:

     I wish to express officially the admiration of our Club for
     your paper on Animal Sanctuaries in Labrador, because the
     whole question of Game Refuges has been one of especial
     interest to us and we have been identified with all
     movements in that direction in this country.

Captain R.G. Boulton, R.N., retired, was engaged for many years on the
Hydrographic Survey of the Lower St. Lawrence, the Gulf and
Newfoundland. He says:

     There is no doubt, as regards the conservation of _birds_,
     that sea-birds, such as gulls, &c., &c., are useful "aids to
     navigation," by warning the mariner of the proximity of
     land, on making the coast. On foggy shores, like those of
     Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador, they are especially
     useful, and it is to the advantage of the voyaging public to
     conserve what we have left. While carrying on the Survey of
     Georgian bay, and North channel of lake Huron, 1883-1893,
     the _Bayfield_, my surveying vessel, was more than once kept
     off the rocks in the foggy weather which prevails in May and
     June, by the chirping and warbling of land birds.

His Excellency the Right Hon. James Bryce, British Ambassador at
Washington, who is a keen botanist and lover of the wilds, writes:

     It is painfully interesting. One finds it hard to realize
     that such wicked waste of the gifts of Providence, and such
     horrible cruelty, should be going on in our time. You are
     doing a great service in calling attention to them and I
     heartily wish you success in your endeavours.

At a special meeting of the Board of Governors of the Camp-Fire Club
of America, held on December 12th last, the following resolution was
unanimously passed:

     "_Whereas_, the Camp-Fire Club of America desires to express
     its interest in and endorsement of the plan for the
     establishment of Bird and Animal Sanctuaries in Labrador,
     outlined by Lieut.-Colonel William Wood in his address
     before the Commission of Conservation delivered at Quebec,
     in January, 1911;

     "We believe that the establishment of adequate sanctuaries
     is one of the most potent factors in the conservation of our
     rapidly disappearing wild life. The Camp-Fire Club of
     America has taken, and is taking, an active part in the
     movement for the establishment of such sanctuaries in
     various places. We believe that such sanctuaries should be
     established in Labrador in the near future, while an
     abundance of undeveloped land is available and before the
     wild life has been decimated to such an extent as to make
     its preservation difficult;

     "_Be it therefore Resolved_, that the Secretary convey to
     Colonel Wood the assurance of our hearty interest in and
     approval of the plan to establish adequate animal
     sanctuaries in Labrador, and our hope that such sanctuaries
     will be established in the near future."

Dr. John M. Clarke, Director, Science Division, New York State
Education Department, and a gentleman acquainted with the wild life of
the gulf of St. Lawrence, writes:

     I have taken much interest in reading your paper. It seems
     to be based on an extraordinary acquaintance with the
     situation.

     Canada is blessed with many unique natural resorts of animal
     life and I have been particularly impressed with the
     invasions that have been made on the wonderful nesting
     places of the waterfowl. In my repeated stays on the coast
     of Gaspe and the islands of the Gulf, now running over a
     dozen years, I have had my attention forced to the hideous
     sacrifices of bird life that are constantly going on; for
     example in the Magdalen islands with their extraordinary
     array of shore birds. The great lagoons within the islands
     afford ideal breeding conditions, and an extraordinary
     attraction for the hunter as well.

     My observation leads me to the conviction that the shooting
     law is not in the least respected on these islands, except
     perhaps by the residents themselves. In some cases the
     outsider is obliged to wait for the fall migration of the
     ducks and geese and so comes within the law, but there are
     plenty of early migrants that arrive during the close
     season, only to be quickly picked up by the summer hunter,
     who realizes that he is too far away to incur the law's
     force.

     As far as the shore birds are concerned, it is not the
     occasional hunter that does the real damage. The islands are
     becoming widely known to students of birds, and it is the
     bird student, the member of the Audubon Society, (in most
     instances, I regret to say, men of my own country) who are
     guilty of ruthless slaughter of the shore birds for their
     skins, and particularly for their eggs; all this in the
     protected season.

