LADY K.--There is a time for all things, my dear. This man is very
convenient to Horace. Mr. Milliken is exceedingly lazy, and Howell
spares him a great deal of trouble. Some day or other I shall take
all this domestic trouble off his hands. But not yet: your poor
brother-in-law is restive, like many weak men. He is subjected to other
influences: his odious mother thwarts me a great deal.

K.--Why, you used to be the dearest friends in the world. I recollect
when I was at Eton--

LADY K.--Were; but friendship don't last for ever. Mrs. Bonnington and
I have had serious differences since I came to live here: she has a
natural jealousy, perhaps, at my superintending her son's affairs. When
she ceases to visit at the house, as she very possibly will, things will
go more easily; and Mr. Howell will go too, you may depend upon it. I am
always sorry when my temper breaks out, as it will sometimes.

K.--Won't it, that's all!

LADY K.--At his insolence, my temper is high; so is yours, my dear. Calm
it for the present, especially as regards Howell.

K.--Gad! d'you know I was very nearly pitching into him? But once,
one night in the Haymarket, at a lobster-shop, where I was with some
fellows, we chaffed some other fellows, and there was one fellah--quite
a little fellah--and I pitched into him, and he gave me the most
confounded lickin' I ever had in my life, since my brother Kicklebury
licked me when we were at Eton; and that, you see, was a lesson to me,
ma'am. Never trust those little fellows, never chaff 'em: dammy, they
may be boxers.

LADY K.--You quarrelsome boy! I remember you coming home with your
naughty head SO bruised. [Looks at watch.] I must go now to take my
drive. [Exit LADY K.]

K.--I owe a doose of a tick at that billiard-room; I shall have that
boatman dunnin' me. Why hasn't Milliken got any horses to ride? Hang
him! suppose he can't ride--suppose he's a tailor. He ain't MY tailor,
though, though I owe him a doosid deal of money. There goes mamma with
that darling nephew and niece of mine. [Enter BULKELEY]. Why haven't you
gone with my lady, you, sir? [to Bulkeley.]

BULKELEY.--My lady have a-took the pony-carriage, sir; Mrs. Bonnington
have a-took the hopen carriage and 'orses, sir, this mornin', which the
Bishop of London is 'olding a confirmation at Teddington, sir, and Mr.
Bonnington is attending the serimony. And I have told Mr. 'Owell, sir,
that my lady would prefer the hopen carriage, sir, which I like the
hexercise myself, sir, and that the pony-carriage was good enough for
Mrs. Bonnington, sir; and Mr. 'Owell was very hinsolent to me, sir; and
I don't think I can stay in the 'ouse with him.

K.--Hold your jaw, sir.

BULKELEY.--Yes, sir. [Exit BULKELEY.]

K.--I wonder who that governess is?--sang rather prettily last
night--wish she'd come and sing now--wish she'd come and amuse me--I've
seen her face before--where have I seen her face?--it ain't at all a bad
one. What shall I do? dammy, I'll read a book: I've not read a book this
ever so long. What's here? [looks amongst books, selects one, sinks down
in easy-chair so as quite to be lost.]

Enter Miss PRIOR.

MISS PRIOR.--There's peace in the house! those noisy children are away
with their grandmamma. The weather is beautiful, and I hope they will
take a long drive. Now I can have a quiet half-hour, and finish that
dear pretty "Ruth"--oh, how it makes me cry, that pretty story.
[Lays down her bonnet on table--goes to glass--takes off cap and
spectacles--arranges her hair--Clarence has got on chair looking at
her.]

K.--By Jove! I know who it is now! Remember her as well as possible.
Four years ago, when little Foxbury used to dance in the ballet over
the water. DON'T I remember her! She boxed my ears behind the scenes,
by jingo. [Coming forward]. Miss Pemberton! Star of the ballet! Light of
the harem! Don't you remember the grand Oriental ballet of the "Bulbul
and the Peri?"

MISS P.--Oh! [screams.] No, n--no, sir. You are mistaken: my name is
Prior. I--never was at the "Coburg Theatre." I--

K. [seizing her hand].--No, you don't, though! What! don't you remember
well that little hand slapping this face? which nature hadn't then
adorned with whiskers, by gad! You pretend you have forgotten little
Foxbury, whom Charley Calverley used to come after, and who used to
drive to the "Coburg" every night in her brougham. How did you know it
was the "Coburg?" That IS a good one! HAD you there, I think.

MISS P.--Sir, in the name of heaven, pity me! I have to keep my mother
and my sisters and my brothers. When--when you saw me, we were in great
poverty; and almost all the wretched earnings I made at that time were
given to my poor father then lying in the Queen's Bench hard by. You
know there was nothing against my character--you know there was not. Ask
Captain Touchit whether I was not a good girl. It was he who brought me
to this house.

K.--Touchit! the old villain!

MISS P.--I had your sister's confidence. I tended her abroad on her
death-bed. I have brought up your nephew and niece. Ask any one if I
have not been honest? As a man, as a gentleman, I entreat you to keep my
secret! I implore you for the sake of my poor mother and her children!
[kneeling.]

K.--By Jove! how handsome you are! How crying becomes your eyes! Get up;
get up. Of course I'll keep your secret, but--

MISS P.--Ah! ah! [She screams as he tries to embrace her. HOWELL rushes
in.]

HOWELL.--Hands off, you little villain! Stir a step and I'll kill you,
if you were a regiment of captains! What! insult this lady who kept
watch at your sister's death-bed and has took charge of her children!
Don't be frightened, Miss Prior. Julia--dear, dear Julia--I'm by you.
If the scoundrel touches you, I'll kill him. I--I love you--there--it's
here--love you madly--with all my 'art--my a-heart!

MISS P.--Howell--for heaven's sake, Howell!

K.--Pooh--ooh! [bursting with laughter]. Here's a novel, by
jingo! Here's John in love with the governess. Fond of plush, Miss
Pemberton--ey? Gad, it's the best thing I ever knew. Saved a good bit,
ey, Jeames? Take a public-house? By Jove! I'll buy my beer there.

JOHN.--Owe for it, you mean. I don't think your tradesmen profit much by
your custom, ex-Cornet Kicklebury.

K.--By Jove! I'll do for you, you villain!

JOHN.--No, not that way, Captain. [Struggles with and throws him.]

K. [screams.]--Hallo, Bulkeley! [Bulkeley is seen strolling in the
garden.]

Enter BULKELEY.

BULKELEY.--What is it, sir?

K.--Take this confounded villain off me, and pitch him into the
Thames--do you hear?

JOHN.--Come here, and I'll break every bone in your hulking body. [To
BULKELEY.]

BULKELEY.--Come, come! whathever his hall this year row about?

MISS P.--For heaven's sake don't strike that poor man.

BULKELEY.--YOU be quiet. What's he a-hittin' about my master for?

JOHN.--Take off your hat, sir, when you speak to a lady. [Takes up a
poker.] And now come on, both of you, cowards! [Rushes at BULKELEY and
knocks his hat off his head.]

BULKELEY [stepping back].--If you'll put down that there poker, you
know, then I'll pitch into you fast enough. But that there poker ain't
fair, you know.

K.--You villain! of course you will leave this house. And, Miss Prior, I
think you understand that you will go too. I don't think my niece wants
to learn DANCIN', you understand. Good-by. Here, Bulkeley! [Gets behind
footman and exit.]

MISS P.--Do you know the meaning of that threat, Mr. Howell?

JOHN.--Yes, Miss Prior.

MISS P.--I was a dancer once, for three months, four years ago, when my
poor father was in prison.

JOHN.--Yes, Miss Prior, I knew it. And I saw you a many times.

MISS P.--And you kept my secret?

JOHN.--Yes, Ju--Jul--Miss Prior.

MISS P.--Thank you, and God bless you, John Howell. There, there. You
mustn't! indeed you mustn't!

JOHN.--You don't remember the printer's boy who used to come to Mr.
O'Reilly, and sit in your 'all in Bury Street, Miss Prior? I was that
boy. I was a country-bred boy--that is if you call Putney country, and
Wimbledon Common and that. I served the Milliken family seven year. I
went with Master Horace to college, and then I revolted against service,
and I thought I'd be a man and turn printer like Doctor Frankling. And I
got in an office: and I went with proofs to Mr. O'Reilly, and I saw
you. And though I might have been in love with somebody else before I
did--yet it was all hup when I saw you.

MISS P. [kindly.]--YOU must not talk to me in that way, John Howell.

JOHN.--Let's tell the tale out. I couldn't stand the newspaper
night-work. I had a mother and brothers and sisters to keep, as you had.
I went back to Horace Milliken and said, Sir, I've lost my work. I and
mine want bread. Will you take me back again? And he did. He's a kind,
kind soul is my master.

MISS P.--He IS a kind, kind soul.

JOHN.--He's good to all the poor. His hand's in his pocket for
everybody. Everybody takes advantage of him. His mother-in-lor rides
over him. So does his Ma. So do I, I may say; but that's over now; and
you and I have had our notice to quit. Miss, I should say.

MISS P.--Yes.

JOHN.--I have saved a bit of money--not much--a hundred pound. Miss
Prior--Julia--here I am--look--I'm a poor feller--a poor servant--but
I've the heart of a man--and--I love you--oh! I love you!

MARY.--Oh ho--ho! [Mary has entered from garden, and bursts out crying.]

MISS P.--It can't be, John Howell--my dear, brave, kind John Howell.
It can't be. I have watched this for some time past, and poor Mary's
despair here. [Kisses Mary, who cries plentifully.] You have the heart
of a true, brave man, and must show it and prove it now. I am not--am
not of your pardon me for saying so--of your class in life. I was bred
by my uncle, away from my poor parents, though I came back to them after
his sudden death; and to poverty, and to this dependent life I am now
leading. I am a servant, like you, John, but in another sphere--have
to seek another place now; and heaven knows if I shall procure one, now
that that unlucky passage in my life is known. Oh, the coward to recall
it! the coward!

MARY.--But John whopped him, Miss! that he did. He gave it him well,
John did. [Crying.]

MISS P.--You can't--you ought not to forego an attachment like that,
John Howell. A more honest and true-hearted creature never breathed than
Mary Barlow.

JOHN.--No, indeed.

MISS P.--She has loved you since she was a little child. And you loved
her once, and do now, John.

MARY.--Oh, Miss! you hare a hangel,--I hallways said you were a hangel.

MISS P.--You are better than I am, my dear much, much better than I am,
John. The curse of my poverty has been that I have had to flatter and to
dissemble, and hide the faults of those I wanted to help, and to smile
when I was hurt, and laugh when I was sad, and to coax, and to tack, and
to bide my time,--not with Mr. Milliken: he is all honor, and kindness,
and simplicity. Who did HE ever injure, or what unkind word did HE ever
say? But do you think, with the jealousy of those poor ladies over his
house, I could have stayed here without being a hypocrite to both of
them? Go, John. My good, dear friend, John Howell, marry Mary. You'll be
happier with her than with me. There! There! [They embrace.]

MARY.--O--o--o! I think I'll go and hiron hout Miss Harabella's frocks
now. [Exit MARY.]

Enter MILLIKEN with CLARENCE--who is explaining things to him.

CLARENCE.--Here they are, I give you my word of honor. Ask 'em, damn em.

MILLIKEN.--What is this I hear? You, John Howell, have dared to strike a
gentleman under my roof! Your master's brother-in-law?

