President Timothy Dwight, D.D., LL.D., b. 1828, g. Yale 1849, g. Yale
Theological School, studied at Bonn and Berlin in Germany; was professor
at Yale and president from 1886 to 1897. He has been an eminent American
scholar for half a century. If there were but two or three such men in
a family it would make it memorable. Yale gave him the degree of D.D.,
and both Harvard and Princeton that of LL.D. He was editor of "The New
Englander." It is a singular fact that the three great advances which
Yale has made have been in the times of the two Dwights and of Woolsey,
all descendants of Jonathan Edwards. By the end of his third year the
number of students had risen to 1365 and the sixth year to 1784. The
gifts to Yale in each of the fifteen years of his administration were
fabulous as compared with any past experiences, often above $350,000.

President Sereno Edwards Dwight, D.D., g. Yale 1803, practiced law in
New Haven; author of important books which were republished in England;
became a clergyman at the age of twenty-nine; pastor of Park St. Church,
Boston; was chaplain of the U.S. Senate; established successful boarding
school in New Haven. Among his students were the two boys who afterwards
made the famous Andrews & Stoddard's Latin Grammar. His literary work
was extensive and valuable. Standing by himself he would shed lustre
upon the names he bore, Edwards and Dwight. He was a tutor in Yale and
was third president of Hamilton College.

William Theodore Dwight, D.D., b. 1795, g. Yale 1813, tutor at Yale,
practiced law in Philadelphia; became a clergyman; pastor in Portland;
overseer of Bowdoin College. He was offered three professorships, which
he declined. He was one of the religious leaders of America for many
years.

Hon. Theodore Dwight, b. 1764, lawyer. Editor "The Connecticut Mirror"
and "The Hartford Courant;" member of Congress, where he won honors by
successfully combating the famous John Randolph; secretary of the famous
Hartford Convention; established and edited 1815-17 the "Albany Daily
Advertiser;" established and edited the "New York Daily Advertiser"
1817-36; wrote "Life of Thomas Jefferson," and many other works of
importance. There were few men in his day who occupied a position of
such influence.

Theodore Dwight, 2d, b. 1796, g. Yale 1814, eminent scholar, imprisoned
in Paris for distributing the New Testament gratis in the streets; spoke
seven languages; was the warmest American friend of Garibaldi and was
authorized by him to edit his works in this country; was director
N.Y. Asylum for the Blind, and of the N.Y. Public School Assn.; was
instrumental in having music introduced into the schools of N.Y. City;
was prominent in religious and philanthropic as well as educational
work. In the Kansas crisis he induced 3,000 settlers to go to Kansas,
and indirectly caused nearly 10,000 to go at that critical time. He
edited at various times "The N.Y. Daily Advertiser," "The Youths Penny
Paper," "The American Magazine," "The Family Visitor," "The N.Y.
Presbyterian," "The Christian Alliance," and wrote several successful
text-books and many literary and historical works. He was a leader in
the noblest sense of the term.

Nathaniel Dwight, M.D., b. 1770, surgeon in United States Army,
practiced medicine in Providence; prepared the first school geography
ever published in the United States; wrote many historical works;
original advocate of special institutional care for the insane. After
eleven years of ardent championship he saw the first insane retreat
established.

Henry E. Dwight, M.D., b. 1832, g. Yale 1852, g. Andover Theological
Seminary 1857, studied in Germany and France and was an eminent
physician in Philadelphia. Rev. S.G. Dwight, g. Union Theological
Seminary, and was a missionary in the Sandwich Islands.

