"Want me! Who ever does want to be reproved for their own folly? I
suppose what you want is to go on and marry that man, who may have
two or three other wives for what you know, and put yourself and your
money into the hands of a person whom you never saw in your life
above a few months ago, and of whose former life you literally know
nothing. Tell the truth, Miss Mackenzie, isn't that what you desire
to do?"

"I find him acting as Mr Stumfold's curate."

"Yes; and when I come to warn you, you insult me. He is Mr Stumfold's
curate, and in many respects he is well fitted for his office."

"But has he two or three wives already, Mrs Stumfold?"

"I never said that he had."

"I thought you hinted it."

"I never hinted it, Miss Mackenzie. If you would only be a little
more careful in the things which you allow yourself to say, it would
be better for yourself; and better for me too, while I am with you."

"I declare you said something about two or three wives; and if there
is anything of that kind true of a gentleman and a clergyman, I don't
think he ought to be allowed to go about as a single gentleman. I
mean as a curate. Mr Maguire is nothing to me,--nothing whatever; and
I don't see why I should have been mixed up with him; but if there is
anything of that sort--"

"But there isn't."

"Then, Mrs Stumfold, I don't think you ought to have mentioned two
or three wives. I don't, indeed. It is such a horrid idea,--quite
horrid! And I suppose, after all, the poor man has not got one?"

"If you had allowed me, I should have told you all, Miss Mackenzie.
Mr Maguire is not married, and never has been married, as far as I
know."

"Then I do think what you said of him was very cruel."

"I said nothing; as you would have known, only you are so hot. Miss
Mackenzie, you quite astonish me; you do, indeed. I had expected to
find you temperate and calm; instead of that, you are so impetuous,
that you will not listen to a word. When it first came to my ears
that there might be something between you and Mr Maguire--"

"I will not be told about something. What does something mean, Mrs
Stumfold?"

"When I was told of this," continued Mrs Stumfold, determined that
she would not be stopped any longer by Miss Mackenzie's energy; "when
I was told of this, and, indeed, I may say saw it--"

"You never saw anything, Mrs Stumfold."

"I immediately perceived that it was my duty to come to you; to come
to you and tell you that another lady has a prior claim upon Mr
Maguire's hand and heart."

"Oh, indeed."

"Another young lady,"--with an emphasis on the word young,--"whom he
first met at my house, who was introduced to him by me,--a young lady
not above thirty years of age, and quite suitable in every way to be
Mr Maguire's wife. She may not have quite so much money as you; but
she has a fair provision, and money is not everything; a lady in
every way suitable--"

"But is this suitable young lady, who is only thirty years of age,
engaged to him?"

"I presume, Miss Mackenzie, that in speaking to you, I am speaking to
a lady who would not wish to interfere with another lady who has been
before her. I do hope that you cannot be indifferent to the ordinary
feelings of a female Christian on that subject. What would you think
if you were interfered with, though, perhaps, as you had not your
fortune in early life, you may never have known what that was."

This was too much even for Miss Mackenzie.

"Mrs Stumfold," she said, again rising from her seat, "I won't talk
about this any more with you. Mr Maguire is nothing to me; and, as
far as I can see, if he was, that would be nothing to you."

"But it would,--a great deal."

"No, it wouldn't. You may say what you like to him, though, for the
matter of that, I think it a very indelicate thing for a lady to go
about raising such questions at all. But perhaps you have known him a
long time, and I have nothing to do with what you and he choose to
talk about. If he is behaving bad to any friend of yours, go and tell
him so. As for me, I won't hear anything more about it."

As Miss Mackenzie continued to stand, Mrs Stumfold was forced to
stand also, and soon afterwards found herself compelled to go away.
She had, indeed, said all that she had come to say, and though she
would willingly have repeated it again had Miss Mackenzie been
submissive, she did not find herself encouraged to do so by the
rebellious nature of the lady she was visiting.

"I have meant well, Miss Mackenzie," she said as she took her
leave, "and I hope that I shall see you just the same as ever on my
Thursdays."

To this Miss Mackenzie made answer only by a curtsey, and then Mrs
Stumfold went her way.

Miss Mackenzie, as soon as she was left to herself, began to cry.
If Mrs Stumfold could have seen her, how it would have soothed and
rejoiced that lady's ruffled spirit! Miss Mackenzie would sooner have
died than have wept in Mrs Stumfold's presence, but no sooner was the
front door closed than she began. To have been attacked at all in
that way would have been too much for her, but to have been called
old and unsuitable--for that was, in truth, the case; to hear herself
accused of being courted solely for her money, and that when in truth
she had not been courted at all; to have been informed that a lover
for her must have been impossible in those days when she had no
money! was not all this enough to make her cry? And then, was it the
truth that Mr Maguire ought to marry some one else? If so, she was
the last woman in Littlebath to interfere between him and that other
one. But how was she to know that this was not some villainy on the
part of Mrs Stumfold? She felt sure, after what she had now seen and
heard, that nothing in that way would be too bad for Mrs Stumfold to
say or do. She never would go to Mrs Stumfold's house again; that
was a matter of course; but what should she do about Mr Maguire? Mr
Maguire might never speak to her in the way of affection,--probably
never would do so; that she could bear; but how was she to bear the
fact that every Stumfoldian in Littlebath would know all about it?
On one thing she finally resolved, that if ever Mr Maguire spoke to
her on the subject, she would tell him everything that had occurred.
After that she cried herself to sleep.

On that afternoon she felt herself to be very desolate and much in
want of a friend. When Susanna came back from school in the evening
she was almost more desolate than before. She could say nothing of
her troubles to one so young, nor yet could she shake off the thought
of them. She had been bold enough while Mrs Stumfold had been with
her, but now that she was alone, or almost worse than alone, having
Susanna with her,--now that the reaction had come, she began to tell
herself that a continuation of this solitary life would be impossible
to her. How was she to live if she was to be trampled upon in this
way? Was it not almost necessary that she should leave Littlebath?
And yet if she were to leave Littlebath, whither should she go, and
how should she muster courage to begin everything over again? If only
it had been given her to have one friend,--one female friend to whom
she could have told everything! She thought of Miss Baker, but Miss
Baker was a staunch Stumfoldian; and what did she know of Miss Baker
that gave her any right to trouble Miss Baker on such a subject? She
would almost rather have gone to Miss Todd, if she had dared.

She laid awake crying half the night. Nothing of the kind had
ever occurred to her before. No one had ever accused her of any
impropriety; no one had ever thrown it in her teeth that she was
longing after fruit that ought to be forbidden to her. In her former
obscurity and dependence she had been safe. Now that she had begun
to look about her and hope for joy in the world, she had fallen into
this terrible misfortune! Would it not have been better for her to
have married her cousin John Ball, and thus have had a clear course
of duty marked out for her? Would it not have been better for her
even to have married Harry Handcock than to have come to this misery?
What good would her money do her, if the world was to treat her in
this way?

And then, was it true? Was it the fact that Mr Maguire was
ill-treating some other woman in order that he might get her money?
In all her misery she remembered that Mrs Stumfold would not commit
herself to any such direct assertion, and she remembered also
that Mrs Stumfold had especially insisted on her own part of the
grievance,--on the fact that the suitable young lady had been met by
Mr Maguire in her drawing-room. As to Mr Maguire himself, she could
reconcile herself to the loss of him. Indeed she had never yet
reconciled herself to the idea of taking him. But she could not
endure to think that Mrs Stumfold's interference should prevail, or,
worse still, that other people should have supposed it to prevail.

The next day was Thursday,--one of Mrs Stumfold's Thursdays,--and in
the course of the morning Miss Baker came to her, supposing that, as
a matter of course, she would go to the meeting.

"Not to-night, Miss Baker," said she.

"Not going! and why not?"

"I'd rather not go out to-night."

"Dear me, how odd. I thought you always went to Mrs Stumfold's.
There's nothing wrong, I hope?"

Then Miss Mackenzie could not restrain herself, and told Miss Baker
everything. And she told her story, not with whines and lamentations,
as she had thought of it herself while lying awake during the past
night, but with spirited indignation. "What right had she to come to
me and accuse me?"

"I suppose she meant it for the best," said Miss Baker.

"No, Miss Baker, she meant it for the worst. I am sorry to speak
so of your friend, but I must speak as I find her. She intended to
insult me. Why did she tell me of my age and my money? Have I made
myself out to be young? or misbehaved myself with the means which
Providence has given me? And as to the gentleman, have I ever
conducted myself so as to merit reproach? I don't know that I was
ever ten minutes in his company that you were not there also."

"It was the last accusation I should have brought against you,"
whimpered Miss Baker.

"Then why has she treated me in this way? What right have I given her
to be my advisor, because I go to her husband's church? Mr Maguire
is my friend, and it might have come to that, that he should be my
husband. Is there any sin in that, that I should be rebuked?"

"It was for the other lady's sake, perhaps."

"Then let her go to the other lady, or to him. She has forgotten
herself in coming to me, and she shall know that I think so."

Miss Baker, when she left the Paragon, felt for Miss Mackenzie more
of respect and more of esteem also than she had ever felt before. But
Miss Mackenzie, when she was left alone, went upstairs, threw herself
on her bed, and was again dissolved in tears.


CHAPTER XIII

Mr Maguire's Courtship


After the scene between Miss Mackenzie and Miss Baker more than
a week passed by before Miss Mackenzie saw any of her Littlebath
friends; or, as she called them with much sadness when speaking of
them to herself, her Littlebath acquaintances. Friends, or friend,
she had none. It was a slow, heavy week with her, and it is hardly
too much to say that every hour in it was spent in thinking of the
attack which Mrs Stumfold had made upon her. When the first Sunday
came, she went to church, and saw there Miss Baker, and Mrs Stumfold,
and Mr Stumfold and Mr Maguire. She saw, indeed, many Stumfoldians,
but it seemed that their eyes looked at her harshly, and she was
quite sure that the coachmaker's wife treated her with marked
incivility as they left the porch together. Miss Baker had frequently
waited for her on Sunday mornings, and walked the length of two
streets with her; but she encountered no Miss Baker near the church
gate on this morning, and she was sure that Mrs Stumfold had
prevailed against her. If it was to be thus with her, had she not
better leave Littlebath as soon as possible? In the same solitude she
lived the whole of the next week; with the same feelings did she go
to church on the next Sunday; and then again was she maltreated by
the upturned nose and half-averted eyes of the coachmaker's wife.

Life such as this would be impossible to her. Let any of my readers
think of it, and then tell themselves whether it could be possible.
Mariana's solitude in the moated grange was as nothing to hers. In
granges, and such like rural retreats, people expect solitude; but
Miss Mackenzie had gone to Littlebath to find companionship. Had she
been utterly disappointed, and found none, that would have been bad;
but she had found it and then lost it. Mariana, in her desolateness,
was still waiting for the coming of some one; and so was Miss
Mackenzie waiting, though she hardly knew for whom. For me, if I am
to live in a moated grange, let it be in the country. Moated granges
in the midst of populous towns are very terrible.

But on the Monday morning,--the morning of the second Monday after
the Stumfoldian attach,--Mr Maguire came, and Mariana's weariness
was, for the time, at an end. Susanna had hardly gone, and the
breakfast things were still on the table, when the maid brought her
up word that Mr Maguire was below, and would see her if she would
allow him to come up. She had heard no ring at the bell, and having
settled herself with a novel in the arm-chair, had almost ceased
for the moment to think of Mr Maguire or of Mrs Stumfold. There was
something so sudden in the request now made to her, that it took away
her breath.

"Mr Maguire, Miss, the clergyman from Mr Stumfold's church," said the
girl again.

It was necessary that she should give an answer, though she was ever
so breathless.

"Ask Mr Maguire to walk up," she said; and then she began to bethink
herself how she would behave to him.

He was there, however, before her thoughts were of much service to
her, and she began by apologising for the breakfast things.

"It is I that ought to beg your pardon for coming so early," said he;
"but my time at present is so occupied that I hardly know how to find
half an hour for myself; and I thought you would excuse me."

"Oh, certainly," said she; and then sitting down she waited for him
to begin.

It would have been clear to any observer, had there been one present,
that Mr Maguire had practised his lesson. He could not rid himself
of those unmistakable signs of preparation which every speaker shows
when he has been guilty of them. But this probably did not matter
with Miss Mackenzie, who was too intent on the part she herself had
to play to notice his imperfections.

"I saw that you observed, Miss Mackenzie," he said, "that I kept
aloof from you on the two last evenings on which I met you at Mrs
Stumfold's."

"That's a long time ago, Mr Maguire," she answered. "It's nearly a
month since I went to Mrs Stumfold's house."

"I know that you were not there on the last Thursday. I noticed it.
I could not fail to notice it. Thinking so much of you as I do, of
course I did notice it. Might I ask you why you did not go?"

"I'd rather not say anything about it," she replied, after a pause.

"Then there has been some reason? Dear Miss Mackenzie, I can assure
you I do not ask you without a cause."

"If you please, I will not speak upon that subject. I had much rather
not, indeed, Mr Maguire."

"And shall I not have the pleasure of seeing you there on next
Thursday?"

"Certainly not."

"Then you have quarrelled with her, Miss Mackenzie?"

He said nothing now of the perfections of that excellent woman, of
whom not long since he had spoken in terms almost too strong for any
simple human virtues.

"I'd rather not speak of it. It can't do any good. I don't know why
you should ask me whether I intend to go there any more, but as you
have, I have answered you."

Then Mr Maguire got up from his chair, and walked about the room,
and Miss Mackenzie, watching him closely, could see that he was
much moved. But, nevertheless, I think he had made up his mind to
walk about the room beforehand. After a while he paused, and, still
standing, spoke to her again across the table.

"May I ask you this question? Has Mrs Stumfold said anything to you
about me?"

"I'd rather not talk about Mrs Stumfold."

"But, surely, I may ask that. I don't think you are the woman to
allow anything said behind a person's back to be received to his
detriment."

"Whatever one does hear about people one always hears behind their
backs."

"Then she has told you something, and you have believed it?"

She felt herself to be so driven by him that she did not know how
to protect herself. It seemed to her that these clerical people of
Littlebath had very little regard for the feelings of others in their
modes of following their own pursuits.

"She has told you something of me, and you have believed her?"
repeated Mr Maguire. "Have I not a right to ask you what she has
said?"

"You have no right to ask me anything."

"Have I not, Miss Mackenzie? Surely that is hard. Is it not hard that
I should be stabbed in the dark, and have no means of redressing
myself? I did not expect such an answer from you;--indeed I did not."

"And is not it hard that I should be troubled in this way? You talk
of stabbing. Who has stabbed you? Is it not your own particular
friend, whom you described to me as the best person in all the world?
If you and she fall out why should I be brought into it? Once for
all, Mr Maguire, I won't be brought into it."

Now he sat down and again paused before he went on with his talk.

"Miss Mackenzie," he said, when he did speak. "I had not intended to
be so abrupt as I fear you will think me in that which I am about to
say; but I believe you will like plain measures best."

"Certainly I shall, Mr Maguire."

"They are the best, always. If, then, I am plain with you, will you
be plain with me also? I think you must guess what it is I have to
say to you."

"I hate guessing anything, Mr Maguire."

"Very well; then I will be plain. We have now known each other for
nearly a year, Miss Mackenzie."

"A year, is it? No, not a year. This is the beginning of June, and
I did not come here till the end of last August. It's about nine
months, Mr Maguire."

"Very well; nine months. Nine months may be as nothing in an
acquaintance, or it may lead to the closest friendship."

"I don't know that we have met so very often. You have the parish to
attend to, Mr Maguire."

"Of course I have--or rather I had, for I have left Mr Stumfold."

"Left Mr Stumfold! Why, I heard you preach yesterday."

"I did preach yesterday, and shall till he has got another assistant.
But he and I are parted as regards all friendly connection."

"But isn't that a pity?"

"Miss Mackenzie, I don't mind telling you that I have found it
impossible to put up with the impertinence of that woman"--and
now, as he spoke, there came a distorted fire out of his imperfect
eye--"impossible! If you knew what I have gone through in attempting
it! But that's over. I have the greatest respect for him in the
world; a very thorough esteem. He is a hard-working man, and though
I do not always approve the style of his wit,--of which, by-the-bye,
he thinks too much himself,--still I acknowledge him to be a good
spiritual pastor. But he has been unfortunate in his marriage. No
doubt he has got money, but money is not everything."

"Indeed, it is not, Mr Maguire."

"How he can live in the same house with that Mr Peters, I can
never understand. The quarrels between him and his daughter are so
incessant that poor Mr Stumfold is unable to conceal them from the
public."

"But you have spoken so highly of her."

"I have endeavoured, Miss Mackenzie--I have endeavoured to think well
of her. I have striven to believe that it was all gold that I saw.
But let that pass. I was forced to tell you that I am going to leave
Mr Stumfold's church, or I should not now have spoken about her or
him. And now comes the question, Miss Mackenzie."

"What is the question, Mr Maguire?"

"Miss Mackenzie--Margaret, will you share your lot with mine? It is
true that you have money. It is true that I have none,--not even a
curacy now. But I don't think that any such consideration as that
would weigh with you for a moment, if you can find it in your heart
to love me."

Miss Mackenzie sat thinking for some minutes before she gave her
answer--or striving to think; but she was so completely under the
terrible fire of his eye, that any thought was very difficult.

"I am not quite sure about that," she said after a while. "I think,
Mr Maguire, that there should be a little money on both sides. You
would hardly wish to live altogether on your wife's fortune."

"I have my profession," he replied, quickly.

"Yes, certainly; and a noble profession it is,--the most noble," said
she.

"Yes, indeed; the most noble."

"But somehow--"

"You mean the clergymen are not paid as they should be. No, they are
not, Miss Mackenzie. And is it not a shame for a Christian country
like this that it should be so? But still, as a profession, it has
its value. Look at Mrs Stumfold; where would she be if she were not a
clergyman's wife? The position has its value. A clergyman's wife is
received everywhere, you know."

"A man before he talks of marriage ought to have something of his
own, Mr Maguire, besides--"

"Besides what?"

"Well, I'll tell you. As you have done me this honour, I think that
I am now bound to tell you what Mrs Stumfold said to me. She had
no right to connect my name with yours or with that of any other
gentleman, and my quarrel with her is about that. As to what she said
about you, that is your affair and not mine."

Then she told him the whole of that conversation which was given in
the last chapter, not indeed repeating the hint about the three or
four wives, but recapitulating as clearly as she could all that had
been said about the suitable young lady.

"I knew it," said he; "I knew it. I knew it as well as though I had
heard it. Now what am I to think of that woman, Miss Mackenzie?"

"Of which woman?"

"Of Mrs Stumfold, of course. It's all jealousy: every bit of it
jealousy."

"Jealousy! Do you mean that she--that she--"

"Not jealousy of that kind, Miss Mackenzie. Oh dear, no. She's as
pure as the undriven snow, I should say, as far as that goes. But she
can't bear to think that I should rise in the world."

"I thought she wanted to marry you to a suitable lady, and young,
with a fair provision."

"Pshaw! The lady has about seventy pounds a-year! But that would
signify nothing if I loved her, Miss Mackenzie."

"There has been something, then?"

"Yes; there has been something. That is, nothing of my
doing,--nothing on earth. Miss Mackenzie, I am as innocent as the
babe unborn."

As he said this she could not help looking into the horrors of his
eyes, and thinking that innocent was not the word for him.

"I'm as innocent as the babe unborn. Why should I be expected to
marry a lady merely because Mrs Stumfold tells me that there she is?
And it's my belief that old Peters has got their money somewhere, and
won't give it up, and that that's the reason of it."

"But did you ever say you would marry her?"

"What! Miss Floss, never! I'll tell you the whole story, Miss
Mackenzie; and if you want to ask any one else, you can ask Mrs
Perch." Mrs Perch was the coachbuilder's wife. "You've seen Miss
Floss at Mrs Stumfold's, and must know yourself whether I ever
noticed her any more than to be decently civil."

"Is she the lady that's so thin and tall?"

"Yes."

"With the red hair?"

"Well, it's sandy, certainly. I shouldn't call it just red myself."

"Some people like red hair, you know," said Miss Mackenzie, thinking
of the suitable lady. Miss Mackenzie was willing at that moment to
forfeit all her fortune if Miss Floss was not older than she was!
"And that is Miss Floss, is it?"

"Yes, and I don't blame Mrs Stumfold for wishing to get a husband for
her friend, but it is hard upon me."

"Really, Mr Maguire, I think that perhaps you couldn't do better."

"Better than what?"

"Better than take Miss Floss. As you say, some people like red hair.
And she is very suitable, certainly. And, Mr Maguire, I really
shouldn't like to interfere;--I shouldn't indeed."

"Miss Mackenzie, you're joking, I know."

"Not in the least, Mr Maguire. You see there has been something about
it."

"There has been nothing."

"There's never smoke without fire; and I don't think a lady like Mrs
Stumfold would come here and tell me all that she did, if it hadn't
gone some way. And you owned just now that you admired her."

"I never owned anything of the kind. I don't admire her a bit. Admire
her! Oh, Miss Mackenzie, what do you think of me?"

Miss Mackenzie said that she really didn't know what to think.

Then, having as he thought altogether disposed of Miss Floss, he
began again to press his suit. And she was weak; for though she gave
him no positive encouragement, neither did she give him any positive
denial. Her mind was by no means made up, and she did not know
whether she wished to take him or to leave him. Now that the thing
had come so near, what guarantee had she that he would be good to
her if she gave him everything that she possessed? As to her cousin
John Ball, she would have had many guarantees. Of him she could say
that she knew what sort of a man he was; but what did she know of
Mr Maguire? At that moment, as he sat there pleading his own cause
with all the eloquence at his command, she remembered that she did
not even know his Christian name. He had always in her presence been
called Mr Maguire. How could she say that she loved a man whose very
name she had not as yet heard?

But still, if she left all her chances to run from her, what other
fate would she have but that of being friendless all her life? Of
course she must risk much if she was ever minded to change her mode
of life. She had said something to him as to the expediency of there
being money on both sides, but as she said it she knew that she would
willingly have given up her money could she only have been sure of
her man. Was not her income enough for both? What she wanted was
companionship, and love if it might be possible; but if not love,
then friendship. This, had she known where she could purchase it with
certainty, she would willingly have purchased with all her wealth.

"If I have surprised you, will you say that you will take time to
think of it?" pleaded Mr Maguire.

Miss Mackenzie, speaking in the lowest possible voice, said that she
would take time to think of it.

When a lady says that she will take time to think of such a
proposition, the gentleman is generally justified in supposing that
he has carried his cause. When a lady rejects a suitor, she should
reject him peremptorily. Anything short of such peremptory reaction
is taken for acquiescence. Mr Maguire consequently was elated, called
her Margaret, and swore that he loved her as he had never loved woman
yet.

"And when may I come again?" he asked.

Miss Mackenzie begged that she might be allowed a fortnight to think
of it.

"Certainly," said the happy man.

"And you must not be surprised," said Miss Mackenzie, "if I make some
inquiry about Miss Floss."

"Any inquiry you please," said Mr Maguire. "It is all in that woman's
brain; it is indeed. Miss Floss, perhaps, has thought of it; but I
can't help that, can I? I can't help what has been said to her. But
if you mean anything as to a promise from me, Margaret, on my word
as a Christian minister of the Gospel, there has been nothing of the
kind."

She did not much mind his calling her Margaret; it was in itself such
a trifle; but when he made a fuss about kissing her hand it annoyed
her.

"Only your hand," he said, beseeching the privilege.

"Pshaw," she said, "what's the good?"

She had sense enough to feel that with such lovemaking as that
between her and her lover there should be no kissing till after
marriage; or at any rate, no kissing of hands, as is done between
handsome young men of twenty-three and beautiful young ladies of
eighteen, when they sit in balconies on moonlight nights. A good
honest kiss, mouth to mouth, might not be amiss when matters were
altogether settled; but when she thought of this, she thought also of
his eye and shuddered. His eye was not his fault, and a man should
not be left all his days without a wife because he squints; but
still, was it possible? could she bring herself to endure it?

He did kiss her hand, however, and then went. As he stood at the door
he looked back fondly and exclaimed--

"On Monday fortnight, Margaret; on Monday fortnight."

"Goodness gracious, Mr Maguire," she answered, "do shut the door;"
and then he vanished.

As soon as he was gone she remembered that his name was Jeremiah. She
did not know how she had learned it, but she knew that such was the
fact. If it did come to pass how was she to call him? She tried the
entire word Jeremiah, but it did not seem to answer. She tried Jerry
also, but that was worse. Jerry might have been very well had they
come together fifteen years earlier in life, but she did not think
that she could call him Jerry now. She supposed it must be Mr
Maguire; but if so, half the romance of the thing would be gone at
once!

She felt herself to be very much at sea, and almost wished that she
might be like Mariana again, waiting and aweary, so grievous was
the necessity of having to make up her mind on such a subject. To
whom should she go for advice? She had told him that she would make
further inquiries about Miss Floss, but of whom was she to make them?
The only person to whom she could apply was Miss Baker, and she
was almost sure that Miss Baker would despise her for thinking of
marrying Mr Maguire.

But after a day or two she did tell Miss Baker, and she saw at
once that Miss Baker did despise her. But Miss Baker, though she
manifestly did despise her, promised her some little aid. Miss Todd
knew everything and everybody. Might Miss Baker tell Miss Todd?
If there was anything wrong, Miss Todd would ferret it out to a
certainty. Miss Mackenzie, hanging down her head, said that Miss
Baker might tell Miss Todd. Miss Baker, when she left Miss Mackenzie,
turned at once into Miss Todd's house, and found her friend at home.

"It surprises me that any woman should be so foolish," said Miss
Baker.

"Come, come, my dear, don't you be hard upon her. We have all been
foolish in our days. Do you remember, when Sir Lionel used to be
here, how foolish you and I were?"

"It's not the same thing at all," said Miss Baker. "Did you ever see
a man with such an eye as he has got?"

"I shouldn't mind his eye, my dear; only I'm afraid he's got no
money."

Miss Todd, however, promised to make inquiries, and declared her
intention of communicating what intelligence she might obtain direct
to Miss Mackenzie. Miss Baker resisted this for a little while,
but ultimately submitted, as she was wont to do, to the stronger
character of her friend.

Miss Mackenzie had declared that she must have a fortnight to
think about it, and Miss Todd therefore knew that she had nearly a
fortnight for her inquiries. The reader may be sure that she did not
allow the grass to grow under her feet. With Miss Mackenzie the time
passed slowly enough, for she could only sit on her sofa and doubt,
resolving first one way and then another; but Miss Todd went about
Littlebath, here and there, among friends and enemies, filling up all
her time; and before the end of the fortnight she certainly knew more
about Mr Maguire than did anybody else in Littlebath.

She did not see Miss Mackenzie till the Saturday, the last Saturday
before the all-important Monday; but on that day she went to her.

"I suppose you know what I'm come about, my dear," she said.

Miss Mackenzie blushed, and muttered something about Miss Baker.

"Yes, my dear; Miss Baker was speaking to me about Mr Maguire. You
needn't mind speaking out to me, Miss Mackenzie. I can understand all
about it; and if I can be of any assistance, I shall be very happy.
No doubt you feel a little shy, but you needn't mind with me."

"I'm sure you're very good."

"I don't know about that, but I hope I'm not very bad. The long and
the short of it is, I suppose, that you think you might as
well--might as well take Mr Maguire."

Miss Mackenzie felt thoroughly ashamed of herself. She could not
explain to Miss Todd all her best motives; and then, those motives
which were not the best were made to seem so very weak and mean by
the way in which Miss Todd approached them. When she thought of the
matter alone, it seemed to her that she was perfectly reasonable in
wishing to be married, in order that she might escape the monotony of
a lonely life; and she thought that if she could talk to Miss Todd
about the subject gently, for a quarter of an hour at a time every
day for two or three months, it was possible that she might explain
her views with credit to herself; but how could she do this to anyone
so very abruptly? She could only confess that she did want to marry
the man, as the child confesses her longing for a tart.

"I have thought about it, certainly," she said.

"Quite right," said Miss Todd; "quite right if you like him. Now for
me, I'm so fond of my own money and my own independence, that I've
never had a fancy that way,--not since I was a girl."

"But you're so different, Miss Todd; you've got such a position of
your own."

And Miss Mackenzie, who was at present desirous of marrying a very
strict evangelical clergyman, thought with envy of the social
advantages and pleasant iniquities of her wicked neighbour.

"Oh, I don't know. I've a few friends, but that comes of being here
so long. And then, you see, I ain't particular as you are. I always
see that when a lady goes in to be evangelical, she soon finds a
husband to take care of her; that is, if she has got any money. It
all goes on very well, and I've no doubt they're right. There's my
friend Mary Baker, she's single still; but then she began very late
in life. Now about Mr Maguire."

"Well, Miss Todd."

"In the first place, I really don't think he has got much that he can
call his own."

"He hasn't got anything, Miss Todd; he told me so himself."

"Did he, indeed?" said Miss Todd; "then let me tell you he is a deal
honester than they are in general."

"Oh, he told me that. I know he's got no income in the world besides
his curacy, and that he has thrown up."

"And therefore you are going to give him yours."

"I don't know about that, Miss Todd; but it wasn't about money that
I was doubting. What I've got is enough for both of us, if his wants
are not greater than mine. What is the use of money if people cannot
be happy together with it? I don't care a bit for money, Miss Todd;
that is, not for itself. I shouldn't like to be dependent on a
stranger; I don't know that I would like to be dependent again even
on a brother; but I should take no shame to be dependent on a husband
if he was good to me."

"That's just it; isn't it?"

"There's quite enough for him and me."

"I must say you look at the matter in the most disinterested way. I
couldn't bring myself to take it up like that."

"You haven't lived the life that I have, Miss Todd, and I don't
suppose you ever feel solitary as I do."

"Well, I don't know. We single women have to be solitary
sometimes--and sometimes sad."

"But you're never sad, Miss Todd."

"Have you never heard there are some animals, that, when they're
sick, crawl into holes, and don't ever show themselves among the
other animals? Though it is only the animals that do it, there's a
pride in that which I like. What's the good of complaining if one's
down in the mouth? When one gets old and heavy and stupid, one can't
go about as one did when one was young; and other people won't care
to come to you as they did then."

"But I had none of that when I was young, Miss Todd."

"Hadn't you? Then I won't say but what you may be right to try and
begin now. But, law! what am I talking of? I am old enough to be your
mother."

"I think it so kind of you to talk to me at all."

"Well, now about Mr Maguire. I don't think he's possessed of much of
the fat of the land; but that you say you know already?"

"Oh yes, I know all that."

"And it seems he has lost his curacy?"

"He threw that up himself."

"I shouldn't be surprised--but mind I don't say this for certain--but
I shouldn't be surprised if he owed a little money."

Miss Mackenzie's face became rather long.

"What do you call a little, Miss Todd?"

"Two or three hundred pounds. I don't call that a great deal."

"Oh dear, no!" and Miss Mackenzie's face again became cheerful. "That
could be settled without any trouble."

"Upon my word you are the most generous woman I ever saw."

"No, I'm not that."

"Or else you must be very much in love?"

"I don't think I am that either, Miss Todd; only I don't care much
about money if other things are suitable. What I chiefly wanted to
know was--"

"About that Miss Floss?"

"Yes, Miss Todd."

"My belief is there never was a greater calumny, or what I should
call a stronger attempt at a do. Mind I don't think much of your St
Stumfolda, and never did. I believe the poor man has never said a
word to the woman. Mrs Stumfold has put it into her head that she
could have Mr Maguire if she chose to set her cap at him, and, I dare
say, Miss Floss has been dutiful to her saint. But, Miss Mackenzie,
if nothing else hinders you, don't let that hinder you." Then Miss
Todd, having done her business and made her report, took her leave.

This was on Saturday. The next day would be Sunday, and then on the
following morning she must make her answer. All that she had heard
about Mr Maguire was, to her thinking, in his favour. As to his
poverty, that he had declared himself, and that she did not mind. As
to a few hundred pounds of debt, how was a poor man to have helped
such a misfortune? In that matter of Miss Floss he had been basely
maligned,--so much maligned, that Miss Mackenzie owed him all her
sympathy. What excuse could she now have for refusing him?

When she went to bed on the Sunday night such were her thoughts and
her feelings.


CHAPTER XIV

Tom Mackenzie's Bed-Side


There was a Stumfoldian edict, ultra-Median-and-Persian in its
strictness, ordaining that no Stumfoldian in Littlebath should be
allowed to receive a letter on Sundays. And there also existed a
coordinate rule on the part of the Postmaster-General,--or, rather,
a privilege granted by that functionary,--in accordance with which
Stumfoldians, and other such sects of Sabbatarians, were empowered
to prohibit the letter-carriers from contaminating their special
knockers on Sunday mornings. Miss Mackenzie had given way to this
easily, seeing nothing amiss in the edict, and not caring much for
her Sunday letters. In consequence, she received on the Monday
mornings those letters which were due to her on Sundays, and on this
special Monday morning she received a letter, as to which the delay
was of much consequence. It was to tell her that her brother Tom was
dying, and to pray that she would be up in London as early on the
Monday as was practicable. Mr Samuel Rubb, junior, who had written
the letter in Gower Street, had known nothing of the Sabbatical
edicts of the Stumfoldians.

"It is an inward tumour," said Mr Rubb, "and has troubled him long,
though he has said nothing about it. It is now breaking, and the
doctor says he can't live. He begs that you will come to him, as he
has very much to say to you. Mrs Tom would have written, but she is
so much taken up, and is so much beside herself, that she begs me to
say that she is not able; but I hope it won't be less welcome coming
from me. The second pair back will be ready for you, just as if it
were your own. I would be waiting at the station on Monday, if I knew
what train you would come by."

This she received while at breakfast on the Monday morning, having
sat down a little earlier than usual, in order that the tea-things
might be taken away so as to make room for Mr Maguire.

Of course she must go up to town instantly, by the first practicable
train. She perceived at once that she would have to send a message by
telegraph, as they would have expected to hear from her that morning.
She got the railway guide, and saw that the early express train had
already gone. There was, however, a mid-day train which would reach
Paddington in the afternoon. She immediately got her bonnet and went
off to the telegraph office, leaving word with the servant, that
if any one called "he" was to be told that she had received sudden
tidings which took her up to London. On her return she found that
"he" had not been there yet, and now she could only hope that he
would not come till after she had started. It would, of course, be
impossible, at such a moment as this, to make any answer to such a
proposition as Mr Maguire's.

He came, and when the servant gave him the message at the door, he
sent up craving permission to see her but for a moment. She could not
refuse him, and went down to him in the drawing-room, with her shawl
and bonnet.

"Dearest Margaret," said he, "what is this?" and he took both her
hands.

"I have received word that my brother, in London, is very ill,--that
he is dying, and I must go to him."

He still held her hands, standing close to her, as though he had some
special right to comfort her.

"Cannot I go with you?" he said. "Let me; do let me."

"Oh, no, Mr Maguire; it is impossible. What could you do? I am going
to my brother's house."

"But have I not a right to be of help to you at such a time?" he
asked.

"No, Mr Maguire; no right; certainly none as yet."

"Oh! Margaret."

"I'm sure you will see that I cannot talk of anything of that sort
now."

"But you will not be back for ever so long."

"I cannot tell."

"Oh! Margaret; you will not leave me in suspense? After bidding me
wait a fortnight, you will not go away without telling me that you
will be mine when you come back? One word will do it."

"Mr Maguire, you really must excuse me now."

"One word, Margaret; only one word," and he still held her.

"Mr Maguire," she said, tearing her hand from him, "I am astonished
at you. I tell you that my brother is dying and you hold me here, and
expect me to give you an answer about nonsense. I thought you were
more manly."

He saw that there was a flash in her eye as he stepped back; so he
begged her pardon, and muttering something about hoping to hear from
her soon, took his leave. Poor man! I do not see why she should not
have accepted him, as she had made up her mind to do so. And to him,
with his creditors, and in his present position, any certainty in
this matter would have made so much difference!

At the Paddington station Miss Mackenzie was met by her other lover,
Mr Rubb. Mr Rubb, however, had never yet declared himself as holding
this position, and did not do so on the present occasion. Their
conversation in the cab was wholly concerning her brother's state, or
nearly so. It seemed that there was no hope. Mr Rubb said that very
clearly. As to time the doctor would say nothing certain; but he had
declared that it might occur any day. The patient could never leave
his bed again; but as his constitution was strong, he might remain in
his present condition some weeks. He did not suffer much pain, or, at
any rate, did not complain of much; but was very sad. Then Mr Rubb
said one other word.

"I am afraid he is thinking of his wife and children."

"Would there be nothing for them out of the business?" asked Miss
Mackenzie.

The junior partner at first shook his head, saying nothing. After a
few minutes he did speak in a low voice. "If there be anything, it
will be very little,--very little."

Miss Mackenzie was rejoiced that she had given no definite promise to
Mr Maguire. There seemed to be now a job for her to do in the world
which would render it quite unnecessary that she should look about
for a husband. If her brother's widow were left penniless, with seven
children, there would be no longer much question as to what she would
do with her money. Perhaps the only person in the world that she
cordially disliked was her sister-in-law. She certainly knew no other
woman whose society would be so unpalatable to her. But if things
were so as Mr Rubb now described them, there could be no doubt about
her duty. It was very well indeed that her answer to Mr Maguire had
been postponed to that Monday.

She found her sister-in-law in the dining-room, and Mrs Mackenzie, of
course, received her with a shower of tears. "I did think you would
have come, Margaret, by the first train."

Then Margaret was forced to explain all about the letter and the
Sunday arrangements at Littlebath; and Mrs Tom was stupid and
wouldn't understand, but persisted in her grievance, declaring that
Tom was killing himself with disappointment.

"And there's Dr Slumpy just this moment gone without a word to
comfort one,--not even to say about when it will be. I suppose you'll
want your dinner before you go up to see him. As for us we've had no
dinners, or anything regular; but, of course, you must be waited on."
Miss Mackenzie simply took off her bonnet and shawl, and declared
herself ready to go upstairs as soon as her brother would be ready to
see her.

"It's fret about money has done it all, Margaret," said the wife.
"Since the day that Walter's shocking will was read, he's never been
himself for an hour. Of course he wouldn't show it to you; but he
never has."

Margaret turned short round upon her sister-in-law on the stairs.

"Sarah," said she, and then she stopped herself. "Never mind; it is
natural, no doubt, you should feel it; but there are times and places
when one's feelings should be kept under control."

"That's mighty fine," said Mrs Mackenzie; "but, however, if you'll
wait here, I'll go up to him."

In a few minutes more Miss Mackenzie was standing by her brother's
bedside, holding his hand in hers.

"I knew you would come, Margaret," he said.

"Of course I should come; who doubted it? But never mind that, for
here I am."

"I only told her that we expected her by the earlier train," said Mrs
Tom.

"Never mind the train as long as she's here," said Tom. "You've heard
how it is with me, Margaret?"

Then Margaret buried her face in the bed-clothes and wept, and Mrs
Tom, weeping also, hid herself behind the curtains.

There was nothing said then about money or the troubles of the
business, and after a while the two women went down to tea. In the
dining-room they found Mr Rubb, who seemed to be quite at home in the
house. Cold meat was brought up for Margaret's dinner, and they all
sat down to one of those sad sick-house meals which he or she who has
not known must have been lucky indeed. To Margaret it was nothing
new. All the life that she remembered, except the last year, had been
spent in nursing her other brother; and now to be employed about the
bed-side of a sufferer was as natural to her as the air she breathed.

"I will sit with him to-night, Sarah, if you will let me," she said;
and Sarah assented.

It was still daylight when she found herself at her post. Mrs
Mackenzie had just left the room to go down among the children,
saying that she would return again before she left him for the night.
To this the invalid remonstrated, begging his wife to go to bed.

"She has not had her clothes off for the last week," said the
husband.

"It don't matter about my clothes," said Mrs Tom, still weeping. She
was always crying when in the sick room, and always scolding when
out of it; thus complying with the two different requisitions of her
nature. The matter, however, was settled by an assurance on her part
that she would go to bed, so that she might be stirring early.

There are women who seem to have an absolute pleasure in fixing
themselves for business by the bedside of a sick man. They generally
commence their operations by laying aside all fictitious feminine
charms, and by arraying themselves with a rigid, unconventional,
unenticing propriety. Though they are still gentle,--perhaps more
gentle than ever in their movements,--there is a decision in all they
do very unlike their usual mode of action. The sick man, who is not
so sick but what he can ponder on the matter, feels himself to be
like a baby, whom he has seen the nurse to take from its cradle, pat
on the back, feed, and then return to its little couch, all without
undue violence or tyranny, but still with a certain consciousness of
omnipotence as far as that child was concerned. The vitality of the
man is gone from him, and he, in his prostrate condition, debarred
by all the features of his condition from spontaneous exertion,
feels himself to be more a woman than the woman herself. She, if
she be such a one as our Miss Mackenzie, arranges her bottles with
precision; knows exactly how to place her chair, her lamp, and her
teapot; settles her cap usefully on her head, and prepares for the
night's work certainly with satisfaction. And such are the best women
of the world,--among which number I think that Miss Mackenzie has a
right to be counted.

A few words of affection were spoken between the brother and
sister, for at such moments brotherly affection returns, and the
estrangements of life are all forgotten in the old memories. He
seemed comforted to feel her hand upon the bed, and was glad to
pronounce her name, and spoke to her as though she had been the
favourite of the family for years, instead of the one member of
it who had been snubbed and disregarded. Poor man, who shall say
that there was anything hypocritical or false in this? And yet,
undoubtedly, it was the fact that Margaret was now the only wealthy
one among them, which had made him send to her, and think of her, as
he lay there in his sickness.

When these words of love had been spoken, he turned himself on his
pillow, and lay silent for a long while,--for hours, till the morning
sun had risen, and the daylight was again seen through the window
curtain. It was not much after midsummer, and the daylight came to
them early. From time to time she had looked at him, and each hour
in the night she had crept round to him, and given him that which he
needed. She did it all with a certain system, noiselessly, but with
an absolute assurance on her own part that she carried with her an
authority sufficient to ensure obedience. On that ground, in that
place, I think that even Miss Todd would have succumbed to her.

But when the morning sun had driven the appearance of night from the
room, making the paraphernalia of sickness more ghastly than they had
been under the light of the lamp, the brother turned himself back
again, and began to talk of those things which were weighing on his
mind.

"Margaret," he said, "it's very good of you to come, but as to
myself, no one's coming can be of any use to me."

"It is all in the hands of God, Tom."

"No doubt, no doubt," said he, sadly, not daring to argue such a
point with her, and yet feeling but little consolation from her
assurance. "So is the bullock in God's hands when the butcher is
going to knock him on the head, but yet we know that the beast
will die. Men live and die from natural causes, and not by God's
interposition."

"But there is hope; that is what I mean. If God pleases--"

"Ah, well. But, Margaret, I fear that he will not please; and what am
I to do about Sarah and the children?"

This was a question that could be answered by no general
platitude,--by no weak words of hopeless consolation. Coming from
him to her, it demanded either a very substantial answer, or else
no answer at all. What was he to do about Sarah and the children?
Perhaps there came a thought across her mind that Sarah and the
children had done very little for her,--had considered her very
little, in those old, weary days, in Arundel Street. And those days
were not, as yet, so very old. It was now not much more than twelve
months since she had sat by the deathbed of her other brother,--since
she had expressed to herself, and to Harry Handcock, a humble wish
that she might find herself to be above absolute want.

"I do not think you need fret about that, Tom," she said, after
turning these things over in her mind for a minute or two.

"How, not fret about them? But I suppose you know nothing of the
state of the business. Has Rubb spoken to you?"

"He did say some word as we came along in the cab."

"What did he say?"

"He said--"

"Well, tell me what he said. He said, that if I died--what then? You
must not be afraid of speaking of it openly. Why, Margaret, they have
all told me that it must be in a month or two. What did Rubb say?"

"He said that there would be very little coming out of the
business--that is, for Sarah and the children--if anything were to
happen to you."

"I don't suppose they'd get anything. How it has been managed I don't
know. I have worked like a galley slave at it, but I haven't kept the
books, and I don't know how things have gone so badly. They have gone
badly,--very badly."

"Has it been Mr Rubb's fault?"

"I won't say that; and, indeed, if it has been any man's fault it has
been the old man's. I don't want to say a word against the one that
you know. Oh, Margaret!"

"Don't fret yourself now, Tom."

"If you had seven children, would not you fret yourself? And I hardly
know how to speak to you about it. I know that we have already had
ever so much of your money, over two thousand pounds; and I fear you
will never see it again."

"Never mind, Tom; it is yours, with all my heart. Only, Tom, as it is
so badly wanted, I would rather it was yours than Mr Rubb's. Could I
not do something that would make that share of the building yours?"

He shifted himself uneasily in his bed, and made her understand that
she had distressed him.

"But perhaps it will be better to say nothing more about that," said
she.

"It will be better that you should understand it all. The property
belongs nominally to us, but it is mortgaged to the full of its
value. Rubb can explain it all, if he will. Your money went to buy
it, but other creditors would not be satisfied without security. Ah,
dear! it is so dreadful to have to speak of all this in this way."

"Then don't speak of it, Tom."

"But what am I to do?"

"Are there no proceeds from the business?"

"Yes, for those who work in it; and I think there will be something
coming out of it for Sarah,--something, but it will be very small.
And if so, she must depend for it solely on Mr Rubb."

"On the young one?"

"Yes; on the one that you know."

There was a great deal more said, and of course everyone will know
how such a conversation was ended, and will understand with what
ample assurance as to her own intentions Margaret promised that the
seven children should not want. As she did so, she made certain rapid
calculations in her head. She must give up Mr Maguire. There was no
doubt about that. She must give up all idea of marrying any one, and,
as she thought of this, she told herself that she was perhaps well
rid of a trouble. She had already given away to the firm of Rubb and
Mackenzie above a hundred a-year out of her income. If she divided
the remainder with Mrs Tom, keeping about three hundred and fifty
pounds a-year for herself and Susanna, she would, she thought, keep
her promise well, and yet retain enough for her own comfort and
Susanna's education. It would be bad for the prospects of young John
Ball, the third of the name, whom she had taught herself to regard as
her heir; but young John Ball would know nothing of the good things
he had lost. As to living with her sister-in-law Sarah, and sharing
her house and income with the whole family, that she declared to
herself nothing should induce her to do. She would give up half of
all that she had, and that half would be quite enough to save her
brother's children from want. In making the promise to her brother
she said nothing about proportions, and nothing as to her own future
life. "What I have," she said, "I will share with them and you may
rest assured that they shall not want." Of course he thanked her as
dying men do thank those who take upon themselves such charges; but
she perceived as he did so, or thought that she perceived, that he
still had something more upon his mind.

Mrs Tom came and relieved her in the morning, and Miss Mackenzie was
obliged to put off for a time that panoply of sick-room armour which
made her so indomitable in her brother's bedroom. Downstairs she met
Mr Rubb, who talked to her much about her brother's affairs, and much
about the oilcloth business, speaking as though he were desirous
that the most absolute confidence should exist between him and her.
But she said no word of her promise to her brother, except that she
declared that the money lent was now to be regarded as a present made
by her to him personally.

"I am afraid that that will avail nothing," said Mr Rubb, junior,
"for the amount now stands as a debt due by the firm to you, and the
firm, which would pay you the money if it could, cannot pay it to
your brother's estate any more than it can to yours."

"But the interest," said Miss Mackenzie.

"Oh, yes! the interest can be paid," said Mr Rubb, junior, but the
tone of his voice did not give much promise that this interest would
be forthcoming with punctuality.

She watched again that night; and on the next day, in the afternoon,
she was told that a gentleman wished to see her in the drawing-room.
Her thoughts at once pointed to Mr Maguire, and she went downstairs
prepared to be very angry with that gentleman. But on entering the
room she found her cousin, John Ball. She was, in truth, glad to see
him; for, after all, she thought that she liked him the best of all
the men or women that she knew. He was always in trouble, but then
she fancied that with him she at any rate knew the worst. There was
nothing concealed with him,--nothing to be afraid of. She hoped that
they might continue to know each other intimately as cousins. Under
existing circumstances they could not, of course, be anything more to
each other than that.

"This is very kind of you, John," she said, taking his hand. "How did
you know I was here?"

"Mr Slow told me. I was with Mr Slow about business of yours. I'm
afraid from what I hear that you find your brother very ill."

"Very ill, indeed, John,--ill to death."

She then asked after her uncle and aunt, and the children, at the
Cedars.

They were much as usual, he said; and he added that his mother would
be very glad to see her at the Cedars; only he supposed there was no
hope of that.

"Not just at present, John. You see I am wholly occupied here."

"And will he really die, do you think?"

"The doctors say so."

"And his wife and children--will they be provided for?"

Margaret simply shook her head, and John Ball, as he watched her,
felt assured that his uncle Jonathan's money would never come in
his way, or in the way of his children. But he was a man used to
disappointment, and he bore this with mild sufferance.

Then he explained to her the business about which he had specially
come to her. She had entrusted him with certain arrangements as to
a portion of her property, and he came to tell her that a certain
railway company wanted some houses which belonged to her, and that by
Act of Parliament she was obliged to sell them.

"But the Act of Parliament will make the railway company pay for
them, won't it, John?"

Then he went on to explain to her that she was in luck's way, "as
usual," said the poor fellow, thinking of his own misfortunes, and
that she would greatly increase her income by the sale. Indeed, it
seemed to her that she would regain pretty nearly all she had lost by
the loan to Rubb and Mackenzie. "How very singular," thought she to
herself. Under these circumstances, it might, after all, be possible
that she should marry Mr Maguire, if she wished it.

When Mr Ball had told his business he did not stay much longer. He
said no word of his own hopes, if hopes they could be called any
longer. As he left her, he just referred to what had passed between
them. "This is no time, Margaret," said he, "to ask you whether you
have changed your mind?"

"No, John; there are other things to think of now; are there not?
And, besides, they will want here all that I can do for them."

She spoke to him with an express conviction that what was wanted of
her by him, as well as by others, was her money, and it did not occur
to him to contradict her.

"He might have asked to see me, I do think," said Mrs Tom, when John
Ball was gone. "But there always was an upsetting pride about those
people at the Cedars which I never could endure. And they are as poor
as church mice. When poverty and pride go together I do detest them.
I suppose he came to find out all about us, but I hope you told him
nothing."

To all this Miss Mackenzie made no answer at all.


CHAPTER XV

The Tearing of the Verses


Things went on in Gower Street for three or four weeks in the
same way, and then Susanna was fetched home from Littlebath. Miss
Mackenzie would have gone down herself but that she was averse to see
Mr Maguire. She therefore kept on her Littlebath lodgings, though Mrs
Tom said much to her of the wasteful extravagance in doing so. It was
at last settled that Mr Rubb should go down to Littlebath and bring
Susanna back with him; and this he did, not at all to that young
lady's satisfaction. It was understood that Susanna did not leave the
school, at which she had lately been received as a boarder; but the
holidays had come, and it was thought well that she should see her
father. During this time Miss Mackenzie received two letters from
Mr Maguire. In the first he pleaded hard for an answer to his offer.
He had, he said, now relinquished his curacy, having found the
interference of that terrible woman to be unendurable. He had left
his curacy, and was at present without employment. Under such
circumstances, "his Margaret" would understand how imperative it
was that he should receive an answer. A curacy, or, rather, a small
incumbency, had offered itself among the mines in Cornwall; but he
could not think of accepting this till he should know what "his
Margaret" might say to it.

To this Margaret answered most demurely, and perhaps a little slily.
She said that her brother's health and affairs were at present in
such a condition as to allow her to think of nothing else; that
she completely understood Mr Maguire's position, and that it was
essential that he should not be kept in suspense. Under these
combined circumstances she had no alternative but to release him from
the offer he had made. This she did with the less unwillingness as
it was probable that her pecuniary position would be considerably
altered by the change in her brother's family which they were now
expecting almost daily. Then she bade him farewell, with many
expressions of her esteem, and said that she hoped he might be happy
among the mines in Cornwall.

Such was her letter; but it did not satisfy Mr Maguire, and he wrote
a second letter. He had declined, he said, the incumbency among the
mines, having heard of something which he thought would suit him
better in Manchester. As to that, there was no immediate hurry, and
he proposed remaining at Littlebath for the next two months, having
been asked to undertake temporary duty in a neighbouring church for
that time. By the end of the two months he hoped that "his Margaret"
would be able to give him an answer in a different tone. As to her
pecuniary position, he would leave that, he said, "all to herself."

To this second letter Miss Mackenzie did not find it necessary to
send any reply. The domestics in the Mackenzie family were not
at this time numerous, and the poor mother had enough to do with
her family downstairs. No nurse had been hired for the sick man,
for nurses cannot be hired without money, and money with the Tom
Mackenzies was scarce. Our Miss Mackenzie would have hired a nurse,
but she thought it better to take the work entirely into her own
hands. She did so, and I think we may say that her brother did not
suffer by it. As she sat by his bedside, night after night, she
seemed to feel that she had fallen again into her proper place, and
she looked back upon the year she had spent at Littlebath almost with
dismay. Since her brother's death, three men had offered to marry
her, and there was a fourth from whom she had expected such an offer.
She looked upon all this with dismay, and told herself that she was
not fit to sail, under her own guidance, out in the broad sea, amidst
such rocks as those. Was not some humbly feminine employment, such as
that in which she was now engaged, better for her in all ways? Sad
as was the present occasion, did she not feel a satisfaction in what
she was doing, and an assurance that she was fit for her position?
Had she not always been ill at ease, and out of her element, while
striving at Littlebath to live the life of a lady of fortune? She
told herself that it was so, and that it would be better for her to
be a hard-working, dependent woman, doing some tedious duty day by
day, than to live a life of ease which prompted her to longings for
things unfitted to her.

She had brought a little writing-desk with her that she had carried
from Arundel Street to Littlebath, and this she had with her in the
sick man's bedroom. Sitting there through the long hours of night,
she would open this and read over and over again those remnants of
the rhymes written in her early days which she had kept when she made
her great bonfire. There had been quires of such verses, but she had
destroyed all but a few leaves before she started for Littlebath.
What were left, and were now read, were very sweet to her, and yet
she knew that they were wrong and meaningless. What business had such
a one as she to talk of the sphere's tune and the silvery moon, of
bright stars shining and hearts repining? She would not for worlds
have allowed any one to know what a fool she had been--either Mrs
Tom, or John Ball, or Mr Maguire, or Miss Todd. She would have been
covered with confusion if her rhymes had fallen into the hands of any
one of them.

And yet she loved them well, as a mother loves her only idiot child.
They were her expressions of the romance and poetry that had been
in her; and though the expressions doubtless were poor, the romance
and poetry of her heart had been high and noble. How wrong the world
is in connecting so closely as it does the capacity for feeling and
the capacity for expression,--in thinking that capacity for the one
implies capacity for the other, or incapacity for the one incapacity
also for the other; in confusing the technical art of the man who
sings with the unselfish tenderness of the man who feels! But the
world does so connect them; and, consequently, those who express
themselves badly are ashamed of their feelings.

She read her poor lines again and again, throwing herself back into
the days and thoughts of former periods, and telling herself that
it was all over. She had thought of encouraging love, and love had
come to her in the shape of Mr Maguire, a very strict evangelical
clergyman, without a cure or an income, somewhat in debt, and with,
oh! such an eye! She tore the papers, very gently, into the smallest
fragments. She tore them again and again, swearing to herself as she
did so that there should be an end of all that; and, as there was
no fire at hand, she replaced the pieces in her desk. During this
ceremony of the tearing she devoted herself to the duties of a single
life, to the drudgeries of ordinary utility, to such works as those
she was now doing. As to any society, wicked or religious,--wicked
after the manner of Miss Todd, or religious after the manner of St
Stumfolda,--it should come or not, as circumstances might direct. She
would go no more in search of it. Such were the resolves of a certain
night, during which the ceremony of the tearing took place.

It came to pass at this time that Mr Rubb, junior, visited his dying
partner almost daily, and was always left alone with him for some
time. When these visits were made Miss Mackenzie would descend to the
room in which her sister-in-law was sitting, and there would be some
conversation between them about Mr Rubb and his affairs. Much as
these two women disliked each other, there had necessarily arisen
between them a certain amount of confidence. Two persons who are much
thrown together, to the exclusion of other society, will tell each
other their thoughts, even though there be no love between them.

"What is he saying to him all these times when he is with him?"
said Mrs Tom one morning, when Miss Mackenzie had come down on the
appearance of Mr Rubb in the sick room.

"He is talking about the business, I suppose."

"What good can that do? Tom can't say anything about that, as to how
it should be done. He thinks a great deal about Sam Rubb; but it's
more than I do."

"They must necessarily be in each other's confidence, I should say."

"He's not in my confidence. My belief is he's been a deal too clever
for Tom; and that he'll turn out to be too clever--for me, and--my
poor orphans." Upon which Mrs Tom put her handkerchief up to her
eyes. "There; he's coming down," continued the wife. "Do you go up
now, and make Tom tell you what it is that Sam Rubb has been saying
to him."

Margaret Mackenzie did go up as she heard Mr Rubb close the
front door; but she had no such purpose as that with which her
sister-in-law had striven to inspire her. She had no wish to make
the sick man tell her anything that he did not wish to tell. In
considering the matter within her own breast, she owned to herself
that she did not expect much from the Rubbs in aid of the wants of
her nephews and nieces; but what would be the use of troubling a
dying man about that? She had agreed with herself to believe that
the oilcloth business was a bad affair, and that it would be well to
hope for nothing from it. That her brother to the last should harass
himself about the business was only natural; but there could be
no reason why she should harass him on the same subject. She had
recognised the fact that his widow and children must be supported by
her; and had she now been told that the oilcloth factory had been
absolutely abandoned as being worth nothing, it would not have caused
her much disappointment. She thought a great deal more of the railway
company that was going to buy her property under such favourable
circumstances.

She was, therefore, much surprised when her brother began about the
business as soon as she had seated herself. I do not know that the
reader need be delayed with any of the details that he gave her, or
with the contents of the papers which he showed her. She, however,
found herself compelled to go into the matter, and compelled also
to make an endeavour to understand it. It seemed that everything
hung upon Samuel Rubb, junior, except the fact that Samuel Rubb's
father, who now never went near the place, got more than half the net
profits; and the further fact, that the whole thing would come to an
end if this payment to old Rubb were stopped.

"Tom," said she, in the middle of it all, when her head was aching
with figures, "if it will comfort you, and enable you to put all
these things away, you may know that I will divide everything I have
with Sarah."

He assured her that her kindness did comfort him; but he hoped better
than that; he still thought that something better might be arranged
if she would only go on with her task. So she went on painfully
toiling through figures.

"Sam drew them up on purpose for you, yesterday afternoon," said he.

"Who did it?" she asked.

"Samuel Rubb."

He then went on to declare that she might accept all Samuel Rubb's
figures as correct.

She was quite willing to accept them, and she strove hard to
understand them. It certainly did seem to her that when her money was
borrowed somebody must have known that the promised security would
not be forthcoming; but perhaps that somebody was old Rubb, whom, as
she did not know him, she was quite ready to regard as the villain in
the play that was being acted. Her own money, too, was a thing of the
past. That fault, if fault there had been, was condoned; and she was
angry with herself in that she now thought of it again.

"And now," said her brother, as soon as she had put the papers back,
and declared that she understood them. "Now I have something to say
to you which I hope you will hear without being angry." He raised
himself on his bed as he said this, doing so with difficulty and
pain, and turning his face upon her so that he could look into her
eyes. "If I didn't know that I was dying I don't think that I could
say it to you."

"Say what, Tom?"

She thought of what most terrible thing it might be possible that
he should have to communicate. Could it be that he had got hold, or
that Rubb and Mackenzie had got hold, of all her fortune, and turned
it into unprofitable oilcloth? Could they in any way have made her
responsible for their engagements? She wished to trust them; she
tried to avoid suspicion; but she feared that things were amiss.

"Samuel Rubb and I have been talking of it, and he thinks it had
better come from me," said her brother.

"What had better come?" she asked.

"It is his proposition, Margaret." Then she knew all about it, and
felt great relief. Then she knew all about it, and let him go on till
he had spoken his speech.

"God knows how far he may be indulging a false hope, or deceiving
himself altogether; but he thinks it possible that you might--might
become fond of him. There, Margaret, that's the long and the short
of it. And when I told him that he had better say that himself, he
declared that you would not bring yourself to listen to him while I
am lying here dying."

"Of course I would not."

"But, look here, Margaret; I know you would do much to comfort me in
my last moments."

"Indeed, I would, Tom."

"I wouldn't ask you to marry a man you didn't like,--not even if it
were to do the children a service; but if that can be got over, the
other feeling should not restrain you when it would be the greatest
possible comfort to me."

"But how could it serve you, Tom?"

"If that could be arranged, Rubb would give up to Sarah during his
father's life all the proceeds of the business, after paying the
old man. And when he dies, and he is very old now, the five hundred
a-year would be continued to her. Think what that would be,
Margaret."

"But, Tom, she shall have what will make her comfortable without
waiting for any old man's death. It shall be quite half of my income.
If that is not enough it shall be more. Will not that do for her?"

Then her brother strove to explain as best he could that the mere
money was not all he wanted. If his sister did not like this man, if
she had no wish to become a married woman, of course, he said, the
plan must fall to the ground. But if there was anything in Mr Rubb's
belief that she was not altogether indifferent to him, if such an
arrangement could be made palatable to her, then he would be able to
think that he, by the work of his life, had left something behind him
to his wife and family.

"And Sarah would be more comfortable," he pleaded. "Of course, she
is grateful to you, as I am, and as we all are. But given bread is
bitter bread, and if she could think it came to her, of her own
right--"

He said ever so much more, but that ever so much more was quite
unnecessary. His sister understood the whole matter. It was desirable
that she, by her fortune, should enable the widow and orphans of
her brother to live in comfort; but it was not desirable that this
dependence on her should be plainly recognised. She did not, however,
feel herself to be angry or hurt. It would, no doubt, be better
for the family that they should draw their income in an apparently
independent way from their late father's business than that they
should owe their support to the charity of an aunt. But then, how
about herself? A month or two ago, before the Maguire feature in
her career had displayed itself so strongly, an overture from Mr
Rubb might probably not have been received with disfavour. But now,
while she was as it were half engaged to another man, she could not
entertain such a proposition. Her womanly feeling revolted from it.
No doubt she intended to refuse Mr Maguire. No doubt she had made up
her mind to that absolutely, during the ceremony of tearing up her
verses. And she had never had much love for Mr Maguire, and had felt
some--almost some, for Mr Rubb. In either case she was sure that, had
she married the man,--the one man or the other,--she would instantly
have become devoted to him. And I, who chronicle her deeds and
endeavour to chronicle her thoughts, feel equally sure that it would
have been so. There was something harsh in it, that Mr Maguire's
offer to her should, though never accepted, debar her from the
possibility of marrying Mr Rubb, and thus settling all the affairs of
her family in a way that would have been satisfactory to them and not
altogether unsatisfactory to her; but she was aware that it did so.
She felt that it was so, and then threw herself back for consolation
upon the security which would still be hers, and the want of security
which must attach itself to a marriage with Mr Rubb. He might make
ducks, and drakes, and oilcloth of it all; and then there would be
nothing left for her, for her sister-in-law, or for the children.

"May I tell him to speak to yourself?" her brother asked, while she
was thinking of all this.

"No, Tom; it would do no good."

"You do not fancy him, then."

"I do not know about fancying; but I think it will be better for me
to remain as I am. I would do anything for you and Sarah, almost
anything; but I cannot do that."

"Then I will say nothing further."

"Don't ask me to do that."

And he did not ask her again, but turned his face from her and
thought of the bitterness of his death-bed.

That evening, when she went down to tea, she met Samuel Rubb standing
at the drawing-room door.

"There is no one here," he said; "will you mind coming in? Has your
brother spoken to you?"

She had followed him into the room, and he had closed the door as he
asked the question.

"Yes, he has spoken to me."

She could see that the man was trembling with anxiety and eagerness,
and she almost loved him that he was anxious and eager. Mr Maguire,
when he had come a wooing, had not done it badly altogether, but
there had not been so much reality as there was about Sam Rubb while
he stood there shaking, and fearing, and hoping.

"Well," said he, "may I hope--may I think it will be so? may I ask
you to be mine?"

He was handsome in her eyes, though perhaps, delicate reader, he
would not have been handsome in yours. She knew that he was not a
gentleman; but what did that matter? Neither was her sister-in-law
Sarah a lady. There was not much in that house in Gower Street that
was after the manner of gentlemen and ladies. She was ready to throw
all that to the dogs, and would have done so but for Mr Maguire. She
felt that she would like to have allowed herself to love him in spite
of the tearing of the verses. She felt this, and was very angry with
Mr Maguire. But the facts were stern, and there was no hope for her.

"Mr Rubb," she said, "there can be nothing of that kind."

"Can't there really, now?" said he.

She assured him in her strongest language, that there could be
nothing of that kind, and then went down to the dining-room.

He did not venture to follow her, but made his way out of the house
without seeing anyone else.

Another fortnight went by, and then, towards the close of September,
came the end of all things in this world for poor Tom Mackenzie. He
died in the middle of the night in his wife's arms, while his sister
stood by holding both their hands. Since the day on which he had
endeavoured to arrange a match between his partner and his sister he
had spoken no word of business, at any rate to the latter, and things
now stood on that footing which she had then attempted to give them.
We all know how silent on such matters are the voices of all in the
bereft household, from the hour of death till that other hour in
which the body is consigned to its kindred dust. Women make mourning,
and men creep about listlessly, but during those few sad days
there may be no talk about money. So it was in Gower Street. The
widow, no doubt, thought much of her bitter state of dependence,
thought something, perhaps, of the chance there might be that her
husband's sister would be less good than her word, now that he was
gone--meditated with what amount of submission she must accept the
generosity of the woman she had always hated; but she was still
mistress of that house till the undertakers had done their work; and
till that work had been done, she said little of her future plans.

"I'd earn my bread, if I knew how," she began, putting her
handkerchief up to her eyes, on the afternoon of the very day on
which he was buried.

"There will be no occasion for that, Sarah," said Miss Mackenzie,
"there will be enough for us all."

"But I would if I knew how. I wouldn't mind what I did; I'd scour
floors rather than be dependent, I've that spirit in me; and I've
worked, and moiled, and toiled with those children; so I have."

Miss Mackenzie then told her that she had solemnly promised her
brother to divide her income with his widow, and informed her that
she intended to see Mr Slow, the lawyer, on the following day, with
reference to the doing of this.

"If there is anything from the factory, that can be divided too,"
said Miss Mackenzie.

"But there won't. The Rubbs will take all that; of course they will.
And Tom put into it near upon ten thousand pounds!"

Then she began to cry again, but soon interrupted her tears to ask
what was to become of Susanna. Susanna, who was by, looked anxiously
up into her aunt's eyes.

"Susanna and I," said the aunt, "have thrown in our lot together, and
we mean to remain so; don't we, dear?"

"If mamma will let me."

"I'm sure it's very good of you to take one off my hands," said the
mother, "for even one will be felt."

Then came a note to Miss Mackenzie from Lady Ball, asking
her to spend a few days at the Cedars before she returned to
Littlebath,--that is, if she did return,--and she consented to
do this. While she was there Mr Slow could prepare the necessary
arrangements for the division of the property, and she could then
make up her mind as to the manner and whereabouts of her future life.
She was all at sea again, and knew not how to choose. If she were a
Romanist, she would go into a convent; but Protestant convents she
thought were bad, and peculiarly unfitted for the followers of Mr
Stumfold. She had nothing to bind her to any spot, and something to
drive her from every spot of which she knew anything.

Before she went to the Cedars Mr Rubb came to Gower Street and bade
her farewell.

"I had allowed myself to hope, Miss Mackenzie," said he, "I had,
indeed; I suppose I was very foolish."

"I don't know as to being foolish, Mr Rubb, unless it was in caring
about such a person as me."

"I do care for you, very much; but I suppose I was wrong to think you
would put up with such as I am. Only I did think that perhaps, seeing
that we had been partners with your brother so long-- All the same, I
know that the Mackenzies are different from the Rubbs."

"That has nothing to do with it; nothing in the least."

"Hasn't it now? Then, perhaps, Miss Mackenzie, at some future time--"

Miss Mackenzie was obliged to tell him that there could not possibly
be any other answer given to him at any future time than that which
she gave him now. He suggested that perhaps he might be allowed to
try again when the first month or two of her grief for her brother
should be over; but she assured him that it would be useless. At the
moment of her conference with him, she did this with all her energy;
and then, as soon as she was alone, she asked herself why she had
been so energetical. After all, marriage was an excellent state in
which to live. The romance was doubtless foolish and wrong, and the
tearing of the papers had been discreet, yet there could be no good
reason why she should turn her back upon sober wedlock. Nevertheless,
in all her speech to Mr Rubb she did do so. There was something in
her position as connected with Mr Maguire which made her feel that it
would be indelicate to entertain another suitor before that gentleman
had received a final answer.

As she went away from Gower Street to the Cedars she thought of this
very sadly, and told herself that she had been like the ass who
starved between two bundles of hay, or as the boy who had fallen
between two stools.


CHAPTER XVI

Lady Ball's Grievance


Miss Mackenzie, before she left Gower Street, was forced to make
some arrangements as to her affairs at Littlebath, and these were
ultimately settled in a manner that was not altogether palatable to
her. Mr Rubb was again sent down, having Susanna in his charge, and
he was empowered to settle with Miss Mackenzie's landlady and give
up the lodgings. There was much that was disagreeable in this. Miss
Mackenzie having just rejected Mr Rubb's suit, did not feel quite
comfortable in giving him a commission to see all her stockings and
petticoats packed up and brought away from the lodgings. Indeed, she
could give him no commission of the kind, but intimated her intention
of writing to the lodging-house keeper. He, however, was profuse
in his assurances that nothing should be left behind, and if Miss
Mackenzie would tell him anything of the way in which the things
ought to be packed, he would be so happy to attend to her! To him
Miss Mackenzie would give no such instructions, but, doubtless, she
gave many to Susanna.

As to Susanna, it was settled that she should remain as a boarder at
the Littlebath school, at any rate for the next half-year. After that
there might be great doubt whether her aunt could bear the expense of
maintaining her in such a position.

Miss Mackenzie had reconciled herself to going to the Cedars because
she would thus have an opportunity of seeing her lawyer and arranging
about her property, whereas had she been down at Littlebath there
would have been a difficulty. And she wanted some one whom she could
trust to act for her, some one besides the lawyer, and she thought
that she could trust her cousin, John Ball. As to getting away from
all her suitors that was impossible. Had she gone to Littlebath there
was one there; had she remained with her sister-in-law, she would
have been always near another; and, on going to the Cedars, she would
meet the third. But she could not on that account absolutely isolate
herself from everybody that she knew in the world. And, perhaps, she
was getting somewhat used to her suitors, and less liable than she
had been to any fear that they could force her into action against
her own consent. So she went to the Cedars, and, on arriving there,
received from her uncle and aunt but a moderate amount of condolence
as to the death of her brother.

Her first and second days in her aunt's house were very quiet.
Nothing was said of John's former desires, and nothing about her own
money or her brother's family. On the morning of the third day she
told her cousin that she would, on the next morning, accompany him
to town if he would allow her. "I am going to Mr Slow's," said she,
"and perhaps you could go with me." To this he assented willingly,
and then, after a pause, surmised that her visit must probably have
reference to the sale of her houses to the railway company. "Partly
to that," she said, "but it chiefly concerns arrangements for my
brother's family."

To this John Ball said nothing, nor did Lady Ball, who was present,
then speak. But Miss Mackenzie could see that her aunt looked at her
cousin, opening her eyes, and expressing concern. John Ball himself
allowed no change to come upon his face, but went on deliberately
with his bread and butter. "I shall be very happy to go with you," he
said, "and will either come and call for you when you have done, or
stay with you while you are there, just as you like."

"I particularly want you to stay with me," said she, "and as we go up
to town I will tell you all about it."

She observed that before her cousin left the house on that day, his
mother got hold of him and was alone with him for nearly half an
hour. After that, Lady Ball was alone with Sir John, in his own room,
for another half hour. The old baronet had become older, of course,
and much weaker, since his niece had last been at the Cedars, and was
now seldom seen about the house till the afternoon.

Of all the institutions at the Cedars that of the carriage was the
most important. Miss Mackenzie found that the carriage arrangement
had been fixed upon a new and more settled basis since her last
visit. Then it used to go out perhaps as often as three times a week.
But there did not appear to be any fixed rule. Like other carriages,
it did, to a certain degree, come when it was wanted. But now there
was, as I have said, a settled basis. The carriage came to the door
on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, exactly at two o'clock, and
Sir John with Lady Ball were driven about till four.

On the first Tuesday of her visit Miss Mackenzie had gone with her
uncle and aunt, and even she had found the pace to be very slow, and
the whole affair to be very dull. Her uncle had once enlivened the
thing by asking her whether she had found any lovers since she went
to Littlebath, and this question had perplexed her very much. She
could not say that she had found none, and as she was not prepared
to acknowledge that she had found any, she could only sit still and
blush.

"Women have plenty of lovers when they have plenty of money," said
the baronet.

"I don't believe that Margaret thinks of anything of the kind," said
Lady Ball.

After that Margaret determined to have as little to do with the
carriage as possible, and on that evening she learned from her cousin
that the horses had been sold to the man who farmed the land, and
were hired every other day for two hours' work.

It was on the Thursday morning that Miss Mackenzie had spoken of
going into town on the morrow, and on that day when her aunt asked
her about the driving, she declined.

"I hope that nothing your uncle said on Tuesday annoyed you?"

"Oh dear, no; but if you don't mind it, I'd rather stay at home."

"Of course you shall if you like it," said her aunt; "and by-the-by,
as I want to speak to you, and as we might not find time after coming
home, if you don't mind it I'll do it now."

Of course Margaret said that she did not mind it, though in truth she
did mind it, and was afraid of her aunt.

"Well then, Margaret, look here. I want to know something about your
brother's affairs. From what I have heard, I fear they were not very
good."

"They were very bad, aunt,--very bad indeed."

"Dear, dear; you don't say so. Sir John always feared that it would
be so when Thomas Mackenzie mixed himself up with those Rubbs. And
there has gone half of Jonathan Ball's money,--money which Sir John
made! Well, well!"

Miss Mackenzie had nothing to say to this; and as she had nothing to
say to it she sat silent, making no attempt at any words.

"It does seem hard; don't it, my dear?"

"It wouldn't make any difference to anybody now--to my uncle, I mean,
or to John, if the money was not gone."

"That's quite true; quite true; only it does seem to be a pity.
However, that half of Jonathan's money which you have got, is not
lost, and there's some comfort in that."

Miss Mackenzie was not called upon to make any answer to this; for
although she had lost a large sum of money by lending it to her
brother, nevertheless she was still possessed of a larger sum of
money than that which her brother Walter had received from Jonathan
Ball.

"And what are they going to do, my dear--the children, I mean, and
the widow? I suppose there'll be something for them out of the
business?"

"I don't think there'll be anything, aunt. As far as I can understand
there will be nothing certain. They may probably get a hundred and
twenty-five pounds a-year." This she named, as being the interest of
the money she had lent--or given.

"A hundred and twenty-five pounds a-year. That isn't much, but it
will keep them from absolute want."

"Would it, aunt?"

"Oh, yes; at least, I suppose so. I hope she's a good manager. She
ought to be, for she's a very disagreeable woman. You told me that
yourself, you know."

Then Miss Mackenzie, having considered for one moment, resolved to
make a clean breast of it all, and this she did with the fewest
possible words.

"I'm going to divide what I've got with them, and I hope it will make
them comfortable."

"What!" exclaimed her aunt.

"I'm going to give Sarah half what I've got, for her and her
children. I shall have enough to live on left."

"Margaret, you don't mean it?"

"Not mean it? why not, aunt? You would not have me let them starve.
Besides, I promised my brother when he was dying."

"Then I must say he was very wrong, very wicked, I may say, to exact
any such promise from you; and no such promise is binding. If you
ask Sir John, or your lawyer, they will tell you so. What! exact
a promise from you to the amount of half your income. It was very
wrong."

"But, aunt, I should do the same if I had made no promise."

"No, you wouldn't, my dear. Your friends wouldn't let you. And indeed
your friends must prevent it now. They will not hear of such a
sacrifice being made."

"But, aunt--"

"Well, my dear."

"It's my own, you know." And Margaret, as she said this, plucked up
her courage, and looked her aunt full in the face.

"Yes, it is your own, by law; but I don't suppose, my dear, that you
are of that disposition or that character that you'd wish to set all
the world at defiance, and make everybody belonging to you feel that
you had disgraced yourself."

"Disgraced myself by relieving my brother's family!"

"Disgraced yourself by giving to that woman money that has come
to you as your fortune has come. Think of it, where it came from!"

"It came to me from my brother Walter."

"And where did he get it? And who made it? And don't you know that
your brother Tom had his share of it, and wasted it all? Did it
not all come from the Balls? And yet you think so little of that,
that you are going to let that woman rob you of it--rob you and my
grandchildren; for that, I tell you, is the way in which the world
will look at it. Perhaps you don't know it, but all that property
was as good as given to John at one time. Who was it first took
you by the hand when you were left all alone in Arundel Street? Oh,
Margaret, don't go and be such an ungrateful, foolish creature!"

Margaret waited for a moment, and then she answered--

"There's nobody so near to me as my own brother's children."

"As to that, Margaret, there isn't much difference in nearness
between your uncle and your nephews and nieces. But there's a right
and a wrong in these things, and when money is concerned, people
are not justified in indulging their fancies. Everything here has
been told to you. You know how John is situated with his children.
And after what there has been between you and him, and after what
there still might be if you would have it so, I own that I am
astonished--fairly astonished. Indeed, my dear, I can only look on it
as simple weakness on your part. It was but the other day that you
told me you had done all that you thought necessary by your brother
in taking Susanna."

"But that was when he was alive, and I thought he was doing well."

"The fact is, you have been there and they've talked you over. It
can't be that you love children that you never saw till the other
day; and as for the woman, you always hated her."

"Whether I love her or hate her has nothing to do with it."

"Margaret, will you promise me this, that you will see Mr Slow and
talk to him about it before you do anything?"

"I must see Mr Slow before I can do anything; but whatever he says, I
shall do it all the same."

"Will you speak to your uncle?"

"I had rather not."

"You are afraid to tell him of this; but of course he must be told.
Will you speak to John?"

"Certainly; I meant to do so going to town to-morrow."

"And if he tells you you are wrong--"

"Aunt, I know I am not wrong. It is nonsense to say that I am wrong
in--"

"That's disrespectful, Margaret!"

"I don't want to be disrespectful, aunt; but in such a case as this
I know that I have a right to do what I like with my own money. If
I was going to give it away to any other friend, if I was going to
marry, or anything like that,"--she blushed at the remembrance of
the iniquities she had half intended as she said this--"then there
might be some reason for you to scold me; but with a brother and
a brother's family it can't be wrong. If you had a brother, and
had been with him when he was dying, and he had left his wife and
children looking to you, you would have done the same."

Upon this Lady Ball got up from her chair and walked to the door.
Margaret had been more impetuous and had answered her with much more
confidence than she had expected. She was determined now to say one
more word, but so to say it that it should not be answered--to strike
one more blow, but so to strike it that it should not be returned.

"Margaret," she said, as she stood with the door open in her hands,
"if you will reflect where the money came from, your conscience will
tell you without much difficulty where it should go to. And when you
think of your brother's children, whom this time last year you had
hardly seen, think also of John Ball's children, who have welcomed
you into this house as their dearest relative. In one sense,
certainly, the money is yours, Margaret; but in another sense, and
that the highest sense, it is not yours to do what you please with
it."

Then Lady Ball shut the door rather loudly, and sailed away along the
hall. When the passages were clear, Miss Mackenzie made her way up
into her own room, and saw none of the family till she came down just
before dinner.

She sat for a long time in the chair by her bed-side thinking of her
position. Was it true after all that she was bound by a sense of
justice to give any of her money to the Balls? It was true that in
one sense it had been taken from them, but she had had nothing to do
with the taking. If her brother Walter had married and had children,
then the Balls would have not expected the money back again. It was
ever so many years,--five-and-twenty years, and more since the legacy
had been made by Jonathan Ball to her brother, and it seemed to her
that her aunt had no common sense on her side in the argument. Was it
possible that she should allow her own nephews and nieces to starve
while she was rich? She had, moreover, made a promise,--a promise to
one who was now dead, and there was a solemnity in that which carried
everything else before it. Even though the thing might be unjust,
still she must do it.

But she was to give only half her fortune to her brother's family;
there would still be the half left for herself, for herself or
for these Balls if they wanted it so sorely. She was beginning to
hate her money. It had brought to her nothing but tribulation and
disappointment. Had Walter left her a hundred a year, she would,
not having then dreamed of higher things, have been amply content.
Would it not be better that she should take for herself some modest
competence, something on which she might live without trouble to her
relatives, without trouble to her friends she had first said,--but
as she did so she told herself with scorn that friends she had
none,--and then let the Balls have what was left her after she had
kept her promise to her brother? Anything would be better than such
persecution as that to which her aunt had subjected her.

At last she made up her mind to speak of it all openly to her cousin.
She had an idea that in such matters men were more trustworthy than
women, and perhaps less greedy. Her cousin would, she thought, be
more just to her than her aunt had been. That her aunt had been very
unjust,--cruel and unjust,--she felt assured.

She came down to dinner, and she could see by the manner of them all
that the matter had been discussed since John Ball's return from
London. Jack, the eldest son, was not at home, and the three girls
who came next to Jack dined with their father and grandfather. To
them Margaret endeavoured to talk easily, but she failed. They had
never been favourites with her as Jack was, and, on this occasion,
she could get very little from them that was satisfactory to her.
John Ball was courteous to her, but he was very silent throughout the
whole evening. Her aunt showed her displeasure by not speaking to
her, or speaking barely with a word. Her uncle, of whose voice she
was always in fear, seemed to be more cross, and when he did speak,
more sarcastic than ever. He asked her whether she intended to go
back to Littlebath.

"I think not," said she.

"Then that has been a failure, I suppose," said the old man.

"Everything is a failure, I think," said she, with tears in her eyes.

This was in the drawing-room, and immediately her cousin John came
and sat by her. He came and sat there, as though he had intended
to speak to her; but he went away again in a minute or two without
having uttered a word. Things went on in the same way till they
moved off to bed, and then the formal adieus for the night were made
with a coldness that amounted, on the part of Lady Ball, almost to
inhospitality.

"Good-night, Margaret," she said, as she just put out the tip of her
finger.

"Good-night, my dear," said Sir John. "I don't know what's the matter
with you, but you look as though you'd been doing something that you
were ashamed of."

Lady Ball was altogether injudicious in her treatment of her niece.
As to Sir John, it made probably very little difference. Miss
Mackenzie had perceived, when she first came to the Cedars, that he
was a cross old man, and that he had to be endured as such by any one
who chose to go into that house. But she had depended on Lady Ball
for kindness of manner, and had been tempted to repeat her visits to
the house because her aunt had, after her fashion, been gracious to
her. But now there was rising in her breast a feeling that she had
better leave the Cedars as soon as she could shake the dust off her
feet, and see nothing more of the Balls. Even the Rubb connection
seemed to her to be better than the Ball connection, and less
exaggerated in its greediness. Were it not for her cousin John, she
would have resolved to go on the morrow. She would have faced the
indignation of her aunt, and the cutting taunts of her uncle, and
have taken herself off at once to some lodging in London. But John
Ball had meant to be kind to her when he came and sat close to her on
the sofa, and her soft heart relented towards him.

Lady Ball had in truth mistaken her niece's character. She had found
her to be unobtrusive, gentle, and unselfish; and had conceived that
she must therefore be weak and compliant. As to many things she was
compliant, and as to some things she was weak; but there was in her
composition a power of resistance and self-sustenance on which Lady
Ball had not counted. When conscious of absolute ill-usage, she could
fight well, and would not bow her neck to any Mrs Stumfold or to any
Lady Ball.


CHAPTER XVII

Mr Slow's Chambers


She came down late to breakfast on the following morning, not being
present at prayers, and when she came down she wore a bonnet.

"I got myself ready, John, for fear I should keep you waiting."

Her aunt spoke to her somewhat more graciously than on the preceding
evening, and accepted her apology for being late.

Just as she was about to start Lady Ball took her apart and spoke one
word to her.

"No one can tell you better what you ought to do than your cousin
John; but pray remember that he is far too generous to say a word for
himself."

Margaret made no answer, and then she and her cousin started on foot
across the grounds to the station. The distance was nearly a mile,
and during the walk no word was said between them about the money.
They got into the train that was to take them up to London, and sat
opposite to each other. It happened that there was no passenger in
either of the seats next to him or her, so that there was ample
opportunity for them to hold a private conversation; but Mr Ball said
nothing to her, and she, not knowing how to begin, said nothing to
him. In this way they reached the London station at Waterloo Bridge,
and then he asked her what she proposed to do next.

"Shall we go to Mr Slow's at once?" she asked.

To this he assented, and at her proposition they agreed to walk to
the lawyer's chambers. These were on the north side of Lincoln's Inn
Fields, near the Turnstile, and Mr Ball remarked that the distance
was again not much above a mile. So they crossed the Strand together,
and made their way by narrow streets into Drury Lane, and then under
a certain archway into Lincoln's Inn Fields. To Miss Mackenzie, who
felt that something ought to be said, the distance and time occupied
seemed to be very short.

"Why, this is Lincoln's Inn Fields!" she exclaimed, as she came out
upon the west side.

"Yes; this is Lincoln's Inn Fields, and Mr Slow's chambers are over
there."

She knew very well where Mr Slow's chambers were situated, but she
paused on the pavement, not wishing to go thither quite at once.

"John," she said, "I thought that perhaps we might have talked over
all this before we saw Mr Slow."

"Talked over all what?"

"About the money that I want to give to my brother's family. Did not
my aunt tell you of it?"

"Yes; she told me that you and she had differed."

"And she told you what about?"

"Yes," said he, slowly; "she told me what about."

"And what ought I to do, John?"

As she asked the question she caught hold of the lappet of his coat,
and looked up into his face as though supplicating him to give her
the advantage of all his discretion and all his honesty.

They were still standing on the pavement, where the street comes out
from under the archway. She was gazing into his face, and he was
looking away from her, over towards the inner railings of the square,
with heavy brow and dull eye and motionless face. She was very eager,
and he seemed to be simply patient, but nevertheless he was working
hard with his thoughts, striving to determine how best he might
answer her. His mother had told him that he might model this woman to
his will, and had repeated to him that story which he had heard so
often of the wrong that had been done to him by his uncle Jonathan.
It may be said that there was no need for such repetition, as John
Ball had himself always thought quite enough of that injury. He had
thought of it for the last twenty years, almost hourly, till it was
graven upon his very soul. He had been a ruined, wretched, moody man,
because of his uncle Jonathan's will. There was no need, one would
have said, to have stirred him on that subject. But his mother, on
this morning, in the ten minutes before prayer-time, had told him
of it all again, and had told him also that the last vestige of his
uncle's money would now disappear from him unless he interfered to
save it.

"On this very day it must be saved; and she will do anything you tell
her," said his mother. "She regards you more than anyone else. If you
were to ask her again now, I believe she would accept you this very
day. At any rate, do not let those people have the money."

And yet he had not spoken to Margaret on the subject during the
journey, and would now have taken her to the lawyer's chambers
without a word, had she not interrupted him and stopped him.

Nevertheless he had been thinking of his uncle, and his uncle's will,
and his uncle's money, throughout the morning. He was thinking of it
at that moment when she stopped him--thinking how hard it all was,
how cruel that those people in the New Road should have had and spent
half his uncle's fortune, and that now the remainder, which at one
time had seemed to be near the reach of his own children, should also
go to atone for the negligence and fraud of those wretched Rubbs.

We all know with how strong a bias we regard our own side of any
question, and he regarded his side in this question with a very
strong bias. Nevertheless he had refrained from a word, and would
have refrained, had she not stopped him.

When she took hold of him by the coat, he looked for a moment into
her face, and thought that in its trouble it was very sweet. She
leaned somewhat against him as she spoke, and he wished that she
would lean against him altogether. There was about her a quiet
power of endurance, and at the same time a comeliness and a womanly
softness which seemed to fit her altogether for his wants and
wishes. As he looked with his dull face across into the square, no
physiognomist would have declared of him that at that moment he was
suffering from love, or thinking of a woman that was dear to him. But
it was so with him, and the physiognomist, had one been there, would
have been wrong. She had now asked him a question, which he was bound
to answer in some way:--"What ought I to do, John?"

He turned slowly round and walked with her, away from their
destination, round by the south side of the square, and then up along
the blank wall on the east side, nearly to the passage into Holborn,
and back again all round the enclosed space. She, while she was
speaking to him and listening to him, hardly remembered where she was
or whither she was going.

"I thought," said he, in answer to her question, "that you intended
to ask Mr Slow's advice?"

"I didn't mean to do more than tell him what should be done. He is
not a friend, you know, John."

"It's customary to ask lawyers their advice on such subjects."

"I'd rather have yours, John. But, in truth, what I want you to say
is, that I am right in doing this,--right in keeping my promise to my
brother, and providing for his children."

"Like most people, Margaret, you want to be advised to follow your
own counsel."

"God knows that I want to do right, John. I want to do nothing else,
John, but what's right. As to this money, I care but little for it
for myself."

"It is your own, and you have a right to enjoy it."

"I don't know much about enjoyment. As to enjoyment, it seems to me
to be pretty much the same whether a person is rich or poor. I always
used to hear that money brought care, and I'm sure I've found it so
since I had any."

"You've got no children, Margaret."

"No; but there are all those orphans. Am I not bound to look upon
them as mine, now that he has gone? If they don't depend on me, whom
are they to depend on?"

"If your mind is made up, Margaret, I have nothing to say against it.
You know what my wishes are. They are just the same now as when you
were last with us. It isn't only for the money I say this, though,
of course, that must go a long way with a man circumstanced as I am;
but, Margaret, I love you dearly, and if you can make up your mind to
be my wife, I would do my best to make you happy."

"I hadn't meant you to talk in that way, John," said Margaret.

But she was not much flurried. She was now so used to these overtures
that they did not come to her as much out of the common way. And she
gave herself none of that personal credit which women are apt to take
to themselves when they find they are often sought in marriage. She
looked upon her lovers as so many men to whom her income would be
convenient, and felt herself to be almost under an obligation to
them for their willingness to put up with the incumbrance which was
attached to it.

"But it's the only way I can talk when you ask me about this," said
he. Then he paused for a moment before he added, "How much is it you
wish to give to your brother's widow?"

"Half what I've got left."

"Got left! You haven't lost any of your money have you, Margaret?"

Then she explained to him the facts as to the loan, and took care
to explain to him also, very fully, the compensatory fact of the
purchase by the railway company. "And my promise to him was made
after I had lent it, you know," she urged.

"I do think it ought to be deducted; I do indeed," he said. "I am
not speaking on my own behalf now, as for the sake of my children,
but simply as a man of business. As for myself, though I do think I
have been hardly used in the matter of my uncle's money, I'll try to
forget it. I'll try at any rate to do without it. When I first knew
you, and found--found that I liked you so much, I own that I did have
hopes. But if it must be, there shall be an end of that. The children
don't starve, I suppose."

"Oh, John!"

"As for me, I won't hanker after your money. But, for your own sake,
Margaret--"

"There will be more than enough for me, you know; and, John--"

She was going to make him some promise; to tell him something of her
intention towards his son, and to make some tender of assistance to
himself; being now in that mind to live on the smallest possible
pittance, of which I have before spoken, when he ceased speaking or
listening, and hurried her on to the attorney's chambers.

"Do what you like with it. It is your own," said he. "And we shall do
no good by talking about it any longer out here."

So at last they made their way up to Mr Slow's rooms, on the first
floor in the old house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and were informed
that that gentleman was at home. Would they be pleased to sit down in
the waiting-room?

There is, I think, no sadder place in the world than the waiting-room
attached to an attorney's chambers in London. In this instance it was
a three-cornered room, which had got itself wedged in between the
house which fronted to Lincoln's Inn Fields, and some buildings in a
narrow lane that ran at the back of the row. There was no carpet in
it, and hardly any need of one, as the greater part of the floor was
strewed with bundles of dusty papers. There was a window in it, which
looked out from the point of the further angle against the wall of
the opposite building. The dreariness of this aspect had been thought
to be too much for the minds of those who waited, and therefore the
bottom panes had been clouded, so that there was in fact no power of
looking out at all. Over the fireplace there was a table of descents
and relationship, showing how heirship went; and the table was very
complicated, describing not only the heirship of ordinary real and
personal property, but also explaining the wonderful difficulties of
gavelkind, and other mysteriously traditional laws. But the table was
as dirty as it was complicated, and the ordinary waiting reader could
make nothing of it. There was a small table in the room, near the
window, which was always covered with loose papers; but these loose
papers were on this occasion again covered with sheets of parchment,
and a pale-faced man, of about thirty, whose beard had never yet
attained power to do more than sprout, was sitting at the table, and
poring over the parchments. Round the room, on shelves, there was a
variety of iron boxes, on which were written the names of Mr Slow's
clients,--of those clients whose property justified them in having
special boxes of their own. But these boxes were there, it must be
supposed, for temporary purposes,--purposes which might be described
as almost permanently temporary,--for those boxes which were allowed
to exist in absolute permanence of retirement, were kept in an iron
room downstairs, the trap-door into which had yawned upon Miss
Mackenzie as she was shown into the waiting-room. There was, however,
one such box open, on the middle of the floor, and sundry of the
parchments which had been taken from it were lying around it.

There were but two chairs in the room besides the one occupied by the
man at the table, and these were taken by John Ball and his cousin.
She sat herself down, armed with patience, indifferent to the delay
and indifferent to the dusty ugliness of everything around her, as
women are on such occasions. He, thinking much of his time, and
somewhat annoyed at being called upon to wait, sat with his chin
resting on his umbrella between his legs, and as he did so he allowed
his eyes to roam around among the names upon the boxes. There was
nothing on any one of those up on the shelves that attracted him.
There was the Marquis of B----, and Sir C. D----, and the Dowager
Countess of E----. Seeing this, he speculated mildly whether Mr Slow
put forward the boxes of his aristocratic customers to show how well
he was doing in the world. But presently his eye fell from the shelf
and settled upon the box on the floor. There, on that box, he saw the
name of Walter Mackenzie.

This did not astonish him, as he immediately said to himself that
these papers were being searched with reference to the business on
which his cousin was there that day; bur suddenly it occurred to him
that Margaret had given him to understand that Mr Slow did not expect
her. He stepped over to her, therefore, one step over the papers, and
asked her the question, whispering it into her ear.

"No," said she, "I had no appointment. I don't think he expects me."

He returned to his seat, and again sitting down with his chin on
the top of his umbrella, surveyed the parchments that lay upon the
ground. Upon one of them, that was not far from his feet, he read the
outer endorsements written as such endorsements always are, in almost
illegible old English letters--

"Jonathan Ball, to John Ball, junior--Deed of Gift."

But, after all, there was nothing more than a coincidence in this.
Of course Mr Slow would have in his possession all the papers
appertaining to the transfer of Jonathan Ball's property to the
Mackenzies; or, at any rate, such as referred to Walter's share of
it. Indeed, Mr Slow, at the time of Jonathan Ball's death, acted for
the two brothers, and it was probable that all the papers would be
with him. John Ball had known that there had been some intention
on his uncle's part, before the quarrel between his father and his
uncle, to make over to him, on his coming of age, a certain property
in London, and he had been told that the money which the Mackenzies
had inherited had ultimately come from this very property. His uncle
had been an eccentric, quarrelsome man, prone to change his mind
often, and not regardful of money as far as he himself was concerned.
John Ball remembered to have heard that his uncle had intended him to
become possessed of certain property in his own right the day that
he became of age, and that this had all been changed because of the
quarrel which had taken place between his uncle and his father. His
father now never spoke of this, and for many years past had seldom
mentioned it. But from his mother he had often heard of the special
injury which he had undergone.

"His uncle," she had said, "had given it, and had taken it back
again,--had taken it back that he might waste it on those
Mackenzies."

All this he had heard very often, but he had never known anything of
a deed of gift. Was it not singular, he thought, that the draft of
such a deed should be lying at his foot at this moment.

He showed nothing of this in his face, and still sat there with his
chin resting on his umbrella. But certainly stronger ideas than usual
of the great wrongs which he had suffered did come into his head as
he looked upon the paper at his feet. He began to wonder whether he
would be justified in taking it up and inspecting it. But as he was
thinking of this the pale-faced man rose from his chair, and after
moving among the papers on the ground for an instant, selected this
very document, and carried it with him to his table. Mr Ball, as
his eyes followed the parchment, watched the young man dust it and
open it, and then having flattened it with his hand, glance over it
till he came to a certain spot. The pale-faced clerk, accustomed
to such documents, glanced over the ambages, the "whereases," the
"aforesaids," the rich exuberance of "admors.," "exors.," and
"assigns," till he deftly came to the pith of the matter, and then
he began to make extracts, a date here and a date there. John Ball
watched him all the time, till the door was opened, and old Mr Slow
himself appeared in the room.

He stepped across the papers to shake hands with his client, and then
shook hands also with Mr Ball, whom he knew. His eye glanced at once
down to the box, and after that over towards the pale-faced clerk.
Mr Ball perceived that the attorney had joined in his own mind the
operation that was going on with these special documents, and the
presence of these two special visitors; and that he, in some measure,
regretted the coincidence. There was something wrong, and John Ball
began to consider whether the old lawyer could be an old scoundrel.
Some lawyers, he knew, were desperate scoundrels. He said nothing,
however; but, obeying Mr Slow's invitation, followed him and his
cousin into the sanctum sanctorum of the chambers.

"They didn't tell me you were here at first," said the lawyer, in a
tone of vexation, "or I wouldn't have had you shown in there."

John Ball thought that this was, doubtless, true, and that very
probably they might not have been put in among those papers had Mr
Slow known what was being done.

"The truth is," continued the lawyer, "the Duke of F----'s man of
business was with me, and they did not like to interrupt me."

Mr Slow was a grey-haired old man, nearer eighty than seventy,
who, with the exception of a fortnight's holiday every year which
he always spent at Margate, had attended those same chambers in
Lincoln's Inn Fields daily for the last sixty years. He was a stout,
thickset man, very leisurely in all his motions, who walked slowly,
talked slowly, read slowly, wrote slowly, and thought slowly; but
who, nevertheless, had the reputation of doing a great deal of
business, and doing it very well. He had a partner in the business,
almost as old as himself, named Bideawhile; and they who knew them
both used to speculate which of the two was the most leisurely. It
was, however, generally felt that, though Mr Slow was the slowest in
his speech, Mr Bideawhile was the longest in getting anything said.
Mr Slow would often beguile his time with unnecessary remarks; but Mr
Bideawhile was so constant in beguiling his time, that men wondered
how, in truth, he ever did anything at all. Of both of them it may be
said that no men stood higher in their profession, and that Mr Ball's
suspicions, had they been known in the neighbourhood of Lincoln's
Inn, would have been scouted as utterly baseless. And, for the
comfort of my readers, let me assure them that they were utterly
baseless. There might, perhaps, have been a little vanity about Mr
Slow as to the names of his aristocratic clients; but he was an
honest, painstaking man, who had ever done his duty well by those who
had employed him.

Is it not remarkable that the common repute which we all give to
attorneys in the general is exactly opposite to that which every man
gives to his own attorney in particular? Whom does anybody trust so
implicitly as he trusts his own attorney? And yet is it not the case
that the body of attorneys is supposed to be the most roguish body in
existence?

The old man seemed now to be a little fretful, and said something
more about his sorrow at their having been sent into that room.

"We are so crowded," he said, "that we hardly know how to stir
ourselves."

Miss Mackenzie said it did not signify in the least. Mr Ball said
nothing, but seated himself with his chin again resting on his
umbrella.

"I was so sorry to see in the papers an account of your brother's
death," said Mr Slow.

"Yes, Mr Slow; he has gone, and left a wife and very large family."

"I hope they are provided for, Miss Mackenzie."

"No, indeed; they are not provided for at all. My brother had not
been fortunate in business."

"And yet he went into it with a large capital,--with a large capital
in such a business as that."

John Ball, with his chin on the umbrella, said nothing. He said
nothing, but he winced as he thought whence the capital had come. And
he thought, too, of those much-meaning words: "Jonathan Ball to John
Ball, junior--Deed of gift."

"He had been unfortunate," said Miss Mackenzie, in an apologetic
tone.

"And what will you do about your loan?" said Mr Slow, looking over
to John Ball when he asked the question, as though inquiring whether
all Miss Mackenzie's affairs were to be talked over openly in the
presence of that gentleman.

"That was a gift," said Miss Mackenzie.

"A deed of gift," thought John Ball to himself. "A deed of gift!"

"Oh, indeed! Then there's an end of that, I suppose," said Mr Slow.

"Exactly so. I have been explaining to my cousin all about it. I hope
the firm will be able to pay my sister-in-law the interest on it, but
that does not seem sure."

"I am afraid I cannot help you there, Miss Mackenzie."

"Of course not. I was not thinking of it. But what I've come about is
this." Then she told Mr Slow the whole of her project with reference
to her fortune; how, on his death-bed, she had promised to give half
of all that she had to her brother's wife and family, and how she had
come there to him, with her cousin, in order that he might put her in
the way of keeping her promise.

Mr Slow sat in silence and patiently heard her to the end. She,
finding herself thus encouraged to speak, expatiated on the solemnity
of her promise, and declared that she could not be comfortable till
she had done all that she had undertaken to perform. "And I shall
have quite enough for myself afterwards, Mr Slow, quite enough."

Mr Slow did not say a word till she had done, and even then he
seemed to delay his speech. John Ball never raised his face from his
umbrella, but sat looking at the lawyer, whom he still suspected of
roguery. And if the lawyer were a rogue, what then about his cousin?
It must not be supposed that he suspected her; but what would come of
her, if the fortune she held were, in truth, not her own?

"I have told my cousin all about it," continued Margaret, "and I
believe that he thinks I am doing right. At any rate, I would do
nothing without his knowing it."

"I think she is giving her sister-in-law too much," said John Ball.

"I am only doing what I promised," urged Margaret.

"I think that the money which she lent to the firm should, at any
rate, be deducted," said John Ball, speaking this with a kind of
proviso to himself, that the words so spoken were intended to be
taken as having any meaning only on the presumption that that
document which he had seen in the other room should turn out to be
wholly inoperative and inefficient at the present moment. In answer
to these side-questions or corollary points as to the deduction or
non-deduction of the loan, Mr Slow answered not a word; but when
there was silence between them, he did make answer as to the original
proposition.

"Miss Mackenzie," he said, "I think you had better postpone doing
anything in this matter for the present."

"Why postpone it?" said she.

"Your brother's death is very recent. It happened not above a
fortnight since, I think."

"And I want to have this settled at once, so that there shall be no
distress. What's the good of waiting?"

"Such things want thinking of, Miss Mackenzie."

"But I have thought of it. All I want now is to have it done."

A slight smile came across the puckered grey face of the lawyer as he
felt the imperative nature of the instruction given to him. The lady
had come there not to be advised, but to have her work done for her
out of hand. But the smile was very melancholy, and soon passed away.

"Is the widow in immediate distress?" asked Mr Slow.

Now the fact was that Miss Mackenzie herself had been in good funds,
having had ready money in her hands from the time of her brother
Walter's death; and for the last year she had by no means spent her
full income. She had, therefore, given her sister-in-law money, and
had paid the small debts which had come in, as such small debts will
come in, directly the dead man's body was under ground. Nay, some had
come in and had been paid while the man was yet dying. She exclaimed,
therefore, that her sister-in-law was not absolutely in immediate
want.

"And does she keep the house?" asked the lawyer.

Then Miss Mackenzie explained that Mrs Tom intended, if possible, to
keep the house, and to take some lady in to lodge with her.

"Then there cannot be any immediate hurry," urged the lawyer; "and
as the sum of money in question is large, I really think the matter
should be considered."

But Miss Mackenzie still pressed it. She was very anxious to make him
understand--and of course he did understand at once--that she had
no wish to hurry him in his work. All that she required of him was
an assurance that he accepted her instructions, and that the thing
should be done with not more than the ordinary amount of legal delay.

"You can pay her what you like out of your own income," said the
lawyer.

"But that is not what I promised," said Margaret Mackenzie.

Then there was silence among them all. Mr Ball had said very little
since he had been sitting in that room, and now it was not he who
broke the silence. He was still thinking of that deed of gift, and
wondering whether it had anything to do with Mr Slow's unwillingness
to undertake the commission which Margaret wished to give him. At
last Mr Slow got up from his chair, and spoke as follows:

"Mr Ball, I hope you will excuse me; but I have a word or two to say
to Miss Mackenzie, which I had rather say to her alone."

"Certainly," said Mr Ball, rising and preparing to go.

"You will wait for me, John," said Miss Mackenzie, asking this favour
of him as though she were very anxious that he should grant it.

Mr Slow said that he might be closeted with Miss Mackenzie for some
little time, perhaps for a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes. John
Ball looked at his watch, and then at his cousin's face, and then
promised that he would wait. Mr Slow himself took him into the outer
office, and then handed him a chair; but he observed that he was not
allowed to go back into the waiting-room.

There he waited for three-quarters of an hour, constantly looking at
his watch, and thinking more and more about that deed of gift. Surely
it must be the case that the document which he had seen had some
reference to this great delay. At last he heard a door open, and a
step along a passage, and then another door was opened, and Mr Slow
reappeared with Margaret Mackenzie behind him. John Ball's eyes
immediately fell on his cousin's face, and he could see that it was
very pale. The lawyer's wore that smile which men put on when they
wish to cover the disagreeable seriousness of the moment.

"Good morning, Miss Mackenzie," said he, pressing his client's hand.

"Good morning, sir," said she.

The lawyer and Mr Ball then touched each other's hands, and the
former followed his cousin down the steps out into the square.


CHAPTER XVIII

Tribulation


When they were once more out in the square, side by side, Miss
Mackenzie took hold of her cousin's arm and walked on for a few steps
in silence, in the direction of Great Queen Street--that is to say,
away from the city, towards which she knew her cousin would go in
pursuit of his own business. And indeed the hour was now close at
hand in which he should be sitting as a director at the Shadrach
Fire Assurance Office. If not at the Shadrach by two, or, with all
possible allowance for the shortcoming of a generally punctual
director, by a quarter past two, he would be too late for his guinea;
and now, as he looked at his watch, it wanted only ten minutes to
two. He was very particular about these guineas, and the chambers of
the Shadrach were away in Old Broad Street. Nevertheless he walked on
with her.

"John," she said, when they had walked half the length of that side
of the square, "I have heard dreadful news."

Then that deed of gift was, after all, a fact; and Mr Slow, instead
of being a rogue, must be the honestest old lawyer in London! He must
have been at work in discovering the wrong that had been done, and
was now about to reveal it to the world. Some such idea as this had
glimmered across Mr Ball's mind as he had sat in Mr Slow's outer
office, with his chin still resting on his umbrella.

But though some such idea as this did cross his mind, his thought on
the instant was of his cousin.

"What dreadful news, Margaret?"

"It is about my money."

"Stop a moment, Margaret. Are you sure that you ought to tell it to
me?"

"If I don't, to whom shall I tell it? And how can I bear it without
telling it to some one?"

"Did Mr Slow bid you speak of it to me?"

"No; he bade me think much of it before I did so, as you are
concerned. And he said that you might perhaps be disappointed."

Then they walked on again in silence. John Ball found his position
to be very difficult, and hardly knew how to speak to her, or how to
carry himself. If it was to be that this money was to come back to
him; if it was his now in spite of all that had come and gone; if the
wrong done was to be righted, and the property wrested from him was
to be restored,--restored to him who wanted it so sorely,--how could
he not triumph in such an act of tardy restitution? He remembered all
the particulars at this moment. Twelve thousand pounds of his uncle
Jonathan's money had gone to Walter Mackenzie. The sum once intended
for him had been much more than that,--more he believed than double
that; but if twelve thousand pounds was now restored to him, how
different would it make the whole tenor of his life; Mr Slow said
that he might be disappointed; but then Mr Slow was not his lawyer.
Did he not owe it to his family immediately to go to his own
attorney? Now he thought no more of his guinea at the Shadrach, but
walked on by his cousin's side with his mind intently fixed on his
uncle's money. She was still leaning on his arm.

"Tell me, John, what shall I do?" said she, looking up into his face.

Would it not be better for them, better for the interests of them
both, that they should be separated? Was it probable, or possible,
that with interests so adverse, they should give each other good
advice? Did it not behove him to explain to her that till this should
be settled between them, they must necessarily regard each other as
enemies? For a moment or two he wished himself away from her, and was
calculating how he might escape. But then, when he looked down at
her, and saw the softness of her eye, and felt the confidence implied
in the weight of her hand upon his arm, his hard heart was softened,
and he relented.

"It is difficult to tell you what you should do," he said. "At
present nothing seems to be known. He has said nothing for certain."

"But I could understand him," she said, in reply; "I could see by
his face, and I knew by the tone of his voice, that he was almost
certain. I know that he is sure of it. John, I shall be a beggar, an
absolute beggar! I shall have nothing; and those poor children will
be beggars, and their mother. I feel as though I did not know where I
am, or what I am doing."

Then an idea came into his head. If this money was not hers, it was
his. If it was not his, then it was hers. Would it not be well that
they should solve all the difficulty by agreeing then and there to be
man and wife? It was true that since his Rachel's death he had seen
no woman whom he so much coveted to have in his home as this one who
now leaned on his arm. But, as he thought of it, there seemed to be
a romance about such a step which would not befit him. What would
his mother and father say to him if, after all his troubles, he was
at last to marry a woman without a farthing? And then, too, would
she consent to give up all further consideration for her brother's
family? Would she agree to abandon her idea of assisting them, if
ultimately it should turn out that the property was hers? No; there
was certainly a looseness about such a plan which did not befit him;
and, moreover, were he to attempt it, he would probably not succeed.

But something must be done, now at this moment. The guinea at the
Shadrach was gone for ever, and therefore he could devote himself for
the day to his cousin.

"Are you to hear again from Mr Slow?" he said.

"I am to go to him this day week."

"And then it will be decided?"

"John, it is decided now; I am sure of it. I feel that it is all
gone. A careful man like that would never have spoken as he did,
unless he was sure. It will be all yours, John."

"So would have been that which your brother had," said he.

"I suppose so. It is dreadful to think of; very dreadful. I can only
promise that I will spend nothing till it is decided. John, I wish
you would take from me what I have, lest it should go." And she
absolutely had her hand upon her purse in her pocket.

"No," said he slowly, "no; you need think of nothing of that sort."

"But what am I to do? Where am I to go while this week passes by?"

"You will stay where you are, of course."

"Oh John! if you could understand! How am I to look my aunt in the
face. Don't you know that she would not wish to have me there at all
if I was a poor creature without anything?" The poor creature did not
know herself how terribly heavy was the accusation she was bringing
against her aunt. "And what will she say when she knows that the
money I have spent has never really been my own?"

Then he counselled her to say nothing about it to her aunt till after
her next visit to Mr Slow's and made her understand that he, himself,
would not mention the subject at the Cedars till the week was passed.
He should go, he said, to his own lawyer, and tell him the whole
story as far as he knew it. It was not that he in the least doubted
Mr Slow's honesty or judgment, but it would be better that the two
should act together. Then when the week was over, he and Margaret
would once more go to Lincoln's Inn Fields.

"What a week I shall have!" said she.

"It will be a nervous time for us both," he answered.

"And what must I do after that?" This question she asked, not in the
least as desirous of obtaining from him any assurance of assistance,
but in the agony of her spirit, and in sheer dismay as to her
prospects.

"We must hope for the best," he said. "God tempers the wind to the
shorn lamb." He had often thought of the way in which he had been
shorn, but he did not, at this moment, remember that the shearing had
never been so tempered as to be acceptable to his own feelings.

"And in God only can I trust," she answered. As she said this, her
mind went away to Littlebath, and the Stumfoldians, and Mr Maguire.
Was there not great mercy in the fact, that this ruin had not found
her married to that unfortunate clergyman? And what would they all
say at Littlebath when they heard the story? How would Mrs Stumfold
exult over the downfall of the woman who had rebelled against her!
how would the nose of the coachmaker's wife rise in the air! and how
would Mr Maguire rejoice that this great calamity had not fallen upon
him! Margaret Mackenzie's heart and spirit had been sullied by no
mean feeling with reference to her own wealth. It had never puffed
her up with exultation. But she calculated on the meanness of others,
as though it was a matter of course, not, indeed, knowing that it was
meanness, or blaming them in any way for that which she attributed to
them. Four gentlemen had wished to marry her during the past year. It
never occurred to her now, that any one of these four would on that
account hold out a hand to help her. In losing her money she would
have lost all that was desirable in their eyes, and this seemed to
her to be natural.

They were still walking round Lincoln's Inn Fields. "John," she
exclaimed suddenly, "I must go to them in Gower Street."

"What, now, to-day?"

"Yes, now, immediately. You need not mind me; I can get back to
Twickenham by myself. I know the trains."

"If I were you, Margaret, I would not go till all this is decided."

"It is decided, John; I know it is. And how can I leave them in such
a condition, spending money which they will never get? They must know
it some time, and the sooner the better. Mr Rubb must know it too. He
must understand that he is more than ever bound to provide them with
an income out of the business."

"I would not do it to-day if I were you."

"But I must, John; this very day. If I am not home by dinner, tell
them that I had to go to Gower Street. I shall at any rate be there
in the evening. Do not you mind coming back with me."

They were then at the gate leading into the New Square, and she
turned abruptly round, and hurried away from him up into Holborn,
passing very near to Mr Slow's chambers. John Ball did not attempt
to follow her, but stood there awhile looking after her. He felt,
in his heart, and knew by his judgment, that she was a good woman,
true, unselfish, full of love, clever too in her way, quick in
apprehension, and endowed with an admirable courage. He had heard her
spoken of at the Cedars as a poor creature who had money. Nay, he
himself had taken a part in so speaking of her. Now she had no money,
but he knew well that she was a creature the very reverse of poor.
What should he do for her? In what way should he himself behave
towards her? In the early days of his youth, before the cares of the
world had made him hard, he had married his Rachel without a penny,
and his father had laughed at him, and his mother had grieved over
him. Tough and hard, and careworn as he was now, defiled by the price
of stocks, and saturated with the poison of the money market, then
there had been in him a touch of romance and a dash of poetry, and
he had been happy with his Rachel. Should he try it again now? The
woman would surely love him when she found that he came to her in her
poverty as he had before come to her in her wealth. He watched her
till she passed out of his sight along the wall leading to Holborn,
and then he made his way to the City through Lincoln's Inn and
Chancery Lane.

Margaret walked straight into Holborn, and over it towards Red Lion
Square. She crossed the line of the omnibuses, feeling that now she
must spend no penny which she could save. She was tired, for she had
already walked much that morning, and the day was close and hot;
but nevertheless she went on quickly, through Bloomsbury Square and
Russell Square, to Gower Street. As she got near to the door her
heart almost failed her; but she went up to it and knocked boldly.
The thing should be done, let the pain of doing it be what it might.

"Laws, Miss Margaret! is that you?" said the maid. "Yes, missus is
at home. She'll see you, of course, but she's hard at work on the
furniture."

Then she went directly up into the drawing-room and there she found
her sister-in-law, with her dress tucked up to her elbows, with a
cloth in her hand, rubbing the chairs.

"What, Margaret! Whoever expected to see you? If we are to let the
rooms, it's as well to have the things tidy, isn't it? Besides, a
person bears it all the better when there's anything to do."

Then Mary Jane, the eldest daughter, came in from the bedroom behind
the drawing-room, similarly armed for work.

Margaret sat down wearily upon the sofa, having muttered some word
in answer to Mrs Tom's apology for having been found at work so soon
after her husband's death.

"Sarah," she said, "I have come to you to-day because I had something
to say to you about business."

"Oh, to be sure! I never thought for a moment you had come for
pleasure, or out of civility, as it might be. Of course I didn't
expect that when I saw you."

"Sarah, will you come upstairs with me into your own room?"

"Upstairs, Margaret? Oh yes, if you please. We shall be down
directly, my dear, and I dare say Margaret will stay to tea. We tea
early, because, since you went, we have dined at one."

Then Mrs Tom led the way up to the room in which Margaret had watched
by her dying brother's bed-side.

"I'm come in here," said Mrs Tom, again apologising, "because the
children had to come out of the room behind the drawing-room. Miss
Colza is staying with us, and she and Mary Jane have your room."

Margaret did not care much for all this; but the solemnity of the
chamber in which, when she last saw it, her brother's body was lying,
added something to her sadness at the moment.

"Sarah," she said, endeavouring to warn her sister-in-law by the tone
of her voice that her news was bad news, "I have just come from Mr
Slow."

"He's the lawyer, isn't he?"

"Yes, he's the lawyer. You know what I promised my brother. I went to
him to make arrangements for doing it, and when there I heard--oh,
Sarah, such dreadful news!"

"He says you're not to do it, I suppose!" And in the woman's voice
and eyes there were signs of anger, not against Mr Slow alone, but
also against Miss Mackenzie. "I knew how it would be. But, Margaret,
Mr Slow has got nothing to do with it. A promise is a promise; and a
promise made to a dying man! Oh, Margaret!"

"If I had it to give I would give it as surely as I am standing here.
When I told my brother it should be so, he believed me at once."

"Of course he believed you."

"But Sarah, they tell me now that I have nothing to give."

"Who tells you so?"

"The lawyer. I cannot explain it all to you; indeed, I do not as
yet understand it myself; but I have learned this morning that the
property which Walter left me was not his to leave. It had been given
away before Mr Jonathan Ball died."

"It's a lie!" said the injured woman,--the woman who was the least
injured, but who, with her children, had perhaps the best excuse for
being ill able to bear the injury. "It must be a lie. It's more than
twenty years ago. I don't believe and won't believe that it can be
so. John Ball must have something to do with this."

"The property will go to him, but he has had nothing to do with it.
Mr Slow found it out."

"It can't be so, not after twenty years. Whatever they may have done
from Walter, they can't take it away from you; not if you've spirit
enough to stand up for your rights. If you let them take it in that
way, I can't tell you what I shall think of you."

"It is my own lawyer that says so."

"Yes, Mr Slow; the biggest rogue of them all. I always knew that of
him, always. Oh, Margaret, think of the children! What are we to do?
What are we to do?" And sitting down on the bedside, she put her
dirty apron up to her eyes.

"I have been thinking of them ever since I heard it," said Margaret.

"But what good will thinking do? You must do something. Oh! Margaret,
after all that you said to him when he lay there dying!" and the
woman, with some approach to true pathos, put her hand on the spot
where her husband's head had rested. "Don't let his children come
to beggary because men like that choose to rob the widow and the
orphan."

"Every one has a right to what is his own," said Margaret. "Even
though widows should be beggars, and orphans should want."

"That's very well of you, Margaret. It's very well for you to say
that, who have friends like the Balls to stand by you. And, perhaps,
if you will let him have it all without saying anything, he will
stand by you firmer than ever. But who is there to stand by me and
my children? It can't be that after twenty years your fortune should
belong to anyone else. Why should it have gone on for more than
twenty years, and nobody have found it out? I don't believe it can
come so, Margaret, unless you choose to let them do it. I don't
believe a word of it."

There was nothing more to be said upon that subject at present. Mrs
Tom did indeed say a great deal more about it, sometimes threatening
Margaret, and sometimes imploring her; but Miss Mackenzie herself
would not allow herself to speak of the thing otherwise than as an
ascertained fact. Had the other woman been more reasonable or less
passionate in her lamentations Miss Mackenzie might have trusted
herself to tell her that there was yet a doubt. But she herself felt
that the doubt was so small, and that, in Mrs Tom's mind, it would
be so magnified into nearly a certainty on the other side, that
she thought it most discreet not to refer to the exact amount of
information which Mr Slow had given to her.

"It will be best for us to think, Sarah," she said, trying to turn
the other's mind away from the coveted income which she would never
possess--"to think what you and the children had better do."

"Oh, dear! oh, dear! oh, dear!"

"It is very bad; but there is always something to be done. We must
lose no time in letting Mr Rubb know the truth. When he hears how it
is, he will understand that something must be done for you out of the
firm."

"He won't do anything. He's downstairs now, flirting with that girl
in the drawing-room, instead of being at his business."

"If he's downstairs, I will see him."

As Mrs Mackenzie made no objection to this, Margaret went downstairs,
and when she came near the passage at the bottom, she heard the
voices of people talking merrily in the parlour. As her hand was
on the lock of the door, words from Miss Colza became very audible.
"Now, Mr Rubb, be quiet." So she knocked at the door, and having been
invited by Mr Rubb to come in, she opened it.

It may be presumed that the flirting had not gone to any perilous
extent, as there were three or four children present. Nevertheless
Miss Colza and Mr Rubb were somewhat disconcerted, and expressed
their surprise at seeing Miss Mackenzie.

"We all thought you were staying with the baronet's lady," said Miss
Colza.

Miss Mackenzie explained that she was staying at Twickenham, but that
she had come up to pay a visit to her sister-in-law. "And I've a word
or two I want to say to you, Mr Rubb, if you'll allow me."

"I suppose, then, I'd better make myself scarce," said Miss Colza.

As she was not asked to stay, she did make herself scarce, taking the
children with her up among the tables and chairs in the drawing-room.
There she found Mary Jane, but she did not find Mrs Mackenzie, who
had thrown herself on the bed in her agony upstairs.

Then Miss Mackenzie told her wretched story to Mr Rubb,--telling it
for the third time. He was awe-struck as he listened, but did not
once attempt to deny the facts, as had been done by Mrs Mackenzie.

"And is it sure?" he asked, when her story was over.

"I don't suppose it is quite sure yet. Indeed, Mr Slow said it was
not quite sure. But I have not allowed myself to doubt it, and I do
not doubt it."

"If he himself had not felt himself sure, he would not have told
you."

"Just so, Mr Rubb. That is what I think; and therefore I have given
my sister-in-law no hint that there is a chance left. I think you had
better not do so either."

"Perhaps not," said he. He spoke in a low voice, almost whispering,
as though he were half scared by the tidings he had heard.

"It is very dreadful," she said; "very dreadful for Sarah and the
children."

"And for you too, Miss Mackenzie."

"But about them, Mr Rubb. What can you do for them out of the
business?"

He looked very blank, and made no immediate answer.

"I know you will feel for their position," she said. "You do; do you
not?"

"Indeed I do, Miss Mackenzie."

"And you will do what you can. You can at any rate ensure them the
interest of the money--of the money you know that came from me."

Still Mr Rubb sat in silence, and she thought that he must be
stonyhearted. Surely he might undertake to do that, knowing, as he so
well knew, the way in which the money had been obtained, and knowing
also that he had already said that so much should be forthcoming out
of the firm to make up a general income for the family of his late
partner.

"Surely there will be no doubt about that, Mr Rubb."

"The Balls will claim the debt," said he hoarsely; and then, in
answer to her inquiries, he explained that the sum she had lent
had not, in truth, been hers to lend. It had formed part of the
money that John Ball could claim, and Mr Slow held in his hands an
acknowledgement of the debt from Rubb and Mackenzie. Of course, Mr
Ball would claim that the interest should be paid to him; and he
would claim the principal too, if, on inquiry, he should find that
the firm would be able to raise it. "I don't know that he wouldn't be
able to come upon the firm for the money your brother put into the
business," said he gloomily. "But I don't think he'll be such a fool
as that. He'd get nothing by it."

"Then may God help them!" said Miss Mackenzie.

"And what will you do?" he asked.

She shook her head, but made him no answer. As for herself she had
not begun to form a plan. Her own condition did not seem to her to be
nearly so dreadful as that of all these young children.

"I wish I knew how to help you," said Samuel Rubb.

"There are some positions, Mr Rubb, in which no one but God can
help one. But, perhaps--perhaps you may still do something for the
children."

"I will try, Miss Mackenzie."

"Thank you, and may God bless you; and He will bless you if you try.
'Who giveth a drop of water to one of them in my name, giveth it also
to me.' You will think of that, will you not?"

"I will think of you, and do the best that I can."

"I had hoped to have made them so comfortable! But God's will be
done; God's will be done. I think I had better go now, Mr Rubb. There
will be no use in my going to her upstairs again. Tell her from me,
with my love, that she shall hear from me when I have seen the
lawyer. I will try to come to her, but perhaps I may not be able.
Good-bye, Mr Rubb."

"Good-bye, Miss Mackenzie. I hope we shall see each other sometimes."

"Perhaps so. Do what you can to support her. She will want all that
her friends can do for her." So saying she went out of the room, and
let herself out of the front door into the street, and began her walk
back to the Waterloo Station.

She had not broken bread in her sister-in-law's house, and it was now
nearly six o'clock. She had taken nothing since she had breakfasted
at Twickenham, and the affairs of the day had been such as to give
her but little time to think of such wants. But now as she made her
weary way through the streets she became sick with hunger, and went
into a baker's shop for a bun. As she ate it she felt that it was
almost wrong in her to buy even that. At the present moment nothing
that she possessed seemed to her to be, by right, her own. Every
shilling in her purse was the property of John Ball, if Mr Slow's
statement were true. Then, when the bun was finished, as she went
down by Bloomsbury church and the region of St Giles's back to the
Strand, she did begin to think of her own position. What should she
do, and how should she commence to do it? She had declared to herself
but lately that the work for which she was fittest was that of
nursing the sick. Was it not possible that she might earn her bread
in this way? Could she not find such employment in some quarter where
her labour would be worth the food she must eat and the raiment she
would require? There was a hospital somewhere in London with which
she thought she had heard that John Ball was connected. Might not he
obtain for her a situation such as that?

It was past eight when she reached the Cedars, and then she was very
tired,--very tired and nearly sick also with want. She went first
of all up to her room, and then crept down into the drawing-room,
knowing that she should find them at tea. When she entered there was
a large party round the table, consisting of the girls and children
and Lady Ball. John Ball, who never took tea, was sitting in his
accustomed place near the lamp, and the old baronet was half asleep
in his arm-chair.

"If you were going to dine in Gower Street, Margaret, why didn't you
say so?" said Lady Ball.

In answer to this, Margaret burst out into tears. It was not the
unkindness of her aunt's voice that upset her so much as her own
weakness, and the terrible struggle of the long day.

"What on earth is the matter?" said Sir John.

One of the girls brought her a cup of tea, but she felt herself to be
too weak to take it in her hand, and made a sign that it should be
put on the table. She was not aware that she had ever fainted, but a
fear came upon her that she might do so now. She rallied herself and
struggled, striving to collect her strength.

"Do you know what is the matter with her, John?" said Lady Ball.

Then John Ball asked her if she had had dinner, and when she did not
answer him he saw how it was.

"Mother," he said, "she has had no food all day; I will get it for
her."

"If she wants anything, the servants can bring it to her, John," said
the mother.

But he would not trust the servants in this matter, but went out
himself and fetched her meat and wine, and pressed her to take it,
and sat himself beside her, and spoke kind words into her ear, and at
last, in some sort, she was comforted.


CHAPTER XIX

Showing How Two of Miss Mackenzie's Lovers Behaved


Mr Ball, on his return home to the Cedars, had given no definite
answer to his mother's inquiries as to the day's work in London, and
had found it difficult to make any reply to her that would for the
moment suffice. She was not a woman easily satisfied with evasive
answers; but, nevertheless, he told her nothing of what had occurred,
and left her simply in a bad humour. This conversation had taken
place before dinner, but after dinner she asked him another question.

"John, you might as well tell me this; are you engaged to Margaret
Mackenzie?"

"No, I am not," said her son, angrily.

After that his mother's humour had become worse than before, and in
that state her niece had found her when she returned home in the
evening, and had suffered in consequence.

On the next morning Miss Mackenzie sent down word to say she was
not well, and would not come down to breakfast. It so happened that
John Ball was going into town on this day also, the Abednego Life
Office holding its board day immediately after that of the Shadrach
Fire Office, and therefore he was not able to see her before she
encountered his mother. Lady Ball went up to her in her bedroom
immediately after breakfast, and there remained with her for some
time. Her aunt at first was tender with her, giving her tea and only
asking her gentle little questions at intervals; but as the old
lady became impatient at learning nothing, she began a system of
cross-questions, and at last grew to be angry and disagreeable. Her
son had distinctly told her that he was not engaged to his cousin,
and had in fact told her nothing else distinctly; but she, when
she had seen how careful he had been in supplying Margaret's wants
himself, with what anxious solicitude he had pressed wine on her;
how he had sat by her saying soft words to her--Lady Ball, when she
remembered this, could not but think that her son had deceived her.
And if so, why had he wished to deceive her? Could it be that he had
allowed her to give away half her money, and had promised to marry
her with the other half? There were moments in which her dear son
John could be very foolish, in spite of that life-long devotion
to the price of stocks, for which he was conspicuous. She still
remembered, as though it were but the other day, how he had persisted
in marrying Rachel, though Rachel brought nothing with her but a
sweet face, a light figure, a happy temper, and the clothes on her
back. To all mothers their sons are ever young, and to old Lady Ball
John Ball was still young, and still, possibly, capable of some such
folly as that of which she was thinking. If it were not so, if there
were not something of that kind in the wind why should he--why should
she--be so hard and uncommunicative in all their answers? There lay
her niece, however, sick with the headache, and therefore weak, and
very much in Lady Ball's power. The evil to be done was great, and
the necessity for preventing it might be immediate. And Lady Ball
was a lady who did not like to be kept in the dark in reference to
anything concerning her family. Having gone downstairs, therefore,
for an hour or so to look after her servants, or, as she had said,
to allow Margaret to have a little sleep, she returned again to the
charge, and sitting close to Margaret's pillow, did her best to find
out the truth.

If she could only have known the whole truth; how her son's thoughts
were running throughout the day, even as he sat at the Abednego
board, not on Margaret with half her fortune, but on Margaret with
none! how he was recalling the sweetness of her face as she looked up
to him in the square, and took him by his coat, and her tears as she
spoke of the orphan children, and the grace of her figure as she had
walked away from him, and the persistency of her courage in doing
what she thought to be right! how he was struggling within himself
with an endeavour, a vain endeavour, at a resolution that such a
marriage as that must be out of the question! Had Lady Ball known all
that, I think she would have flown to the offices of the Abednego
after her son, and never have left him till she had conquered his
heart and trampled his folly under her feet.

But she did not conquer Margaret Mackenzie. The poor creature lying
there, racked, in truth, with pain and sorrow, altogether incapable
of any escape from her aunt's gripe, would not say a word that might
tend to ease Lady Ball's mind. If she had told all that she knew, all
that she surmised, how would her aunt have rejoiced? That the money
should come without the wife would indeed have been a triumph! And
Margaret in telling all would have had nothing to tell of those
terribly foolish thoughts which were then at work in the City. To her
such a state of things as that which I have hinted would have seemed
quite as improbable, quite as unaccountable, as it would have done
to her aunt. But she did not tell all, nor in truth did she tell
anything.

"And John was with you at the lawyer's," said Lady Ball, attempting
her cross-examination for the third time. "Yes; he was with me
there."

"And what did he say when you asked Mr Slow to make such a settlement
as that?"

"He didn't say anything, aunt. The whole thing was put off."

"I know it was put off; of course it was put off. I didn't suppose
any respectable lawyer in London would have dreamed of doing such a
thing. But what I want to know is, how it was put off. What did Mr
Slow say?"

"I am to see him again next week."

"But not to get him to do anything of that kind?"

"I can't tell, aunt, what he is to do then."

"But what did he say when you made such a proposition as that? Did he
not tell you that it was quite out of the question?"

"I don't think he said that, aunt."

"Then what did he say? Margaret, I never saw such a person as you
are. Why should you be so mysterious? There can't be anything you
don't want me to know, seeing how very much I am concerned; and I do
think you ought to tell me all that occurred, knowing, as you do,
that I have done my very best to be kind to you."

"Indeed there isn't anything I can tell--not yet."

Then Lady Ball remained silent at the bed-head for the space,
perhaps, of ten minutes, meditating over it all. If her son was, in
truth, engaged to this woman, at any rate she would find that out. If
she asked a point-blank question on that subject, Margaret would not
be able to leave it unanswered, and would hardly be able to give a
directly false answer.

"My dear," she said, "I think you will not refuse to tell me plainly
whether there is anything between you and John. As his mother, I have
a right to know?"

"How anything between us?" said Margaret, raising herself on her
elbow.

"Are you engaged to marry him?"

"Oh, dear! no."

"And there is nothing of that sort going on?"

"Nothing at all."

"You are determined still to refuse him?"

"It is quite out of the question, aunt. He does not wish it at all.
You may be sure that he has quite changed his mind about it."

"But he won't have changed his mind if you have given up your plan
about your sister-in-law."

"He has changed it altogether, aunt. You needn't think anything more
about that. He thinks no more about it."

Nevertheless he was thinking about it this very moment, as he voted
for accepting a doubtful life at the Abednego, which was urged on the
board by a director, who, I hope, had no intimate personal relations
with the owner of the doubtful life in question.

Lady Ball did not know what to make of it. For many years past she
had not seen her son carry himself so much like a lover as he had
done when he sat himself beside his cousin pressing her to drink
her glass of sherry. Why was he so anxious for her comfort? And why,
before that, had he been so studiously reticent as to her affairs?

"I can't make anything out of you," said Lady Ball, getting up from
her chair with angry alacrity; "and I must say that I think it very
ungrateful of you, seeing all that I have done for you."

So saying, she left the room.

What, oh, what would she think when she should come to know the
truth? Margaret told herself as she lay there, holding her head
between her hands, that she was even now occupying that room and
enjoying the questionable comfort of that bed under false pretences.
When it was known that she was absolutely a pauper, would she then
be made welcome to her uncle's house? She was now remaining there
without divulging her circumstances, under the advice and by the
authority of her cousin; and she had resolved to be guided by him in
all things as long as he would be at the trouble to guide her. On
whom else could she depend? But, nevertheless, her position was very
grievous to her, and the more so now that her aunt had twitted her
with ingratitude. When the servant came to her, she felt that she
had no right to the girl's services; and when a message was brought
to her from Lady Ball, asking whether she would be taken out in the
carriage, she acknowledged to herself that such courtesy to her was
altogether out of place.

On that evening her cousin said nothing to her, and on the next day
he went again up to town.

"What, four days running, John!" said Lady Ball, at breakfast.

"I have particular business to-day, mother," said he.

On that evening, when he came back, he found a moment to take
Margaret by the hand and tell her that his own lawyer also was to
meet them at Mr Slow's chambers on the day named. He took her thus,
and held her hand closely in his while he was speaking, but he said
nothing to her more tender than the nature of such a communication
required.

"You and John are terribly mysterious," said Lady Ball to her, a
minute or two afterwards. "If there is anything I do hate it's
mystery in families. We never had any with us till you came."

On the next day a letter reached her which had been redirected from
Gower Street. It was from Mr Maguire; and she took it up into her own
room to read it and answer it. The letter and reply were as follows:


   Littlebath, Oct., 186--.

   DEAREST MARGARET,

   I hope the circumstances of the case will, in your
   opinion, justify me in writing to you again, though I am
   sorry to intrude upon you at a time when your heart must
   yet be sore with grief for the loss of your lamented
   brother. Were we now all in all to each other, as I
   hope we may still be before long, it would be my sweet
   privilege to wipe your eyes, and comfort you in your
   sorrow, and bid you remember that it is the Lord who
   giveth and the Lord who taketh away. Blessed be the name
   of the Lord. I do not doubt that you have spoken to
   yourself daily in those words, nay, almost hourly, since
   your brother was taken from you. I had not the privilege
   of knowing him, but if he was in any way like his sister,
   he would have been a friend whom I should have delighted
   to press to my breast and carry in my heart of hearts.

   But now, dearest Margaret, will you allow me to intrude
   upon you with another theme? Of course you well know the
   subject upon which, at present, I am thinking more than on
   any other. May I be permitted to hope that that subject
   sometimes presents itself to you in a light that is not
   altogether disagreeable. When you left Littlebath so
   suddenly, carried away on a mission of love and kindness,
   you left me, as you will doubtlessly remember, in a state
   of some suspense. You had kindly consented to acknowledge
   that I was not altogether indifferent to you.


"That's not true," said Margaret to herself, almost out loud; "I
never told him anything of the kind."


   And it was arranged that on that very day we were to have
   had a meeting, to which--shall I confess it?--I looked
   forward as the happiest moment of my life. I can hardly
   tell you what my feelings were when I found that you were
   going, and that I could only just say to you, farewell. If
   I could only have been with you when that letter came I
   think I could have softened your sorrow, and perhaps then,
   in your gentleness, you might have said a word which would
   have left me nothing to wish for in this world. But it has
   been otherwise ordered, and, Margaret, I do not complain.

   But what makes me write now is the great necessity that
   I should know exactly how I stand. You said something in
   your last dear letter which gave me to understand that you
   wished to do something for your brother's family. Promises
   made by the bed-sides of the dying are always dangerous,
   and in the cases of Roman Catholics have been found to be
   replete with ruin.


Mr Maguire, no doubt, forgot that in such cases the promises are made
by, and not to, the dying person.


   Nevertheless, I am far from saying that they should not
   be kept in a modified form, and you need not for a moment
   think that I, if I may be allowed to have an interest in
   the matter, would wish to hinder you from doing whatever
   may be becoming. I think I may promise you that you will
   find no mercenary spirit in me, although, of course, I am
   bound, looking forward to the tender tie which will, I
   hope, connect us, to regard your interests above all other
   worldly affairs. If I may then say a word of advice, it is
   to recommend that nothing permanent be done till we can
   act together in this matter. Do not, however, suppose that
   anything you can do or have done, can alter the nature of
   my regard.

   But now, dearest Margaret, will you not allow me to press
   for an immediate answer to my appeal? I will tell you
   exactly how I am circumstanced, and then you will see
   how strong is my reason that there should be no delay.
   Very many people here, I may say all the elite of the
   evangelical circles, including Mrs Perch--[Mrs Perch was
   the coachmaker's wife, who had always been so true to Mrs
   Stumfold]--desired that I should establish a church here,
   on my own bottom, quite independent of Mr Stumfold. The
   Stumfolds would then soon have to leave Littlebath, there
   is no doubt of that, and she has already made herself
   so unendurable, and her father and she together are so
   distressing, that the best of their society has fallen
   away from them. Her treatment to you was such that I
   could never endure her afterwards. Now the opening for a
   clergyman with pure Gospel doctrines would be the best
   thing that has turned up for a long time. The church would
   be worth over six hundred a year, besides the interest of
   the money which would have to be laid out. I could have
   all this commenced at once, and secure the incumbency,
   if I could myself head the subscription list with two
   thousand pounds. It should not be less than that. You will
   understand that the money would not be given, though, no
   doubt, a great many persons would, in this way, be induced
   to give theirs. But the pew rents would go in the first
   instance to provide interest for the money not given, but
   lent; as would of course be the case with your money, if
   you would advance it.

   I should not think of such a plan as this if I did not
   feel that it was the best thing for your interests; that
   is, if, as I fondly hope, I am ever to call you mine.
   Of course, in that case, it is only common prudence on
   my part to do all I can to insure for myself such a
   professional income, for your sake. For, dearest Margaret,
   my brightest earthly hope is to see you with everything
   comfortable around you. If that could be arranged, it
   would be quite within our means to keep some sort of
   carriage.


Here would be a fine opportunity for rivalling Mrs Stumfold! That was
the temptation with which he hoped to allure her.


   But the thing must be done quite immediately; therefore
   let me pray you not to postpone my hopes with unnecessary
   delay. I know it seems unromantic to urge a lady with
   any pecuniary considerations, but I think that under the
   circumstances, as I have explained them, you will forgive
   me.

   Believe me to be, dearest Margaret,
   Yours, with truest,
   Most devoted affection,

   JEREH. MAGUIRE.


One man had wanted her money to buy a house on a mortgage, and
another now asked for it to build a church, giving her, or promising
to give her, the security of the pew rents. Which of the two was
the worst? They were both her lovers, and she thought that he was
the worst who first made his love and then tried to get her money.
These were the ideas which at once occurred to her upon her reading
Mr Maguire's letter. She had quite wit enough to see through the
whole project; how outsiders were to be induced to give their
money, thinking that all was to be given; whereas those inside the
temple,--those who knew all about it,--were simply to make for
themselves a good speculation. Her cousin John's constant solicitude
for money was bad; but, after all, it was not so bad as this. She
told herself at once that the letter was one which would of itself
have ended everything between her and Mr Maguire, even had nothing
occurred to put an absolute and imperative stop to the affair. Mr
Maguire pressed for an early answer, and before she left the room she
sat down and wrote it.


   The Cedars, Twickenham, October, 186--.

   DEAR SIR


Before she wrote the words, "Dear Sir," she had to think much of
them, not having had as yet much experience in writing letters to
gentlemen; but she concluded at last that if she simply wrote "Sir,"
he would take it as an insult, and that if she wrote "My dear Mr
Maguire," it would, under the circumstances, be too affectionate.


   DEAR SIR,

   I have got your letter to-day, and I hasten to answer it
   at once. All that to which you allude between us must be
   considered as being altogether over, and I am very sorry
   that you should have had so much trouble. My circumstances
   are altogether changed. I cannot explain how, as it would
   make my letter very long; but you may be assured that such
   is the case, and to so great an extent that the engagement
   you speak of would not at all suit you at present. Pray
   take this as being quite true, and believe me to be

   Your very humble servant,

   MARGARET MACKENZIE.


I feel that the letter was somewhat curt and dry as an answer to
an effusion so full of affection as that which the gentleman had
written; and the fair reader, when she remembers that Miss Mackenzie
had given the gentleman considerable encouragement, will probably
think that she should have expressed something like regret at so
sudden a termination to so tender a friendship. But she, in truth,
regarded the offer as having been made to her money solely, and as
in fact no longer existing as an offer, now that her money itself was
no longer in existence. She was angry with Mr Maguire for the words
he had written about her brother's affairs; for his wish to limit
her kindness to her nephews and nieces, and also for his greediness
in being desirous of getting her money at once; but as to the main
question, she thought herself bound to answer him plainly, as she
would have answered a man who came to buy from her a house, which
house was no longer in her possession.

Mr Maguire when he received her letter, did not believe a word of it.
He did not in the least believe that she had actually lost everything
that had once belonged to her, or that he, if he married her now,
would obtain less than he would have done had he married her before
her brother's death. But he thought that her brother's family and
friends had got hold of her in London; that Mr Rubb might very
probably have done it; and that they were striving to obtain command
of her money, and were influencing her to desert him. He thinking so,
and being a man of good courage, took a resolution to follow his
game, and to see whether even yet he might not obtain the good things
which had made his eyes glisten and his mouth water. He knew that
there was very much against him in the race that he was desirous of
running, and that an heiress with--he did not know how much a year,
but it had been rumoured among the Stumfoldians that it was over
a thousand--might not again fall in his way. There were very many
things against him, of which he was quite conscious. He had not a
shilling of his own, and was in receipt of no professional income. He
was not altogether a young man. There was in his personal appearance
a defect which many ladies might find it difficult to overcome; and
then that little story about his debts, which Miss Todd had picked
up, was not only true, but was some degrees under the truth. No
doubt, he had a great wish that his wife should be comfortable; but
he also, for himself, had long been pining after those eligible
comforts, which when they appertain to clergymen, the world, with so
much malice, persists in calling the flesh-pots of Egypt. Thinking
of all this, of the position he had already gained in spite of his
personal disadvantages, and of the great chance there was that his
Margaret might yet be rescued from the Philistines, he resolved upon
a journey to London.

In the meantime Miss Mackenzie's other lover had not been idle, and
he also was resolved by no means to give up the battle.

It cannot be said that Mr Rubb was not mercenary in his views, but
with his desire for the lady's money was mingled much that was
courageous, and something also that was generous. The whole truth
had been told to him as plainly as it had been told to Mr Ball, and
nevertheless he determined to persevere. He went to work diligently
on that very afternoon, deserting the smiles of Miss Colza, and made
such inquiries into the law of the matter as were possible to him;
and they resulted, as far as Miss Mackenzie was concerned, in his
appearing late one afternoon at the front door of Sir John Ball's
house. On the day following this Miss Mackenzie was to keep her
appointment with Mr Slow, and her cousin was now up in London among
the lawyers.

Miss Mackenzie was sitting with her aunt when Mr Rubb called.
They were both in the drawing-room; and Lady Ball, who had as yet
succeeded in learning nothing, and who was more than ever convinced
that there was much to learn, was not making herself pleasant to her
companion. Throughout the whole week she had been very unpleasant.
She did not quite understand why Margaret's sojourn at the Cedars
had been and was to be so much prolonged. Margaret, feeling herself
compelled to say something on the subject, had with some hesitation
told her aunt that she was staying till she had seen her lawyer
again, because her cousin wished her to stay.

In answer to this, Lady Ball had of course told her that she was
welcome. Her ladyship had then cross-questioned her son on that
subject also, but he had simply said that as there was law business
to be done, Margaret might as well stay at Twickenham till it was
completed.

"But, my dear," Lady Ball had said, "her law business might go on for
ever, for what you know."

"Mother," said the son, sternly, "I wish her to stay here at present,
and I suppose you will not refuse to permit her to do so."

After this, Lady Ball could go no further.

On the day on which Mr Rubb was announced in the drawing-room,
the aunt and niece were sitting together. "Mr Rubb--to see Miss
Mackenzie," said the old servant, as he opened the door.

Miss Mackenzie got up, blushing to her forehead, and Lady Ball rose
from her chair with an angry look, as though asking the oilcloth
manufacturer how he dared to make his way in there. The name of the
Rubbs had been specially odious to all the family at the Cedars since
Tom Mackenzie had carried his share of Jonathan Ball's money into the
firm in the New Road. And Mr Rubb's appearance was not calculated to
mitigate this anger. Again he had got on those horrid yellow gloves,
and again had dressed himself up to his idea of the garb of a man of
fashion. To Margaret's eyes, in the midst of her own misfortunes, he
was a thing horrible to behold, as he came into that drawing-room.
When she had seen him in his natural condition, at her brother's
house, he had been at any rate unobjectionable to her; and when,
on various occasions, he had talked to her about his own business,
pleading his own cause and excusing his own fault, she had really
liked him. There had been a moment or two, the moments of his
bitterest confessions, in which she had in truth liked him much. But
now! What would she not have given that the old servant should have
taken upon himself to declare that she was not at home.

But there he was in her aunt's drawing-room, and she had nothing to
do but to ask him to sit down.

"This is my aunt, Lady Ball," said Margaret.

"I hope I have the honour of seeing her ladyship quite well," said Mr
Rubb, bowing low before he ventured to seat himself.

Lady Ball would not condescend to say a word, but stared at him in a
manner that would have driven him out of the room had he understood
the nature of such looks on ladies' faces.

"I hope my sister-in-law and the children are well," said Margaret,
with a violent attempt to make conversation.

"Pretty much as you left them, Miss Mackenzie; she takes on a good
deal; but that's only human nature; eh, my lady?"

But her ladyship still would not condescend to speak a word.

Margaret did not know what further to say. All subjects on which it
might have been possible for her to speak to Mr Rubb were stopped
from her in the presence of her aunt. Mr Rubb knew of that great
calamity of which, as yet, Lady Ball knew nothing,--of that great
calamity to the niece, but great blessing, as it would be thought by
the aunt. And she was in much fear lest Mr Rubb should say something
which might tend to divulge the secret.

"Did you come by the train?" she said, at last, reduced in her agony
to utter the first unmeaning question of which she could think.

"Yes, Miss Mackenzie, I came by the train, and I am going back by the
5.45, if I can just be allowed to say a few words to you first."

"Does the gentleman mean in private?" asked Lady Ball.

"If you please, my lady," said Mr Rubb, who was beginning to think
that he did not like Lady Ball.

"If Miss Mackenzie wishes it, of course she can do so."

"It may be about my brother's affairs," said Margaret, getting up.

"It is nothing to me, my dear, whether they are your brother's or
your own," said Lady Ball; "you had better not interrupt your uncle
in the study; but I daresay you'll find the dining-room disengaged."

So Miss Mackenzie led the way into the dining-room, and Mr Rubb
followed. There they found some of the girls, who stared very hard at
Mr Rubb, as they left the room at their cousin's request. As soon as
they were left alone Mr Rubb began his work manfully.

"Margaret," said he, "I hope you will let me call you so now that you
are in trouble?"

To this she made no answer.

"But perhaps your trouble is over? Perhaps you have found out that it
isn't as you told us the other day?"

"No, Mr Rubb; I have found nothing of that kind; I believe it is as I
told you."

"Then I'll tell you what I propose. You haven't given up the fight,
have you? You have not done anything?"

"I have done nothing as yet."

"Then I'll tell you my plan. Fight it out."

"I do not want to fight for anything that is not my own."

"But it is your own. It is your own of rights, even though it should
not be so by some quibble of the lawyers. I don't believe twelve
Englishmen would be found in London to give it to anybody else; I
don't indeed."

"But my own lawyer tells me it isn't mine, Mr Rubb."

"Never mind him; don't you give up anything. Don't you let them make
you soft. When it comes to money nobody should give up anything. Now
I'll tell you what I propose."

She now sat down and listened to him, while he stood over her. It was
manifest that he was very eager, and in his eagerness he became loud,
so that she feared his words might be heard out of the room.

"You know what my sentiments are," he said. At that moment she did
not remember what his sentiments were, nor did she know what he
meant. "They're the same now as ever. Whether you have got your
fortune, or whether you've got nothing, they're the same. I've
seen you tried alongside of your brother, when he was a-dying, and,
Margaret, I like you now better than ever I did."

"Mr Rubb, at present, all that cannot mean anything."

"But doesn't it mean anything? By Jove! it does though. It means just
this, that I'll make you Mrs Rubb to-morrow, or as soon as Doctors'
Commons, and all that, will let us do it; and I'll chance the money
afterwards. Do you let it just go easy, and say nothing, and I'll
fight them. If the worst comes to the worst, they'll be willing
enough to cry halves with us. But, Margaret, if the worst does come
to be worse than that you won't find me hard to you on that account.
I shall always remember who helped me when I wanted help."

"I am sure, Mr Rubb, I am much obliged to you."

"Don't talk about being obliged, but get up and give me your hand,
and say it shall be a bargain." Then he tried to take her by the hand
and raise her from the chair up towards him.

"No, no, no!" said she.

"But I say yes. Why should it be no? If there never should come a
penny out of this property I will put a roof over your head, and will
find you victuals and clothes respectably. Who will do better for you
than that? And as for the fight, by Jove! I shall like it. You'll
find they'll get nothing out of my hands till they have torn away my
nails."

Here was a new phase in her life. Here was a man willing to marry her
even though she had no assured fortune.

"Margaret," said he, pleading his cause again, "I have that love
for you that I would take you though it was all gone, to the last
farthing."

"It is all gone."

"Let that be as it may, we'll try it. But though it should be all
gone, every shilling of it, still, will you be my wife?"

It was altogether a new phase, and one that was inexplicable to her.
And this came from a man to whom she had once thought that she might
bring herself to give her hand and her heart, and her money also. She
did not doubt that if she took him at his word he would be good to
her, and provide her with shelter, and food and raiment, as he had
promised her. Her heart was softened towards him, and she forgot his
gloves and his shining boots. But she could not bring herself to say
that she would love him, and be his wife. It seemed to her now that
she was under the guidance of her cousin, and that she was pledged to
do nothing of which he would disapprove. He would not approve of her
accepting the hand of a man who would be resolved to litigate this
matter with him.

"It cannot be," she said. "I feel how generous you are, but it cannot
be."

"And why shouldn't it be?"

"Oh, Mr Rubb, there are things one cannot explain."

"Margaret, think of it. How are you to do better?"

"Perhaps not; probably not. In many ways I am sure I could not do
better. But it cannot be."

Not then, nor for the next twenty minutes, but at last he took his
answer and went. He did this when he found that he had no more
minutes to spare if he intended to return by the 5.45 train. Then,
with an angry gesture of his head, he left her, and hurried across to
the front door. Then, as he went out, Mr John Ball came in.

"Good evening, sir," said Mr Rubb. "I am Mr Samuel Rubb. I have just
been seeing Miss Mackenzie, on business. Good evening, sir."

John Ball said never a word, and Samuel Rubb hurried across the
grounds to the railway station.


CHAPTER XX

Showing How the Third Lover Behaved


"What has that man been here for?" Those were the first words which
Mr Ball spoke to his cousin after shutting the hall-door behind
Mr Rubb's back. When the door was closed he turned round and saw
Margaret as she was coming out of the dining-room, and in a voice
that sounded to her as though he were angry, asked her the above
question.

"He came to see me, John," said Miss Mackenzie, going back into the
dining-room. "He was my brother's partner."

"He said he came upon business; what business could he have?"

It was not very easy for her to tell him what had been Mr Rubb's
business. She had no wish to keep anything secret from her cousin,
but she did not know how to describe the scene which had just taken
place, or how to acknowledge that the man had come there to ask her
to marry him.

"Does he know anything of this matter of your money?" continued Mr
Ball.

"Oh yes; he knows it all. He was in Gower Street when I told my
sister-in-law."

"And he came to advise you about it?"

"Yes; he did advise me about it. But his advice I shall not take."

"And what did he advise?"

Then Margaret told him that Mr Rubb had counselled her to fight it
out to the last, in order that a compromise might at any rate be
obtained.

"If it has no selfish object in view I am far from saying that he is
wrong," said John Ball. "It is what I should advise a friend to do
under similar circumstances."

"It is not what I shall do, John."

"No; you are like a lamb that gives itself up to the slaughterer. I
have been with one lawyer or the other all day, and the end of it
is that there is no use on earth in your going to London to-morrow,
nor, as far as I can see, for another week to come. The two lawyers
together have referred the case to counsel for opinion,--for an
amicable opinion as they call it. From what they all say, Margaret,
it seems to me clear that the matter will go against you."

"I have expected nothing else since Mr Slow spoke to me."

"But no doubt you can make a fight, as your friend says."

"I don't want to fight, John; you know that."

"Mr Slow won't let you give it up without a contest. He suggested
a compromise,--that you and I should divide it. But I hate
compromises." She looked up into his face but said nothing. "The
truth is, I have been so wronged in the matter, the whole thing has
been so cruel, it has, all of it together, so completely ruined me
and my prospects in life, that were it any one but you, I would
sooner have a lawsuit than give up one penny of what is left." Again
she looked at him, but he went on speaking of it without observing
her. "Think what it has been, Margaret! The whole of this property
was once mine! Not the half of it only that has been called yours,
but the whole of it! The income was actually paid for one half-year
to a separate banking account on my behalf, before I was of age. Yes,
paid to me, and I had it! My uncle Jonathan had no more legal right
to take it away from me than you have to take the coat off my back.
Think of that, and of what four-and-twenty thousand pounds would have
done for me and my family from that time to this. There have been
nearly thirty years of this robbery!"

"It was not my fault, John."

"No; it was not your fault. But if your brothers could pay me back
all that they really owe me, all that the money would now be worth,
it would come to nearly a hundred thousand pounds. After that, what
is a man to say when he is asked to compromise? As far as I can see,
there is not a shadow of doubt about it. Mr Slow does not pretend
that there is a doubt. How they can fail to see the justice of it is
what passes my understanding!"

"Mr Slow will give up at once, I suppose, if I ask him?"

"I don't want you to ask him. I would rather that you didn't say a
word to him about it. There is a debt too from that man Rubb which
they advise me to abandon."

In answer to this, Margaret could say nothing, for she knew well that
her trust in the interest of that money was the only hope she had of
any maintenance for her sister-in-law.

After a few minutes' silence he again spoke to her. "He desires to
know whether you want money for immediate use."

"Who wants to know?"

"Mr Slow."

"Oh no, John. I have money at the bankers', but I will not touch it."

"How much is there at the bankers?"

"There is more than three hundred pounds; but very little more;
perhaps three hundred and ten."

"You may have that."

"John, I don't want anything that is not my own; not though I had to
walk out to earn my bread in the streets to-morrow."

"That is your own, I tell you. The tenants have been ordered not to
pay any further rents, till they receive notice. You can make them
pay, nevertheless, if you wish it; at least, you might do so, till
some legal steps were taken."

"Of course, I shall do nothing of the kind. It was Mr Slow's people
who used to get the money. And am I not to go up to London
to-morrow?"

"You can go if you choose, but you will learn nothing. I told Mr Slow
that I would bid you wait till I heard from him again. It is time now
for us to get ready for dinner."

Then, as he was going to leave the room, she took him by the coat and
held him again,--held him as fast as she had done on the pavement in
Lincoln's Inn Fields. There was a soft, womanly, trusting weakness in
the manner of her motion as she did this, which touched him now as it
had touched him then.

"John," she said, "if there is to be so much delay, I must not stay
here."

"Why not, Margaret?"

"My aunt does not like my staying; I can see that; and I don't think
it is fair to do so while she does not know all about it. It is
something like cheating her out of the use of the house."

"Then I will tell her."

"What, all? Had I not better go first?"

"No; you cannot go. Where are you to go to? I will tell her
everything to-night. I had almost made up my mind to do so already.
It will be better that they should both know it,--my father and my
mother. My father probably will be required to say all that he knows
about the matter."

"I shall be ready to go at once if she wishes it," said Margaret.

To this he made no answer, but went upstairs to his bedroom, and
there, as he dressed, thought again, and again, and again of his
cousin Margaret. What should he do for her, and in what way should he
treat her? The very name of the Mackenzies he had hated of old, and
their names were now more hateful to him than ever. He had correctly
described his own feelings towards them when he said, either truly or
untruly, that they had deprived him of that which would have made his
whole life prosperous instead of the reverse. And it seemed as though
he had really thought that they had been in fault in this,--that they
had defrauded him. It did not, apparently, occur to him that the only
persons he could blame were his uncle Jonathan and his own lawyers,
who, at his uncle's death, had failed to discover on his behalf what
really were his rights. Walter Mackenzie had been a poor creature
who could do nothing. Tom Mackenzie had been a mean creature who had
allowed himself to be cozened in a petty trade out of the money which
he had wrongfully acquired. They were odious to him, and he hated
their memories. He would fain have hated all that belonged to them,
had he been able. But he was not able to hate this woman who clung to
him, and trusted him, and felt no harsh feelings towards him, though
he was going to take from her everything that had been hers. She
trusted him for advice even though he was her adversary! Would he
have trusted her or any other human being under such circumstances?
No, by heavens! But not the less on that account did he acknowledge
to himself that this confidence in her was very gracious.

That evening passed by very quietly as far as Miss Mackenzie was
concerned. She had some time since, immediately on her last arrival
at the Cedars, offered to relieve her aunt from the trouble of making
tea, and the duty had then been given up to her. But since Lady
Ball's affair in obtaining possession of her niece's secret, the post
of honour had been taken away.

"You don't make it as your uncle likes it," Lady Ball had said.

She made her little offer again on this evening, but it was rejected.

"Thank you, no; I believe I had better do it myself," had been the
answer.

"Why can't you let Margaret make tea? I'm sure she does it very
well," said John.

"I don't see that you can be a judge, seeing that you take none," his
mother replied; "and if you please, I'd rather make the tea in my own
house as long as I can."

This little allusion to her own house was, no doubt, a blow at her
son, to punish him in that he had dictated to her in that matter of
the continued entertainment of her guest; but Margaret also felt it
to be a blow at her, and resolved that she would escape from the
house with as little further delay as might be possible. Beyond this,
the evening was very quiet, till Margaret, a little after tea, took
her candle and went off wearily to her room.

But then the business of the day as regarded the Cedars began; for
John Ball, before he went to bed, told both his father and his
mother the whole story,--the story, that is, as far as the money
was concerned, and also as far as Margaret's conduct to him was
concerned; but of his own feelings towards her he said nothing.

"She has behaved admirably, mother," he said; "you must acknowledge
that, and I think that she is entitled to all the kindness we can
show her."

"I have been kind to her," Lady Ball answered.

This had taken place in Lady Ball's own room, after they had left Sir
John. The tidings had taken the old man so much by surprise, that he
had said little or nothing. Even his caustic ill-nature had deserted
him, except on one occasion, when he remarked that it was like his
brother Jonathan to do as much harm with his money as was within his
reach.

"My memory in such a matter is worth nothing,--absolutely nothing,"
the old man had said. "I always supposed something was wrong. I
remember that. But I left it all to the lawyers."

In Lady Ball's room the conversation was prolonged to a late hour of
the night, and took various twists and turns, as such conversations
will do.

"What are we to do about the young woman?" That was Lady Ball's main
question, arising, no doubt, from the reflection that the world would
lean very heavily on them if they absolutely turned her out to starve
in the streets.

John Ball made no proposition in answer to this, having not as yet
made up his mind as to what his own wishes were with reference to the
young woman. Then his mother made her proposition.

"Of course that money due by the Rubbs must be paid. Let her take
that." But her son made no reply to this other than that he feared
the Rubbs were not in a condition to pay the money.

"They would pay her the interest at any rate," said Lady Ball, "till
she had got into some other way of life. She would do admirably for a
companion to an old lady, because her manners are good, and she does
not want much waiting upon herself."

On the next morning Miss Mackenzie trembled in her shoes as she came
down to breakfast. Her uncle, whom she feared the most, would not be
there; but the meeting with her aunt, when her aunt would know that
she was a pauper and that she had for the last week been an impostor,
was terrible to her by anticipation. But she had not calculated that
her aunt's triumph in this newly-acquired wealth for the Ball family
would, for the present, cover any other feeling that might exist. Her
aunt met her with a gracious smile, was very urbane in selecting a
chair for her at prayers close to her own, and pressed upon her a
piece of buttered toast out of a little dish that was always prepared
for her ladyship's own consumption. After breakfast John Ball again
went to town. He went daily to town during the present crisis; and,
on this occasion, his mother made no remark as to the urgency of his
business. When he was gone Lady Ball began to potter about the house,
after her daily custom, and was longer in her pottering than was
usual with her. Miss Mackenzie helped the younger children in their
lessons, as she often did; and when time for luncheon came, she
had almost begun to think that she was to be allowed to escape any
conversation with her aunt touching the great money question. But
it was not so. At one she was told that luncheon and the children's
dinner was postponed till two, and she was asked by the servant to go
up to Lady Ball in her own room.

"Come and sit down, my dear," said Lady Ball, in her sweetest voice.
"It has got to be very cold, and you had better come near the fire."
Margaret did as she was bidden, and sat herself down in the chair
immediately opposite to her aunt.

"This is a wonderful story that John has told me," continued her
aunt--"very wonderful."

"It is sad enough for me," said Margaret, who did not feel inclined
to be so self-forgetful in talking to her aunt as she had been with
her cousin.

"It is sad for you, Margaret, no doubt. But I am sure you have within
you that conscientious rectitude of purpose that you would not wish
to keep anything for yourself that in truth belongs to another."

To this Margaret answered nothing, and her aunt went on.

"It is a great change to you, no doubt; and, of course, that is the
point on which I wish to speak to you most especially. I have told
John that something must be done for you."

This jarred terribly on poor Margaret's feelings. Her cousin had said
nothing, not a word as to doing anything for her. The man who had
told her of his love, and asked her to be his wife, not twelve months
since,--who had pressed her to be of all women the dearest to him
and the nearest,--had talked to her of her ruin without offering her
aid, although this ruin to her would enrich him very greatly. She
had expected nothing from him, had wanted nothing from him; but by
degrees, when absent from him, the feeling had grown upon her that he
had been hard to her in abstaining from expressions of commiseration.
She had yielded to him in the whole affair, assuring him that nothing
should be done by her to cause him trouble; and she would have been
grateful to him if in return he had said something to her of her
future mode of life. She had intended to speak to him about the
hospital; but she had thought that she might abstain from doing so
till he himself should ask some question as to her plans. He had
asked no such question, and she was now almost determined to go
away without troubling him on the subject. But if he, who had once
professed to love her, would make no suggestion as to her future
life, she could ill bear that any offer of the kind should come from
her aunt, who, as she knew, had only regarded her for her money.

"I would rather," she replied, "that nothing should be said to him on
the subject."

"And why not, Margaret?"

"I desire that I may be no burden to him or anybody. I will go away
and earn my bread; and even if I cannot do that, my relations shall
not be troubled by hearing from me."

She said this without sobbing, but not without that almost hysterical
emotion which indicates that tears are being suppressed with pain.

"That is false pride, my dear."

"Very well, aunt. I daresay it is false; but it is my pride. I may be
allowed to keep my pride, though I can keep nothing else."

"What you say about earning your bread is very proper; and I and John
and your uncle also have been thinking of that. But I should be glad
if some additional assistance should be provided for you, in the
event of old age, you know, or illness. Now, as to earning your
bread, I remarked to John that you were peculiarly qualified for
being a lady's companion."

"For being what, aunt?"

"For being companion to some lady in the decline of life, who would
want to have some nice mannered person always with her. You have the
advantage of being ladylike and gentle, and I think that you are
patient by disposition."

"Aunt," said Miss Mackenzie, and her voice as she spoke was hardly
gentle, nor was it indicative of much patience. Her hysterics also
seemed for the time to have given way to her strong passionate
feeling. "Aunt," she said, "I would sooner take a broom in my hand,
and sweep a crossing in London, than lead such a life as that. What!
make myself the slave of some old woman, who would think that she had
bought the power of tyrannising over me by allowing me to sit in the
same room with her? No, indeed! It may very likely be the case that I
may have to serve such a one in the kitchen, but it shall be in the
kitchen, and not in the drawing-room. I have not had much experience
in life, but I have had enough to learn that lesson!"

Lady Ball, who during the first part of the conversation had been
unrolling and winding a great ball of worsted, now sat perfectly
still, holding the ball in her lap, and staring at her niece. She was
a quick-witted woman, and it no doubt occurred to her that the great
objection to living with an old lady, which her niece had expressed
so passionately, must have come from the trial of that sort of
life which she had had at the Cedars. And there was enough in Miss
Mackenzie's manner to justify Lady Ball in thinking that some such
expression of feeling as this had been intended by her. She had
never before heard Margaret speak out so freely, even in the days
of her undoubted heiress-ship; and now, though she greatly disliked
her niece, she could not avoid mingling something of respect and
something almost amounting to fear with her dislike. She did not
dare to go on unwinding her worsted, and giving the advantage of her
condescension to a young woman who spoke out at her in that way.

"I thought I was advising you for the best," she said, "and I hoped
that you would have been thankful."

"I don't know what may be for the best," said Margaret, again
bordering upon the hysterical in the tremulousness of her voice, "but
that I'm sure would be for the worst. However, I've made up my mind
to nothing as yet."

"No, my dear; of course not; but we all must think of it, you know."

Her cousin John had not thought of it, and she did not want any one
else to do so. She especially did not want her aunt to think of it.
But it was no doubt necessary that her aunt should consider how long
she would be required to provide a home for her impoverished niece,
and Margaret's mind at once applied itself to that view of the
subject. "I have made up my mind that I will go to London next week,
and then I must settle upon something."

"You mean when you go to Mr Slow's?"

"I mean that I shall go for good. I have a little money by me, which
John says I may use, and I shall take a lodging till--till--till--"
Then she could not go on any further.

"You can stay here, Margaret, if you please;--that is till something
more is settled about all this affair."

"I will go on Monday, aunt. I have made up my mind to that." It was
now Saturday. "I will go on Monday. It will be better for all parties
that I should be away." Then she got up, and waiting no further
speech from her aunt, took herself off to her own room.

She did not see her aunt again till dinner-time, and then neither of
them spoke to each other. Lady Ball thought that she had reason to
be offended, and Margaret would not be the first to speak. In the
evening, before the whole family, she told her cousin that she had
made up her mind to go up to London on Monday. He begged her to
reconsider her resolution, but when she persisted that she would do
so, he did not then argue the question any further. But on the Sunday
he implored her not to go as yet, and did obtain her consent to
postpone her departure till Tuesday. He wished, he said, to be at
any rate one day more in London before she went. On the Sunday she
was closeted with her uncle who also sent for her, and to him she
suggested her plan of becoming nurse at a hospital. He remarked that
he hoped that would not be necessary.

"Something will be necessary," she said, "as I don't mean to eat
anybody's bread but my own."

In answer to this he said that he would speak to John, and then that
interview was over. On the Monday morning John Ball said something
respecting Margaret to his mother which acerbated that lady more than
ever against her niece. He had not proposed that anything special
should be done; but he had hinted, when his mother complained of
Margaret, that Margaret's conduct was everything that it ought to be.

"I believe you would take anybody's part against me," Lady Ball had
said, and then as a matter of course she had been very cross. The
whole of that day was terrible to Miss Mackenzie, and she resolved
that nothing said by her cousin should induce her to postpone her
departure for another day.

In order to insure this by a few minutes' private conversation with
him, and also with the view of escaping for some short time from the
house, she walked down to the station in the evening to meet her
cousin. The train by which he arrived reached Twickenham at five
o'clock, and the walk occupied about twenty minutes. She met him just
as he was coming out of the station gate, and at once told him that
she had come there for the sake of walking back with him and talking
to him. He thanked her, and said that he was very glad to meet her.
He also wanted to speak to her very particularly. Would she take his
arm?

She took his arm, and then began with a quick tremulous voice to tell
him of her sufferings at the house. She threw no blame on her aunt
that she could avoid, but declared it to be natural that under such
circumstances as those now existing her prolonged sojourn at her
aunt's house should be unpleasant to both of them. In answer to all
this, John Ball said nothing, but once or twice lifted up his left
hand so as to establish Margaret's arm more firmly on his own. She
hardly noticed the motion, but yet she was aware that it was intended
for kindness, and then she broke forth with a rapid voice as to her
plan about the hospital. "I think we can manage better than that, at
any rate," said he, stopping her in the path when this proposal met
his ear. But she went on to declare that she would like it, that she
was strong and qualified for such work, that it would satisfy her
aspirations, and be fit for her. And then, after that, she declared
that nothing should induce her to undertake the kind of life that had
been suggested by her aunt. "I quite agree with you there," said he;
"quite. I hate tabbies as much as you do."

They had now come to a little gate, of which John Ball kept a key,
and which led into the grounds belonging to the Cedars. The grounds
were rather large, and the path through them extended for half a
mile, but the land was let off to a grazier. When inside the wall,
however, they were private; and Mr Ball, as soon as he had locked
the gate behind him, stopped her in the dark path, and took both her
hands in his. The gloom of the evening had now come round them, and
the thick trees which formed the belt of the place, joined to the
high wall, excluded from them nearly all what light remained.

"And now," said he, "I will tell you my plan."

"What plan?" said she; but her voice was very low.

"I proposed it once before, but you would not have it then."

When she heard this, she at once drew both her hands from him, and
stood before him in an agony of doubt. Even in the gloom, the trees
were going round her, and everything, even her thoughts, were obscure
and misty.

"Margaret," said he, "you shall be my wife, and the mother of my
children, and I will love you as I loved Rachel before. I loved you
when I asked you at Christmas, but I did not love you then as I love
you now."

She still stood before him, but answered him not a word. How often
since the tidings of her loss had reached her had the idea of such
a meeting as this come before her! how often had she seemed to
listen to such words as those he now spoke to her! Not that she had
expected it, or hoped for it, or even thought of it as being in truth
possible; but her imagination had been at work, during the long hours
of the night, and the romance of the thing had filled her mind, and
the poetry of it had been beautiful to her. She had known--she had
told herself that she knew--that no man would so sacrifice himself;
certainly no such man as John Ball, with all his children and his
weary love of money! But now the poetry had come to be fact, and the
romance had turned itself into reality, and the picture formed by her
imagination had become a living truth. The very words of which she
had dreamed had been spoken to her.

"Shall it be so, my dear?" he said, again taking one of her hands.
"You want to be a nurse; will you be my nurse? Nay; I will not ask,
but it shall be so. They say that the lovers who demand are ever the
most successful. I make my demand. Tell me, Margaret, will you obey
me?"

He had walked on now, but in order that his time might be sufficient,
he led her away from the house. She was following him, hardly knowing
whither she was going.

"Susanna," said he, "shall come and live with the others; one more
will make no difference."

"And my aunt?" said Margaret.

It was the first word she had spoken since the gate had been locked
behind her, and this word was spoken in a whisper.

"I hope my mother may feel that such a marriage will best conduce
to my happiness; but, Margaret, nothing that my mother can say will
change me. You and I have known something of each other now. Of you,
from the way in which things have gone, I have learned much. Few men,
I take it, see so much of their future wives as I have seen of you.
If you can love me as your husband, say so at once honestly, and then
leave the rest to me."

"I will," she said, again whispering; and then she clung to his hand,
and for a minute or two he had his arm round her waist. Then he took
her, and kissed her lips, and told her that he would take care of
her, and watch for her, and keep her, if possible, from trouble.

Ah, me, how many years had rolled by since last she had been kissed
in that way! Once, and once only, had Harry Handcock so far presumed,
and so far succeeded. And now, after a dozen years or more, that game
had begun again with her! She had boxed Harry Handcock's ears when he
had kissed her; but now, from her lover of to-day, she submitted to
the ceremony very tamely.

"Oh, John," she said, "how am I to thank you?" But the thanks were
tendered for the promise of his care, and not for the kiss.

I think there was but little more said between them before they
reached the door-step. When there, Mr Ball, speaking already with
something of marital authority, gave her his instructions.

"I shall tell my mother this evening," he said, "as I hate mysteries;
and I shall tell my father also. Of course there may be something
disagreeable said before we all shake down happily in our places, but
I shall look to you, Margaret, to be firm."

"I shall be firm," she said, "if you are."

"I shall be firm," was the reply; and then they went into the house.


CHAPTER XXI

Mr Maguire Goes to London on Business


Mr Maguire made up his mind to go to London, to look after his
lady-love, but when he found himself there he did not quite know what
to do. It is often the case with us that we make up our minds for
great action,--that in some special crisis of our lives we resolve
that something must be done, and that we make an energetic start; but
we find very soon that we do not know how to go on doing anything. It
was so with Mr Maguire. When he had secured a bed at a small public
house near the Great Western railway station,--thinking, no doubt
that he would go to the great hotel on his next coming to town,
should he then have obtained the lady's fortune,--he scarcely knew
what step he would next take. Margaret's last letter had been written
to him from the Cedars, but he thought it probable that she might
only have gone there for a day or two. He knew the address of the
house in Gower Street, and at last resolved that he would go boldly
in among the enemy there; for he was assured that the family of the
lady's late brother were his special enemies in this case. It was
considerably past noon when he reached London, and it was about three
when, with a hesitating hand, but a loud knock, he presented himself
at Mrs Mackenzie's door.

He first asked for Miss Mackenzie, and was told that she was not
staying there. Was he thereupon to leave his card and go away? He had
told himself that in this pursuit of the heiress he would probably be
called upon to dare much, and if he did not begin to show some daring
at once, how could he respect himself, or trust to himself for future
daring? So he boldly asked for Mrs Mackenzie, and was at once shown
into the parlour. There sat the widow, in her full lugubrious weeds,
there sat Miss Colza, and there sat Mary Jane, and they were all busy
hemming, darning, and clipping; turning old sheets into new ones; for
now it was more than ever necessary that Mrs Mackenzie should make
money at once by taking in lodgers. When Mr Maguire was shown into
the room each lady rose from her chair, with her sheet in her hands
and in her lap, and then, as he stood before them, at the other side
of the table, each lady again sat down.

"A gentleman as is asking for Miss Margaret," the servant had said;
that same cook to whom Mr Grandairs had been so severe on the
occasion of Mrs Mackenzie's dinner party. The other girl had been
unnecessary to them in their poverty, and had left them.

"My name is Maguire, the Rev. Mr Maguire, from Littlebath, where I
had the pleasure of knowing Miss Mackenzie."

Then the widow asked him to take a chair, and he took a chair.

"My sister-in-law is not with us at present," said Mrs Mackenzie.

"She is staying for a visit with her aunt, Lady Ball, at the Cedars,
Twickenham," said Mary Jane, who had contrived to drop her sheet, and
hustle it under the table with her feet, as soon as she learned that
the visitor was a clergyman.

"Lady Ball is the lady of Sir John Ball, Baronet," said Miss Colza,
whose good nature made her desirous of standing up for the honour of
the family with which she was, for the time, domesticated.

"I knew she had been at Lady Ball's," said the clergyman, "as I heard
from her from thence; but I thought she had probably returned."

"Oh dear, no," said the widow, "she ain't returned here, nor don't
mean. We haven't the room for her, and that's the truth. Have we,
Mary Jane?"

"That we have not, mamma; and I don't think aunt Margaret would think
of such a thing."

Then, thought Mr Maguire, the Balls must have got hold of the
heiress, and not the Mackenzies, and my battle must be fought at the
Cedars, and not here. Still, as he was there, he thought possibly he
might obtain some further information; and this would be the easier,
if, as appeared to be the case, there was enmity between the Gower
Street family and their relative.

"Has Miss Mackenzie gone to live permanently at the Cedars?" he
asked.

"Not that I know of," said the widow.

"It isn't at all unlikely, mamma, that it may be so, when you
consider everything. It's just the sort of way in which they'll most
likely get over her."

"Mary Jane, hold your tongue," said her mother; "you shouldn't say
things of that sort before strangers."

"Though I may not have the pleasure of knowing you and your amiable
family," said Mr Maguire, smiling his sweetest, "I am by no means a
stranger to Miss Mackenzie."

Then the ladies all looked at him, and thought they had never seen
anything so terrible as that squint.

"Miss Mackenzie is making a long visit at the Cedars," said Miss
Colza, "that is all we know at present. I am told the Balls are
very nice people, but perhaps a little worldly-minded; that's to be
expected, however, from people who live out of the west-end from
London. I live in Finsbury Square, or at least, I did before I came
here, and I ain't a bit ashamed to own it. But of course the west-end
is the nicest."

Then Mr Maguire got up, saying that he should probably do himself the
pleasure of calling on Miss Mackenzie at the Cedars, and went his
way.

"I wonder what he's after," said Mrs Mackenzie, as soon as the door
was shut.

"Perhaps he came to tell her to bear it all with Christian
resignation," said Miss Colza; "they always do come when anything's
in the wind like that; they like to know everything before anybody
else."

"It's my belief he's after her money," said Mrs Mackenzie.

"With such a squint as that!" said Mary Jane; "I wouldn't have him
though he was made of money, and I hadn't a farthing."

"Beauty is but skin deep," said Miss Colza.

"And it's manners to wait till you are asked," said Mrs Mackenzie.

Mary Jane chucked up her head with disdain, thereby indicating that
though she had not been asked, and though beauty is but skin deep,
still she held the same opinion.

Mr Maguire, as he went away to a clerical advertising office in the
neighbourhood of Exeter Hall, thought over the matter profoundly.
It was clear enough to him that the Mackenzies of Gower Street were
not interfering with him; very probably they might have hoped and
attempted to keep the heiress among them; that assertion that there
was no room for her in the house--as though they were and ever had
been averse to having her with them--seemed to imply that such was
the case. It was the natural language of a disappointed woman. But
if so, that hope was now over with them. And then the young lady had
plainly exposed the suspicions which they all entertained as to the
Balls. These grand people at the Cedars, this baronet's family at
Twickenham, must have got her to come among them with the intention
of keeping her there. It did not occur to him that the baronet or the
baronet's son would actually want Miss Mackenzie's money. He presumed
baronets to be rich people; but still they might very probably be as
dogs in the manger, and desirous of preventing their relative from
doing with her money that active service to humanity in general which
would be done were she to marry a deserving clergyman who had nothing
of his own.

He made his visit to the advertising office, and learned that
clergymen without cures were at present drugs in the market. He
couldn't understand how this should be the case, seeing that the
newspapers were constantly declaring that the supply of university
clergymen were becoming less and less every day. He had come from
Trinity, Dublin and after the success of his career at Littlebath,
was astonished that he should not be snapped at by the retailers of
curacies.

On the next day he visited Twickenham. Now, on the morning of that
very day Margaret Mackenzie first woke to the consciousness that
she was the promised wife of her cousin John Ball. There was great
comfort in the thought.

It was not only, nor even chiefly, that she who, on the preceding
morning, had awakened to the remembrance of her utter destitution,
now felt that all those terrible troubles were over. It was not
simply that her great care had been vanquished for her. It was this,
that the man who had a second time come to her asking for her love,
had now given her all-sufficient evidence that he did so for the sake
of her love. He, who was so anxious for money, had shown her that he
could care for her more even than he cared for gold. As she thought
of this, and made herself happy in the thought, she would not rise
at once from her bed, but curled herself in the clothes and hugged
herself in her joy.

"I should have taken him before, at once, instantly, if I could have
thought that it was so," she said to herself; "but this is a thousand
times better."

Then she found that the pillow beneath her cheek was wet with her
tears.

On the preceding evening she had been very silent and demure, and her
betrothed had also been silent. There had been no words about the
tea-making, and Lady Ball had been silent also. As far as she knew,
Margaret was to go on the following day, but she would say nothing on
the subject. Margaret, indeed, had commenced her packing, and did not
know when she went to bed whether she was to go or not. She rather
hoped that she might be allowed to go, as her aunt would doubtless
be disagreeable; but in that, and in all matters now, she would of
course be guided implicitly by Mr Ball. He had told her to be firm,
and of her own firmness she had no doubt whatever. Lady Ball, with
all her anger, or with all her eloquence, should not talk her out of
her husband. She could be firm, and she had no doubt that John Ball
could be firm also.

Nevertheless, when she was dressing, she did not fail to tell herself
that she might have a bad time of it that morning,--and a bad time of
it for some days to come, if it was John's intention that she should
remain at the Cedars. She was convinced that Lady Ball would not
welcome her as a daughter-in-law now as she would have done when the
property was thought to belong to her. What right had she to expect
such welcome? No doubt some hard things would be said to her; but
she knew her own courage, and was sure that she could bear any hard
things with such a hope within her breast as that which she now
possessed. She left her room a little earlier than usual, thinking
that she might thus meet her cousin and receive his orders. And in
this she was not disappointed; he was in the hall as she came down,
and she was able to smile on him, and press his hand, and make her
morning greetings to him with some tenderness in her voice. He looked
heavy about the face, and almost more careworn than usual, but he
took her hand and led her into the breakfast-room.

"Did you tell your mother, John?" she said, standing very close to
him, almost leaning upon his shoulder.

He, however, did not probably want such signs of love as this, and
moved a step away from her.

"Yes," said he, "I told both my father and my mother. What she says
to you, you must hear, and bear it quietly for my sake."

"I will," said Margaret.

"I think that she is unreasonable, but still she is my mother."

"I shall always remember that, John."

"And she is old, and things have not always gone well with her. She
says, too, that you have been impertinent to her."

Margaret's face became very red at this charge, but she made no
immediate reply.

"I don't think you could mean to be impertinent."

"Certainly not, John; but, of course, I shall feel myself much more
bound to her now than I was before."

"Yes, of course; but I wish that nothing had occurred to make her so
angry with you."

"I don't think that I was impertinent, John, though perhaps it might
seem so. When she was talking about my being a companion to a lady,
I perhaps answered her sharply. I was so determined that I wouldn't
lead that sort of life, that, perhaps I said more than I should have
done. You know, John, that it hasn't been quite pleasant between us
for the last few days."

John did know this, and he knew also that there was not much
probability of pleasantness for some days to come. His mother's last
words to him on the preceding evening, as he was leaving her after
having told his story, did not give much promise of pleasantness for
Margaret. "John," she had said, "nothing on earth shall induce me to
live in the same house with Margaret Mackenzie as your wife. If you
choose to break up everything for her sake, you can do it. I cannot
control you. But remember, it will be your doing."

Margaret then asked him what she was to do, and where she was to
live. She would fain have asked him when they were to be married, but
she did not dare to make inquiry on that point. He told her that, for
the present, she must remain at the Cedars. If she went away it would
be regarded as an open quarrel, and moreover, he did not wish that
she should live by herself in London lodgings. "We shall be able to
see how things go for a day or two," he said. To this she submitted
without a murmur, and then Lady Ball came into the room.

They were both very nervous in watching her first behaviour, but were
not at all prepared for the line of conduct which she adopted. John
Ball and Margaret had separated when they heard the rustle of her
dress. He had made a step towards the window, and she had retreated
to the other side of the fire-place. Lady Ball, on entering the room,
had been nearest to Margaret, but she walked round the table away
from her usual place for prayers, and accosted her son.

"Good-morning, John," she said, giving him her hand.

Margaret waited a second or two, and then addressed her aunt.

"Good-morning, aunt," she said, stepping half across the rug.

But her aunt, turning her back to her, moved into the embrasure of
the window. It had been decided that there was to be an absolute cut
between them! As long as she remained in that house Lady Ball would
not speak to her. John said nothing, but a black frown came upon his
brow. Poor Margaret retired, rebuked, to her corner by the chimney.
Just at that moment the girls and children rushed in from the study,
with the daily governess who came every morning, and Sir John rang
for the servants to come to prayers.

I wonder whether that old lady's heart was at all softened as she
prayed? whether it ever occurred to her to think that there was any
meaning in that form of words she used, when she asked her God to
forgive her as she might forgive others? Not that Margaret had in
truth trespassed against her at all; but, doubtless, she regarded
her niece as a black trespasser, and as being quite qualified for
forgiveness, could she have brought herself to forgive. But I fear
that the form of words on that occasion meant nothing, and that she
had been delivered from no evil during those moments she had been on
her knees. Margaret sat down in her accustomed place, but no notice
was taken of her by her aunt. When the tea had been poured out, John
got up from his seat and asked his mother which was Margaret's cup.

"My dear," said she, "if you will sit down, Miss Mackenzie shall have
her tea."

"I will take it to her," said he.

"John," said his mother, drawing her chair somewhat away from the
table, "if you flurry me in this way, you will drive me out of the
room."

Then he had sat down, and Margaret received her cup in the usual way.
The girls and children stared at each other, and the governess, who
always breakfasted at the house, did not dare to lift her eyes from
off her plate.

Margaret longed for an opportunity of starting with John Ball, and
walking with him to the station, but no such opportunity came in her
way. It was his custom always to go up to his father before he left
home, and on this occasion Margaret did not see him after he quitted
the breakfast table. When the clatter of the knives and cups was
over, and the eating and drinking was at an end, Lady Ball left the
room and Margaret began to think what she would do. She could not
remain about the house in her aunt's way, without being spoken to,
or speaking. So she went to her room, resolving that she would not
leave it till the carriage had taken off Sir John and her aunt. Then
she would go out for a walk, and would again meet her cousin at the
station.

From her bedroom window she could see the sweep before the front of
the house, and at two o'clock she saw and heard the lumbering of the
carriage as it came to the door, and then she put on her hat to be
ready for her walk; but her uncle and aunt did not, as it seemed,
come out, and the carriage remained there as a fixture. This had been
the case for some twenty minutes, when there came a knock at her own
door, and the maid-servant told her that her aunt wished to see her
in the drawing-room.

"To see me?" said Margaret, thoroughly surprised, and not a little
dismayed.

"Yes, Miss; and there's a gentleman there who asked for you when he
first come."

Now, indeed, she was dismayed. Who could be the gentleman? Was it Mr
Slow, or a myrmidon from Mr Slow's legal abode? Or was it Mr Rubb
with his yellow gloves again? Whoever it was there must be something
very special in his mission, as her aunt had, in consequence,
deferred her drive, and was also apparently about to drop her purpose
of cutting her niece's acquaintance in her own house.

But we will go back to Mr Maguire. He had passed the evening and the
morning in thinking over the method of his attack, and had at last
resolved that he would be very bold. He would go down to the Cedars,
and claim Margaret as his affianced bride. He went, therefore, down
to the Cedars, and in accordance with his plan as arranged, he gave
his card to the servant, and asked if he could see Sir John Ball
alone. Now, Sir John Ball never saw any one on business, or, indeed,
not on business; and, after a while, word was brought out to Mr
Maguire that he could see Lady Ball, but that Sir John was not well
enough to receive any visitors. Lady Ball, Mr Maguire thought, would
suit him better than Sir John. He signified his will accordingly, and
on being shown into the drawing-room, found her ladyship there alone.

It must be acknowledged that he was a brave man, and that he was
doing a bold thing. He knew that he should find himself among
enemies, and that his claim would be ignored and ridiculed by the
persons whom he was about to attack; he knew that everybody, on first
seeing him, was affrighted and somewhat horrified; he knew too,--at
least, we must presume that he knew,--that the lady herself had given
him no promise. But he thought it possible, nay, almost probable,
that she would turn to him if she saw him again; that she might own
him as her own; that her feelings might be strong enough in his
favour to induce her to throw off the thraldom of her relatives, and
that he might make good his ground in her breast, even if he could
not bear her away in triumph out of the hands of his enemies.

When he entered the room Lady Ball looked at him and shuddered.
People always did shudder when they saw him for the first time.

"Lady Ball," said he, "I am the Rev. Mr Maguire, of Littlebath."

She was holding his card in her hand, and having notified to him that
she was aware of the fact he had mentioned, asked him to sit down.

"I have called," said he, taking his seat, "hoping to be allowed to
speak to you on a subject of extreme delicacy."

"Indeed," said Lady Ball, thinking to catch his eye, and failing in
the effort.

"I may say of very extreme delicacy. I believe your niece, Miss
Margaret Mackenzie, is staying here?" In answer to this, Lady Ball
acknowledged that Miss Mackenzie was now at the Cedars.

"Have you any objection, Lady Ball, to allowing me to see her in your
presence?"

Lady Ball was a quick-thinking, intelligent, and, at the same time,
prudent old lady, and she gave no answer to this before she had
considered the import of the question. Why should this clergyman want
to see Margaret? And would his seeing her conduce most to her own
success, or to Margaret's? Then there was the fact that Margaret was
of an age which entitled her to the right of seeing any visitor who
might call on her. Thinking over all this as best she could in the
few moments at her command, and thinking also of this clergyman's
stipulation that she was to be present at the interview, she
said that she had no objection whatever. She would send for Miss
Mackenzie.

She rose to ring the bell, but Mr Maguire, also rising from his
chair, stopped her hand.

"Pardon me for a moment," said he. "Before you call Margaret to come
down I would wish to explain to you for what purpose I have come
here."

Lady Ball, when she heard the man call her niece by her Christian
name, listened with all her ears. Under no circumstances but one
could such a man call such a woman by her Christian name in such
company.

"Lady Ball," he said, "I do not know whether you may be aware of it
or no, but I am engaged to marry your niece."

Lady Ball, who had not yet resumed her seat, now did so.

"I had not heard of it," she said.

"It may be so," said Mr Maguire.

"It is so," said Lady Ball.

"Very probably. There are many reasons which operate upon young
ladies in such a condition to keep their secret even from their
nearest relatives. For myself, being a clergyman of the Church of
England, professing evangelical doctrines, and therefore, as I had
need not say, averse to everything that may have about it even a
seeming of impropriety, I think it best to declare the fact to you,
even though in doing so I may perhaps give some offence to dear
Margaret."

It must, I think, be acknowledged that Mr Maguire was true to
himself, and that he was conducting his case at any rate with
courage.

Lady Ball was doubtful what she would do. It was on her tongue to
tell the man that her niece's fortune was gone. But she remembered
that she might probably advance her own interests by securing an
interview between the two lovers of Littlebath in her own presence.
She never for a moment doubted that Mr Maguire's statement was true.
It never occurred to her that there had been no such engagement.
She felt confident from the moment in which Mr Maguire's important
tidings had reached her ears that she had now in her hands the means
of rescuing her son. That Mr Maguire would cease to make his demand
for his bride when he should hear the truth, was of course to be
expected; but her son would not be such an idiot, such a soft fool,
as to go on with his purpose when he should learn that such a secret
as this had been kept back from him. She had refused him, and taken
up with this horrid, greasy, evil-eyed parson when she was rich; and
then, when she was poor,--even before she had got rid of her other
engagement, she had come back upon him, and, playing upon his pity,
had secured him in her toils. Lady Ball felt well inclined to thank
the clergyman for coming to her relief at such a moment.

"It will be best that I should ask my niece to come down to you,"
said she, getting up and walking out of the room.

But she did not go up to her niece. She first went to Sir John and
quieted his impatience with reference to the driving, and then, after
a few minutes' further delay for consideration, she sent the servant
up to her niece. Having done this she returned to the drawing-room,
and found Mr Maguire looking at the photographs on the table.

"It is very like dear Margaret, very like her, indeed," said he,
looking at one of Miss Mackenzie. "The sweetest face that ever my
eyes rested on! May I ask you if you have just seen your niece, Lady
Ball?"

"No, sir, I have not seen her; but I have sent for her."

There was still some little delay before Margaret came down. She
was much fluttered, and wanted time to think, if only time could be
allowed to her. Perhaps there had come a man to say that her money
was not gone. If so, with what delight would she give it all to her
cousin John! That was her first thought. But if so, how then about
the promise made to her dying brother? She almost wished that the
money might not be hers. Looking to herself only, and to her own
happiness, it would certainly be better for her that it should not be
hers. And if it should be Mr Rubb with the yellow gloves! But before
she could consider that alternative she had opened the door, and
there was Mr Maguire standing ready to receive her.

"Dearest Margaret!" he exclaimed. "My own love!" And there he stood,
with his arms open, as though he expected Miss Mackenzie to rush into
them. He was certainly a man of very great courage.

"Mr Maguire!" said she, and she stood still near the door. Then she
looked at her aunt, and saw that Lady Ball's eyes were keenly fixed
upon her. Something like the truth, some approximation to the facts
as they were, flashed upon her in a moment, and she knew that she had
to bear herself in this difficulty with all her discretion and all
her fortitude.

"Margaret," exclaimed Mr Maguire, "will you not come to me?"

"What do you mean, Mr Maguire?" said she, still standing aloof from
him, and retreating somewhat nearer to the door.

"The gentleman says that you are engaged to marry him," said Lady
Ball.

Margaret, looking again into her aunt's face, saw the smile of
triumph that sat there, and resolved at once to make good her ground.

"If he has said that, he has told an untruth,--an untruth both
unmanly and unmannerly. You hear, sir, what Lady Ball has stated. Is
it true that you have made such an assertion?"

"And will you contradict it, Margaret? Oh, Margaret! Margaret! you
cannot contradict it."

The reader must remember that this clergyman no doubt thought and
felt that he had a good deal of truth on his side. Gentlemen when
they make offers to ladies, and are told by ladies that they may
come again, and that time is required for consideration, are always
disposed to think that the difficulties of the siege are over. And
in nine cases out of ten it is so. Mr Maguire, no doubt, since
the interview in question, had received letters from the lady
which should at any rate have prevented him from uttering any such
assertion as that which he had now made; but he looked upon those
letters as the work of the enemy, and chose to go back for his
authority to the last words which Margaret had spoken to him. He knew
that he was playing an intricate game,--that all was not quite on the
square; but he thought that the enemy was playing him false, and that
falsehood in return was therefore fair. This that was going on was a
robbery of the Church, a spoiling of Israel, a touching with profane
hands of things that had already been made sacred.

"But I do contradict it," said Margaret, stepping forward into the
room, and almost exciting admiration in Lady Ball's breast by her
demeanour. "Aunt," said she, "as this gentleman has chosen to come
here with such a story as this, I must tell you all the facts."

"Has he ever been engaged to you?" asked Lady Ball.

"Never."

"Oh, Margaret!" again exclaimed Mr Maguire.

"Sir, I will ask you to let me tell my aunt the truth. When I was at
Littlebath, before I knew that my fortune was not my own,"--as she
said this she looked hard into Mr Maguire's face--"before I had
become penniless, as I am now,"--then she paused again, and still
looking at him, saw with inward pleasure the elongation of her
suitor's face, "this gentleman asked me to marry him."

"He did ask you?" said Lady Ball.

"Of course I asked her," urged Mr Maguire. "There can be no denying
that on either side."

He did not now quite know what to do. He certainly did not wish to
impoverish the Church by marrying Miss Mackenzie without any fortune.
But might it not all be a trick? That she had been rich he knew, and
how could she have become poor so quickly?

"He did ask me, and I told him that I must take a fortnight to
consider of it."

"You did not refuse him, then?" said Lady Ball.

"Not then, but I have done so since by letter. Twice I have written
to him, telling him that I had nothing of my own, and that there
could be nothing between us."

"I got her letters," said Mr Maguire, turning round to Lady Ball. "I
certainly got her letters. But such letters as those, if they are
written under dictation--"

He was rather anxious that Lady Bell should quarrel with him. In the
programme which he had made for himself when he came to the house, a
quarrel to the knife with the Ball family was a part of his tactics.
His programme, no doubt, was disturbed by the course which events had
taken, but still a quarrel with Lady Ball might be the best for him.
If she were to quarrel with him, it would give him some evidence that
this story about the loss of the money was untrue. But Lady Ball
would not quarrel with him. She sat still and said nothing. "Nobody
dictated them," said Margaret. "But now you are here, I will tell you
the facts. The money which I thought was mine, in truth belongs to my
cousin, Mr John Ball, and I--"

So far she spoke loudly, With her face raised, and her eyes fixed
upon him. Then as she concluded, she dropped her voice and eyes
together. "And I am now engaged to him as his wife."

"Oh, indeed!" said Mr Maguire.

"That statement must be taken for what it is worth," said Lady Ball,
rising from her seat. "Of what Miss Mackenzie says now, I know
nothing. I sincerely hope that she may find that she is mistaken."

"And now, Margaret," said Mr Maguire, "may I ask to see you for one
minute alone?"

"Certainly not," said she. "If you have anything more to say I will
hear it in my aunt's presence." She waited a few moments, but as he
did not speak, she took herself back to the door and made her escape
to her own room.

How Mr Maguire took himself out of the house we need not stop to
inquire. There must, I should think, have been some difficulty in the
manoeuvre. It was considerably past three when Sir John was taken
out for his drive, and while he was in the carriage his wife told him
what had occurred.


CHAPTER XXII

Still at the Cedars


Margaret, when she had reached her own room, and seated herself
so that she could consider all that had occurred in quietness,
immediately knew her own difficulty. Of course Lady Ball would give
her account of what had occurred to her son, and of course John would
be angry when he learned that there had been any purpose of marriage
between her and Mr Maguire. She herself took a different view of the
matter now than that which had hitherto presented itself. She had not
thought much of Mr Maguire or his proposal. It had been made under a
state of things differing much from that now existing, and the change
that had come upon her affairs had seemed to her to annul the offer.
She had learned to regard it almost as though it had never been.
There had been no engagement; there had hardly been a purpose in
her own mind; and the moment had never come in which she could have
spoken of it to her cousin with propriety.

That last, in truth, was her valid excuse for not having told him the
whole story. She had hardly been with him long enough to do more than
accept the offer he had himself made. Of course she would have told
him of Mr Maguire,--of Mr Maguire and of Mr Rubb also, when first an
opportunity might come for her to do so. She had no desire to keep
from his knowledge any tittle of what had occurred. There had been
nothing of which she was ashamed. But not the less did she feel that
it would have been well for her that she should have told her own
story before that horrid man had come to the Cedars. The story would
now first be told to him by her aunt, and she knew well the tone in
which it would be told.

It occurred to her that she might even yet go and meet him at the
station. But if so, she must tell him at once, and he would know that
she had done so because she was afraid of her aunt, and she disliked
the idea of excusing herself before she was accused. If he really
loved her, he would listen to her, and believe her. If he did
not--why then let Lady Ball have her own way. She had promised to be
firm, and she would keep her promise; but she would not intrigue with
the hope of making him firm. If he was infirm of purpose, let him
go. So she sat in her room, even when she heard the door close after
his entrance, and did not go down till it was time for her to show
herself in the drawing-room before dinner. When she entered the room
was full. He nodded at her with a pleasant smile, and she made up her
mind that he had heard nothing as yet. Her uncle had excused himself
from coming to table, and her aunt and John were talking together in
apparent eagerness about him. For one moment her cousin spoke to her
before dinner.

"I am afraid," he said, "that my father is sinking fast."

Then she felt quite sure that he had as yet heard nothing about Mr
Maguire.

But it was late in the evening, when other people had gone to bed,
that Lady Ball was in the habit of discussing family affairs with
her son, and doubtless she would do so to-night. Margaret, before
she went up to her room, strove hard to get from him a few words of
kindness, but it seemed as though he was not thinking of her.

"He is full of his father," she said to herself.

When her bed-candle was in her hand she did make an opportunity to
speak to him.

"Has Mr Slow settled anything more as yet?" she asked.

"Well, yes. Not that he has settled anything, but he has made a
proposition to which I am willing to agree. I don't go up to town
to-morrow, and we will talk it over. If you will agree to it, all the
money difficulties will be settled."

"I will agree to anything that you tell me is right."

"I will explain it all to you to-morrow; and, Margaret, I have told
Mr Slow what are my intentions,--our intentions, I ought to say." She
smiled at him with that sweet smile of hers, as though she thanked
him for speaking of himself and her together, and then she took
herself away. Surely, after speaking to her in that way, he would not
allow any words from his mother to dissuade him from his purpose?

She could not go to bed. She knew that her fate was being discussed,
and she knew that her aunt at that very time was using every argument
in her power to ruin her. She felt, moreover, that the story might
be told in such a way as to be terribly prejudicial to her. And now,
when his father was so ill, might it not be very natural that he
should do almost anything to lessen his mother's troubles? But to her
it would be absolute ruin; such ruin that nothing which she had yet
endured would be in any way like it. The story of the loss of her
money had stunned her, but it had not broken her spirit. Her misery
from that had arisen chiefly from the wants of her brother's family.
But if he were now to tell her that all must be over between them,
her very heart would be broken.

She could not go to bed while this was going on, so she sat
listening, till she should hear the noise of feet about the house.
Silently she loosened the lock of her own door, so that the sound
might more certainly come to her, and she sat thinking what she might
best do. It had not been quite eleven when she came upstairs, and at
twelve she did not hear anything. And yet she was almost sure that
they must be still together in that small room downstairs, talking of
her and of her conduct. It was past one before she heard the door of
the room open. She heard it so plainly, that she wondered at herself
for having supposed for a moment that they could have gone without
her noticing them. Then she heard her cousin's heavy step coming
upstairs. In passing to his room he would not go actually by her
door, but would be very near it. She looked through the chink, having
carefully put away her own candle, and could see his face as he came
upon the top stair. It wore a look of trouble and of pain, but not,
as she thought, of anger. Her aunt, she knew, would go to her room by
the back stairs, and would go through the kitchen and over the whole
of the lower house, before she would come out on the landing to which
Margaret's room opened. Then, seeing her cousin, the idea occurred
to her that she would have it all over on that very night. If he
had heard that which changed his purpose, why should she be left in
suspense? He should tell her at once, and at once she would prepare
herself for her future life.

So she opened the door a little way, and called to him.

"John," she said, "is that you?"

She spoke almost in a whisper, but, nevertheless, he heard her very
clearly, and at once turned towards her room.

"Come in, John," she said, opening the door wider. "I wish to speak
to you. I have been waiting till you should come up."

She had taken off her dress, and had put on in place of it a white
dressing-gown; but of this she had not thought till he was already
within the room. "I hope you won't mind finding me like this, but I
did so want to speak to you to-night."

He, as he looked at her, felt that he had no objection to make to her
appearance. If that had been his only trouble concerning her he would
have been well satisfied. When he was within the room, she closed the
lock of the door very softly, and then began to question him.

"Tell me," she said, "what my aunt has been saying to you about that
man that came here to-day."

He did not answer her at once, but stood leaning against the bed.

"I know she has been telling you," continued Margaret. "I know she
would not let you go to bed without accusing me. Tell me, John, what
she has told you."

He was very slow to speak. As he had sat listening to his mother's
energetic accusation against the woman he had promised to marry,
hearing her bring up argument after argument to prove that Margaret
had, in fact, been engaged to that clergyman,--that she had intended
to marry that man while she had money, and had not, up to that day,
made him fully understand that she would not do so,--he had himself
said little or nothing, claiming to himself the use of that night
for consideration. The circumstances against Margaret he owned to
be very strong. He felt angry with her for having had any lover at
Littlebath. It was but the other day, during her winter visit to
the Cedars, that he had himself proposed to her, and that she had
rejected him. He had now renewed his proposal, and he did not like to
think that there had been any one else between his overtures. And he
could not deny the strength of his mother's argument when she averred
that Mr Maguire would not have come down there unless he had had, as
she said, every encouragement. Indeed, throughout the whole affair,
Lady Ball believed Mr Maguire, and disbelieved her niece; and
something of her belief, and something also of her disbelief,
communicated itself to her son. But, still, he reserved to himself
the right of postponing his own opinion till the morrow; and as he
was coming upstairs, when Margaret saw him through the chink of the
door, he was thinking of her smiles, of her graciousness, and her
goodness. He was remembering the touch of her hand when they were
together in the square, and the feminine sweetness with which she had
yielded to him every point regarding her fortune. When he did not
speak to her at once, she questioned him again.

"I know she has told you that Mr Maguire has been here, and that she
has accused me of deceiving you."

"Yes, Margaret, she has."

"And what have you said in return; or rather, what have you thought?"

He had been leaning, or half sitting, on the bed, and she had placed
herself beside him. How was it that she had again taken him by the
coat, and again looked up into his face with those soft, trusting
eyes? Was it a trick with her? Had she ever taken that other man by
the coat in the same way, and smitten him also with the battery of
her eyes? The loose sleeve of her dressing-gown had fallen back, and
he could see that her arm was round and white, and very fair. Was
she conversant with such tricks as these? His mother had called her
clever and cunning as a serpent. Was it so? Had his mother seen with
eyes clearer than his own, and was he now being surrounded by the
meshes of a false woman's web? He moved away from her quickly, and
stood upon the hearth-rug with his back to the empty fire grate.

Then she stood up also.

"John," she said, "if you have condemned me, say so. I shall defend
myself for the sake of my character, but I shall not ask you to come
back to me."

But he had not condemned her. He had not condemned her altogether,
neither had he acquitted her. He was willing enough to hear her
defence, as he had heard his mother's accusation; but he was desirous
of hearing it without committing himself to any opinion.

"I have been much surprised," he said, "by what my mother has now
told me,--very much surprised indeed. If Mr Maguire had any claim
upon your hand, should you not have told me?"

"He had no claim; but no doubt it was right that I should tell you. I
was bound by my duty to tell you everything that had occurred."

"Of course you were--and yet you did not do it."

"But I was not so bound before what you said to me in the shrubbery
last night? Remember, John, it was but last night. Have I had a
moment to speak to you?"

"If there was any question of engagement between you and him, you
should have told it me then, on the instant."

"But there was no question. He came to me one day and made me an
offer. I will tell you everything, and I think you will believe me.
I found him holding a position of respect, at Littlebath, and I was
all alone in the world. Why should I not listen to him? I gave him no
answer, but told him to speak to me again after a while. Then came my
poor brother's illness and death; and after that came, as you know,
the loss of all my money. In the meantime Mr Maguire had written,
but as I knew that my brother's family must trust to me for their
support--that, at least, John was my hope then--I answered him that
my means were not the same as before, and that everything must be
over. Then he wrote to me again after I had lost my money, and once
I answered him. I wrote to him so that he should know that nothing
could come of it. Here are all his letters, and I have a copy of
the last I wrote to him." So saying, she pulled the papers out
of her desk,--the desk in which still lay the torn shreds of her
poetry,--and handed them to him. "After that, what right had he to
come here and make such a statement as he did to my aunt? How can he
be a gentleman, and say what was so false?"

"No one says that he is a gentleman," replied John Ball, as he took
the proffered papers.

"I have told you all now," said she; and as she spoke, a gleam of
anger flashed from her eyes, for she was not in all respects a
Griselda such as she of old. "I have told you all now, and if further
excuse be wanting, I have none further to make."

Slowly he read the letters, still standing up on the hearth-rug, and
then he folded them again into their shapes, and slowly gave them
back to her.

"There is no doubt," said he, "as to his being a blackguard. He was
hunting for your money, and now that he knows you have got none, he
will trouble you no further." Then he made a move from the place on
which he stood, as if he were going.

"And is that to be all, John?" she said.

"I shall see you to-morrow," he replied. "I am not going to town."

"But is that to be all to-night?"

"It is very late," and he looked at his watch. "I do not see that any
good can come of talking more about it now. Good-night to you."

"Good-night," she said. Then she waited till the door was closed, and
when he was gone she threw herself upon the bed. Alas! alas! Now once
more was she ruined, and her present ruin was ruin indeed.

She threw herself on the bed, and sobbed as though she would have
broken her heart in the bitterness of her spirit. She had told him
the plainest, simplest truest story, and he had received it without
one word of comment in her favour,--without one sign to show that her
truthfulness had been acknowledged by him! He had told her that this
man, who had done her so great an injury, was a blackguard; but of
her own conduct he had not allowed himself to speak. She knew that
his judgment had gone against her, and though she felt it to be
hard,--very hard,--she resolved that she would make no protest
against it. Of course she would leave the Cedars. Only a few hours
since she had assured herself that it was her duty henceforward to
obey him in everything. But that was now all changed. Whatever he
might say to the contrary, she would go. If he chose to follow her
whither she went, and again ask her to be his wife she would receive
him with open arms. Oh, yes; let him only once again own that she was
worthy of him, and then she would sit at his feet and confess her
folly, and ask his pardon a thousand times for the trouble she had
given him. But unless he were to do this she would never again beg
for favour. She had made her defence, and had, as she felt, made it
in vain. She would not condescend to say one other word in excuse of
her conduct.

As for her aunt, all terms between Lady Ball and herself must be at
an end. Lady Ball had passed a day with her in the house without
speaking to her, except when that man had come, and then she had
taken part with him! Her aunt, she thought, had been untrue to
hospitality in not defending the guest within her own walls; she had
been untrue to her own blood, in not defending her husband's niece;
but, worse than all that, ten times worse, she had been untrue as
from one woman to another! Margaret, as she thought of this, rose
from the bed and walked wildly through the room unlike any Griselda.
No; she would have no terms with Lady Ball. Lady Ball had understood
it all, though John had not done so! She had known how it all was,
and had pretended not to know. Because she had an object of her own
to gain, she had allowed these calumnies to be believed! Let come
what might, they should all know that Margaret Mackenzie, poor,
wretched, destitute as she was, had still spirit enough to resent
such injuries as these.

In the morning she sent down word by one of her young cousins that
she would not come to breakfast, and she asked that some tea might be
sent up to her.

"Is she in bed, my dear?" asked Lady Ball.

"No, she is not in bed," said Jane Ball. "She is sitting up, and has
got all her things about the room as though she were packing."

"What nonsense!" said Lady Ball; "why does she not come down?"

Then Isabella, the eldest girl, was sent up to her, but Margaret
refused to show herself.

"She says she would rather not; but she wants to know if papa will
walk out with her at ten."

Lady Ball again said that this was nonsense, but tea and toast were
at last supplied to her, and her cousin promised to be ready at the
hour named. Exactly at ten o'clock, Margaret opened the schoolroom
door, and asked one of the girls to tell her father that she would be
found on the walk leading to the long shrubbery.

There on the walk she remained, walking slowly backwards and forwards
over a space of twenty yards, till he joined her. She gave him her
hand, and then turned towards the long shrubbery, and he, following
her direction, walked at her side.

"John," she said, "you will not be surprised at my telling you that,
after what has occurred, I shall leave this place to-day."

"You must not do that," he said.

"Ah, but I must do it. There are some things John, which no woman
should bear or need bear. After what has occurred it is not right
that I should incur your mother's displeasure any longer. All my
things are ready. I want you to have them taken down to the one
o'clock train."

"No, Margaret; I will not consent to that."

"But, John, I cannot consent to anything else. Yesterday was a
terrible day for me. I don't think you can know how terrible. What I
endured then no one has a right to expect that I should endure any
longer. It was necessary that I should say something to you of what
had occurred, and that I said last night. I have no further call to
remain here, and, most positively, I shall go to-day."

He looked into her face and saw that she was resolved, but yet he was
not minded to give way. He did not like to think that all authority
over her was passing out of his hands. During the night he had
not made up his mind to pardon her at once. Nay, he had not yet
told himself that he would pardon her at all. But he was prepared
to receive her tears and excuses, and we may say that, in all
probability, he would have pardoned her had she wept before him
and excused herself. But though she could shed tears on this
matter,--though, doubtless, there were many tears to be shed by
her,--she would shed no more before him in token of submission. If he
would first submit, then, indeed, she might weep on his shoulder or
laugh on his breast, as his mood might dictate.

"Margaret," he said, "we have very much to talk over before you can
go."

"There will be time for that between this and one. Look here, John; I
have made up my mind to go. After what took place yesterday, it will
be better for us all that we should be apart."

"I don't see that, unless, indeed, you are determined to quarrel
with us altogether. I suppose my wishes in the matter will count for
something."

"Yesterday morning they would have counted for everything; but not
this morning."

"And why not, Margaret?"

This was a question to which it was so difficult to find a reply,
that she left it unanswered. They both walked on in silence for some
paces, and then she spoke again.

"You said yesterday that you had been with Mr Slow, and that you had
something to tell me. If you still wish to tell me anything, perhaps
you can do so now."

"Everything seems to be so much changed," said he, speaking very
gloomily.

"Yes," said she; "things are changed. But my confidence in Mr Slow,
and in you, is not altered. If you like it, you can settle everything
about the money without consulting me. I shall agree to anything
about that."

"I was going to propose that your brother's family should have the
debt due by the Rubbs. Mr Slow thinks he might so manage as to secure
the payment of the interest."

"Very well; I shall be delighted that it should be so. I had hoped
that they would have had more, but that of course is all over. I
cannot give them what is not mine."

But this arrangement, which would have been pleasant enough
before,--which seemed to be very pleasant when John Ball was last
in Mr Slow's chambers, telling that gentleman that he was going to
make everything smooth by marrying his cousin,--was not by any means
so pleasant now. He had felt, when he was mentioning the proposed
arrangement to Margaret, that the very naming of it seemed to imply
that Mr Maguire and his visit were to go for nothing. If Mr Maguire
and his visit were to go for much--to go for all that which Lady Ball
wished to make of them--then, in such a case as that, the friendly
arrangement in question would not hold water. If that were to be so,
they must all go to work again, and Mr Slow must be told to do the
best in his power for his own client. John Ball was by no means
resolved to obey his mother implicitly and make so much of Mr Maguire
and his visit as all this; but how could he help doing so if Margaret
would go away? He could not as yet bring himself to tell her that Mr
Maguire and the visit should go altogether for nothing. He shook his
head in his trouble, and pished and pshawed.

"The truth is, Margaret, you can't go to-day."

"Indeed I shall, John," said she, smiling. "You would hardly wish to
keep me a prisoner, and the worst you could do would be to keep my
luggage from me."

"Then I must say that you are very obstinate."

"It is not very often that I resolve to have my own way; but I have
resolved now, and you should not try to balk me."

They had now come round nearly to the house, and she showed, by the
direction that she took, that she was going in.

"You will go?" said he.

"Yes," said she; "I will go. My address will be at the old house in
Arundel Street. Shall I see you again before I go?" she asked him,
when she stood on the doorstep. "Perhaps you will be busy, and I had
better say goodbye."

"Good-bye," said he, very gloomily; but he took her hand.

"I suppose I had better not disturb my uncle. You will give him my
love. And, John, you will tell some one about my luggage; will you
not?"

He muttered some affirmative, and then went round from the front of
the house, while she entered the hall.

It was now half-past eleven, and she intended to start at half-past
twelve. She went into the drawing-room and not finding her aunt, rang
the bell. Lady Ball was with Sir John, she was told. She then wrote a
note on a scrap of paper, and sent it in:


   DEAR AUNT,

   I leave here at half-past twelve. Perhaps you would like
   to see me before I go.

   M. M.


Then, while she was waiting for an answer, she went into the school
room, and said good-bye to all the children.

"But you are coming back, aunt Meg," said the youngest girl.

Margaret stooped down to kiss her, and, when the child saw and felt
the tears, she asked no further questions.

"Lady Ball is in the drawing-room, Miss," a servant said at that
moment, and there she went to fight her last battle!

"What's the meaning of this, Margaret?" said her aunt.

"Simply that I am going. I was to have gone on Monday, as you will
remember."

"But it was understood that you were to stop."

For a moment or two Margaret said nothing.

"I hate these sudden changes," said Lady Ball; "they are hardly
respectable. I don't think you should leave the house in this way,
without having given notice to any one. What will the servants think
of it?"

"They will probably think the truth, aunt. They probably thought
that, when they saw that you did not speak to me yesterday morning.
You can hardly imagine that I should stay in the house under such
circumstances as that."

"You must do as you like, of course."

"In this instance I must, aunt. I suppose I cannot see my uncle?"

"It is quite out of the question."

"Then I will say good-bye to you. I have said good-bye to John.
Good-bye, aunt," and Margaret put out her hand.

But Lady Ball did not put out hers.

"Good-bye, Margaret," she said. "There are circumstances under which
it is impossible for a person to make any expression of feeling that
may be taken for approbation. I hope a time may come when these
things shall have passed away, and that I may be able to see you
again." Margaret's eyes, as she made her way out of the room were
full of tears, and when she found herself outside the hall door, and
at the bottom of the steps, she was obliged to put her handkerchief
up to them. Before her on the road was a boy with a donkey cart
and her luggage. She looked round furtively, half-fearing, half
hoping--hardly expecting, but yet thinking, that she might again see
her cousin. But he did not show himself to her as she walked down to
the railway station by herself. As she went she told herself that she
was right; she applauded her own courage, but what, oh! what was she
to do? Everything now was over for her. Her fortune was gone. The man
whom she had learned to love had left her. There was no place in the
world on which her feet might rest till she had made one for herself
by the work of her hands. And as for friends--was there a single
being in the world whom she could now call her friend?


CHAPTER XXIII

The Lodgings of Mrs Buggins, Née Protheroe


It was nearly the end of October when Miss Mackenzie left the Cedars
and at that time of the year there is not much difficulty in getting
lodgings in London. The house which her brother Walter occupied in
Arundel Street had, at his death, remained in the hands of an old
servant of his, who had bought her late master's furniture with her
savings, and had continued to live there, letting out the house in
lodgings. Her former mistress had gone to see her once or twice
during the past year, and it had been understood between them, that
if Miss Mackenzie ever wanted a room for a night or two in London,
she could be accommodated at the old house. She would have preferred
to write to Hannah Protheroe,--or Mrs Protheroe, as she was now
called by brevet rank since she had held a house of her own,--had
time permitted her to do so. But time and the circumstances did not
permit this, and therefore she had herself driven to Arundel Street
without any notice.

Mrs Protheroe received her with open arms, and with many promises
of comfort and attendance,--as was to be expected, seeing that Mrs
Protheroe was, as she thought, receiving into her house the rich
heiress. She proffered at once the use of her drawing-room and of the
best bedroom, and declared that as the house was now empty, with the
exception of one young gentleman from Somerset House upstairs, she
would be able to devote herself almost exclusively to Miss Mackenzie.
Things were much changed from those former days in which Hannah
Protheroe used frequently to snub Margaret Mackenzie, being almost of
equal standing in the house with her young mistress. And now Margaret
was called upon to explain, that low as her standing might have been
then, at this present moment it was even lower. She had indeed the
means of paying for her lodgings, but these she was called upon to
husband with the minutest economy. The task of telling all this was
difficult. She began it by declining the drawing-room, and by saying
that a bedroom upstairs would suffice for her.

"You haven't heard, Hannah, what has happened to me," she said, when
Mrs Protheroe expressed her surprise at this decision. "My brother's
will was no will at all. I do not get any of his property. It all
goes under some other will to my cousin, Mr John Ball."

By these tidings Hannah was of course prostrated, and driven into a
state of excitement that was not without its pleasantness as far as
she was concerned. Of course she objected that the last will must be
the real will, and in this way the matter came to full discussion
between them.

"And, after all, that John Ball is to have everything!" said Mrs
Protheroe, holding up both her hands. By this time Hannah Protheroe
had got herself comfortably into a chair, and no doubt her personal
pleasure in the evening's occupation was considerably enhanced by the
unconscious feeling that she was the richer woman of the two. But she
behaved very well, and I am inclined to think, in preparing buttered
muffins for her guest, she was more particular in the toasting, and
more generous with the butter, than she would have been had she been
preparing the dainty for drawing-room use. And when she learned that
Margaret had eaten nothing since breakfast, she herself went out
and brought in a sweetbread with her own hand, though she kept a
servant whom she might have sent to the shop. And, for the honour of
lodging-house keepers, I protest that that sweetbread never made its
appearance in any bill.

"You will be more comfortable down here with me, won't you, my dear,
than up there, with not a creature to speak to?"

In this way Mrs Protheroe made her apology for giving Miss Mackenzie
her tea downstairs, in a little back parlour behind the kitchen. It
was a tidy room, with two wooden armchairs, and a bit of carpet over
the flags in the centre, and a rug before the fire. Margaret did
not inquire why it smelt of tobacco, nor did Mrs Protheroe think
it necessary to give any explanation why she went up herself at
half-past seven to answer the bell at the area; nor did she say
anything then of the office messenger from Somerset House, who often
found this little room convenient for his evening pipe. So was passed
the first evening after our Griselda had left the Cedars.

The next day she sat at home doing nothing,--still talking to Hannah
Protheroe, and thinking that perhaps John Ball might come. But he
did not come. She dined downstairs, at one o'clock, in the same
room behind the kitchen, and then she had tea at six. But as Hannah
intimated that perhaps a gentleman friend would look in during
the evening, she was obliged to betake herself, after tea, to the
solitude of her own room. As Hannah was between fifty and sixty, and
nearer the latter age than the former, there could be no objection to
her receiving what visitors she pleased. The third day passed with
Miss Mackenzie the same as the second, and still no cousin came to
see her. The next day, being Sunday, she diversified by going to
church three times; but on the Sunday she was forced to dine alone,
as the gentleman friend usually came in on that day to eat his bit of
mutton with his friend, Mrs Protheroe.

"A most respectable man, in the Admiralty branch, Miss Margaret, and
will have a pension of twenty-seven shillings and sixpence a week in
a year or two. And it is so lonely by oneself, you know."

Then Miss Mackenzie knew that Hannah Protheroe intended to become
Hannah Buggins, and she understood the whole mystery of the tobacco
smoke.

On the Monday she went to the house in Gower Street, and communicated
to them the fact that she had left the Cedars. Miss Colza was in the
room with her sister-in-law and nieces, and as it was soon evident
that Miss Colza knew the whole history of her misfortune with
reference to the property, she talked about her affairs before Miss
Colza as though that young lady had been one of her late brother's
family. But yet she felt that she did not like Miss Colza, and once
or twice felt almost inclined to resent certain pushing questions
which Miss Colza addressed to her.

"And have you quarrelled with all the Ball family?" the young lady
asked, putting great emphasis on the word all.

"I did not say that I had quarrelled with any of them," said Miss
Mackenzie.

"Oh! I beg pardon. I thought as you came away so sudden like, and as
you didn't see any of them since, you know--"

"It is a matter of no importance whatever," said Miss Mackenzie.

"No: none in the least," said Miss Colza. And in this way they made
up their minds to hate each other.

But what did the woman mean by talking in this way of all the Balls,
as though a quarrel with one of the family was a thing of more
importance than a quarrel with any of the others? Could she know, or
could she even guess, anything of John Ball and of the offer he had
made? But this mystery was soon cleared up in Margaret's mind, when,
at Mrs Mackenzie's request, they two went upstairs into that lady's
bedroom for a little private conversation.

The conversation was desired for purposes appertaining solely to the
convenience of the widow. She wanted some money, and then, with tears
in her eyes, she demanded to know what was to be done. Miss Colza
paid her eighteen shillings a week for board and lodging, and that
was now two weeks in arrear; and one bedroom was let to a young man
employed in the oilcloth factory, at seven shillings a week.

"And the rent is ninety pounds, and the taxes twenty-two," said Mrs
Mackenzie, with her handkerchief up to her eyes; "and there's the
taxman come now for seven pound ten, and where I'm to get it, unless
I coined my blood, I don't know."

Margaret gave her two sovereigns which she had in her purse, and
promised to send her a cheque for the amount of the taxes due.
Then she told as much as she could tell of that proposal as to the
interest of the money due from the firm in the New Road.

"If it could only be made certain," said the widow, who had fallen
much from her high ideas since Margaret had last seen her. Things
were greatly changed in that house since the day on which the dinner,
à la Russe, had been given under the auspices of Mr Grandairs. "If
it can only be made certain. They still keep his name up in the firm.
There it is as plain as life over the place of business"--she would
not even yet call it a shop--"Rubb and Mackenzie; and yet they won't
let me know anything as to how matters are going on. I went there the
other day, and they would tell me nothing. And as for Samuel Rubb, he
hasn't been here this last fortnight, and I've got no one to see me
righted. If you were to ask Mr Slow, wouldn't he be able to see me
righted?"

Margaret declared that she hardly knew whether that would come
within Mr Slow's line of business, and that she did not feel herself
competent to give advice on such a point as that. She then explained,
as best she could, that her own affairs were not as yet settled, but
that she was led to hope, from what had been said to her, that the
interest due by the firm on the money borrowed might become a fixed
annual income for Mrs Mackenzie's benefit.

After that it came out that Mr Maguire had again been in Gower
Street.

"And he was alone, for the best part of half an hour, with that young
woman downstairs," said Mrs Mackenzie.

"And you saw him?" Margaret asked.

"Oh, yes; I saw him afterwards."

"And what did he say?"

"He didn't say much to me. Only he gave me to understand--at least,
that is what I suppose he meant--that you and he-- He meant to say,
that you and he had been courting, I suppose."

Then Margaret understood why Miss Colza had desired to know whether
she had quarrelled with all the Balls. In her open and somewhat
indignant speech in the drawing-room at the Cedars, she had declared
before Mr Maguire, in her aunt's presence, that she was engaged to
marry her cousin, John Ball. Mr Maguire had now enlisted Miss Colza
in his service, and had told Miss Colza what had occurred. But still
Miss Mackenzie did not thoroughly understand the matter. Why, she
asked herself, should Mr Maguire trouble himself further, now that he
knew that she had no fortune? But, in truth, it was not so easy to
satisfy Mr Maguire on that point, as it was to satisfy Miss Mackenzie
herself. He believed that the relatives of his lady-love were
robbing her, or that they were, at any rate, taking advantage of her
weakness. If it might be given to him to rescue her and her fortune
from them, then, in such case as that, surely he would get his
reward. The reader will therefore understand why Miss Colza was
anxious to know whether Miss Mackenzie had quarrelled with all the
Balls.

Margaret's face became unusually black when she was told that she
and Mr Maguire had been courting, but she did not contradict the
assertion. She did, however, express her opinion of that gentleman.

"He is a mean, false, greedy man," she said, and then paused a
moment; "and he has been the cause of my ruin." She would not,
however, explain what she meant by this, and left the house, without
going back to the room in which Miss Colza was sitting.

About a week afterwards she got a letter from Mr Slow, in which that
gentleman,--or rather the firm, for the letter was signed Slow and
Bideawhile,--asked her whether she was in want of immediate funds.
The affair between her and her cousin was not yet, they said, in a
state for final settlement, but they would be justified in supplying
her own immediate wants out of the estate. To this she sent a reply,
saying that she had money for her immediate wants, but that she would
feel very grateful if anything could be done for Mrs Mackenzie and
her family. Then she got a further letter, very short, saying that a
half-year's interest on the loan had, by Mr Ball's consent, been paid
to Mrs Mackenzie by Rubb and Mackenzie.

On the day following this, when she was sitting up in her bedroom,
Mrs Protheroe came to her, dressed in wonderful habiliments. She
wore a dark-blue bonnet, filled all round with yellow flowers, and a
spotted silk dress, of which the prevailing colour was scarlet. She
was going, she said, to St Mary-le-Strand, "to be made Mrs Buggins
of." She tried to carry it off with bravado when she entered the
room, but she left it with a tear in her eye, and a whimper in her
throat. "To be sure, I'm an old woman," she said before she went.
"Who has said that I ain't? Not I; nor yet Buggins. We is both of us
old. But I don't know why we is to be desolate and lonely all our
days, because we ain't young. It seems to me that the young folks is
to have it all to themselves, and I'm sure I don't know why." Then
she went, clearly resolved, that as far as she was concerned, the
young people shouldn't have it all to themselves; and as Buggins was
of the same way of thinking, they were married at St Mary-le-Strand
that very morning.

And this marriage would have been of no moment to us or to our little
history, had not Mr Maguire chosen that morning, of all mornings
in the year, to call on Miss Mackenzie in Arundel Street. He had
obtained her address--of course, from Miss Colza; and, not having
been idle the while in pushing his inquiries respecting Miss
Mackenzie's affairs, had now come to Arundel Street to carry on the
battle as best he might. Margaret was still in her room as he came,
and as the girl could not show the gentleman up there, she took him
into an empty parlour, and brought the tidings up to the lodger. Mr
Maguire had not sent up his name; but a personal description by the
girl at once made Margaret know who was there.

"I won't see him," said she, with heightened colour, grieving greatly
that the strong-minded Hannah Protheroe,--or Buggins, as it might
probably be by that time,--was not at home. "Martha, don't let him
come up. Tell him to go away at once."

After some persuasion, the girl went down with the message, which she
softened to suit her own idea of propriety. But she returned, saying
that the gentleman was very urgent. He insisted that he must see Miss
Mackenzie, if only for an instant, before he left the house.

"Tell him," said Margaret, "that nothing shall induce me to see him.
I'll send for a policeman. If he won't go when he's told, Martha, you
must go for a policeman."

Martha, when she heard that, became frightened about the spoons and
coats, and ran down again in a hurry. Then she came up again with a
scrap of paper, on which a few words had been written with a pencil.
This was passed through a very narrow opening in the door, as
Margaret stood with it guarded, fearing lest the enemy might carry
the point by an assault.

"You are being robbed," said the note, "you are, indeed,--and my only
wish is to protect you."

"Tell him that there is no answer, and that I will receive no more
notes from him," said Margaret. Then, at last, when he received that
message, Mr Maguire went away.

About a week after that, another visitor came to Miss Mackenzie, and
him she received. But he was not the man for whose coming she in
truth longed. It was Mr Samuel Rubb who now called, and when Mrs
Buggins told her lodger that he was in the parlour, she went down
to see him willingly. Her life was now more desolate than it had
been before the occurrence of that ceremony in the church of St
Mary-le-Strand; for, though she had much respect for Mr Buggins, of
whose character she had heard nothing that was not good, and though
she had given her consent as to the expediency of the Buggins'
alliance, she did not find herself qualified to associate with Mr
Buggins.

"He won't say a word, Miss," Hannah had pleaded, "and he'll run and
fetch for you like a dog."

But even when recommended so highly for his social qualities,
Buggins, she felt, would be antipathetic to her; and, with many
false assurances that she did not think it right to interrupt a
newly-married couple, she confined herself on those days to her own
room.

But when Mr Rubb came, she went down to see him. How much Mr
Rubb knew of her affairs,--how far he might be in Miss Colza's
confidence,--she did not know; but his conduct to her had not been
offensive, and she had been pleased when she learned that the first
half year's interest had been paid to her sister-in-law.

"I'm sorry to hear of all this, Miss Mackenzie," said he, when he
came forward to greet her. He had not thought it necessary, on this
occasion, to put on his yellow gloves or his shiny boots, and she
liked him the better on that account.

"Of all what, Mr Rubb?" said she.

"Why, about you and the family at the Cedars. If what I hear is true,
they've just got you to give up everything, and then dropped you."

"I left Sir John Ball's house on my own account, Mr Rubb; I was not
turned out."

"I don't suppose they'd do that. They wouldn't dare to do that; not
so soon after getting hold of your money. Miss Mackenzie, I hope
I shall not anger you; but it seems to me to be the most horridly
wicked piece of business I ever heard of."

"You are mistaken, Mr Rubb. You forget that the thing was first found
out by my own lawyer."

"I don't know how that may be, but I can't bring myself to believe
that it all is as they say it is; I can't, indeed."

She merely smiled, and shook her head. Then he went on speaking.

"I hope I'm not giving offence. It's not what I mean, if I am."

"You are not giving any offence, Mr Rubb; only I think you are
mistaken about my relatives at Twickenham."

"Of course, I may be; there's no doubt of that. I may be mistaken,
like another. But, Miss Mackenzie, by heavens, I can't bring myself
to think it." As he spoke in this energetic way, he rose from his
chair, and stood opposite to her. "I cannot bring myself to think
that the fight should be given up."

"But there has been no fight."

"There ought to be a fight, Miss Mackenzie; I know that there ought.
I believe I'm right in supposing, if all this is allowed to go by the
board as it is going, that you won't have, so to say, anything of
your own."

"I shall have to earn my bread like other people; and, indeed, I am
endeavouring now to put myself in the way of doing so."

"I'll tell you how you shall earn it. Come and be my wife. I think
we've got a turn for good up at the business. Come and be my wife.
That's honest, any way."

"You are honest," said she, with a tear in her eye.

"I am honest now," said he, "though I was not honest to you once;"
and I think there was a tear in his eye also.

"If you mean about that money that you have borrowed, I am very
glad of it--very glad of it. It will be something for them in Gower
Street."

"Miss Mackenzie, as long as I have a hand to help myself with, they
shall have that at least. But now, about this other thing. Whether
there's nothing to come or anything, I'll be true to my offer. I'll
fight for it, if there's to be a fight, and I'll let it go if there's
to be no fight. But whether one way or whether the other, there shall
be a home for you when you say the word. Say it now. Will you be my
wife?"

"I cannot say that word, Mr Rubb."

"And why not?"

"I cannot say it; indeed, I cannot."

"Is it Mr Ball that prevents you?"

"Do not ask me questions like that. Indeed, indeed, indeed, I cannot
do as you ask me."

"You despise me, like enough, because I am only a tradesman?"

"What am I myself, that I should despise any man? No, Mr Rubb, I am
thankful and grateful to you; but it cannot be."

Then he took up his hat, and, turning away from her without any word
of adieu, made his way out of the house.

"He really do seem a nice man, Miss," said Mrs Buggins. "I wonder you
wouldn't have him liefer than go into one of them hospitals."

Whether Miss Mackenzie had any remnant left of another hope,
or whether all such hope had gone, we need not perhaps inquire
accurately. Whatever might be the state of her mind on that score,
she was doing her best to carry out her purpose with reference to the
plan of nursing; and as she could not now apply to her cousin, she
had written to Mr Slow upon the subject.

Late in November yet another gentleman came to see her, but when he
came she was unfortunately out. She had gone up to the house in Gower
Street, and had there been so cross-questioned by the indefatigable
Miss Colza that she had felt herself compelled to tell her
sister-in-law that she could not again come there as long as Miss
Colza was one of the family. It was manifest to her that these
questions had been put on behalf of Mr Maguire, and she had therefore
felt more indignant than she would have been had they originated in
the impertinent curiosity of the woman herself. She also informed
Mrs Mackenzie that, in obedience to instructions from Mr Slow, she
intended to postpone her purpose with reference to the hospital till
some time early in the next year. Mr Slow had sent a clerk to her
to explain that till that time such amicable arrangement as that to
which he looked forward to make could not be completed. On her return
from this visit to Gower Street she found the card,--simply the
card,--of her cousin, John Ball.

Why had she gone out? Why had she not remained a fixture in the
house, seeing that it had always been possible that he should come?
But why! oh, why! had he treated her in this way, leaving his card
at her home, as though that would comfort her in her grievous
desolation? It would have been far better that he should have left
there no intimation of his coming. She took the card, and in her
anger threw it from her into the fire.

But yet she waited for him to come again. Not once during the next
ten days, excepting on the Sunday, did she go out of the house during
the hours that her cousin would be in London. Very sad and monotonous
was her life, passed alone in her own bedroom. And it was the more
sad, because Mrs Buggins somewhat resented the manner in which her
husband was treated. Mrs Buggins was still attentive, but she made
little speeches about Buggins' respectability, and Margaret felt that
her presence in the house was an annoyance.

At last, at the end of the ten days, John Ball came again, and
Margaret, with a fluttering heart, descended to meet him in the empty
parlour.

She was the first to speak. As she had come downstairs, she had made
up her mind to tell him openly what were her thoughts.

"I had hoped to have seen you before this, John," she said, as she
gave him her hand.

"I did call before. Did you not get my card?"

"Oh, yes; I got your card. But I had expected to see you before that.
The kind of life that I am leading here is very sad, and cannot be
long continued."

"I would have had you remain at the Cedars, Margaret; but you would
not be counselled by me."

"No; not in that, John."

"I only mention it now to excuse myself. But you are not to suppose
that I am not anxious about you, because I have not seen you. I have
been with Mr Slow constantly. These law questions are always very
tedious in being settled."

"But I want nothing for myself."

"It behoves Mr Slow, for that very reason, to be the more anxious on
your behalf; and, if you will believe me, Margaret, I am quite as
anxious as he is. If you had remained with us, I could have discussed
the matter with you from day to day; but, of course, I cannot do so
while you are here."

As he was talking in this way, everything with reference to their
past intercourse came across her mind. She could not tell him that
she had been anxious to see him, not with reference to the money,
but that he might tell her that he did not find her guilty on that
charge which her aunt had brought against her concerning Mr Maguire.
She did not want assurances of solicitude as to her future means
of maintenance. She cared little or nothing about her future
maintenance, if she could not get from him one kind word with
reference to the past. But he went on talking to her about Mr Slow,
and the interest, and the property, and the law, till, at last, in
her anger, she told him that she did not care to hear further about
it, till she should be told at last what she was to do.

"As I have got nothing of my own," she said, "I want to be earning my
bread, and I think that the delay is cruel."

"And do you think," said he, "that the delay is not cruel to me
also?"

She thought that he alluded to the fact that he could not yet obtain
possession of the income for his own purposes.

"You may have it all at once, for me," she said.

"Have all what?" he replied. "Margaret, I think you fail to see the
difficulties of my position. In the first place, my father is on his
deathbed!"

"Oh, John, I am sorry for that."

"And, then, my mother is very bitter about all this. And how can I,
at such a time, tell her that her opinion is to go for nothing? I am
bound to think of my own children, and cannot abandon my claim to the
property."

"No one wants you to abandon it. At least, I do not."

"What am I to do, then? This Mr Maguire is making charges against
me."

"Oh, John!"

"He is saying that I am robbing you, and trying to cover the robbery
by marrying you. Both my own lawyer, and Mr Slow, have told me that a
plain statement of the whole case must be prepared, so that any one
who cares to inquire may learn the whole truth, before I can venture
to do anything which might otherwise compromise my character. You
do not think of all this, Margaret, when you are angry with me."
Margaret, hanging down her head, confessed that she had not thought
of it.

"The difficulty would have been less, had you remained at the
Cedars."

Then she again lifted her head, and told him that that would have
been impossible. Let things go as they might, she knew that she had
been right in leaving her aunt's house.

There was not much more said between them, nor did he give her any
definite promise as to when he would see her again. He told her
that she might draw on Mr Slow for money if she wanted it, but that
she again declined. And he told her also not to withdraw Susanna
Mackenzie from her school at Littlebath--at any rate, not for
the present; and intimated also that Mr Slow would pay the
schoolmistress's bill. Then he took his leave of her. He had spoken
no word of love to her; but yet she felt, when he was gone, that her
case was not as hopeless now as it had seemed to be that morning.


CHAPTER XXIV

The Little Story of the Lion and the Lamb


During those three months of October, November, and December, Mr
Maguire was certainly not idle. He had, by means of pertinacious
inquiry, learned a good deal about Miss Mackenzie; indeed, he had
learned most of the facts which the reader knows, though not quite
all of them. He had seen Jonathan Ball's will, and he had seen Walter
Mackenzie's will. He had ascertained, through Miss Colza, that John
Ball now claimed the property by some deed said to have been executed
by Jonathan Ball previous to the execution of his will; and he
had also learned, from Miss Mackenzie's own lips, in Lady Ball's
presence, that she had engaged herself to marry the man who was thus
claiming her property. Why should Mr Ball want to marry her,--who
would in such a case be penniless,--but that he felt himself
compelled in that way to quell all further inquiry into the thing
that he was doing? And why should she desire to marry him, but that
in this way she might, as it were, go with her own property, and not
lose the value of it herself when compelled to surrender it to her
cousin? That she would have given herself, with all her property, to
him,--Maguire,--a few months ago, Mr Maguire felt fully convinced,
and, as I have said before, had some ground for such conviction. He
had learned also from Miss Colza, that Miss Mackenzie had certainly
quarrelled with Lady Ball, and that she had, so Miss Colza believed,
been turned out of the house at the Cedars. Whether Mr Ball had or
had not abandoned his matrimonial prospects, Miss Colza could not
quite determine. Having made up her mind to hate Miss Mackenzie, and
therefore, as was natural, thinking that no gentleman could really
like such "a poor dowdy creature," she rather thought that he had
abandoned his matrimonial prospects. Mr Maguire had thus learned much
on the subject; but he had not learned this:--that John Ball was
honest throughout in the matter, and that the lawyers employed in it
were honest also.

And now, having got together all this information, and he himself
being in a somewhat precarious condition as to his own affairs, Mr
Maguire resolved upon using his information boldly. He had a not
incorrect idea of the fitness of things, and did not fail to tell
himself that were he at that moment in possession of those clerical
advantages which his labours in the vineyard should have earned
for him, he would not have run the risk which he must undoubtedly
incur by engaging himself in this matter. Had he a full church
at Littlebath depending on him, had Mr Stumfold's chance and Mr
Stumfold's success been his, had he still even been an adherent of
the Stumfoldian fold, he would have paused before he rushed to the
public with an account of Miss Mackenzie's grievance. But as matters
stood with him, looking round upon his own horizon, he did not
see that he had any course before him more likely to lead to good
pecuniary results, than this.

The reader has been told how Mr Maguire went to Arundel Street,
and how he was there received. But that reception did not at all
daunt his courage. It showed him that the lady was still under the
Ball influence, and that his ally, Miss Colza, was probably wrong
in supposing that the Ball marriage was altogether off. But this
only made him the more determined to undermine that influence, and
to prevent that marriage. If he could once succeed in convincing
the lady that her best chance of regaining her fortune lay in his
assistance, or if he could even convince her that his interference
must result, either with or without her good wishes, in dividing her
altogether from the Ball alliance, then she would be almost compelled
to throw herself into his arms. That she was violently in love with
him he did not suppose, nor did he think it at all more probable that
she should be violently in love with her cousin. He put her down
in his own mind as one of those weak, good women, who can bring
themselves easily to love any man, and who are sure to make useful
wives, because they understand so thoroughly the nature of obedience.
If he could secure for her her fortune, and could divide her from
John Ball, he had but little doubt that she would come to him,
in spite of the manner in which she had refused to receive him
in Arundel Street. Having considered all this, after the mode of
thinking which I have attempted to describe, he went to work with
such weapons as were readiest to his hands.

As a first step, he wrote boldly to John Ball. In this letter
he reasserted the statement he had made to Lady Ball as to Miss
Mackenzie's engagement to himself, and added some circumstances
which he had not mentioned to Lady Ball. He said, that having become
engaged to that lady, he had, in consequence, given up his curacy
at Littlebath, and otherwise so disarranged his circumstances, as
to make it imperative upon him to take the steps which he was now
taking. He had come up to London, expecting to find her anxious
to receive him in Gower Street, and had then discovered that she
had been taken away to the Cedars. He could not, he said, give any
adequate description of his surprise, when, on arriving there, he
heard from the mouth of his own Margaret that she was now engaged to
her cousin. But if his surprise then had been great and terrible, how
much greater and more terrible must it have been when, step by step,
the story of that claim upon her fortune revealed itself to him! He
pledged himself, in his letter, as a gentleman and as a Christian
minister, to see the matter out. He would not allow Miss Mackenzie
to be despoiled of her fortune and her hand,--both of which he had
a right to regard as his own,--without making known to the public a
transaction which he regarded as nefarious. Then there was a good
deal of eloquent indignation the nature and purport of which the
reader will probably understand.

Mr Ball did not at all like this letter. He had that strong feeling
of disinclination to be brought before the public with reference
to his private affairs, which is common to all Englishmen; and
he specially had a dislike to this, seeing that there would be a
question not only as to money, but also as to love. A gentleman does
not like to be accused of a dishonest attempt to possess himself of a
lady's property; but, at the age of fifty, even that is almost better
than one which charges him with such attempt against a lady's heart.
He knew that he was not dishonest, and therefore could endure the
first. He was not quite sure that he was not, or might not become,
ridiculous, and therefore feared the latter very greatly. He could
not ignore the letter, and there was nothing for it but to show it to
his lawyer. Unfortunately, he had told this lawyer, on the very day
of Mr Maguire's visit to the Cedars, that all was to be made smooth
by his marriage with Miss Mackenzie; and now, with much misery
and many inward groanings, he had to explain all this story of Mr
Maguire. It was the more painful in that he had to admit that an
offer had been made to the lady by the clergyman, and had not been
rejected.

"You don't think there was more than that?" asked the lawyer, having
paved the way for his question with sundry apologetic flourishes.

"I am sure there was not," said John Ball. "She is as true as the
Gospel, and he is as false as the devil."

"Oh, yes," said the lawyer; "there's no doubt about his falsehood.
He's one of those fellows for whom nothing is too dirty. Clergymen
are like women. As long as they're pure, they're a long sight purer
than other men; but when they fall, they sink deeper."

"You needn't be afraid of taking her word," said John Ball. "If all
women were as pure as she is, there wouldn't be much amiss with
them." His eyes glittered as he spoke of her, and it was a pity that
Margaret could not have heard him then, and seen him there.

"You don't think she has been--just a little foolish, you know?"

"I think she was very foolish in not bidding such a man to go about
his business, at once. But she has not been more so than what she
owns. She is as brave as she is good, and I don't think she would
keep anything back."

The result was that a letter was written by the lawyer to Mr Maguire,
telling Mr Maguire that any further communication should be made
to him; and also making a slight suggestion as to the pains and
penalties which are incurred in the matter of a libel. Mr Maguire had
dated his letter from Littlebath, and there the answer reached him.
He had returned thither, having found that he could take no further
immediate steps towards furthering his cause in London.

And now, what steps should he take next? More than once he thought
of putting his own case into the hands of a lawyer; but what was a
lawyer to do for him? An action for breach of promise was open to
him, but he had wit enough to feel that there was very little chance
of success for him in that line. He might instruct a lawyer to look
into Miss Mackenzie's affairs, and he thought it probable that he
might find a lawyer to take such instructions. But there would be
much expense in this, and, probably, no result. Advancing logically
from one conclusion to another, he at last resolved that he must rush
boldly into print, and lay the whole iniquity of the transaction open
to the public.

He believed--I think he did believe--that the woman was being
wronged. Some particle of such belief he had, and fostering himself
with this, he sat himself down, and wrote a leading article.

Now there existed in Littlebath at this time a weekly periodical
called the _Christian Examiner_, with which Mr Maguire had for some
time had dealings. He had written for the paper, taking an earnest
part in local religious subjects; and the paper, in return, had
very frequently spoken highly of Mr Maguire's eloquence, and of Mr
Maguire's energy. There had been a give and take in this, which all
people understand who are conversant with the provincial, or perhaps
I might add, with the metropolitan press of the country. The paper
in question was not a wicked paper, nor were the gentlemen concerned
in its publication intentionally scurrilous or malignant; but it was
subject to those great temptations which beset all class newspapers
of the kind, and to avoid which seems to be almost more difficult, in
handling religious subjects, than in handling any other. The editor
of a _Christian Examiner_, if, as is probable, he have, of his own,
very strong and one-sided religious convictions, will think that
those who differ from him are in a perilous way, and so thinking,
will feel himself bound to tell them so. The man who advocates one
line of railway instead of another, or one prime minister as being
superior to all others, does not regard his opponents as being
fatally wrong,--wrong for this world and for the next,--and he can
restrain himself. But how is a newspaper writer to restrain himself
when his opponent is incurring everlasting punishment, or, worse
still, carrying away others to a similar doom, in that they read, and
perhaps even purchase, that which the lost one has written? In this
way the contents of religious newspapers are apt to be personal;
and heavy, biting, scorching attacks, become the natural vehicle of
_Christian Examiners_.

Mr Maguire sat down and wrote his leading article, which on the
following Saturday appeared in all the glory of large type. The
article shall not be repeated here at length, because it contained
sundry quotations from Holy Writ which may as well be omitted,
but the purport of it shall be explained. It commenced with a
dissertation against an undue love of wealth,--the _auri sacra
fames_, as the writer called it; and described with powerful unction
the terrible straits into which, when indulged, it led the vile,
wicked, ugly, hideous, loathsome, devilish human heart. Then there
was an eloquent passage referring to worms and dust and grass, and
a quotation respecting treasures both corruptible and incorruptible.
Not at once, but with crafty gradations, the author sloped away to
the point of his subject. How fearful was it to watch the way in
which the strong, wicked ones,--the roaring lions of the earth,
beguiled the ignorance of the innocent, and led lonely lambs into
their slaughter-houses. All this, much amplified, made up half
the article; and then, after the manner of a pleasant relater of
anecdotes, the clerical story-teller began his little tale. When,
however, he came to the absolute writing of the tale, he found it
to be prudent for the present to omit the names of his hero and
heroine--to omit, indeed, the names of all the persons concerned. He
had first intended boldly to dare it all, and perhaps would yet have
done so had he been quite sure of his editor. But his editor he found
might object to these direct personalities at the first sound of the
trumpet, unless the communication were made in the guise of a letter,
with Mr Maguire's name at the end of it. After a while the editor
might become hot in the fight himself, and then the names could
be blazoned forth. And there existed some chance,--some small
chance,--that the robber-lion, John Ball, might be induced to drop
his lamb from his mouth when he heard this premonitory blast, and
then the lion's prey might be picked up by--"the bold hunter," Mr
Maguire would probably have said, had he been called upon to finish
the sentence himself; anyone else might, perhaps, say, by the jackal.
The little story was told, therefore, without the mention of any
names. Mr Maguire had read other little stories told in another
way in other newspapers, of greater weight, no doubt, than the
Littlebath _Christian Examiner_, and had thought that he could
wield a thunderbolt as well as any other Jupiter; but in wielding
thunderbolts, as in all other operations of skill, a man must first
try his 'prentice hand with some reticence; and thus he reconciled
himself to prudence, not without some pangs of conscience which
accused him inwardly of cowardice.

"Not long ago there was a lady in this town, loved and respected by
all who knew her." Thus he began, and then gave a not altogether
inaccurate statement of the whole affair, dropping, of course, his
own share in the concern, and accusing the vile, wicked, hideous,
loathsome human heart of the devouring lion, who lived some miles
to the west end of London, of a brutal desire and a hellish scheme
to swallow up the inheritance of the innocent, loved, and respected
lamb, in spite of the closest ties of consanguinity between them. And
then he went on to tell how, with a base desire of covering up from
the eyes of an indignant public his bestial greediness in having made
this dishonest meal, the lion had proposed to himself the plan of
marrying the lamb! It was a pity that Maguire had not learned--that
Miss Colza had not been able to tell him--that the lion had once
before expressed his wish to take the lamb for his wife. Had he
known that, what a picture he would have drawn of the disappointed
vindictive king of the forest, as lying in his lair at Twickenham he
meditated his foul revenge! This unfortunately was unknown to Mr
Maguire and unsuspected by him.

But the article did not end here. The indignant writer of it went on
to say that he had buckled on his armour in support of the lamb, and
that he was ready to meet the lion either in the forest or in any
social circle; either in the courts of law or before any Christian
arbitrator. With loud trumpetings, he summoned the lion to appear and
plead guilty, or to stand forward, if he dared, and declare himself
innocent with his hand on his heart. If the lion could prove himself
to be innocent the writer of that article offered him the right hand
of fellowship, an offer which the lion would not, perhaps, regard
as any strong inducement; but if the lion were not innocent--if, as
the writer of that article was well aware was the case, the lion was
basely, greedily, bestially guilty, then the writer of that article
pledged himself to give the lion no peace till he had disgorged his
prey, and till the lamb was free to come back, with all her property,
to that Christian circle in Littlebath which had loved her so warmly
and respected her so thoroughly.

Such was the nature of the article, and the editor put it in. After
all, what, in such matters, is an editor to do? Is it not his
business to sell his paper? And if the editor of a _Christian
Examiner_ cannot trust the clergyman he has sat under, whom can he
trust? Some risk an editor is obliged to run, or he will never sell
his paper. There could be little doubt that such an article as this
would be popular among the religious world of Littlebath, and that it
would create a demand. He had his misgivings--had that poor editor.
He did not feel quite sure of his lion and his lamb. He talked the
matter over vehemently with Mr Maguire in the little room in which
he occupied himself with his scissors and his paste; but ultimately
the article was inserted. Who does not know that interval of triumph
which warms a man's heart when he has delivered his blow, and
the return blow has not been yet received? The blow has been so
well struck that it must be successful, nay, may probably be
death-dealing. So felt Mr Maguire when two dozen copies of the
_Christian Examiner_ were delivered at his lodgings on the Saturday
morning. The article, though printed as a leading article, had been
headed as a little story,--"The Lion and the Lamb,"--so that it might
more readily attract attention. It read very nicely in print. It
had all that religious unction which is so necessary for _Christian
Examiners_, and with it that spice of devilry, so delicious to
humanity that without it even _Christian Examiners_ cannot be made
to sell themselves. He was very busy with his two dozen damp copies
before him,--two dozen which had been sent to him, by agreement, as
the price of his workmanship. He made them up and directed them with
his own hand. To the lion and the lamb he sent two copies, two to
each. To Mr Slow he sent a copy, and another to Messrs Slow and
Bideawhile, and a third to the other lawyer. He sent a copy to Lady
Ball and one to Sir John. Another he sent to the old Mackenzie,
baronet at Incharrow, and two more to the baronet's eldest son, and
the baronet's eldest son's wife. A copy he sent to Mrs Tom Mackenzie,
and a copy to Miss Colza; and a copy also he sent to Mrs Buggins.
And he sent a copy to the Chairman of the Board at the Shadrach Fire
Office, and another to the Chairman at the Abednego Life Office. A
copy he sent to Mr Samuel Rubb, junior, and a copy to Messrs Rubb and
Mackenzie. Out of his own pocket he supplied the postage stamps, and
with his own hand he dropped the papers into the Littlebath
post-office.

Poor Miss Mackenzie, when she read the article, was stricken almost
to the ground. How she did hate the man whose handwriting on the
address she recognised at once! What should she do? In her agony
she almost resolved that she would start at once for the Cedars and
profess her willingness to go before all the magistrates in London
and Littlebath, and swear that her cousin was no lion and that she
was no lamb. At that moment her feelings towards the Christians
and _Christian Examiners_ of Littlebath were not the feelings of
a Griselda. I think she could have spoken her mind freely had Mr
Maguire come in her way. Then, when she saw Mrs Buggins's copy, her
anger blazed up afresh, and her agony became more intense. The horrid
man must have sent copies all over the world, or he would never have
thought of sending a copy to Mrs Buggins!

But she did not go to the Cedars. She reflected that when there she
might probably find her cousin absent, and in such case she would
hardly know how to address herself to her aunt. Mr Ball, too, might
perhaps come to her, and for three days she patiently awaited his
coming. On the evening of the third day there came to her, not Mr
Ball, but a clerk from Mr Slow, the same clerk who had been with her
before, and he made an appointment with her at Mr Slow's office on
the following morning. She was to meet Mr Ball there, and also to
meet Mr Ball's lawyer. Of course she consented to go, and of course
she was on Mr Slow's staircase exactly at the time appointed. Of what
she was thinking as she walked round Lincoln's Inn Fields to kill a
quarter of an hour which she found herself to have on hand, we will
not now inquire.

She was shown at once into Mr Slow's room, and the first thing that
met her eyes was a copy of that horrible _Christian Examiner_, lying
on the table before him. She knew it instantly, and would have known
it had she simply seen a corner of the printing. To her eyes and
to her mind, no other printed paper had ever been so ugly and so
vicious. But she saw that there was also another newspaper under the
_Christian Examiner_. Mr Slow brought her to the fire, and gave her
a chair, and was very courteous. In a few moments came the other
lawyer, and with him came John Ball.

Mr Slow opened the conference, all the details of which need not be
given here. He first asked Miss Mackenzie whether she had seen that
wicked libel. She, with much energy and, I may almost say, with
virulence, declared that the horrid paper had been sent to her. She
hoped that nobody suspected that she had known anything about it.
In answer to this, they all assured her that she need not trouble
herself on that head. Mr Slow then told her that a London paper had
copied the whole story of the "Lion and the Lamb," expressing a hope
that the lion would be exposed if there was any truth in it, and the
writer would be exposed if there was none.

"The writer was Mr Maguire, a clergyman," said Miss Mackenzie, with
indignation.

"We all know that," said Mr Slow, with a slight smile on his face.
Then he went on reading the remarks of the London paper, which
declared that the Littlebath _Christian Examiner_, having gone so
far, must, of necessity, go further. The article was calculated to
give the greatest pain to, no doubt, many persons; and the innocence
or guilt of "the Lion," as poor John Ball was called, must be made
manifest to the public.

"And now, my dear Miss Mackenzie, I will tell you what we propose to
do," said Mr Slow. He then explained that it was absolutely necessary
that a question of law should be tried and settled in a court of
law, between her and her cousin. When she protested against this, he
endeavoured to explain to her that the cause would be an amicable
cause, a simple reference, in short, to a legal tribunal. Of course,
she did not understand this, and, of course, she still protested; but
after a while, when she began to perceive that her protest was of no
avail, she let that matter drop. The cause should be brought on as
soon as possible, but could not be decided till late in the spring.
She was told that she had better make no great change in her own
manner of life till that time, and was again informed that she could
have what money she wanted for her own maintenance. She refused to
take any money: but when the reference was made to some proposed
change in her life, she looked wistfully into her cousin's face. He,
however, had nothing to say then, and kept his eyes intently fixed
upon the carpet.

Mr Slow then took up the _Christian Examiner_, and declared to her
what was their intention with reference to that. A letter should
be written from his house to the editor of the London newspaper,
giving a plain statement of the case, with all the names, explaining
that all the parties were acting in perfect concert, and that the
matter was to be decided in the only way which could be regarded as
satisfactory. In answer to this, Miss Mackenzie, almost in tears,
pointed out how distressing would be the publicity thus given to her
name "particularly"--she said, "particularly--" But she could not go
on with the expression of her thoughts, or explain that so public a
reference to a proposal of marriage from her cousin must be doubly
painful to her, seeing that the idea of such a marriage had been
abandoned. But Mr Slow understood all this, and, coming over to her,
took her gently by the hand.

"My dear," he said, "you may trust me in this as though I were your
father. I know that such publicity is painful; but, believe me, it is
the best that we can do."

Of course she had no alternative but to yield.

When the interview was over, her cousin walked home with her to
Arundel Street, and said much to her as to the necessity for this
trial. He said so much, that she, at last, dimly understood that
the matter could not be set at rest by her simple renouncing of the
property. Her own lawyer could not allow her to do so; nor could he,
John Ball, consent to receive the property in such a manner. "You
see, by that newspaper, what people would say of me."

But had he not the power of making everything easy by doing that
which he himself had before proposed to do? Why did he not again say,
"Margaret, come and be my wife?" She acknowledged to herself that he
had a right to act as though he had never said those words,--that the
facts elicited by Mr Maguire's visit to the Cedars were sufficient to
absolve him from his offer. But yet she thought that they should have
been sufficient also to induce him to renew it.

On that occasion, when he left her at the door in Arundel Street, he
had not renewed his offer.


CHAPTER XXV

Lady Ball in Arundel Street


On Christmas Day Miss Mackenzie was pressed very hard to eat her
Christmas dinner with Mr and Mrs Buggins, and she almost gave way.
She had some half-formed idea in her head that should she once
sit down to table with Buggins, she would have given up the fight
altogether. She had no objection to Buggins, and had, indeed, no
strong objection to put herself on a par with Buggins; but she felt
that she could not be on a par with Buggins and with John Ball at
the same time. Why it should be that in associating with the man
she would take a step downwards, and might yet associate with the
man's wife without taking any step downwards, she did not attempt to
explain to herself. But I think that she could have explained it had
she put herself to the task of analysing the question, and that she
felt exactly the result of such analysis without making it. At any
rate, she refused the invitation persistently, and ate her wretched
dinner alone in her bedroom.

She had often told herself, in those days of her philosophy at
Littlebath, that she did not care to be a lady; and she told herself
now the same thing very often when she was thinking of the hospital.
She cosseted herself with no false ideas as to the nature of the work
which she proposed to undertake. She knew very well that she might
have to keep rougher company than that of Buggins if she put her
shoulder to that wheel. She was willing enough to do this, and had
been willing to encounter such company ever since she left the
Cedars. She was prepared for the roughness. But she would not put
herself beyond the pale, as it were, of her cousin's hearth, moved
simply by a temptation to relieve the monotony of her life. When the
work came within her reach she would go to it, but till then she
would bear the wretchedness of her dull room upstairs. She wondered
whether he ever thought how wretched she must be in her solitude.

On New Year's Day she heard that her uncle was dead. She was already
in mourning for her brother, and was therefore called upon to make no
change in that respect. She wrote a note of condolence to her aunt,
in which she strove much, and vainly, to be cautious and sympathetic
at the same time, and in return received a note, in which Lady Ball
declared her purpose of coming to Arundel Street to see her niece as
soon as she found herself able to leave the house. She would, she
said, give Margaret warning the day beforehand, as it would be very
sad if she had her journey all for nothing.

Her aunt, Lady Ball, was coming to see her in Arundel Street! What
could be the purpose of such a visit after all that had passed
between them? And why should her aunt trouble herself to make it
at a period of such great distress? Lady Ball must have some very
important plan to propose, and poor Margaret's heart was in a
flutter. It was ten days after this before the second promised note
arrived, and then Margaret was asked to say whether she would be at
home and able to receive her aunt's visit at ten minutes past two on
the day but one following. Margaret wrote back to say that she would
be at home at ten minutes past two on the day named.

Her aunt was old, and she again borrowed the parlour, though she was
not now well inclined to ask favours from Mrs Buggins. Mrs Buggins
had taken to heart the slight put upon her husband, and sometimes
made nasty little speeches.

"Oh dear, yes, in course, Miss Margaret; not that I ever did think
much of them Ballses, and less than ever now, since the gentleman was
kind enough to send me the newspaper. But she's welcome to the room,
seeing as how Mr Tiddy will be in the City, of course; and you're
welcome to it, too, though you do keep yourself so close to yourself,
which won't ever bring you round to have your money again; that it
won't."

Lady Ball came and was shown into the parlour, and her niece went
down to receive her.

"I would have been here before you came, aunt, only the room is not
mine."

In answer to this, Lady Ball said that it did very well. Any room
would answer the present purpose. Then she sat down on the sofa from
which she had risen. She was dressed, of course, in the full weeds
of her widowhood, and the wide extent of her black crape was almost
awful in Margaret's eyes. She did not look to be so savage as her
niece had sometimes seen her, but there was about her a ponderous
accumulation of crape, which made her even more formidable than she
used to be. It would be almost impossible to refuse anything to a
person so black, so grave, so heavy, and so big.

"I have come to you, my dear," she said, "as soon as I possibly could
after the sad event which we have had at home."

In answer to this, Margaret said that she was much obliged, but she
hoped that her aunt had put herself to no trouble. Then she said a
word or two about her uncle,--a word or two that was very difficult,
as of course it could mean nothing.

"Yes," said the widow, "he has been taken from us after a long and
useful life. I hope his son will always show himself to be worthy of
such a father."

After that there was silence in the room for a minute or two, during
which Margaret waited for her aunt to begin; but Lady Ball sat
there solid, grave, and black, as though she thought that her very
presence, without any words, might be effective upon Margaret as a
preliminary mode of attack. Margaret herself could find nothing to
say to her aunt, and she, therefore, also remained silent. Lady Ball
was so far successful in this, that when three minutes were over her
niece had certainly been weakened by the oppressive nature of the
meeting. She had about her less of vivacity, and perhaps also less of
vitality, than when she first entered the room.

"Well, my dear," said her aunt at last, "there are things, you know,
which must be talked about, though they are ever so disagreeable;"
and then she pulled out of her pocket that abominable number of the
Littlebath _Christian Examiner_.

"Oh, aunt, I hope you are not going to talk about that."

"My dear, that is cowardly; it is, indeed. How am I to help talking
about it? I have come here, from Twickenham, on purpose to talk about
it."

"Then, aunt, I must decline; I must, indeed."

"My dear!"

"I must, indeed, aunt."

Let a man or a woman's vitality be ever so thoroughly crushed and
quenched by fatigue or oppression--or even by black crape--there will
always be some mode of galvanising which will restore it for a time,
some specific either of joy or torture which will produce a return
of temporary energy. This Littlebath newspaper was a battery of
sufficient power to put Margaret on her legs again, though she
perhaps might not be long able to keep them.

"It is a vile, lying paper, and it was written by a vile, lying man,
and I hope you will put it up and say nothing about it."

"It is a vile, lying paper, Margaret; but the lies are against my
son, and not against you."

"He is a man, and knows what he is about, and it does not signify to
him. But, aunt, I won't talk about it, and there's an end of it."

"I hope he does know what he is about," said Lady Ball. "I hope he
does. But you, as you say, are a woman, and therefore it specially
behoves you to know what you are about."

"I am not doing anything to anybody," said Margaret.

Lady Ball had now refolded the offensive newspaper, and restored it
to her pocket. Perhaps she had done as much with it as she had from
the first intended. At any rate, she brought it forth no more, and
made no further intentionally direct allusion to it. "I don't suppose
you really wish to do any injury to anybody," she said.

"Does anybody accuse me of doing them an injury?" Margaret asked.

"Well, my dear, if I were to say that I accused you, perhaps you
would misunderstand me. I hope--I thoroughly expect, that before I
leave you, I may be able to say that I do not accuse you. If you
will only listen to me patiently for a few minutes, Margaret--which
I couldn't get you to do, you know, before you went away from the
Cedars in that very extraordinary manner--I think I can explain to
you something which--" Here Lady Ball became embarrassed, and paused;
but Margaret gave her no assistance, and therefore she began a new
sentence. "In point of fact, I want you to listen to what I say, and
then, I think--I do think--you will do as we would have you."

Whom did she include in that word "we"? Margaret had still sufficient
vitality not to let the word pass by unquestioned. "You mean yourself
and John?" said she.

"I mean the family," said Lady Ball rather sharply. "I mean the
whole family, including those dear girls to whom I have been in the
position of a mother since my son's wife died. It is in the name of
the Ball family that I now speak, and surely I have a right."

Margaret thought that Lady Ball had no such right, but she would not
say so at that moment.

"Well, Margaret, to come to the point at once, the fact is this. You
must renounce any idea that you may still have of becoming my son's
wife." Then she paused.

"Has John sent you here to say this?" demanded Margaret.

"I don't wish you to ask any such question as that. If you had any
real regard for him I don't think you would ask it. Consider his
difficulties, and consider the position of those poor children! If he
were your brother, would you advise him, at his age, to marry a woman
without a farthing, and also to incur the certain disgrace which
would attach to his name after--after all that has been said about
it in this newspaper?"--then, Lady Ball put her hand upon her
pocket--"in this newspaper, and in others?"

This was more than Margaret could bear. "There would be no disgrace,"
said she, jumping to her feet.

"Margaret, if you put yourself into a passion, how can you understand
reason? You ought to know, yourself, by the very fact of your being
in a passion, that you are wrong. Would there be no disgrace, after
all that has come out about Mr Maguire?"

"No, none--none!" almost shouted this modern Griselda. "There could
be no disgrace. I won't admit it. As for his marrying me, I don't
expect it. There is nothing to bind him to me. If he doesn't come
to me I certainly shall not go to him. I have looked upon it as all
over between him and me; and as I have not troubled him with any
importunities, nor yet you, it is cruel in you to come to me in this
way. He is free to do what he likes--why don't you go to him? But
there would be no disgrace."

"Of course he is free. Of course such a marriage never can take place
now. It is quite out of the question. You say that it is all over,
and you are quite right. Why not let this be settled in a friendly
way between you and me, so that we might be friends again? I should
be so glad to help you in your difficulties if you would agree with
me about this."

"I want no help."

"Margaret, that is nonsense. In your position you are very wrong to
set your natural friends at defiance. If you will only authorise me
to say that you renounce this marriage--"

"I will not renounce it," said Margaret, who was still standing up.
"I will not renounce it. I would sooner lose my tongue than let
it say such a word. You may tell him, if you choose to tell him
anything, that I demand nothing from him; nothing. All that I once
thought mine is now his, and I demand nothing from him. But when he
asked me to be his wife he told me to be firm, and in that I will
obey him. He may renounce me, and I shall have nothing with which to
reproach him; but I will never renounce him--never." And then the
modern Griselda, who had been thus galvanised into vitality, stood
over her aunt in a mood that was almost triumphant.

"Margaret, I am astonished at you," said Lady Ball, when she had
recovered herself.

"I can't help that, aunt."

"And now let me tell you this. My son is, of course, old enough to
do as he pleases. If he chooses to ruin himself and his children by
marrying, anybody--even if it were out of the streets--I can't help
it. Stop a moment and hear me to the end." This she said, as her
niece had made a movement as though towards the door. "I say, even
if it were out of the streets, I couldn't help it. But nothing shall
induce me to live in the same house with him if he marries you. It
will be on your conscience for ever that you have brought ruin on the
whole family, and that will be your punishment. As for me, I shall
take myself off to some solitude, and--there--I--shall--die." Then
Lady Ball put her handkerchief up to her face and wept copiously.

Margaret stood still, leaning upon the table, but she spoke no word,
either in answer to the threat or to the tears. Her immediate object
was to take herself out of the room, but this she did not know how to
achieve. At last her aunt spoke again: "If you please, I will get you
to ask your landlady to send for a cab." Then the cab was procured,
and Buggins, who had come home for his dinner, handed her ladyship
in. Not a word had been spoken during the time that the cab was being
fetched, and when Lady Ball went down the passage, she merely said,
"I wish you good-bye, Margaret."

"Good-bye," said Margaret, and then she escaped to her own bedroom.

Lady Ball had not done her work well. It was not within her power to
induce Margaret to renounce her engagement, and had she known her
niece better, I do not think that she would have made the attempt.
She did succeed in learning that Margaret had received no renewal
of an offer from her son,--that there was, in fact, no positive
engagement now existing between them; and with this, I think, she
should have been satisfied. Margaret had declared that she demanded
nothing from her cousin, and with this assurance Lady Ball should
have been contented. But she had thought to carry her point, to
obtain the full swing of her will, by means of a threat, and had
forgotten that in the very words of her own menace she conveyed to
Margaret some intimation that her son was still desirous of doing
that very thing which she was so anxious to prevent. There was no
chance that her threat should have any effect on Margaret. She ought
to have known that the tone of the woman's mind was much too firm
for that. Margaret knew--was as sure of it as any woman could be
sure--that her cousin was bound to her by all ties of honour. She
believed, too, that he was bound to her by love, and that if he
should finally desert it, he would be moved to do so by mean motives.
It was no anger on the score of Mr Maguire that would bring him to
such a course, no suspicion that she was personally unworthy of
being his wife. Our Griselda, with all her power of suffering and
willingness to suffer, understood all that, and was by no means
disposed to give way to any threat from Lady Ball.

When she was upstairs, and once more in solitude, she disgraced
herself again by crying. She could be strong enough when attacked by
others, but could not be strong when alone. She cried and sobbed upon
her bed, and then, rising, looked at herself in the glass, and told
herself that she was old and ugly, and fitted only for that hospital
nursing of which she had been thinking. But still there was something
about her heart that bore her up. Lady Ball would not have come to
her, would not have exercised her eloquence upon her, would not have
called upon her to renounce this engagement, had she not found all
similar attempts upon her own son to be ineffectual. Could it then
be so, that, after all, her cousin would be true to her? If it were
so, if it could be so, what would she not do for him and for his
children? If it were so, how blessed would have been all these
troubles that had brought her to such a haven at last! Then she tried
to reconcile his coldness to her with that which she so longed to
believe might be the fact. She was not to expect him to be a lover
such as are young men. Was she young herself, or would she like him
better if he were to assume anything of youth in his manners? She
understood that life with him was a serious thing, and that it was
his duty to be serious and grave in what he did. It might be that it
was essential to his character, after all that had passed, that the
question of the property should be settled finally, before he could
come to her, and declare his wishes. Thus flattering herself, she put
away from her her tears, and dressed herself, smoothing her hair, and
washing away the traces of her weeping; and then again she looked at
herself in the glass to see if it were possible that she might be
comely in his eyes.

The months of January and February slowly wore themselves away, and
during the whole of that time Margaret saw her cousin but once, and
then she met him at Mr Slow's chambers. She had gone there to sign
some document, and there she had found him. She had then been told
that she would certainly lose her cause. No one who had looked into
the matter had any doubt of that. It certainly was the case that
Jonathan Ball had bequeathed property which was not his at the
time he made the will, but which at the time of his death, in fact,
absolutely belonged to his nephew, John Ball. Old Mr Slow, as he
explained this now for the seventh or eighth time, did it without a
tone of regret in his voice, or a sign of sorrow in his eye. Margaret
had become so used to the story now, that it excited no strong
feelings within her. Her wish, she said, was, that the matter should
be settled. The lawyer, with almost a smile on his face, but still
shaking his head, said that he feared it could not be settled before
the end of April. John Ball sat by, leaning his face, as usual, upon
his umbrella, and saying nothing. It did, for a moment, strike Miss
Mackenzie as singular, that she should be reduced from affluence to
absolute nothingness in the way of property, in so very placid a
manner. Mr Slow seemed to be thinking that he was, upon the whole,
doing rather well for his client.

"Of course you understand, Miss Mackenzie, that you can have any
money you require for your present personal wants."

This had been said to her so often, that she took it as one of Mr
Slow's legal formulas, which meant nothing to the laity.

On that occasion also Mr Ball walked home with her, and was very
eloquent about the law's delays. He also seemed to speak as though
there was nothing to be regretted by anybody, except the fact that he
could not get possession of the property as quick as he wished. He
said not a word of anything else, and Margaret, of course, submitted
to be talked to by him rather than to talk herself. Of Lady Ball's
visit he said not a word, nor did she. She asked after the children,
and especially after Jack. One word she did say:

"I had hoped Jack would have come to see me at my lodgings."

"Perhaps he had better not," said Jack's father, "till all is
settled. We have had much to trouble us at home since my father's
death."

Then of course she dropped that subject. She had been greatly
startled on that day on hearing her cousin called Sir John by Mr
Slow. Up to that moment it had never occurred to her that the man of
whom she was so constantly thinking as her possible husband was a
baronet. To have been Mrs Ball seemed to her to have been possible;
but that she should become Lady Ball was hardly possible. She wished
that he had not been called Sir John. It seemed to her to be almost
natural that people should be convinced of the impropriety of such a
one as her becoming the wife of a baronet.

During this period she saw her sister-in-law once or twice, who on
those occasions came down to Arundel Street. She herself would not go
to Gower Street, because of the presence of Miss Colza. Miss Colza
still continued to live there, and still continued very much in
arrear in her contributions to the household fund. Mrs Mackenzie did
not turn her out, because she would,--so she said,--in such case get
nothing. Mrs Tom was by this time quite convinced that the property
would, either justly or unjustly, go into the hands of John Ball, and
she was therefore less anxious to make any sacrifice to please her
sister-in-law.

"I'm sure I don't see why you should be so bitter against her," said
Mrs Tom. "I don't suppose she told the clergyman a word that wasn't
true."

Miss Mackenzie declined to discuss the subject, and assured Mrs Tom
that she only recommended the banishment of Miss Colza because of her
apparent unwillingness to pay.

"As for the money," said Mrs Tom, "I expect Mr Rubb to see to that. I
suppose he intends to make her Mrs Rubb sooner or later."

Miss Mackenzie, having some kindly feeling towards Mr Rubb, would
have preferred to hear that Miss Colza was likely to become Mrs
Maguire. During these visits, Mrs Tom got more than one five-pound
note from her sister-in-law, pleading the difficulty she had in
procuring breakfast for lodgers without any money for the baker.
Margaret protested against these encroachments, but, still, the money
would be forthcoming.

Once, towards the end of February, Mrs Buggins seduced her lodger
down into her parlour in the area, and Miss Mackenzie thought she
perceived that something of the old servant's manners had returned to
her. She was more respectful than she had been of late, and made no
attempts at smart, ill-natured speeches.

"It's a weary life, Miss, this you're living here, isn't it?" said
she.

Margaret said that it was weary, but that there could be no change
till the lawsuit should be settled. It would be settled, she hoped,
in April.

"Bother it for a lawsuit," said Mrs Buggins. "They all tells me that
it ain't any lawsuit at all, really."

"It's an amicable lawsuit," said Miss Mackenzie.

"I never see such amicableness! 'Tis a wonder to hear, Miss, how
everybody is talking about it everywheres. Where we was last
night--that is, Buggins and I--most respectable people in the copying
line--it isn't only he as does the copying, but she too; nurses the
baby, and minds the kitchen fire, and goes on, sheet after sheet, all
at the same time; and a very tidy thing they make of it, only they do
straggle their words so;--well, they were saying as it's one of the
most remarkablest cases as ever was know'd."

"I don't see that I shall be any the better because it's talked
about."

"Well, Miss Margaret, I'm not so sure of that. It's my belief that if
one only gets talked about enough, one may have a'most anything one
chooses to ask for."

"But I don't want to ask for anything."

"But if what we heard last night is all true, there's somebody else
that does want to ask for something, or, as has asked, as folks say."

Margaret blushed up to the eyes, and then protested that she did not
know what Mrs Buggins meant.

"I never dreamed of it, my dear; indeed, I didn't, when the old lady
come here with her tantrums; but now, it's as plain as a pikestaff.
If I'd a' known anything about that, my dear, I shouldn't have made
so free about Buggins; indeed, I shouldn't."

"You're talking nonsense, Mrs Buggins; indeed, you are."

"They have the whole story all over the town at any rate, and in the
lane, and all about the courts; and they declare it don't matter a
toss of a halfpenny which way the matter goes, as you're to become
Lady Ball the very moment the case is settled."

Miss Mackenzie protested that Mrs Buggins was a stupid woman,--the
stupidest woman she had ever heard or seen; and then hurried up into
her own room to hug herself in her joy, and teach herself to believe
that what so many people said must at last come true.

Three days after this, a very fine, private carriage, with two
servants on a hammer cloth, drove up to the door in Arundel Street,
and the maid-servant, hurrying upstairs, told Miss Mackenzie that
a beautifully-dressed lady downstairs was desirous of seeing her
immediately.


CHAPTER XXVI

Mrs Mackenzie of Cavendish Square


"My dear," said the beautifully-dressed lady, "you don't know me, I
think;" and the beautifully-dressed lady came up to Miss Mackenzie
very cordially, took her by the hand, smiled upon her, and seemed to
be a very good-natured person indeed. Margaret told the lady that
she did not know her, and at that moment was altogether at a loss to
guess who the lady might be. The lady might be forty years of age,
but was still handsome, and carried with her that easy, self-assured,
well balanced manner, which, if it be not overdone, goes so far to
make up for beauty, if beauty itself be wanting.

"I am your cousin, Mrs Mackenzie,--Clara Mackenzie. My husband
is Walter Mackenzie, and his father is Sir Walter Mackenzie, of
Incharrow. Now you will know all about me."

"Oh, yes, I know you," said Margaret.

"I ought, I suppose, to make ever so many apologies for not coming to
you before; but I did call upon you, ever so long ago; I forget when,
and after that you went to live at Littlebath. And then we heard of
you as being with Lady Ball, and for some reason, which I don't quite
understand, it has always been supposed that Lady Ball and I were not
to know each other. And now I have heard this wonderful story about
your fortune, and about everything else, too, my dear; and it seems
all very beautiful, and very romantic; and everybody says that you
have behaved so well; and so, to make a long story short, I have come
to find you out in your hermitage, and to claim cousinship, and all
that sort of thing."

"I'm sure I'm very much obliged to you, Mrs Mackenzie--"

"Don't say it in that way, my dear, or else you'll make me think you
mean to turn a cold shoulder on me for not coming to you before."

"Oh, no."

"But we've only just come to town; and though of course I heard the
story down in Scotland--"

"Did you?"

"Did I? Why, everybody is talking about it, and the newspapers have
been full of it."

"Oh, Mrs Mackenzie, that is so terrible."

"But nobody has said a word against you. Even that stupid clergyman,
who calls you the lamb, has not pretended to say that you were
his lamb. We had the whole story of the Lion and the Lamb in the
_Inverary Interpreter_, but I had no idea that it was you, then. But
the long and the short of it is, that my husband says he must know
his cousin; and to tell the truth, it was he that sent me; and we
want you to come and stay with us in Cavendish Square till the
lawsuit is over, and everything is settled."

Margaret was so startled by the proposition, that she did not know
how to answer it. Of course she was at first impressed with a strong
idea of the impossibility of her complying with such a request,
and was simply anxious to find some proper way of refusing it. The
Incharrow Mackenzies were great people who saw much company, and it
was, she thought, quite out of the question that she should go to
their house. At no time of her career would she have been, as she
conceived, fit to live with such grand persons; but at the present
moment, when she grudged herself even a new pair of gloves out of
the money remaining to her, while she was still looking forward to
a future life passed as a nurse in a hospital, she felt that there
would be an absolute unfitness in such a visit.

"You are very kind," she said at last with faltering voice, as she
meditated in what words she might best convey her refusal.

"No, I'm not a bit kind; and I know from the tone of your voice that
you are meditating a refusal. But I don't mean to accept it. It is
much better that you should be with us while all this is going on,
than that you should be living here alone. And there is no one with
whom you could live during this time so properly, as with those who
are your nearest relatives."

"But, Mrs Mackenzie--"

"I suppose you are thinking now of another cousin, but it's not at
all proper that you should go to his house;--not as yet, you know.
And you need not suppose that he'll object because of what I said
about Lady Ball and myself. The Capulets and the Montagues don't
intend to keep it up for ever; and, though we have never visited Lady
Ball, my husband and the present Sir John know each other very well."

Mrs Mackenzie was not on that occasion able to persuade Margaret to
come at once to Cavendish Square, and neither was Margaret able to
give a final refusal. She did not intend to go, but she could not
bring herself to speak a positive answer in such a way as to have
much weight with Mrs Mackenzie. That lady left her at last, saying
that she would send her husband, and promising Margaret that she
would herself come in ten days to fetch her.

"Oh no," said Margaret; "it will be very good-natured of you to come,
but not for that."

"But I shall come, and shall come for that," said Mrs Mackenzie;
and at the end of the ten days she did come, and she did carry her
husband's cousin back with her to Cavendish Square.

In the meantime Walter Mackenzie had called in Arundel Street,
and had seen Margaret. But there had been given to her advice by
a counsellor whom she was more inclined to obey than any of the
Mackenzies. John Ball had written to her, saying that he had heard of
the proposition, and recommending her to accept the invitation given
to her.

"Till all this trouble about the property is settled," said he, "it
will be much better that you should be with your cousins than living
alone in Mrs Buggins' lodgings."

After receiving this Margaret held out no longer but was carried off
by the handsome lady in the grand carriage, very much to the delight
of Mrs Buggins.

Mrs Buggins' respect for Miss Mackenzie had returned altogether
since she had heard of the invitation to Cavendish Square, and she
apologised, almost without ceasing, for the liberty she had taken in
suggesting that Margaret should drink tea with her husband.

"And indeed, Miss, I shouldn't have proposed such a thing, were it
ever so, if I had suspected for a hinstant how things were a going to
be. For Buggins is a man as knows his place, and never puts himself
beyond it! But you was that close, Miss--"

In answer to this Margaret would say that it didn't signify, and that
it wasn't on that account; and I have no doubt but that the two women
thoroughly understood each other.

There was a subject on which, in spite of all her respect, Mrs
Buggins ventured to give Miss Mackenzie much advice, and to insist on
that advice strongly. Mrs Buggins was very anxious that the future
"baronet's lady" should go out upon her grand visit with a proper
assortment of clothing. That argument of the baronet's lady was the
climax of Mrs Buggins' eloquence: "You, my dear, as is going to be
one baronet's lady is going to a lady who is going to be another
baronet's lady, and it's only becoming you should go as is becoming."

Margaret declared that she was not going to be anybody's lady, but
Mrs Buggins altogether pooh-poohed this assertion.

"That, Miss, is your predestination," said Mrs Buggins, "and well
you'll become it. And as for money, doesn't that old party who
found it all out say reg'lar once a month that there's whatever you
want to take for your own necessaries? and you that haven't had a
shilling from him yet! If it was me, I'd send him in such a bill for
necessaries as 'ud open that old party's eyes a bit, and hurry him up
with his lawsuits."

The matter was at last compromised between her and Margaret, and a
very moderate expenditure for smarter clothing was incurred.

On the day appointed Mrs Mackenzie again came, and Margaret was
carried off to Cavendish Square. Here she found herself suddenly
brought into a mode of life altogether different from anything she
had as yet experienced. The Mackenzies were people who went much into
society, and received company frequently at their own house. The
first of these evils for a time Margaret succeeded in escaping, but
from the latter she had no means of withdrawing herself. There was
very much to astonish her at this period of her life, but that which
astonished her perhaps more than anything else was her own celebrity.
Everybody had heard of the Lion and the Lamb, and everybody was aware
that she was supposed to represent the milder of those two favourite
animals. Everybody knew the story of her property, or rather of
the property which had never in truth been hers, and which was now
being made to pass out of her hands by means of a lawsuit, of which
everybody spoke as though it were the best thing in the world for
all the parties concerned. People, when they mentioned Sir John Ball
to her--and he was often so mentioned--never spoke of him in harsh
terms, as though he were her enemy. She observed that he was always
named before her in that euphuistic language which we naturally use
when we speak to persons of those who are nearest to them and dearest
to them. The romance of the thing, and not the pity of it, was the
general subject of discourse, so that she could not fail to perceive
that she was generally regarded as the future wife of Sir John Ball.

It was the sudden way in which all this had come upon her that
affected her so greatly. While staying in Arundel Street she had
been altogether ignorant that the story of the Lion and the Lamb had
become public, or that her name had been frequent in men's mouths.
When Mrs Buggins had once told her that she was thus becoming famous,
she had ridiculed Mrs Buggins' statement. Mrs Buggins had brought
home word from some tea-party that the story had been discussed among
her own friends; but Miss Mackenzie had regarded that as an accident.
A lawyer's clerk or two about Chancery Lane or Carey Street might by
chance hear of the matter in the course of their daily work;--that it
should be so, and that such people talked of her affairs distressed
her; but that had, she was sure, been all. Now, however, in her new
home she had learned that Mr Maguire's efforts had become notorious,
and that she and her history were public property. When all this
first became plain to her, it overwhelmed her so greatly that she was
afraid to show her face; but this feeling gradually wore itself away,
and she found herself able to look around upon the world again, and
ask herself new questions of the future, as she had done when she had
first found herself to be the possessor of her fortune.

When she had been about three weeks with the Mackenzies, Sir John
Ball came to see her. He had written to her once before that, but his
letter had referred simply to some matter of business. When he was
shown into the drawing-room in Cavendish Square, Mrs Mackenzie and
Margaret were both there, but the former in a few minutes got up
and left the room. Margaret had wished with all her heart that her
hostess would remain with them. She was sure that Sir John Ball had
nothing to say that she would care to hear, and his saying nothing
would seem to be of no special moment while three persons were in the
room. But his saying nothing when special opportunity for speaking
had been given to him would be of moment to her. Her destiny was in
his hands to such a degree that she felt his power over her to amount
almost to a cruelty. She longed to ask him what her fate was to be,
but it was a question that she could not put to him. She knew that he
would not tell her now; and she knew also that the very fact of his
not telling her would inflict upon her a new misery, and deprive her
of the comfort which she was beginning to enjoy. If he could not tell
her at once how all this was to be ended, it would be infinitely
better for her that he should remain away from her altogether.

As soon as Mrs Mackenzie had left the room he began to describe to
her his last interview with the lawyers. She listened to him, and
pretended to interest herself, but she did not care two straws about
the lawyers. Point after point he explained to her, showing the
unfortunate ingenuity with which his uncle Jonathan had contrived to
confuse his affairs, and Margaret attempted to appear concerned. But
her mind had now for some months past refused to exert itself with
reference to the mode in which Mr Jonathan Ball had disposed of his
money. Two years ago she had been told that it was hers; since that,
she had been told that it was not hers. She had felt the hardship of
this at first; but now that feeling was over with her, and she did
not care to hear more about it. But she did care very much to know
what was to be her future fate.

"And when will be the end of it, John?" she asked him.

"Ha! that seems so hard to say. They did name the first of April, but
it won't be so soon as that. Mr Slow said to-day about the end of
April, but his clerk seems to think it will be the middle of May."

"It is very provoking," said Margaret.

"Yes, it is," said John Ball, "very provoking; I feel it so. It
worries me so terribly that I have no comfort in life. But I suppose
you find everything very nice here."

"They are very kind to me."

"Very kind, indeed. It was quite the proper thing for them to do; and
when I heard that Mrs Mackenzie had been to you in Arundel Street, I
was delighted."

Margaret did not dare to tell him that she would have preferred to
have been left in Arundel Street; but that, at the moment, was her
feeling. If, when all this was over, she would still have to earn her
bread, it would have been much better for her not to have come among
her rich relations. What good would it then do her to have lived two
or three months in Cavendish Square?

"I wish it were all settled, John," she said; and as she spoke there
was a tear standing in the corner of each eye.

"I wish it were, indeed," said John Ball; but I think that he did not
see the tears.

It was on her tongue to speak some word about the hospital; but she
felt that if she did so now, it would be tantamount to asking him
that question which it did not become her to ask; so she repressed
the word, and sat in silence.

"When the day is positively fixed for the hearing," said he, "I will
be sure to let you know."

"I wish you would let me know nothing further about it, John, till it
is all settled."

"I sometimes almost fancy that I wish the same thing," said he, with
a faint attempt at a smile; and after that he got up and went his
way.

This was not to be endured. Margaret declared to herself that she
could not live and bear it. Let the people around her say what they
would, it could not be that he would treat her in this way if he
intended to make her his wife. It would be better for her to make
up her mind that it was not to be so, and to insist on leaving the
Mackenzies' house. She would go, not again to Arundel Street, but to
some lodging further away, in some furthest recess of London, where
no one would come to her and flurry her with false hopes, and there
remain till she might be allowed to earn her bread. That was the mood
in which Mrs Mackenzie found her late in the afternoon on the day of
Sir John Ball's visit. There was to be a dinner party in the house
that evening, and Margaret began by asking leave to absent herself.

"Nonsense, Margaret," said Mrs Mackenzie; "I won't have anything of
the kind."

"I cannot come down, Mrs Mackenzie; I cannot, indeed."

"That is absolute nonsense. That man has been saying something unkind
to you. Why do you mind what he says?"

"He has not said anything unkind; he has not said anything at all."

"Oh, that's the grief, is it?"

"I don't know what you mean by grief; but if you were situated as I
am you would perceive that you were in a false position."

"I am sure he has been saying something unkind to you."

Margaret hardly knew how to tell her thoughts and feelings, and yet
she wished to tell them. She had resolved that she would tell the
whole to Mrs Mackenzie, having convinced herself that she could
not carry out her plan of leaving Cavendish Square without some
explanation of the kind. She did not know how to make her speech with
propriety, so she jumped at the difficulty boldly. "The truth is, Mrs
Mackenzie, that he has no more idea of marrying me than he has of
marrying you."

"Margaret, how can you talk such nonsense?"

"It is not nonsense; it is true; and it will be much better that it
should all be understood at once. I have nothing to blame him for,
nothing; and I don't blame him; but I cannot bear this kind of life
any longer. It is killing me. What business have I to be living here
in this way, when I have got nothing of my own, and have no one to
depend on but myself?"

"Then he must have said something to you; but, whatever it was, you
cannot but have misunderstood him."

"No; he has said nothing, and I have not misunderstood him." Then
there was a pause. "He has said nothing to me, and I am bound to
understand what that means."

"Margaret, I want to put one question to you," said Mrs Mackenzie,
speaking with a serious air that was very unusual with her,--"and
you will understand, dear, that I only do so because of what you are
saying now."

"You may put any question you please to me," said Margaret.

"Has your cousin ever asked you to be his wife, or has he not?"

"Yes, he has. He has asked me twice."

"And what answer did you make him?"

"When I thought all the property was mine, I refused him. Then, when
the property became his, he asked me again, and I accepted him.
Sometimes, when I think of that, I feel so ashamed of myself, that I
hardly dare to hold up my head."

"But you did not accept him simply because you had lost your money."

"No; but it looks so like it; does it not? And of course he must
think that I did so."

"I am quite sure he thinks nothing of the kind. But he did ask you,
and you did accept him?"

"Oh, yes."

"And since that, has he ever said anything to you to signify that the
match should be broken off?"

"The very day after he had asked me, Mr Maguire came to the Cedars
and saw me, and Lady Ball was there too. And he was very false, and
told my aunt things that were altogether untrue. He said that--that I
had promised to marry him, and Lady Ball believed him."

"But did Mr Ball believe him?"

"My aunt said all that she could against me, and when John spoke to
me the next day, it was clear that he was very angry with me."

"But did he believe you or Mr Maguire when you told him that Mr
Maguire's story was a falsehood from beginning to end?"

"But it was not a falsehood from beginning to end. That's where I
have been so very, very unfortunate; and perhaps I ought to say, as
I don't want to hide anything from you, so very, very wrong. The man
did ask me to marry him, and I had given him no answer."

"Had you thought of accepting him?"

"I had not thought about that at all, when he came to me. So I told
him that I would consider it all, and that he must come again."

"And he came again."

"Then my brother's illness occurred, and I went to London. After that
Mr Maguire wrote to me two or three times, and I refused him in the
plainest language that I could use. I told him that I had lost all
my fortune, and then I was sure that there would be an end of any
trouble from him; but he came to the Cedars on purpose to do me all
this injury; and now he has put all these stories about me into the
newspapers, how can I think that any man would like to make me his
wife? I have no right to be surprised that Lady Ball should be so
eager against it."

"But did Mr Ball believe you when you told him the story?"

"I think he did believe me."

"And what did he say?"

Margaret did not answer at once, but sat with her fingers up among
her hair upon her brow:

"I am trying to think what were his words," she said, "but I cannot
remember. I spoke more than he did. He said that I should have told
him about Mr Maguire, and I tried to explain to him that there had
been no time to do so. Then I said that he could leave me if he
liked."

"And what did he answer?"

"If I remember rightly, he made no answer. He left me saying that
he would see me again the next day. But the next day I went away.
I would not remain in the house with Lady Ball after what she had
believed about me. She took that other man's part against me, and
therefore I went away."

"Did he say anything as to your going?"

"He begged me to stay, but I would not stay. I thought it was all
over then. I regarded him as being quite free from any engagement,
and myself as being free from any necessity of obeying him. And it
was all over. I had no right to think anything else."

"And what came next?"

"Nothing. Nothing else has happened, except that Lady Ball came to me
in Arundel Street, asking me to renounce him."

"And you refused?"

"Yes; I would do nothing at her bidding. Why should I? She had been
my enemy throughout, since she found that the money belonged to her
son and not to me."

"And all this time you have seen him frequently?"

"I have seen him sometimes about the business."

"And he has never said a word to you about your engagement to him?"

"Never a word."

"Nor you to him?"

"Oh, no! how could I speak to him about it?"

"I would have done so. I would not have had my heart crushed within
me. But perhaps you were right. Perhaps it was best to be patient."

"I know that I have been wrong to expect anything or to hope for
anything," said Margaret. "What right have I to hope for anything
when I refused him while I was rich?"

"That has nothing to do with it."

"When he asked me again, he only did it because he pitied me. I don't
want to be any man's wife because he pities me."

"But you accepted him."

"Yes; because I loved him."

"And now?" Again Miss Mackenzie sat silent, still moving her fingers
among the locks upon her brow. "And now, Margaret?" repeated Mrs
Mackenzie.

"What's the use of it now?"

"But you do love him?"

"Of course I love him. How shall it be otherwise? What has he done
to change my love? His feelings have changed, and I have no right to
blame him. He has changed; and I hate myself, because I feel that
in coming here I have, as it were, run after him. I should have put
myself in some place where no thought of marrying him should ever
have come again to me."

"Margaret, you are wrong throughout."

"Am I? Everybody always says that I am always wrong."

"If I can understand anything of the matter, Sir John Ball has not
changed."

"Then, why--why--why?"

"Ah, yes, exactly; why? Why is it that men and women cannot always
understand each other; that they will remain for hours in each
other's presence without the power of expressing, by a single word,
the thoughts that are busy within them? Who can say why it is so? Can
you get up and make a clean breast of it all to him?"

"But I am a woman, and am very poor."

"Yes, and he is a man, and, like most men, very dumb when they have
anything at heart which requires care in the speaking. He knows no
better than to let things be as they are; to leave the words all
unspoken till he can say to you, 'Now is the time for us to go and
get ourselves married;' just as he might tell you that now was the
time to go and dine."

"But will he ever say that?"

"Of course he will. If he does not say so when all this business is
off his mind, when Mr Maguire and his charges are put at rest, when
the lawyers have finished their work, then come to me and tell me
that I have deceived you. Say to me then, 'Clara Mackenzie, you have
put me wrong, and I look to you to put me right.' You will find I
will put you right."

In answer to this, Margaret was able to say nothing further. She sat
for a while with her face buried in her hands thinking of it all,
asking herself whether she might dare to believe it all. At last,
however, she went up to dress for dinner; and when she came down to
the drawing-room there was a smile upon her face.

After that a month or six weeks passed in Cavendish Square, and there
was, during all that time, no further special reference to Sir John
Ball or his affairs. Twice he was asked to dine with the Mackenzies,
and on both occasions he did so. On neither of those evenings did
he say very much to Margaret; but, on both of them he said some few
words, and it was manifestly his desire that they should be regarded
as friends.

And as the spring came on, Margaret's patience returned to her, and
her spirits were higher than they had been at any time since she
first discovered that success among the Stumfoldians at Littlebath
did not make her happy.


CHAPTER XXVII

The Negro Soldiers' Orphan Bazaar


In the spring days of the early May there came up in London that
year a great bazaar,--a great charity bazaar on behalf of the orphan
children of negro soldiers who had fallen in the American war.
Tidings had come to this country that all slaves taken in the
revolted States had been made free by the Northern invaders, and that
these free men had been called upon to show their immediate gratitude
by becoming soldiers in the Northern ranks. As soldiers they were
killed in battle, or died, and as dead men they left orphans behind
them. Information had come that many of these orphans were starving,
and hence had arisen the cause for the Negro Soldiers' Orphan Bazaar.
There was still in existence at that time, down at South Kensington,
some remaining court or outstanding building which had belonged to
the Great International Exhibition, and here the bazaar was to be
held. I do not know that I can trace the way in which the idea grew
and became great, or that anyone at the time was able to attribute
the honour to the proper founder. Some gave it all to the Prince of
Wales, declaring that his royal highness had done it out of his own
head; and others were sure that the whole business had originated
with a certain philanthropical Mr Manfred Smith who had lately come
up in the world, and was supposed to have a great deal to do with
most things. Be that as it may, this thing did grow and become
great, and there was a list of lady patronesses which included some
duchesses, one marchioness, and half the countesses in London. It was
soon manifest to the eyes of those who understood such things, that
the Negro Soldiers' Orphan Bazaar was to be a success, and therefore
there was no difficulty whatsoever in putting the custody of the
stalls into the hands of proper persons. The difficulty consisted in
rejecting offers from persons who undoubtedly were quite proper for
such an occasion. There came to be interest made for permission to
serve, and boastings were heard of unparalleled success in the bazaar
line. The Duchess of St Bungay had a happy bevy of young ladies who
were to act as counter attendants under her grace; and who so happy
as any young lady who could get herself put upon the duchess's staff?
It was even rumoured that a certain very distinguished person would
have shown herself behind a stall, had not a certain other more
distinguished person expressed an objection; and while the rumour
was afloat as to the junior of those two distinguished persons, the
young-ladydom of London was frantic in its eagerness to officiate.
Now at that time there had become attached to the name of our poor
Griselda a romance with which the west-end of London had become
wonderfully well acquainted. The story of the Lion and the Lamb was
very popular. Mr Maguire may be said to have made himself odious
to the fashionable world at large, and the fate of poor Margaret
Mackenzie with her lost fortune, and the additional misfortune of her
clerical pledged protector, had recommended itself as being truly
interesting to all the feeling hearts of the season. Before May was
over, gentlemen were enticed to dinner parties by being told--and
untruly told--that the Lamb had been "secured;" as on the previous
year they had been enticed by a singular assurance as to Bishop
Colenso; and when Margaret on one occasion allowed herself to be
taken to Covent Garden Theatre, every face from the stalls was turned
towards her between the acts.

Who then was more fit to take a stall, or part of a stall at the
Negro Soldiers' Orphan Bazaar, than our Griselda? When the thing
loomed so large, lady patronesses began to be aware that mere
nobodies would hardly be fit for the work. There would have been
little or no difficulty in carrying out a law that nobody should
take a part in the business who had not some handle to her name, but
it was felt that such an arrangement as that might lead to failure
rather than glory. The commoner world must be represented but it
should be represented only by ladies who had made great names for
themselves. Mrs Conway Sparkes, the spiteful poetess, though she was
old and ugly as well as spiteful, was to have a stall and a bevy,
because there was thought to be no doubt about her poetry. Mrs
Chaucer Munro had a stall and a bevy; but I cannot clearly tell her
claim to distinction, unless it was that she had all but lost her
character four times, but had so saved it on each of those occasions
that she was just not put into the Index Expurgatorius of fashionable
society in London. It was generally said by those young men who
discussed the subject, that among Mrs Chaucer Munro's bevy would
be found the most lucrative fascination of the day. And then Mrs
Mackenzie was asked to take a stall, or part of a stall, and to bring
Griselda with her as her assistant. By this time the Lamb was most
generally known as "Griselda" among fashionable people.

Now Mrs Mackenzie was herself a woman of fashion, and quite open to
the distinction of having a part assigned to her at the great bazaar
of the season. She did not at all object to a booth on the left hand
of the Duchess of St Bungay, although it was just opposite to Mrs
Chaucer Munro. She assented at once.

"But you must positively bring Griselda," said Lady Glencora
Palliser, by whom the business of this mission was conducted.

"Of course, I understand that," said Mrs Mackenzie. "But what if she
won't come?"

"Griseldas are made to do anything," said Lady Glencora, "and of
course she must come."

Having settled the difficulty in this way, Lady Glencora went her
way, and Mrs Mackenzie did not allow Griselda to go to her rest that
night till she had extracted from her a promise of acquiescence,
which, I think, never would have been given had Miss Mackenzie
understood anything of the circumstances under which her presence was
desired.

But the promise was given, and Margaret knew little or nothing of
what was expected from her till there came up, about a fortnight
before the day of the bazaar, the great question of her dress for
the occasion. Previous to that she would fain have been energetic in
collecting and making things for sale at her stall, for she really
taught herself to be anxious that the negro soldiers' orphans
should have provision made for them; but, alas! her energy was
all repressed, and she found that she was not to be allowed to do
anything in that direction.

"Things of that sort would not go down at all now-a-days, Margaret,"
said Mrs Mackenzie. "Nobody would trouble themselves to carry them
away. There are tradesmen who furnish the stalls, and mark their
own prices, and take back what is not sold. You charge double the
tradesman's price, that's all."

Margaret, when her eyes were thus opened, of course ceased to make
little pincushions, but she felt that her interest in the thing was
very much lowered. But a word must be said as to that question of
the dress. Miss Mackenzie, when she was first interrogated as to her
intentions, declared her purpose of wearing a certain black silk
dress which had seen every party at Mrs Stumfold's during Margaret's
Littlebath season. To this her cousin demurred, and from demurring
proceeded to the enunciation of a positive order. The black silk
dress in question should not be worn. Now Miss Mackenzie chose to be
still in mourning on the second of June, the day of the bazaar, her
brother having died in September, and had no fitting garment, so she
said, other than the black silk in question. Whereupon Mrs Mackenzie,
without further speech to her cousin on the subject, went out and
purchased a muslin covered all over with the prettiest little frecks
of black, and sent a milliner to Margaret, and provided a bonnet of
much the same pattern, the gayest, lightest, jauntiest, falsest,
most make-belief-mourning bonnet that ever sprang from the art of a
designer in bonnets--and thus nearly broke poor Margaret's heart.

"People should never have things given them, who can't buy for
themselves," she said, with tears in her eyes, "because of course
they know what it means."

"But, my dearest," said Mrs Mackenzie, "young ladies who never have
any money of their own at all always accept presents from all their
relations. It is their special privilege."

"Oh, yes, young ladies; but not women like me who are waiting to find
out whether they are ruined or not."

The difficulty, however, was at last overcome, and Margaret, with
many inward upbraidings of her conscience, consented to wear the
black-freckled dress.

"I never saw anybody look so altered in my life," said Mrs Mackenzie,
when Margaret, apparelled, appeared in the Cavendish Square
drawing-room on the morning in question. "Oh, dear, I hope Sir John
Ball will come to look at you."

"Nonsense! he won't be such a fool as to do anything of the kind."

"I took care to let him know that you would be there;" said Mrs
Mackenzie.

"You didn't?"

"But I did, my dear."

"Oh, dear, what will he think of me?" ejaculated Margaret; but
nevertheless I fancy that there must have been some elation in her
bosom when she regarded herself and the freckled muslin in the glass.

Both Mrs Mackenzie and Miss Mackenzie had more than once gone down
to the place to inspect the ground and make themselves familiar with
the position they were to take. There were great stalls and little
stalls, which came alternately; and the Mackenzie stall stood next
to a huge centre booth at which the duchess was to preside. On their
other hand was the stall of old Lady Ware, and opposite to them, as
has been before said, the doubtful Mrs Chaucer Munro was to hold
difficult sway over her bevy of loud nymphs. Together with Mrs
Mackenzie were two other Miss Mackenzies, sisters of her husband,
handsome, middle-aged women, with high cheek-bones and fine
brave-looking eyes. All the Mackenzies, except our Griselda, were
dressed in the tartan of their clan; and over the stall there was
some motto in Gaelic, "Dhu dhaith donald dhuth," which nobody could
understand, but which was not the less expressive. Indeed, the
Mackenzie stall was got up very well; but then was it not known and
understood that Mrs Mackenzie did get up things very well? It was
acknowledged on all sides that the Lamb, Griselda, was uncommonly
well got up on this occasion.

It was understood that the ladies were to be assembled in the bazaar
at half-past two, and that the doors were to be thrown open to the
public at three o'clock. Soon after half-past two Mrs Mackenzie's
carriage was at the door, and the other Mackenzies having come up at
the same time, the Mackenzie phalanx entered the building together.
There were many others with them, but as they walked up they found
the Countess of Ware standing alone in the centre of the building,
with her four daughters behind her. She had on her head a wonderful
tiara, which gave to her appearance a ferocity almost greater than
was natural to her. She was a woman with square jaws, and a big face,
and stout shoulders: but she was not, of her own unassisted height,
very tall. But of that tiara and its altitude she was proud, and as
she stood in the midst of the stalls, brandishing her umbrella-sized
parasol in her anger, the ladies, as they entered, might well be
cowed by her presence.

"When ladies say half-past two," said she, "they ought to come at
half-past two. Where is the Duchess of St Bungay? I shall not wait
for her."

But there was a lady there who had come in behind the Mackenzies,
whom nothing ever cowed. This was the Lady Glencora Palliser, the
great heiress who had married the heir of a great duke, pretty,
saucy, and occasionally intemperate, in whose eyes Lady Ware with her
ferocious tiara was simply an old woman in a ridiculous head-gear.
The countess had apparently addressed herself to Mrs Mackenzie, who
had been the foremost to enter the building, and our Margaret had
already begun to tremble. But Lady Glencora stepped forward, and took
the brunt of the battle upon herself.

"Nobody ever yet was so punctual as my Lady Ware," said Lady
Glencora.

"It is very annoying to be kept waiting on such occasions," said the
countess.

"But my dear Lady Ware, who keeps you waiting? There is your stall,
and why on earth should you stand here and call us all over as we
come in, like naughty schoolboys?"

"The duchess said expressly that she would be here at half-past two."

"Who ever expects the dear duchess to keep her word?" said Lady
Glencora.

