It seemed to Ethan that his heart was bound with cords which an
unseen hand was tightening with every tick of the clock. Twice he
opened his lips to speak to Mattie and found no breath. At length,
as she turned to re-enter the house, he laid a detaining hand on
her.

"I'm going to drive you over, Matt," he whispered.

She murmured back: "I think Zeena wants I should go with Jotham."

"I'm going to drive you over," he repeated; and she went into the
kitchen without answering.

At dinner Ethan could not eat. If he lifted his eyes they rested on
Zeena's pinched face, and the corners of her straight lips seemed to
quiver away into a smile. She ate well, declaring that the mild
weather made her feel better, and pressed a second helping of beans
on Jotham Powell, whose wants she generally ignored.

Mattie, when the meal was over, went about her usual task of
clearing the table and washing up the dishes. Zeena, after feeding
the cat, had returned to her rocking-chair by the stove, and Jotham
Powell, who always lingered last, reluctantly pushed back his chair
and moved toward the door.

On the threshold he turned back to say to Ethan: "What time'll I
come round for Mattie?"

Ethan was standing near the window, mechanically filling his pipe
while he watched Mattie move to and fro. He answered: "You needn't
come round; I'm going to drive her over myself."

He saw the rise of the colour in Mattie's averted cheek, and the
quick lifting of Zeena's head.

"I want you should stay here this afternoon, Ethan," his wife said.
"Jotham can drive Mattie over."

Mattie flung an imploring glance at him, but he repeated curtly:
"I'm going to drive her over myself."

Zeena continued in the same even tone: "I wanted you should stay and
fix up that stove in Mattie's room afore the girl gets here. It
ain't been drawing right for nigh on a month now."

Ethan's voice rose indignantly. "If it was good enough for Mattie I
guess it's good enough for a hired girl."

"That girl that's coming told me she was used to a house where they
had a furnace," Zeena persisted with the same monotonous mildness.

"She'd better ha' stayed there then," he flung back at her; and
turning to Mattie he added in a hard voice: "You be ready by three,
Matt; I've got business at Corbury."

Jotham Powell had started for the barn, and Ethan strode down after
him aflame with anger. The pulses in his temples throbbed and a fog
was in his eyes. He went about his task without knowing what force
directed him, or whose hands and feet were fulfilling its orders. It
was not till he led out the sorrel and backed him between the shafts
of the sleigh that he once more became conscious of what he was
doing. As he passed the bridle over the horse's head, and wound the
traces around the shafts, he remembered the day when he had made the
same preparations in order to drive over and meet his wife's cousin
at the Flats. It was little more than a year ago, on just such a
soft afternoon, with a "feel" of spring in the air. The sorrel,
turning the same big ringed eye on him, nuzzled the palm of his hand
in the same way; and one by one all the days between rose up and
stood before him...

He flung the bearskin into the sleigh, climbed to the seat, and
drove up to the house. When he entered the kitchen it was empty, but
Mattie's bag and shawl lay ready by the door. He went to the foot of
the stairs and listened. No sound reached him from above, but
presently he thought he heard some one moving about in his deserted
study, and pushing open the door he saw Mattie, in her hat and
jacket, standing with her back to him near the table.

She started at his approach and turning quickly, said: "Is it time?"

"What are you doing here, Matt?" he asked her.

She looked at him timidly. "I was just taking a look round-that's
all," she answered, with a wavering smile.

They went back into the kitchen without speaking, and Ethan picked
up her bag and shawl.

"Where's Zeena?" he asked.

"She went upstairs right after dinner. She said she had those
shooting pains again, and didn't want to be disturbed."

"Didn't she say good-bye to you?"

"No. That was all she said."

Ethan, looking slowly about the kitchen, said to himself with a
shudder that in a few hours he would be returning to it alone. Then
the sense of unreality overcame him once more, and he could not
bring himself to believe that Mattie stood there for the last time
before him.

"Come on," he said almost gaily, opening the door and putting her
bag into the sleigh. He sprang to his seat and bent over to tuck the
rug about her as she slipped into the place at his side. "Now then,
go 'long," he said, with a shake of the reins that sent the sorrel
placidly jogging down the hill.

"We got lots of time for a good ride, Matt!" he cried, seeking her
hand beneath the fur and pressing it in his. His face tingled and he
felt dizzy, as if he had stopped in at the Starkfield saloon on a
zero day for a drink.

At the gate, instead of making for Starkfield, he turned the sorrel
to the right, up the Bettsbridge road. Mattie sat silent, giving no
sign of surprise; but after a moment she said: "Are you going round
by Shadow Pond?"

He laughed and answered: "I knew you'd know!"

She drew closer under the bearskin, so that, looking sideways around
his coat-sleeve, he could just catch the tip of her nose and a blown
brown wave of hair. They drove slowly up the road between fields
glistening under the pale sun, and then bent to the right down a
lane edged with spruce and larch. Ahead of them, a long way off, a
range of hills stained by mottlings of black forest flowed away in
round white curves against the sky. The lane passed into a pine-wood
with boles reddening in the afternoon sun and delicate blue shadows
on the snow. As they entered it the breeze fell and a warm stillness
seemed to drop from the branches with the dropping needles. Here the
snow was so pure that the tiny tracks of wood-animals had left on it
intricate lace-like patterns, and the bluish cones caught in its
surface stood out like ornaments of bronze.

Ethan drove on in silence till they reached a part of the wood where
the pines were more widely spaced, then he drew up and helped Mattie
to get out of the sleigh. They passed between the aromatic trunks,
the snow breaking crisply under their feet, till they came to a
small sheet of water with steep wooded sides. Across its frozen
surface, from the farther bank, a single hill rising against the
western sun threw the long conical shadow which gave the lake its
name. It was a shy secret spot, full of the same dumb melancholy
that Ethan felt in his heart.

He looked up and down the little pebbly beach till his eye lit on a
fallen tree-trunk half submerged in snow.

"There's where we sat at the picnic," he reminded her.

The entertainment of which he spoke was one of the few that they had
taken part in together: a "church picnic" which, on a long afternoon
of the preceding summer, had filled the retired place with
merry-making. Mattie had begged him to go with her but he had
refused. Then, toward sunset, coming down from the mountain where he
had been felling timber, he had been caught by some strayed
revellers and drawn into the group by the lake, where Mattie,
encircled by facetious youths, and bright as a blackberry under her
spreading hat, was brewing coffee over a gipsy fire. He remembered
the shyness he had felt at approaching her in his uncouth clothes,
and then the lighting up of her face, and the way she had broken
through the group to come to him with a cup in her hand. They had
sat for a few minutes on the fallen log by the pond, and she had
missed her gold locket, and set the young men searching for it; and
it was Ethan who had spied it in the moss.... That was all; but all
their intercourse had been made up of just such inarticulate
flashes, when they seemed to come suddenly upon happiness as if they
had surprised a butterfly in the winter woods...

"It was right there I found your locket," he said, pushing his foot
into a dense tuft of blueberry bushes.

"I never saw anybody with such sharp eyes!" she answered.

She sat down on the tree-trunk in the sun and he sat down beside
her.

"You were as pretty as a picture in that pink hat," he said.

She laughed with pleasure. "Oh, I guess it was the hat!" she
rejoined.

They had never before avowed their inclination so openly, and Ethan,
for a moment, had the illusion that he was a free man, wooing the
girl he meant to marry. He looked at her hair and longed to touch it
again, and to tell her that it smelt of the woods; but he had never
learned to say such things.

Suddenly she rose to her feet and said: "We mustn't stay here any
longer."

He continued to gaze at her vaguely, only half-roused from his
dream. "There's plenty of time," he answered.

They stood looking at each other as if the eyes of each were
straining to absorb and hold fast the other's image. There were
things he had to say to her before they parted, but he could not say
them in that place of summer memories, and he turned and followed
her in silence to the sleigh. As they drove away the sun sank behind
the hill and the pine-boles turned from red to grey.

By a devious track between the fields they wound back to the
Starkfield road. Under the open sky the light was still clear, with
a reflection of cold red on the eastern hills. The clumps of trees
in the snow seemed to draw together in ruffled lumps, like birds
with their heads under their wings; and the sky, as it paled, rose
higher, leaving the earth more alone.

As they turned into the Starkfield road Ethan said: "Matt, what do
you mean to do?"

She did not answer at once, but at length she said: "I'll try to get
a place in a store."

"You know you can't do it. The bad air and the standing all day
nearly killed you before."

"I'm a lot stronger than I was before I came to Starkfield."

"And now you're going to throw away all the good it's done you!"

There seemed to be no answer to this, and again they drove on for a
while without speaking. With every yard of the way some spot where
they had stood, and laughed together or been silent, clutched at
Ethan and dragged him back.

"Isn't there any of your father's folks could help you?"

"There isn't any of 'em I'd ask."

He lowered his voice to say: "You know there's nothing I wouldn't do
for you if I could."

"I know there isn't."

"But I can't-"

She was silent, but he felt a slight tremor in the shoulder against
his.

"Oh, Matt," he broke out, "if I could ha' gone with you now I'd ha'
done it-"

She turned to him, pulling a scrap of paper from her breast.
"Ethan-I found this," she stammered. Even in the failing light he
saw it was the letter to his wife that he had begun the night before
and forgotten to destroy. Through his astonishment there ran a
fierce thrill of joy. "Matt-" he cried; "if I could ha' done it,
would you?"

"Oh, Ethan, Ethan-what's the use?" With a sudden movement she tore
the letter in shreds and sent them fluttering off into the snow.

"Tell me, Matt! Tell me!" he adjured her.

She was silent for a moment; then she said, in such a low tone that
he had to stoop his head to hear her: "I used to think of it
sometimes, summer nights, when the moon was so bright I couldn't
sleep."

His heart reeled with the sweetness of it. "As long ago as that?"

She answered, as if the date had long been fixed for her: "The first
time was at Shadow Pond."

"Was that why you gave me my coffee before the others?"

"I don't know. Did I? I was dreadfully put out when you wouldn't go
to the picnic with me; and then, when I saw you coming down the
road, I thought maybe you'd gone home that way o' purpose; and that
made me glad."

They were silent again. They had reached the point where the road
dipped to the hollow by Ethan's mill and as they descended the
darkness descended with them, dropping down like a black veil from
the heavy hemlock boughs.

"I'm tied hand and foot, Matt. There isn't a thing I can do," he
began again.

"You must write to me sometimes, Ethan."

"Oh, what good'll writing do? I want to put my hand out and touch
you. I want to do for you and care for you. I want to be there when
you're sick and when you're lonesome."

"You mustn't think but what I'll do all right."

"You won't need me, you mean? I suppose you'll marry!"

"Oh, Ethan!" she cried.

"I don't know how it is you make me feel, Matt. I'd a'most rather
have you dead than that!"

"Oh, I wish I was, I wish I was!" she sobbed.

The sound of her weeping shook him out of his dark anger, and he
felt ashamed.

"Don't let's talk that way," he whispered.

"Why shouldn't we, when it's true? I've been wishing it every minute
of the day."

"Matt! You be quiet! Don't you say it."

"There's never anybody been good to me but you."

"Don't say that either, when I can't lift a hand for you!"

"Yes; but it's true just the same."

They had reached the top of School House Hill and Starkfield lay
below them in the twilight. A cutter, mounting the road from the
village, passed them by in a joyous flutter of bells, and they
straightened themselves and looked ahead with rigid faces. Along the
main street lights had begun to shine from the house-fronts and
stray figures were turning in here and there at the gates. Ethan,
with a touch of his whip, roused the sorrel to a languid trot.

As they drew near the end of the village the cries of children
reached them, and they saw a knot of boys, with sleds behind them,
scattering across the open space before the church.

"I guess this'll be their last coast for a day or two," Ethan said,
looking up at the mild sky.

Mattie was silent, and he added: "We were to have gone down last
night."

Still she did not speak and, prompted by an obscure desire to help
himself and her through their miserable last hour, he went on
discursively: "Ain't it funny we haven't been down together but just
that once last winter?"

She answered: "It wasn't often I got down to the village."

"That's so," he said.

They had reached the crest of the Corbury road, and between the
indistinct white glimmer of the church and the black curtain of the
Varnum spruces the slope stretched away below them without a sled on
its length. Some erratic impulse prompted Ethan to say: "How'd you
like me to take you down now?"

She forced a laugh. "Why, there isn't time!"

"There's all the time we want. Come along!" His one desire now was
to postpone the moment of turning the sorrel toward the Flats.

"But the girl," she faltered. "The girl'll be waiting at the
station."

"Well, let her wait. You'd have to if she didn't. Come!"

The note of authority in his voice seemed to subdue her, and when he
had jumped from the sleigh she let him help her out, saying only,
with a vague feint of reluctance: "But there isn't a sled round
anywheres."

"Yes, there is! Right over there under the spruces." He threw the
bearskin over the sorrel, who stood passively by the roadside,
hanging a meditative head. Then he caught Mattie's hand and drew her
after him toward the sled.

She seated herself obediently and he took his place behind her, so
close that her hair brushed his face. "All right, Matt?" he called
out, as if the width of the road had been between them.

She turned her head to say: "It's dreadfully dark. Are you sure you
can see?"

He laughed contemptuously: "I could go down this coast with my eyes
tied!" and she laughed with him, as if she liked his audacity.
Nevertheless he sat still a moment, straining his eyes down the long
hill, for it was the most confusing hour of the evening, the hour
when the last clearness from the upper sky is merged with the rising
night in a blur that disguises landmarks and falsifies distances.

"Now!" he cried.

The sled started with a bound, and they flew on through the dusk,
gathering smoothness and speed as they went, with the hollow night
opening out below them and the air singing by like an organ. Mattie
sat perfectly still, but as they reached the bend at the foot of the
hill, where the big elm thrust out a deadly elbow, he fancied that
she shrank a little closer.

"Don't be scared, Matt!" he cried exultantly, as they spun safely
past it and flew down the second slope; and when they reached the
level ground beyond, and the speed of the sled began to slacken, he
heard her give a little laugh of glee.

They sprang off and started to walk back up the hill. Ethan dragged
the sled with one hand and passed the other through Mattie's arm.

"Were you scared I'd run you into the elm?" he asked with a boyish
laugh.

"I told you I was never scared with you," she answered.

The strange exaltation of his mood had brought on one of his rare
fits of boastfulness. "It is a tricky place, though. The least
swerve, and we'd never ha' come up again. But I can measure
distances to a hair's-breadth-always could."

She murmured: "I always say you've got the surest eye..."

Deep silence had fallen with the starless dusk, and they leaned on
each other without speaking; but at every step of their climb Ethan
said to himself: "It's the last time we'll ever walk together."

They mounted slowly to the top of the hill. When they were abreast
of the church he stooped his head to her to ask: "Are you tired?"
and she answered, breathing quickly: "It was splendid!"

With a pressure of his arm he guided her toward the Norway spruces.
"I guess this sled must be Ned Hale's. Anyhow I'll leave it where I
found it." He drew the sled up to the Varnum gate and rested it
against the fence. As he raised himself he suddenly felt Mattie
close to him among the shadows.

"Is this where Ned and Ruth kissed each other?" she whispered
breathlessly, and flung her arms about him. Her lips, groping for
his, swept over his face, and he held her fast in a rapture of
surprise.

"Good-bye-good-bye," she stammered, and kissed him again.

"Oh, Matt, I can't let you go!" broke from him in the same old cry.

She freed herself from his hold and he heard her sobbing. "Oh, I
can't go either!" she wailed.

"Matt! What'll we do? What'll we do?"

They clung to each other's hands like children, and her body shook
with desperate sobs.

Through the stillness they heard the church clock striking five.

"Oh, Ethan, it's time!" she cried.

He drew her back to him. "Time for what? You don't suppose I'm going
to leave you now?"

"If I missed my train where'd I go?"

"Where are you going if you catch it?"

She stood silent, her hands lying cold and relaxed in his.

"What's the good of either of us going anywheres without the other
one now?" he said.

She remained motionless, as if she had not heard him. Then she
snatched her hands from his, threw her arms about his neck, and
pressed a sudden drenched cheek against his face. "Ethan! Ethan! I
want you to take me down again!"

"Down where?"

"The coast. Right off," she panted. "So 't we'll never come up any
more."

"Matt! What on earth do you mean?"

She put her lips close against his ear to say: "Right into the big
elm. You said you could. So 't we'd never have to leave each other
any more."

"Why, what are you talking of? You're crazy!"

"I'm not crazy; but I will be if I leave you."

"Oh, Matt, Matt-" he groaned.

She tightened her fierce hold about his neck. Her face lay close to
his face.

"Ethan, where'll I go if I leave you? I don't know how to get along
alone. You said so yourself just now. Nobody but you was ever good
to me. And there'll be that strange girl in the house... and she'll
sleep in my bed, where I used to lay nights and listen to hear you
come up the stairs..."

The words were like fragments torn from his heart. With them came
the hated vision of the house he was going back to-of the stairs he
would have to go up every night, of the woman who would wait for him
there. And the sweetness of Mattie's avowal, the wild wonder of
knowing at last that all that had happened to him had happened to
her too, made the other vision more abhorrent, the other life more
intolerable to return to...

Her pleadings still came to him between short sobs, but he no longer
heard what she was saying. Her hat had slipped back and he was
stroking her hair. He wanted to get the feeling of it into his hand,
so that it would sleep there like a seed in winter. Once he found
her mouth again, and they seemed to be by the pond together in the
burning August sun. But his cheek touched hers, and it was cold and
full of weeping, and he saw the road to the Flats under the night
and heard the whistle of the train up the line.

The spruces swathed them in blackness and silence. They might have
been in their coffins underground. He said to himself: "Perhaps
it'll feel like this..." and then again: "After this I sha'n't feel
anything..."

Suddenly he heard the old sorrel whinny across the road, and
thought: "He's wondering why he doesn't get his supper..."

"Come!" Mattie whispered, tugging at his hand.

Her sombre violence constrained him: she seemed the embodied
instrument of fate. He pulled the sled out, blinking like a
night-bird as he passed from the shade of the spruces into the
transparent dusk of the open. The slope below them was deserted. All
Starkfield was at supper, and not a figure crossed the open space
before the church. The sky, swollen with the clouds that announce a
thaw, hung as low as before a summer storm. He strained his eyes
through the dimness, and they seemed less keen, less capable than
usual.

He took his seat on the sled and Mattie instantly placed herself in
front of him. Her hat had fallen into the snow and his lips were in
her hair. He stretched out his legs, drove his heels into the road
to keep the sled from slipping forward, and bent her head back
between his hands. Then suddenly he sprang up again.

"Get up," he ordered her.

It was the tone she always heeded, but she cowered down in her seat,
repeating vehemently: "No, no, no!"

"Get up!"

"Why?"

"I want to sit in front."

"No, no! How can you steer in front?"

"I don't have to. We'll follow the track."

They spoke in smothered whispers, as though the night were
listening.

"Get up! Get up!" he urged her; but she kept on repeating: "Why do
you want to sit in front?"

"Because I-because I want to feel you holding me," he stammered, and
dragged her to her feet.

The answer seemed to satisfy her, or else she yielded to the power
of his voice. He bent down, feeling in the obscurity for the glassy
slide worn by preceding coasters, and placed the runners carefully
between its edges. She waited while he seated himself with crossed
legs in the front of the sled; then she crouched quickly down at his
back and clasped her arms about him. Her breath in his neck set him
shuddering again, and he almost sprang from his seat. But in a flash
he remembered the alternative. She was right: this was better than
parting. He leaned back and drew her mouth to his...

Just as they started he heard the sorrel's whinny again, and the
familiar wistful call, and all the confused images it brought with
it, went with him down the first reach of the road. Half-way down
there was a sudden drop, then a rise, and after that another long
delirious descent. As they took wing for this it seemed to him that
they were flying indeed, flying far up into the cloudy night, with
Starkfield immeasurably below them, falling away like a speck in
space... Then the big elm shot up ahead, lying in wait for them at
the bend of the road, and he said between his teeth: "We can fetch
it; I know we can fetch it-"

As they flew toward the tree Mattie pressed her arms tighter, and
her blood seemed to be in his veins. Once or twice the sled swerved
a little under them. He slanted his body to keep it headed for the
elm, repeating to himself again and again: "I know we can fetch it";
and little phrases she had spoken ran through his head and danced
before him on the air. The big tree loomed bigger and closer, and as
they bore down on it he thought: "It's waiting for us: it seems to
know." But suddenly his wife's face, with twisted monstrous
lineaments, thrust itself between him and his goal, and he made an
instinctive movement to brush it aside. The sled swerved in
response, but he righted it again, kept it straight, and drove down
on the black projecting mass. There was a last instant when the air
shot past him like millions of fiery wires; and then the elm...

The sky was still thick, but looking straight up he saw a single
star, and tried vaguely to reckon whether it were Sirius, or-or-The
effort tired him too much, and he closed his heavy lids and thought
that he would sleep... The stillness was so profound that he heard a
little animal twittering somewhere near by under the snow. It made a
small frightened cheep like a field mouse, and he wondered languidly
if it were hurt. Then he understood that it must be in pain: pain so
excruciating that he seemed, mysteriously, to feel it shooting
through his own body. He tried in vain to roll over in the direction
of the sound, and stretched his left arm out across the snow. And
now it was as though he felt rather than heard the twittering; it
seemed to be under his palm, which rested on something soft and
springy. The thought of the animal's suffering was intolerable to
him and he struggled to raise himself, and could not because a rock,
or some huge mass, seemed to be lying on him. But he continued to
finger about cautiously with his left hand, thinking he might get
hold of the little creature and help it; and all at once he knew
that the soft thing he had touched was Mattie's hair and that his
hand was on her face.

He dragged himself to his knees, the monstrous load on him moving
with him as he moved, and his hand went over and over her face, and
he felt that the twittering came from her lips...

He got his face down close to hers, with his ear to her mouth, and
in the darkness he saw her eyes open and heard her say his name.

"Oh, Matt, I thought we'd fetched it," he moaned; and far off, up
the hill, he heard the sorrel whinny, and thought: "I ought to be
getting him his feed..."

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


THE QUERULOUS DRONE ceased as I entered Frome's kitchen, and of the
two women sitting there I could not tell which had been the speaker.

One of them, on my appearing, raised her tall bony figure from her
seat, not as if to welcome me-for she threw me no more than a brief
glance of surprise-but simply to set about preparing the meal which
Frome's absence had delayed. A slatternly calico wrapper hung from
her shoulders and the wisps of her thin grey hair were drawn away
from a high forehead and fastened at the back by a broken comb. She
had pale opaque eyes which revealed nothing and reflected nothing,
and her narrow lips were of the same sallow colour as her face.

The other woman was much smaller and slighter. She sat huddled in an
arm-chair near the stove, and when I came in she turned her head
quickly toward me, without the least corresponding movement of her
body. Her hair was as grey as her companion's, her face as bloodless
and shrivelled, but amber-tinted, with swarthy shadows sharpening
the nose and hollowing the temples. Under her shapeless dress her
body kept its limp immobility, and her dark eyes had the bright
witch-like stare that disease of the spine sometimes gives.

Even for that part of the country the kitchen was a poor-looking
place. With the exception of the dark-eyed woman's chair, which
looked like a soiled relic of luxury bought at a country auction,
the furniture was of the roughest kind. Three coarse china plates
and a broken-nosed milk-jug had been set on a greasy table scored
with knife-cuts, and a couple of straw-bottomed chairs and a kitchen
dresser of unpainted pine stood meagrely against the plaster walls.

"My, it's cold here! The fire must be 'most out," Frome said,
glancing about him apologetically as he followed me in.

The tall woman, who had moved away from us toward the dresser, took
no notice; but the other, from her cushioned niche, answered
complainingly, in a high thin voice. "It's on'y just been made up
this very minute. Zeena fell asleep and slep' ever so long, and I
thought I'd be frozen stiff before I could wake her up and get her
to 'tend to it."

I knew then that it was she who had been speaking when we entered.

Her companion, who was just coming back to the table with the
remains of a cold mince-pie in a battered pie-dish, set down her
unappetising burden without appearing to hear the accusation brought
against her.

Frome stood hesitatingly before her as she advanced; then he looked
at me and said: "This is my wife, Mis' Frome." After another
interval he added, turning toward the figure in the arm-chair: "And
this is Miss Mattie Silver..."

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Hale, tender soul, had pictured me as lost in the Flats and
buried under a snow-drift; and so lively was her satisfaction on
seeing me safely restored to her the next morning that I felt my
peril had caused me to advance several degrees in her favour.

Great was her amazement, and that of old Mrs. Varnum, on learning
that Ethan Frome's old horse had carried me to and from Corbury
Junction through the worst blizzard of the winter; greater still
their surprise when they heard that his master had taken me in for
the night.

Beneath their wondering exclamations I felt a secret curiosity to
know what impressions I had received from my night in the Frome
household, and divined that the best way of breaking down their
reserve was to let them try to penetrate mine. I therefore confined
myself to saying, in a matter-of-fact tone, that I had been received
with great kindness, and that Frome had made a bed for me in a room
on the ground-floor which seemed in happier days to have been fitted
up as a kind of writing-room or study.

"Well," Mrs. Hale mused, "in such a storm I suppose he felt he
couldn't do less than take you in-but I guess it went hard with
Ethan. I don't believe but what you're the only stranger has set
foot in that house for over twenty years. He's that proud he don't
even like his oldest friends to go there; and I don't know as any
do, any more, except myself and the doctor..."

"You still go there, Mrs. Hale?" I ventured.

"I used to go a good deal after the accident, when I was first
married; but after awhile I got to think it made 'em feel worse to
see us. And then one thing and another came, and my own troubles...
But I generally make out to drive over there round about New Year's,
and once in the summer. Only I always try to pick a day when Ethan's
off somewheres. It's bad enough to see the two women sitting
there-but his face, when he looks round that bare place, just kills
me... You see, I can look back and call it up in his mother's day,
before their troubles."

Old Mrs. Varnum, by this time, had gone up to bed, and her daughter
and I were sitting alone, after supper, in the austere seclusion of
the horse-hair parlour. Mrs. Hale glanced at me tentatively, as
though trying to see how much footing my conjectures gave her; and I
guessed that if she had kept silence till now it was because she had
been waiting, through all the years, for some one who should see
what she alone had seen.

I waited to let her trust in me gather strength before I said: "Yes,
it's pretty bad, seeing all three of them there together."

She drew her mild brows into a frown of pain. "It was just awful
from the beginning. I was here in the house when they were carried
up-they laid Mattie Silver in the room you're in. She and I were
great friends, and she was to have been my bridesmaid in the
spring... When she came to I went up to her and stayed all night.
They gave her things to quiet her, and she didn't know much till
to'rd morning, and then all of a sudden she woke up just like
herself, and looked straight at me out of her big eyes, and said...
Oh, I don't know why I'm telling you all this," Mrs. Hale broke off,
crying.

She took off her spectacles, wiped the moisture from them, and put
them on again with an unsteady hand. "It got about the next day,"
she went on, "that Zeena Frome had sent Mattie off in a hurry
because she had a hired girl coming, and the folks here could never
rightly tell what she and Ethan were doing that night coasting, when
they'd ought to have been on their way to the Flats to ketch the
train... I never knew myself what Zeena thought-I don't to this day.
Nobody knows Zeena's thoughts. Anyhow, when she heard o' the
accident she came right in and stayed with Ethan over to the
minister's, where they'd carried him. And as soon as the doctors
said that Mattie could be moved, Zeena sent for her and took her
back to the farm."

"And there she's been ever since?"

Mrs. Hale answered simply: "There was nowhere else for her to go;"
and my heart tightened at the thought of the hard compulsions of the
poor.

"Yes, there she's been," Mrs. Hale continued, "and Zeena's done for
her, and done for Ethan, as good as she could. It was a miracle,
considering how sick she was-but she seemed to be raised right up
just when the call came to her. Not as she's ever given up
doctoring, and she's had sick spells right along; but she's had the
strength given her to care for those two for over twenty years, and
before the accident came she thought she couldn't even care for
herself."

Mrs. Hale paused a moment, and I remained silent, plunged in the
vision of what her words evoked. "It's horrible for them all," I
murmured.

"Yes: it's pretty bad. And they ain't any of 'em easy people either.
Mattie was, before the accident; I never knew a sweeter nature. But
she's suffered too much-that's what I always say when folks tell me
how she's soured. And Zeena, she was always cranky. Not but what she
bears with Mattie wonderful-I've seen that myself. But sometimes the
two of them get going at each other, and then Ethan's face'd break
your heart... When I see that, I think it's him that suffers most...
anyhow it ain't Zeena, because she ain't got the time... It's a
pity, though," Mrs. Hale ended, sighing, "that they're all shut up
there'n that one kitchen. In the summertime, on pleasant days, they
move Mattie into the parlour, or out in the door-yard, and that
makes it easier... but winters there's the fires to be thought of;
and there ain't a dime to spare up at the Fromes.'"

Mrs. Hale drew a deep breath, as though her memory were eased of its
long burden, and she had no more to say; but suddenly an impulse of
complete avowal seized her.

