Mrs. Palmer set her little coffee-cup upon the table beside her, calmly
following her own motion with her eyes, and not seeming to realize with
what serious entreaty her daughter's gaze was fixed upon her. Mildred
repeated the last sentence of her revelation, and introduced a stress of
insistence.

"Mama, it WAS Alice Adams!"

But Mrs. Palmer declined to be greatly impressed, so far as her
appearance went, at least; and to emphasize her refusal, she smiled
indulgently. "What makes you think so?"

"Henrietta told me yesterday."

At this Mrs. Palmer permitted herself to laugh softly aloud. "Good
heavens! Is Henrietta a soothsayer? Or is she Arthur's particular
confidante?"

"No. Ella Dowling told her."

Mrs. Palmer's laughter continued. "Now we have it!" she exclaimed. "It's
a game of gossip: Arthur tells Ella, Ella tells Henrietta, and Henrietta
tells----"

"Don't laugh, please, mama," Mildred begged. "Of course Arthur didn't
tell anybody. It's roundabout enough, but it's true. I know it! I
hadn't quite believed it, but I knew it was true when he got so red. He
looked--oh, for a second or so he looked--stricken! He thought I didn't
notice it. Mama, he's been to see her almost every evening lately. They
take long walks together. That's why he hasn't been here."

Of Mrs. Palmer's laughter there was left only her indulgent smile, which
she had not allowed to vanish. "Well, what of it?" she said.

"Mama!"

"Yes," said Mrs. Palmer. "What of it?"

"But don't you see?" Mildred's well-tutored voice, though modulated and
repressed even in her present emotion, nevertheless had a tendency to
quaver. "It's true. Frank Dowling was going to see her one evening and
he saw Arthur sitting on the stoop with her, and didn't go in. And Ella
used to go to school with a girl who lives across the street from here.
She told Ella----"

"Oh, I understand," Mrs. Palmer interrupted. "Suppose he does go there.
My dear, I said, 'What of it?'"

"I don't see what you mean, mama. I'm so afraid he might think we knew
about it, and that you and papa said those things about her and her
father on that account--as if we abused them because he goes there
instead of coming here."

"Nonsense!" Mrs. Palmer rose, went to a window, and, turning there,
stood with her back to it, facing her daughter and looking at her
cheerfully. "Nonsense, my dear! It was perfectly clear that she was
mentioned by accident, and so was her father. What an extraordinary man!
If Arthur makes friends with people like that, he certainly knows better
than to expect to hear favourable opinions of them. Besides, it's only a
little passing thing with him."

"Mama! When he goes there almost every----"

"Yes," Mrs. Palmer said, dryly. "It seems to me I've heard somewhere
that other young men have gone there 'almost every!' She doesn't
last, apparently. Arthur's gallant, and he's impressionable--but
he's fastidious, and fastidiousness is always the check on
impressionableness. A girl belongs to her family, too--and this one does
especially, it strikes me! Arthur's very sensible; he sees more than
you'd think."

Mildred looked at her hopefully. "Then you don't believe he's likely to
imagine we said those things of her in any meaning way?"

At this, Mrs. Palmer laughed again. "There's one thing you seem not to
have noticed, Mildred."

"What's that?"

"It seems to have escaped your attention that he never said a word."

"Mightn't that mean----?" Mildred began, but she stopped.

"No, it mightn't," her mother replied, comprehending easily. "On the
contrary, it might mean that instead of his feeling it too deeply to
speak, he was getting a little illumination."

Mildred rose and came to her. "WHY do you suppose he never told us he
went there? Do you think he's--do you think he's pleased with her, and
yet ashamed of it? WHY do you suppose he's never spoken of it?"

"Ah, that," Mrs. Palmer said,--"that might possibly be her own doing.
If it is, she's well paid by what your father and I said, because we
wouldn't have said it if we'd known that Arthur----" She checked herself
quickly. Looking over her daughter's shoulder, she saw the two gentlemen
coming from the corridor toward the wide doorway of the room; and she
greeted them cheerfully. "If you've finished with each other for a
while," she added, "Arthur may find it a relief to put his thoughts on
something prettier than a trust company--and more fragrant."

Arthur came to Mildred.

"Your mother said at lunch that perhaps you'd----"

"I didn't say 'perhaps,' Arthur," Mrs. Palmer interrupted, to correct
him. "I said she would. If you care to see and smell those lovely things
out yonder, she'll show them to you. Run along, children!"


Half an hour later, glancing from a window, she saw them come from
the hothouses and slowly cross the lawn. Arthur had a fine rose in his
buttonhole and looked profoundly thoughtful.


CHAPTER XXI

That morning and noon had been warm, though the stirrings of a feeble
breeze made weather not flagrantly intemperate; but at about three
o'clock in the afternoon there came out of the southwest a heat like an
affliction sent upon an accursed people, and the air was soon dead of
it. Dripping negro ditch-diggers whooped with satires praising hell and
hot weather, as the tossing shovels flickered up to the street level,
where sluggish male pedestrians carried coats upon hot arms, and
fanned themselves with straw hats, or, remaining covered, wore soaked
handkerchiefs between scalp and straw. Clerks drooped in silent, big
department stores, stenographers in offices kept as close to electric
fans as the intervening bulk of their employers would let them; guests
in hotels left the lobbies and went to lie unclad upon their beds; while
in hospitals the patients murmured querulously against the heat, and
perhaps against some noisy motorist who strove to feel the air by
splitting it, not troubled by any foreboding that he, too, that hour
next week, might need quiet near a hospital. The "hot spell" was a
true spell, one upon men's spirits; for it was so hot that, in suburban
outskirts, golfers crept slowly back over the low undulations of their
club lands, abandoning their matches and returning to shelter.

Even on such a day, sizzling work had to be done, as in winter. There
were glowing furnaces to be stoked, liquid metals to be poured; but such
tasks found seasoned men standing to them; and in all the city probably
no brave soul challenged the heat more gamely than Mrs. Adams did, when,
in a corner of her small and fiery kitchen, where all day long her
hired African immune cooked fiercely, she pressed her husband's evening
clothes with a hot iron. No doubt she risked her life, but she risked
it cheerfully in so good and necessary a service for him. She would have
given her life for him at any time, and both his and her own for her
children.

Unconscious of her own heroism, she was surprised to find herself rather
faint when she finished her ironing. However, she took heart to believe
that the clothes looked better, in spite of one or two scorched places;
and she carried them upstairs to her husband's room before increasing
blindness forced her to grope for the nearest chair. Then, trying to
rise and walk, without having sufficiently recovered, she had to sit
down again; but after a little while she was able to get upon her feet;
and, keeping her hand against the wall, moved successfully to the door
of her own room. Here she wavered; might have gone down, had she not
been stimulated by the thought of how much depended upon her;--she made
a final great effort, and floundered across the room to her bureau,
where she kept some simple restoratives. They served her need, or her
faith in them did; and she returned to her work.

She went down the stairs, keeping a still tremulous hand upon the rail;
but she smiled brightly when Alice looked up from below, where the
woodwork was again being tormented with superfluous attentions.

"Alice, DON'T!" her mother said, commiseratingly. "You did all that this
morning and it looks lovely. What's the use of wearing yourself out on
it? You ought to be lying down, so's to look fresh for to-night."

"Hadn't you better lie down yourself?" the daughter returned. "Are you
ill, mama?"

"Certainly not. What in the world makes you think so?"

"You look pretty pale," Alice said, and sighed heavily. "It makes me
ashamed, having you work so hard--for me."

"How foolish! I think it's fun, getting ready to entertain a little
again, like this. I only wish it hadn't turned so hot: I'm afraid your
poor father'll suffer--his things are pretty heavy, I noticed. Well,
it'll do him good to bear something for style's sake this once, anyhow!"
She laughed, and coming to Alice, bent down and kissed her. "Dearie,"
she said, tenderly, "wouldn't you please slip upstairs now and take just
a little teeny nap to please your mother?"

But Alice responded only by moving her head slowly, in token of refusal.

"Do!" Mrs. Adams urged. "You don't want to look worn out, do you?"

"I'll LOOK all right," Alice said, huskily. "Do you like the way I've
arranged the furniture now? I've tried all the different ways it'll go."

"It's lovely," her mother said, admiringly. "I thought the last way you
had it was pretty, too. But you know best; I never knew anybody with so
much taste. If you'd only just quit now, and take a little rest----"

"There'd hardly be time, even if I wanted to; it's after five but I
couldn't; really, I couldn't. How do you think we can manage about
Walter--to see that he wears his evening things, I mean?"

Mrs. Adams pondered. "I'm afraid he'll make a lot of objections, on
account of the weather and everything. I wish we'd had a chance to
tell him last night or this morning. I'd have telephoned to him this
afternoon except--well, I scarcely like to call him up at that place,
since your father----"

"No, of course not, mama."

"If Walter gets home late," Mrs. Adams went on, "I'll just slip out and
speak to him, in case Mr. Russell's here before he comes. I'll just tell
him he's got to hurry and get his things on."

"Maybe he won't come home to dinner," Alice suggested, rather hopefully.
"Sometimes he doesn't."

"No; I think he'll be here. When he doesn't come he usually telephones
by this time to say not to wait for him; he's very thoughtful about
that. Well, it really is getting late: I must go and tell her she ought
to be preparing her fillet. Dearie, DO rest a little."

"You'd much better do that yourself," Alice called after her, but Mrs.
Adams shook her head cheerily, not pausing on her way to the fiery
kitchen.

Alice continued her useless labours for a time; then carried her bucket
to the head of the cellar stairway, where she left it upon the top step;
and, closing the door, returned to the "living-room;" Again she changed
the positions of the old plush rocking-chairs, moving them into the
corners where she thought they might be least noticeable; and while
thus engaged she was startled by a loud ringing of the door-bell. For
a moment her face was panic-stricken, and she stood staring, then
she realized that Russell would not arrive for another hour, at the
earliest, and recovering her equipoise, went to the door.

Waiting there, in a languid attitude, was a young coloured woman, with
a small bundle under her arm and something malleable in her mouth.
"Listen," she said. "You folks expectin' a coloured lady?"

"No," said Alice. "Especially not at the front door."

"Listen," the coloured woman said again. "Listen. Say, listen. Ain't
they another coloured lady awready here by the day? Listen. Ain't Miz
Malena Burns here by the day this evenin'? Say, listen. This the number
house she give ME."

"Are you the waitress?" Alice asked, dismally.

"Yes'm, if Malena here."

"Malena is here," Alice said, and hesitated; but she decided not to
send the waitress to the back door; it might be a risk. She let her in.
"What's your name?"

"Me? I'm name' Gertrude. Miss Gertrude Collamus."

"Did you bring a cap and apron?"

Gertrude took the little bundle from under her arm. "Yes'm. I'm all
fix'."

"I've already set the table," Alice said. "I'll show you what we want
done."

She led the way to the dining-room, and, after offering some instruction
there, received by Gertrude with languor and a slowly moving jaw, she
took her into the kitchen, where the cap and apron were put on. The
effect was not fortunate; Gertrude's eyes were noticeably bloodshot,
an affliction made more apparent by the white cap; and Alice drew her
mother apart, whispering anxiously,

"Do you suppose it's too late to get someone else?"

"I'm afraid it is," Mrs. Adams said. "Malena says it was hard enough to
get HER! You have to pay them so much that they only work when they feel
like it."

"Mama, could you ask her to wear her cap straighter? Every time she
moves her head she gets it on one side, and her skirt's too long behind
and too short in front--and oh, I've NEVER seen such FEET!" Alice
laughed desolately. "And she MUST quit that terrible chewing!"

"Never mind; I'll get to work with her. I'll straighten her out all I
can, dearie; don't worry." Mrs. Adams patted her daughter's shoulder
encouragingly. "Now YOU can't do another thing, and if you don't run and
begin dressing you won't be ready. It'll only take me a minute to dress,
myself, and I'll be down long before you will. Run, darling! I'll look
after everything."

Alice nodded vaguely, went up to her room, and, after only a moment with
her mirror, brought from her closet the dress of white organdie she
had worn the night when she met Russell for the first time. She laid it
carefully upon her bed, and began to make ready to put it on. Her mother
came in, half an hour later, to "fasten" her.

"I'M all dressed," Mrs. Adams said, briskly. "Of course it doesn't
matter. He won't know what the rest of us even look like: How could he?
I know I'm an old SIGHT, but all I want is to look respectable. Do I?"

"You look like the best woman in the world; that's all!" Alice said,
with a little gulp.

Her mother laughed and gave her a final scrutiny. "You might use just
a tiny bit more colour, dearie--I'm afraid the excitement's made you a
little pale. And you MUST brighten up! There's sort of a look in your
eyes as if you'd got in a trance and couldn't get out. You've had it all
day. I must run: your father wants me to help him with his studs. Walter
hasn't come yet, but I'll look after him; don't worry, And you better
HURRY, dearie, if you're going to take any time fixing the flowers on
the table."

She departed, while Alice sat at the mirror again, to follow her advice
concerning a "tiny bit more colour." Before she had finished, her father
knocked at the door, and, when she responded, came in. He was dressed
in the clothes his wife had pressed; but he had lost substantially in
weight since they were made for him; no one would have thought that they
had been pressed. They hung from him voluminously, seeming to be the
clothes of a larger man.

"Your mother's gone downstairs," he said, in a voice of distress.

"One of the buttonholes in my shirt is too large and I can't keep the
dang thing fastened. _I_ don't know what to do about it! I only got one
other white shirt, and it's kind of ruined: I tried it before I did this
one. Do you s'pose you could do anything?"

"I'll see," she said.

"My collar's got a frayed edge," he complained, as she examined his
troublesome shirt. "It's a good deal like wearing a saw; but I expect
it'll wilt down flat pretty soon, and not bother me long. I'm liable to
wilt down flat, myself, I expect; I don't know as I remember any such
hot night in the last ten or twelve years." He lifted his head and
sniffed the flaccid air, which was laden with a heavy odour. "My, but
that smell is pretty strong!" he said.

"Stand still, please, papa," Alice begged him. "I can't see what's the
matter if you move around. How absurd you are about your old glue smell,
papa! There isn't a vestige of it, of course."

"I didn't mean glue," he informed her. "I mean cabbage. Is that
fashionable now, to have cabbage when there's company for dinner?"

"That isn't cabbage, papa. It's Brussels sprouts."

"Oh, is it? I don't mind it much, because it keeps that glue smell off
me, but it's fairly strong. I expect you don't notice it so much because
you been in the house with it all along, and got used to it while it was
growing."

"It is pretty dreadful," Alice said. "Are all the windows open
downstairs?"

"I'll go down and see, if you'll just fix that hole up for me."

"I'm afraid I can't," she said. "Not unless you take your shirt off and
bring it to me. I'll have to sew the hole smaller."

"Oh, well, I'll go ask your mother to----"

"No," said Alice. "She's got everything on her hands. Run and take it
off. Hurry, papa; I've got to arrange the flowers on the table before he
comes."

He went away, and came back presently, half undressed, bringing the
shirt. "There's ONE comfort," he remarked, pensively, as she worked.
"I've got that collar off--for a while, anyway. I wish I could go to
table like this; I could stand it a good deal better. Do you seem to be
making any headway with the dang thing?"

"I think probably I can----"

Downstairs the door-bell rang, and Alice's arms jerked with the shock.

"Golly!" her father said. "Did you stick your finger with that fool
needle?"

She gave him a blank stare. "He's come!"

She was not mistaken, for, upon the little veranda, Russell stood facing
the closed door at last. However, it remained closed for a considerable
time after he rang. Inside the house the warning summons of the bell was
immediately followed by another sound, audible to Alice and her father
as a crash preceding a series of muffled falls. Then came a distant
voice, bitter in complaint.

"Oh, Lord!" said Adams. "What's that?"

Alice went to the top of the front stairs, and her mother appeared in
the hall below.

"Mama!"

Mrs. Adams looked up. "It's all right," she said, in a loud whisper.
"Gertrude fell down the cellar stairs. Somebody left a bucket there,
and----" She was interrupted by a gasp from Alice, and hastened to
reassure her. "Don't worry, dearie. She may limp a little, but----"

Adams leaned over the banisters. "Did she break anything?" he asked.

"Hush!" his wife whispered. "No. She seems upset and angry about it,
more than anything else; but she's rubbing herself, and she'll be all
right in time to bring in the little sandwiches. Alice! Those flowers!"

"I know, mama. But----"

"Hurry!" Mrs. Adams warned her. "Both of you hurry! I MUST let him in!"

She turned to the door, smiling cordially, even before she opened it.
"Do come right in, Mr. Russell," she said, loudly, lifting her voice
for additional warning to those above. "I'm SO glad to receive you
informally, this way, in our own little home. There's a hat-rack here
under the stairway," she continued, as Russell, murmuring some response,
came into the hall. "I'm afraid you'll think it's almost TOO informal,
my coming to the door, but unfortunately our housemaid's just had a
little accident--oh, nothing to mention! I just thought we better
not keep you waiting any longer. Will you step into our living-room,
please?"

She led the way between the two small columns, and seated herself in one
of the plush rocking-chairs, selecting it because Alice had once pointed
out that the chairs, themselves, were less noticeable when they had
people sitting in them. "Do sit down, Mr. Russell; it's so very warm
it's really quite a trial just to stand up!"

"Thank you," he said, as he took a seat. "Yes. It is quite warm." And
this seemed to be the extent of his responsiveness for the moment.
He was grave, rather pale; and Mrs. Adams's impression of him, as
she formed it then, was of "a distinguished-looking young man, really
elegant in the best sense of the word, but timid and formal when he
first meets you." She beamed upon him, and used with everything she said
a continuous accompaniment of laughter, meaningless except that it was
meant to convey cordiality. "Of course we DO have a great deal of warm
weather," she informed him. "I'm glad it's so much cooler in the house
than it is outdoors."

"Yes," he said. "It is pleasanter indoors." And, stopping with this
single untruth, he permitted himself the briefest glance about the room;
then his eyes returned to his smiling hostess.

"Most people make a great fuss about hot weather," she said. "The only
person I know who doesn't mind the heat the way other people do is
Alice. She always seems as cool as if we had a breeze blowing, no matter
how hot it is. But then she's so amiable she never minds anything. It's
just her character. She's always been that way since she was a little
child; always the same to everybody, high and low. I think character's
the most important thing in the world, after all, don't you, Mr.
Russell?"

"Yes," he said, solemnly; and touched his bedewed white forehead with a
handkerchief.

"Indeed it is," she agreed with herself, never failing to continue her
murmur of laughter. "That's what I've always told Alice; but she never
sees anything good in herself, and she just laughs at me when I praise
her. She sees good in everybody ELSE in the world, no matter how
unworthy they are, or how they behave toward HER; but she always
underestimates herself. From the time she was a little child she was
always that way. When some other little girl would behave selfishly or
meanly toward her, do you think she'd come and tell me? Never a word
to anybody! The little thing was too proud! She was the same way about
school. The teachers had to tell me when she took a prize; she'd bring
it home and keep it in her room without a word about it to her father
and mother. Now, Walter was just the other way. Walter would----" But
here Mrs. Adams checked herself, though she increased the volume of
her laughter. "How silly of me!" she exclaimed. "I expect you know how
mothers ARE, though, Mr. Russell. Give us a chance and we'll talk about
our children forever! Alice would feel terribly if she knew how I've
been going on about her to you."

In this Mrs. Adams was right, though she did not herself suspect it,
and upon an almost inaudible word or two from him she went on with her
topic. "Of course my excuse is that few mothers have a daughter like
Alice. I suppose we all think the same way about our children, but SOME
of us must be right when we feel we've got the best. Don't you think
so?"

"Yes. Yes, indeed."

"I'm sure _I_ am!" she laughed. "I'll let the others speak for
themselves." She paused reflectively. "No; I think a mother knows
when she's got a treasure in her family. If she HASN'T got one, she'll
pretend she has, maybe; but if she has, she knows it. I certainly
know _I_ have. She's always been what people call 'the joy of the
household'--always cheerful, no matter what went wrong, and always ready
to smooth things over with some bright, witty saying. You must be sure
not to TELL we've had this little chat about her--she'd just be furious
with me--but she IS such a dear child! You won't tell her, will you?"

"No," he said, and again applied the handkerchief to his forehead for an
instant. "No, I'll----" He paused, and finished lamely: "I'll--not tell
her."

Thus reassured, Mrs. Adams set before him some details of her daughter's
popularity at sixteen, dwelling upon Alice's impartiality among her
young suitors: "She never could BEAR to hurt their feelings, and always
treated all of them just alike. About half a dozen of them were just
BOUND to marry her! Naturally, her father and I considered any such idea
ridiculous; she was too young, of course."

Thus the mother went on with her biographical sketches, while the pale
young man sat facing her under the hard overhead light of a white globe,
set to the ceiling; and listened without interrupting. She was glad to
have the chance to tell him a few things about Alice he might not
have guessed for himself, and, indeed, she had planned to find such an
opportunity, if she could; but this was getting to be altogether too
much of one, she felt. As time passed, she was like an actor who must
improvise to keep the audience from perceiving that his fellow-players
have missed their cues; but her anxiety was not betrayed to the still
listener; she had a valiant soul.

Alice, meanwhile, had arranged her little roses on the table in as many
ways, probably, as there were blossoms; and she was still at it when
her father arrived in the dining-room by way of the back stairs and the
kitchen.

"It's pulled out again," he said. "But I guess there's no help for it
now; it's too late, and anyway it lets some air into me when it bulges.
I can sit so's it won't be noticed much, I expect. Isn't it time you
quit bothering about the looks of the table? Your mother's been talking
to him about half an hour now, and I had the idea he came on your
account, not hers. Hadn't you better go and----"

"Just a minute." Alice said, piteously. "Do YOU think it looks all
right?"

"The flowers? Fine! Hadn't you better leave 'em the way they are,
though?"

"Just a minute," she begged again. "Just ONE minute, papa!" And she
exchanged a rose in front of Russell's plate for one that seemed to her
a little larger.

"You better come on," Adams said, moving to the door.

"Just ONE more second, papa." She shook her head, lamenting. "Oh, I wish
we'd rented some silver!"

"Why?"

"Because so much of the plating has rubbed off a lot of it. JUST a
second, papa." And as she spoke she hastily went round the table,
gathering the knives and forks and spoons that she thought had their
plating best preserved, and exchanging them for more damaged pieces at
Russell's place. "There!" she sighed, finally.

"Now I'll come." But at the door she paused to look back dubiously, over
her shoulder.

"What's the matter now?"

"The roses. I believe after all I shouldn't have tried that vine effect;
I ought to have kept them in water, in the vase. It's so hot, they
already begin to look a little wilted, out on the dry tablecloth like
that. I believe I'll----"

"Why, look here, Alice!" he remonstrated, as she seemed disposed to turn
back. "Everything'll burn up on the stove if you keep on----"

"Oh, well," she said, "the vase was terribly ugly; I can't do any
better. We'll go in." But with her hand on the door-knob she paused.
"No, papa. We mustn't go in by this door. It might look as if----"

"As if what?"

"Never mind," she said. "Let's go the other way."

"I don't see what difference it makes," he grumbled, but nevertheless
followed her through the kitchen, and up the back stairs then through
the upper hallway. At the top of the front stairs she paused for a
moment, drawing a deep breath; and then, before her father's puzzled
eyes, a transformation came upon her.

Her shoulders, like her eyelids, had been drooping, but now she threw
her head back: the shoulders straightened, and the lashes lifted over
sparkling eyes; vivacity came to her whole body in a flash; and she
tripped down the steps, with her pretty hands rising in time to the
lilting little tune she had begun to hum.

At the foot of the stairs, one of those pretty hands extended itself at
full arm's length toward Russell, and continued to be extended until it
reached his own hand as he came to meet her. "How terrible of me!" she
exclaimed. "To be so late coming down! And papa, too--I think you know
each other."

Her father was advancing toward the young man, expecting to shake hands
with him, but Alice stood between them, and Russell, a little flushed,
bowed to him gravely over her shoulder, without looking at him;
whereupon Adams, slightly disconcerted, put his hands in his pockets and
turned to his wife.

"I guess dinner's more'n ready," he said. "We better go sit down."

But she shook her head at him fiercely, "Wait!" she whispered.

"What for? For Walter?"

"No; he can't be coming," she returned, hurriedly, and again warned him
by a shake of her head. "Be quiet!"

"Oh, well----" he muttered.

"Sit down!"

He was thoroughly mystified, but obeyed her gesture and went to the
rocking-chair in the opposite corner, where he sat down, and, with an
expression of meek inquiry, awaited events.

Meanwhile, Alice prattled on: "It's really not a fault of mine,
being tardy. The shameful truth is I was trying to hurry papa. He's
incorrigible: he stays so late at his terrible old factory--terrible new
factory, I should say. I hope you don't HATE us for making you dine with
us in such fearful weather! I'm nearly dying of the heat, myself, so you
have a fellow-sufferer, if that pleases you. Why is it we always bear
things better if we think other people have to stand them, too?" And she
added, with an excited laugh: "SILLY of us, don't you think?"

Gertrude had just made her entrance from the dining-room, bearing a
tray. She came slowly, with an air of resentment; and her skirt still
needed adjusting, while her lower jaw moved at intervals, though not
now upon any substance, but reminiscently, of habit. She halted before
Adams, facing him.

He looked plaintive. "What you want o' me?" he asked.

For response, she extended the tray toward him with a gesture of
indifference; but he still appeared to be puzzled. "What in the
world----?" he began, then caught his wife's eye, and had presence of
mind enough to take a damp and plastic sandwich from the tray. "Well,
I'll TRY one," he said, but a moment later, as he fulfilled this
promise, an expression of intense dislike came upon his features, and
he would have returned the sandwich to Gertrude. However, as she
had crossed the room to Mrs. Adams he checked the gesture, and sat
helplessly, with the sandwich in his hand. He made another effort to
get rid of it as the waitress passed him, on her way back to the
dining-room, but she appeared not to observe him, and he continued to be
troubled by it.

Alice was a loyal daughter. "These are delicious, mama," she said; and
turning to Russell, "You missed it; you should have taken one. Too
bad we couldn't have offered you what ought to go with it, of course,
but----"

She was interrupted by the second entrance of Gertrude, who announced,
"Dinner serve'," and retired from view.

"Well, well!" Adams said, rising from his chair, with relief. "That's
good! Let's go see if we can eat it." And as the little group moved
toward the open door of the dining-room he disposed of his sandwich by
dropping it in the empty fireplace.

Alice, glancing back over her shoulder, was the only one who saw him,
and she shuddered in spite of herself. Then, seeing that he looked at
her entreatingly, as if he wanted to explain that he was doing the best
he could, she smiled upon him sunnily, and began to chatter to Russell
again.


CHAPTER XXII

Alice kept her sprightly chatter going when they sat down, though the
temperature of the room and the sight of hot soup might have discouraged
a less determined gayety. Moreover, there were details as unpropitious
as the heat: the expiring roses expressed not beauty but pathos, and
what faint odour they exhaled was no rival to the lusty emanations of
the Brussels sprouts; at the head of the table, Adams, sitting low in
his chair, appeared to be unable to flatten the uprising wave of
his starched bosom; and Gertrude's manner and expression were of a
recognizable hostility during the long period of vain waiting for the
cups of soup to be emptied. Only Mrs. Adams made any progress in this
direction; the others merely feinting, now and then lifting their spoons
as if they intended to do something with them.

Alice's talk was little more than cheerful sound, but, to fill a
desolate interval, served its purpose; and her mother supported her
with ever-faithful cooings of applausive laughter. "What a funny thing
weather is!" the girl ran on. "Yesterday it was cool--angels had charge
of it--and to-day they had an engagement somewhere else, so the devil
saw his chance and started to move the equator to the North Pole; but by
the time he got half-way, he thought of something else he wanted to do,
and went off; and left the equator here, right on top of US! I wish he'd
come back and get it!"

"Why, Alice dear!" her mother cried, fondly. "What an imagination! Not
a very pious one, I'm afraid Mr. Russell might think, though!" Here she
gave Gertrude a hidden signal to remove the soup; but, as there was
no response, she had to make the signal more conspicuous. Gertrude was
leaning against the wall, her chin moving like a slow pendulum, her
streaked eyes fixed mutinously upon Russell. Mrs. Adams nodded several
times, increasing the emphasis of her gesture, while Alice talked
briskly; but the brooding waitress continued to brood. A faint snap of
the fingers failed to disturb her; nor was a covert hissing whisper of
avail, and Mrs. Adams was beginning to show signs of strain when her
daughter relieved her.

"Imagine our trying to eat anything so hot as soup on a night like
this!" Alice laughed. "What COULD have been in the cook's mind not to
give us something iced and jellied instead? Of course it's because she's
equatorial, herself, originally, and only feels at home when Mr. Satan
moves it north." She looked round at Gertrude, who stood behind her. "Do
take this dreadful soup away!"

Thus directly addressed, Gertrude yielded her attention, though
unwillingly, and as if she decided only by a hair's weight not to
revolt, instead. However, she finally set herself in slow motion; but
overlooked the supposed head of the table, seeming to be unaware of
the sweltering little man who sat there. As she disappeared toward
the kitchen with but three of the cups upon her tray he turned to look
plaintively after her, and ventured an attempt to recall her.

"Here!" he said, in a low voice. "Here, you!"

"What is it, Virgil?" his wife asked.

"What's her name?"

Mrs. Adams gave him a glance of sudden panic, and, seeing that the
guest of the evening was not looking at her, but down at the white cloth
before him, she frowned hard, and shook her head.

Unfortunately Alice was not observing her mother, and asked, innocently:
"What's whose name, papa?"

"Why, this young darky woman," he explained. "She left mine."

"Never mind," Alice laughed. "There's hope for you, papa. She hasn't
gone forever!"

"I don't know about that," he said, not content with this impulsive
assurance. "She LOOKED like she is." And his remark, considered as a
prediction, had begun to seem warranted before Gertrude's return with
china preliminary to the next stage of the banquet.

Alice proved herself equal to the long gap, and rattled on through it
with a spirit richly justifying her mother's praise of her as "always
ready to smooth things over"; for here was more than long delay to be
smoothed over. She smoothed over her father and mother for Russell; and
she smoothed over him for them, though he did not know it, and remained
unaware of what he owed her. With all this, throughout her prattlings,
the girl's bright eyes kept seeking his with an eager gayety, which but
little veiled both interrogation and entreaty--as if she asked: "Is it
too much for you? Can't you bear it? Won't you PLEASE bear it? I would
for you. Won't you give me a sign that it's all right?"

He looked at her but fleetingly, and seemed to suffer from the heat, in
spite of every manly effort not to wipe his brow too often. His colour,
after rising when he greeted Alice and her father, had departed, leaving
him again moistly pallid; a condition arising from discomfort, no doubt,
but, considered as a decoration, almost poetically becoming to him.
Not less becoming was the faint, kindly smile, which showed his wish to
express amusement and approval; and yet it was a smile rather strained
and plaintive, as if he, like Adams, could only do the best he could.

He pleased Adams, who thought him a fine young man, and decidedly
the quietest that Alice had ever shown to her family. In her father's
opinion this was no small merit; and it was to Russell's credit, too,
that he showed embarrassment upon this first intimate presentation; here
was an applicant with both reserve and modesty. "So far, he seems to be
first rate a mighty fine young man," Adams thought; and, prompted by no
wish to part from Alice but by reminiscences of apparent candidates less
pleasing, he added, "At last!"

Alice's liveliness never flagged. Her smoothing over of things was an
almost continuous performance, and had to be. Yet, while she chattered
through the hot and heavy courses, the questions she asked herself
were as continuous as the performance, and as poignant as what her eyes
seemed to be asking Russell. Why had she not prevailed over her mother's
fear of being "skimpy?" Had she been, indeed, as her mother said she
looked, "in a trance?" But above all: What was the matter with HIM? What
had happened? For she told herself with painful humour that something
even worse than this dinner must be "the matter with him."

The small room, suffocated with the odour of boiled sprouts, grew hotter
and hotter as more and more food appeared, slowly borne in, between
deathly long waits, by the resentful, loud-breathing Gertrude. And while
Alice still sought Russell's glance, and read the look upon his face
a dozen different ways, fearing all of them; and while the straggling
little flowers died upon the stained cloth, she felt her heart grow as
heavy as the food, and wondered that it did not die like the roses.

With the arrival of coffee, the host bestirred himself to make known a
hospitable regret, "By George!" he said. "I meant to buy some cigars."
He addressed himself apologetically to the guest. "I don't know what I
was thinking about, to forget to bring some home with me. I don't use
'em myself--unless somebody hands me one, you might say. I've always
been a pipe-smoker, pure and simple, but I ought to remembered for kind
of an occasion like this."

"Not at all," Russell said. "I'm not smoking at all lately; but when I
do, I'm like you, and smoke a pipe."

Alice started, remembering what she had told him when he overtook her on
her way from the tobacconist's; but, after a moment, looking at him,
she decided that he must have forgotten it. If he had remembered, she
thought, he could not have helped glancing at her. On the contrary, he
seemed more at ease, just then, than he had since they sat down, for he
was favouring her father with a thoughtful attention as Adams responded
to the introduction of a man's topic into the conversation at last.
"Well, Mr. Russell, I guess you're right, at that. I don't say but what
cigars may be all right for a man that can afford 'em, if he likes 'em
better than a pipe, but you take a good old pipe now----"

He continued, and was getting well into the eulogium customarily
provoked by this theme, when there came an interruption: the door-bell
rang, and he paused inquiringly, rather surprised.

Mrs. Adams spoke to Gertrude in an undertone:

"Just say, 'Not at home.'"

"What?"

"If it's callers, just say we're not at home."

Gertrude spoke out freely: "You mean you astin' me to 'tend you' front
do' fer you?"

She seemed both incredulous and affronted, but Mrs. Adams persisted,
though somewhat apprehensively. "Yes. Hurry--uh--please. Just say we're
not at home if you please."

Again Gertrude obviously hesitated between compliance and revolt, and
again the meeker course fortunately prevailed with her. She gave Mrs.
Adams a stare, grimly derisive, then departed. When she came back she
said:

"He say he wait."

"But I told you to tell anybody we were not at home," Mrs Adams
returned. "Who is it?"

"Say he name Mr. Law."

"We don't know any Mr. Law."

"Yes'm; he know you. Say he anxious to speak Mr. Adams. Say he wait."

"Tell him Mr. Adams is engaged."

"Hold on a minute," Adams intervened. "Law? No. I don't know any Mr.
Law. You sure you got the name right?"

"Say he name Law," Gertrude replied, looking at the ceiling to express
her fatigue. "Law. 'S all he tell me; 's all I know."

Adams frowned. "Law," he said. "Wasn't it maybe 'Lohr?'"

"Law," Gertrude repeated. "'S all he tell me; 's all I know."

"What's he look like?"

"He ain't much," she said. "'Bout you' age; got brustly white moustache,
nice eye-glasses."

"It's Charley Lohr!" Adams exclaimed. "I'll go see what he wants."

"But, Virgil," his wife remonstrated, "do finish your coffee; he might
stay all evening. Maybe he's come to call."

Adams laughed. "He isn't much of a caller, I expect. Don't worry: I'll
take him up to my room." And turning toward Russell, "Ah--if you'll just
excuse me," he said; and went out to his visitor.

When he had gone, Mrs. Adams finished her coffee, and, having glanced
intelligently from her guest to her daughter, she rose. "I think perhaps
I ought to go and shake hands with Mr. Lohr, myself," she said, adding
in explanation to Russell, as she reached the door, "He's an old friend
of my husband's and it's a very long time since he's been here."

Alice nodded and smiled to her brightly, but upon the closing of the
door, the smile vanished; all her liveliness disappeared; and with this
change of expression her complexion itself appeared to change, so that
her rouge became obvious, for she was pale beneath it. However, Russell
did not see the alteration, for he did not look at her; and it was but
a momentary lapse the vacation of a tired girl, who for ten seconds lets
herself look as she feels. Then she shot her vivacity back into place as
by some powerful spring.

"Penny for your thoughts!" she cried, and tossed one of the wilted
roses at him, across the table. "I'll bid more than a penny; I'll bid
tuppence--no, a poor little dead rose a rose for your thoughts, Mr.
Arthur Russell! What are they?"

He shook his head. "I'm afraid I haven't any."

"No, of course not," she said. "Who could have thoughts in weather like
this? Will you EVER forgive us?"

"What for?"

"Making you eat such a heavy dinner--I mean LOOK at such a heavy dinner,
because you certainly didn't do more than look at it--on such a night!
But the crime draws to a close, and you can begin to cheer up!" She
laughed gaily, and, rising, moved to the door. "Let's go in the other
room; your fearful duty is almost done, and you can run home as soon as
you want to. That's what you're dying to do."

"Not at all," he said in a voice so feeble that she laughed aloud.

"Good gracious!" she cried. "I hadn't realized it was THAT bad!"

For this, though he contrived to laugh, he seemed to have no verbal
retort whatever; but followed her into the "living-room," where she
stopped and turned, facing him.

"Has it really been so frightful?" she asked.

"Why, of course not. Not at all."

"Of course yes, though, you mean!"

"Not at all. It's been most kind of your mother and father and you."

"Do you know," she said, "you've never once looked at me for more than a
second at a time the whole evening? And it seemed to me I looked rather
nice to-night, too!"

"You always do," he murmured.

"I don't see how you know," she returned; and then stepping closer
to him, spoke with gentle solicitude: "Tell me: you're really feeling
wretchedly, aren't you? I know you've got a fearful headache, or
something. Tell me!"

"Not at all."

"You are ill--I'm sure of it."

"Not at all."

"On your word?"

"I'm really quite all right."

"But if you are----" she began; and then, looking at him with a
desperate sweetness, as if this were her last resource to rouse him,
"What's the matter, little boy?" she said with lisping tenderness. "Tell
auntie!"

It was a mistake, for he seemed to flinch, and to lean backward,
however, slightly. She turned away instantly, with a flippant lift and
drop of both hands. "Oh, my dear!" she laughed. "I won't eat you!"

And as the discomfited young man watched her, seeming able to lift
his eyes, now that her back was turned, she went to the front door and
pushed open the screen. "Let's go out on the porch," she said. "Where we
belong!"

Then, when he had followed her out, and they were seated, "Isn't this
better?" she asked. "Don't you feel more like yourself out here?"

He began a murmur: "Not at----"

But she cut him off sharply: "Please don't say 'Not at all' again!"

"I'm sorry."

"You do seem sorry about something," she said. "What is it? Isn't it
time you were telling me what's the matter?"

"Nothing. Indeed nothing's the matter. Of course one IS rather affected
by such weather as this. It may make one a little quieter than usual, of
course."

She sighed, and let the tired muscles of her face rest. Under the hard
lights, indoors, they had served her until they ached, and it was a
luxury to feel that in the darkness no grimacings need call upon them.

"Of course, if you won't tell me----" she said.

"I can only assure you there's nothing to tell."

"I know what an ugly little house it is," she said. "Maybe it was the
furniture--or mama's vases that upset you. Or was it mama herself--or
papa?"

"Nothing 'upset' me."

At that she uttered a monosyllable of doubting laughter. "I wonder why
you say that."

"Because it's so."

"No. It's because you're too kind, or too conscientious, or too
embarrassed--anyhow too something--to tell me." She leaned forward,
elbows on knees and chin in hands, in the reflective attitude she knew
how to make graceful. "I have a feeling that you're not going to tell
me," she said, slowly. "Yes--even that you're never going to tell me. I
wonder--I wonder----"

"Yes? What do you wonder?"

"I was just thinking--I wonder if they haven't done it, after all."

"I don't understand."

"I wonder," she went on, still slowly, and in a voice of reflection, "I
wonder who HAS been talking about me to you, after all? Isn't that it?"

"Not at----" he began, but checked himself and substituted another form
of denial. "Nothing is 'it.'"

"Are you sure?"

"Why, yes."

"How curious!" she said.

"Why?"

"Because all evening you've been so utterly different."

"But in this weather----"

"No. That wouldn't make you afraid to look at me all evening!"

"But I did look at you. Often."

"No. Not really a LOOK."

"But I'm looking at you now."

"Yes--in the dark!" she said. "No--the weather might make you even
quieter than usual, but it wouldn't strike you so nearly dumb. No--and
it wouldn't make you seem to be under such a strain--as if you thought
only of escape!"

"But I haven't----"

"You shouldn't," she interrupted, gently. "There's nothing you have to
escape from, you know. You aren't committed to--to this friendship."

"I'm sorry you think----" he began, but did not complete the fragment.

She took it up. "You're sorry I think you're so different, you mean to
say, don't you? Never mind: that's what you did mean to say, but you
couldn't finish it because you're not good at deceiving."

"Oh, no," he protested, feebly. "I'm not deceiving. I'm----"

"Never mind," she said again. "You're sorry I think you're so
different--and all in one day--since last night. Yes, your voice SOUNDS
sorry, too. It sounds sorrier than it would just because of my thinking
something you could change my mind about in a minute so it means you're
sorry you ARE different."

"No--I----"

But disregarding the faint denial, "Never mind," she said. "Do you
remember one night when you told me that nothing anybody else could do
would ever keep you from coming here? That if you--if you left me it
would be because I drove you away myself?"

"Yes," he said, huskily. "It was true."

"Are you sure?"

"Indeed I am," he answered in a low voice, but with conviction.

"Then----" She paused. "Well--but I haven't driven you away."

"No."

"And yet you've gone," she said, quietly.

"Do I seem so stupid as all that?"

"You know what I mean." She leaned back in her chair again, and her
hands, inactive for once, lay motionless in her lap. When she spoke it
was in a rueful whisper:

"I wonder if I HAVE driven you away?"

"You've done nothing--nothing at all," he said.

"I wonder----" she said once more, but she stopped. In her mind she was
going back over their time together since the first meeting--fragments
of talk, moments of silence, little things of no importance, little
things that might be important; moonshine, sunshine, starlight; and her
thoughts zigzagged among the jumbling memories; but, as if she made for
herself a picture of all these fragments, throwing them upon the canvas
haphazard, she saw them all just touched with the one tainting quality
that gave them coherence, the faint, false haze she had put over this
friendship by her own pretendings. And, if this terrible dinner, or
anything, or everything, had shown that saffron tint in its true colour
to the man at her side, last night almost a lover, then she had indeed
of herself driven him away, and might well feel that she was lost.

"Do you know?" she said, suddenly, in a clear, loud voice. "I have the
strangest feeling. I feel as if I were going to be with you only about
five minutes more in all the rest of my life!"

"Why, no," he said. "Of course I'm coming to see you--often. I----"

"No," she interrupted. "I've never had a feeling like this before.
It's--it's just SO; that's all! You're GOING--why, you're never coming
here again!" She stood up, abruptly, beginning to tremble all over.
"Why, it's FINISHED, isn't it?" she said, and her trembling was manifest
now in her voice. "Why, it's all OVER, isn't it? Why, yes!"

He had risen as she did. "I'm afraid you're awfully tired and nervous,"
he said. "I really ought to be going."

"Yes, of COURSE you ought," she cried, despairingly. "There's nothing
else for you to do. When anything's spoiled, people CAN'T do anything
but run away from it. So good-bye!"

"At least," he returned, huskily, "we'll only--only say good-night."

Then, as moving to go, he stumbled upon the veranda steps, "Your HAT!"
she cried. "I'd like to keep it for a souvenir, but I'm afraid you need
it!"

She ran into the hall and brought his straw hat from the chair where he
had left it. "You poor thing!" she said, with quavering laughter. "Don't
you know you can't go without your hat?"

Then, as they faced each other for the short moment which both of them
knew would be the last of all their veranda moments, Alice's broken
laughter grew louder. "What a thing to say!" she cried. "What a romantic
parting--talking about HATS!"

Her laughter continued as he turned away, but other sounds came from
within the house, clearly audible with the opening of a door upstairs--a
long and wailing cry of lamentation in the voice of Mrs. Adams. Russell
paused at the steps, uncertain, but Alice waved to him to go on.

"Oh, don't bother," she said. "We have lots of that in this funny little
old house! Good-bye!"

And as he went down the steps, she ran back into the house and closed
the door heavily behind her.


CHAPTER XXIII

Her mother's wailing could still be heard from overhead, though more
faintly; and old Charley Lohr was coming down the stairs alone.

He looked at Alice compassionately. "I was just comin' to suggest maybe
you'd excuse yourself from your company," he said. "Your mother was
bound not to disturb you, and tried her best to keep you from hearin'
how she's takin' on, but I thought probably you better see to her."

"Yes, I'll come. What's the matter?"

"Well," he said, "_I_ only stepped over to offer my sympathy and
services, as it were. _I_ thought of course you folks knew all about it.
Fact is, it was in the evening paper--just a little bit of an item on
the back page, of course."

"What is it?"

He coughed. "Well, it ain't anything so terrible," he said. "Fact is,
your brother Walter's got in a little trouble--well, I suppose you might
call it quite a good deal of trouble. Fact is, he's quite considerable
short in his accounts down at Lamb and Company."

Alice ran up the stairs and into her father's room, where Mrs. Adams
threw herself into her daughter's arms. "Is he gone?" she sobbed. "He
didn't hear me, did he? I tried so hard----"

Alice patted the heaving shoulders her arms enclosed. "No, no," she
said. "He didn't hear you--it wouldn't have mattered--he doesn't matter
anyway."

"Oh, POOR Walter!" The mother cried. "Oh, the POOR boy! Poor, poor
Walter! Poor, poor, poor, POOR----"

"Hush, dear, hush!" Alice tried to soothe her, but the lament could
not be abated, and from the other side of the room a repetition in
a different spirit was as continuous. Adams paced furiously there,
pounding his fist into his left palm as he strode. "The dang boy!" he
said. "Dang little fool! Dang idiot! Dang fool! Whyn't he TELL me, the
dang little fool?"

"He DID!" Mrs. Adams sobbed. "He DID tell you, and you wouldn't GIVE it
to him."

"He DID, did he?" Adams shouted at her. "What he begged me for was money
to run away with! He never dreamed of putting back what he took. What
the dangnation you talking about--accusing me!"

"He NEEDED it," she said. "He needed it to run away with! How could he
expect to LIVE, after he got away, if he didn't have a little money? Oh,
poor, poor, POOR Walter! Poor, poor, poor----"

She went back to this repetition; and Adams went back to his own, then
paused, seeing his old friend standing in the hallway outside the open
door.

"Ah--I'll just be goin', I guess, Virgil," Lohr said. "I don't see as
there's any use my tryin' to say any more. I'll do anything you want me
to, you understand."

"Wait a minute," Adams said, and, groaning, came and went down the
stairs with him. "You say you didn't see the old man at all?"

"No, I don't know a thing about what he's going to do," Lohr said, as
they reached the lower floor. "Not a thing. But look here, Virgil,
I don't see as this calls for you and your wife to take on so hard
about--anyhow not as hard as the way you've started."

"No," Adams gulped. "It always seems that way to the other party that's
only looking on!"

"Oh, well, I know that, of course," old Charley returned, soothingly.
"But look here, Virgil: they may not catch the boy; they didn't even
seem to be sure what train he made, and if they do get him, why, the ole
man might decide not to prosecute if----"

"HIM?" Adams cried, interrupting. "Him not prosecute? Why, that's what
he's been waiting for, all along! He thinks my boy and me both cheated
him! Why, he was just letting Walter walk into a trap! Didn't you say
they'd been suspecting him for some time back? Didn't you say they'd
been watching him and were just about fixing to arrest him?"

"Yes, I know," said Lohr; "but you can't tell, especially if you raise
the money and pay it back."

"Every cent!" Adams vociferated. "Every last penny! I can raise it--I
GOT to raise it! I'm going to put a loan on my factory to-morrow. Oh,
I'll get it for him, you tell him! Every last penny!"

"Well, ole feller, you just try and get quieted down some now." Charley
held out his hand in parting. "You and your wife just quiet down some.
You AIN'T the healthiest man in the world, you know, and you already
been under quite some strain before this happened. You want to take
care of yourself for the sake of your wife and that sweet little girl
upstairs, you know. Now, good-night," he finished, stepping out upon the
veranda. "You send for me if there's anything I can do."

"Do?" Adams echoed. "There ain't anything ANYBODY can do!" And then, as
his old friend went down the path to the sidewalk, he called after him,
"You tell him I'll pay him every last cent! Every last, dang, dirty
PENNY!"

He slammed the door and went rapidly up the stairs, talking loudly to
himself. "Every dang, last, dirty penny! Thinks EVERYBODY in this family
wants to steal from him, does he? Thinks we're ALL yellow, does he?
I'll show him!" And he came into his own room vociferating, "Every last,
dang, dirty penny!"

Mrs. Adams had collapsed, and Alice had put her upon his bed, where she
lay tossing convulsively and sobbing, "Oh, POOR Walter!" over and
over, but after a time she varied the sorry tune. "Oh, poor Alice!" she
moaned, clinging to her daughter's hand. "Oh, poor, POOR Alice to have
THIS come on the night of your dinner--just when everything seemed to be
going so well--at last--oh, poor, poor, POOR----"

"Hush!" Alice said, sharply. "Don't say 'poor Alice!' I'm all right."

"You MUST be!" her mother cried, clutching her. "You've just GOT to be!
ONE of us has got to be all right--surely God wouldn't mind just ONE of
us being all right--that wouldn't hurt Him----"

"Hush, hush, mother! Hush!"

But Mrs. Adams only clutched her the more tightly. "He seemed SUCH a
nice young man, dearie! He may not see this in the paper--Mr. Lohr said
it was just a little bit of an item--he MAY not see it, dearie----"

Then her anguish went back to Walter again; and to his needs as a
fugitive--she had meant to repair his underwear, but had postponed doing
so, and her neglect now appeared to be a detail as lamentable as the
calamity itself. She could neither be stilled upon it, nor herself
exhaust its urgings to self-reproach, though she finally took up another
theme temporarily. Upon an unusually violent outbreak of her husband's,
in denunciation of the runaway, she cried out faintly that he was cruel;
and further wearied her broken voice with details of Walter's beauty as
a baby, and of his bedtime pieties throughout his infancy.

So the hot night wore on. Three had struck before Mrs. Adams was got to
bed; and Alice, returning to her own room, could hear her father's bare
feet thudding back and forth after that. "Poor papa!" she whispered in
helpless imitation of her mother. "Poor papa! Poor mama! Poor Walter!
Poor all of us!"

She fell asleep, after a time, while from across the hall the bare
feet still thudded over their changeless route; and she woke at seven,
hearing Adams pass her door, shod. In her wrapper she ran out into the
hallway and found him descending the stairs.

"Papa!"

"Hush," he said, and looked up at her with reddened eyes. "Don't wake
your mother."

"I won't," she whispered. "How about you? You haven't slept any at all!"

"Yes, I did. I got some sleep. I'm going over to the works now. I got
to throw some figures together to show the bank. Don't worry: I'll get
things fixed up. You go back to bed. Good-bye."

"Wait!" she bade him sharply.

"What for?"

"You've got to have some breakfast."

"Don't want 'ny."

"You wait!" she said, imperiously, and disappeared to return almost at
once. "I can cook in my bedroom slippers," she explained, "but I don't
believe I could in my bare feet!"

Descending softly, she made him wait in the dining-room until she
brought him toast and eggs and coffee. "Eat!" she said. "And I'm going
to telephone for a taxicab to take you, if you think you've really got
to go."

"No, I'm going to walk--I WANT to walk."

She shook her head anxiously. "You don't look able. You've walked all
night."

"No, I didn't," he returned. "I tell you I got some sleep. I got all I
wanted anyhow."

"But, papa----"

"Here!" he interrupted, looking up at her suddenly and setting down his
cup of coffee. "Look here! What about this Mr. Russell? I forgot all
about him. What about him?"

Her lip trembled a little, but she controlled it before she spoke.
"Well, what about him, papa?" she asked, calmly enough.

"Well, we could hardly----" Adams paused, frowning heavily. "We could
hardly expect he wouldn't hear something about all this."

"Yes; of course he'll hear it, papa."

"Well?"

"Well, what?" she asked, gently.

"You don't think he'd be the--the cheap kind it'd make a difference
with, of course."

"Oh, no; he isn't cheap. It won't make any difference with him."

Adams suffered a profound sigh to escape him. "Well--I'm glad of that,
anyway."

"The difference," she explained--"the difference was made without his
hearing anything about Walter. He doesn't know about THAT yet."

"Well, what does he know about?"

"Only," she said, "about me."

"What you mean by that, Alice?" he asked, helplessly.

"Never mind," she said. "It's nothing beside the real trouble we're
in--I'll tell you some time. You eat your eggs and toast; you can't keep
going on just coffee."

"I can't eat any eggs and toast," he objected, rising. "I can't."

"Then wait till I can bring you something else."

"No," he said, irritably. "I won't do it! I don't want any dang food!
And look here"--he spoke sharply to stop her, as she went toward the
telephone--"I don't want any dang taxi, either! You look after your
mother when she wakes up. I got to be at WORK!"

And though she followed him to the front door, entreating, he could not
be stayed or hindered. He went through the quiet morning streets at
a rickety, rapid gait, swinging his old straw hat in his hands, and
whispering angrily to himself as he went. His grizzled hair, not trimmed
for a month, blew back from his damp forehead in the warm breeze; his
reddened eyes stared hard at nothing from under blinking lids; and one
side of his face twitched startlingly from time to time;--children might
have run from him, or mocked him.

When he had come into that fallen quarter his industry had partly
revived and wholly made odorous, a negro woman, leaning upon her
whitewashed gate, gazed after him and chuckled for the benefit of a
gossiping friend in the next tiny yard. "Oh, good Satan! Wha'ssa matter
that ole glue man?"

"Who? Him?" the neighbour inquired. "What he do now?"

"Talkin' to his ole se'f!" the first explained, joyously. "Look like
gone distracted--ole glue man!"

Adams's legs had grown more uncertain with his hard walk, and he
stumbled heavily as he crossed the baked mud of his broad lot, but cared
little for that, was almost unaware of it, in fact. Thus his eyes saw
as little as his body felt, and so he failed to observe something that
would have given him additional light upon an old phrase that already
meant quite enough for him.

There are in the wide world people who have never learned its meaning;
but most are either young or beautifully unobservant who remain
wholly unaware of the inner poignancies the words convey: "a rain of
misfortunes." It is a boiling rain, seemingly whimsical in its choice of
spots whereon to fall; and, so far as mortal eye can tell, neither the
just nor the unjust may hope to avoid it, or need worry themselves by
expecting it. It had selected the Adams family for its scaldings; no
question.

The glue-works foreman, standing in the doorway of the brick shed,
observed his employer's eccentric approach, and doubtfully stroked a
whiskered chin.

"Well, they ain't no putticular use gettin' so upset over it," he said,
as Adams came up. "When a thing happens, why, it happens, and that's all
there is to it. When a thing's so, why, it's so. All you can do about it
is think if there's anything you CAN do; and that's what you better be
doin' with this case."

Adams halted, and seemed to gape at him. "What--case?" he said, with
difficulty. "Was it in the morning papers, too?"

"No, it ain't in no morning papers. My land! It don't need to be in no
papers; look at the SIZE of it!"

"The size of what?"

"Why, great God!" the foreman exclaimed. "He ain't even seen it. Look!
Look yonder!"

Adams stared vaguely at the man's outstretched hand and pointing
forefinger, then turned and saw a great sign upon the facade of the big
factory building across the street. The letters were large enough to be
read two blocks away.

     "AFTER THE FIFTEENTH OF NEXT MONTH
     THIS BUILDING WILL BE OCCUPIED BY
     THE J. A. LAMB LIQUID GLUE CO.  INC."


A gray touring-car had just come to rest before the principal entrance
of the building, and J. A. Lamb himself descended from it. He glanced
over toward the humble rival of his projected great industry, saw his
old clerk, and immediately walked across the street and the lot to speak
to him.

"Well, Adams," he said, in his husky, cheerful voice, "how's your
glue-works?"

Adams uttered an inarticulate sound, and lifted the hand that held his
hat as if to make a protective gesture, but failed to carry it out; and
his arm sank limp at his side. The foreman, however, seemed to feel that
something ought to be said.

"Our glue-works, hell!" he remarked. "I guess we won't HAVE no
glue-works over here not very long, if we got to compete with the sized
thing you got over there!"

Lamb chuckled. "I kind of had some such notion," he said. "You see,
Virgil, I couldn't exactly let you walk off with it like swallering a
pat o' butter, now, could I? It didn't look exactly reasonable to expect
me to let go like that, now, did it?"

Adams found a half-choked voice somewhere in his throat. "Do you--would
you step into my office a minute, Mr. Lamb?"

"Why, certainly I'm willing to have a little talk with you," the old
gentleman said, as he followed his former employee indoors, and he
added, "I feel a lot more like it than I did before I got THAT up, over
yonder, Virgil!"

Adams threw open the door of the rough room he called his office, having
as justification for this title little more than the fact that he had a
telephone there and a deal table that served as a desk. "Just step into
the office, please," he said.

Lamb glanced at the desk, at the kitchen chair before it, at the
telephone, and at the partition walls built of old boards, some covered
with ancient paint and some merely weatherbeaten, the salvage of a
house-wrecker; and he smiled broadly. "So these are your offices, are
they?" he asked. "You expect to do quite a business here, I guess, don't
you, Virgil?"

Adams turned upon him a stricken and tortured face. "Have you seen
Charley Lohr since last night, Mr. Lamb?"

"No; I haven't seen Charley."

"Well, I told him to tell you," Adams began;--"I told him I'd pay
you----"

"Pay me what you expect to make out o' glue, you mean, Virgil?"

"No," Adams said, swallowing. "I mean what my boy owes you. That's what
I told Charley to tell you. I told him to tell you I'd pay you every
last----"

"Well, well!" the old gentleman interrupted, testily. "I don't know
anything about that."

"I'm expecting to pay you," Adams went on, swallowing again, painfully.
"I was expecting to do it out of a loan I thought I could get on my
glue-works."

The old gentleman lifted his frosted eyebrows. "Oh, out o' the
GLUE-works? You expected to raise money on the glue-works, did you?"

At that, Adams's agitation increased prodigiously. "How'd you THINK I
expected to pay you?" he said. "Did you think I expected to get money on
my own old bones?" He slapped himself harshly upon the chest and legs.
"Do you think a bank'll lend money on a man's ribs and his broken-down
old knee-bones? They won't do it! You got to have some BUSINESS
prospects to show 'em, if you haven't got any property nor securities;
and what business prospects have I got now, with that sign of yours up
over yonder? Why, you don't need to make an OUNCE o' glue; your sign's
fixed ME without your doing another lick! THAT'S all you had to do; just
put your sign up! You needn't to----"

"Just let me tell you something, Virgil Adams," the old man interrupted,
harshly. "I got just one right important thing to tell you before we
talk any further business; and that's this: there's some few men in this
town made their money in off-colour ways, but there aren't many; and
those there are have had to be a darn sight slicker than you know how to
be, or ever WILL know how to be! Yes, sir, and they none of them had the
little gumption to try to make it out of a man that had the spirit not
to let 'em, and the STRENGTH not to let 'em! I know what you thought.
'Here,' you said to yourself, 'here's this ole fool J. A. Lamb; he's
kind of worn out and in his second childhood like; I can put it over on
him, without his ever----'"

"I did not!" Adams shouted. "A great deal YOU know about my feelings
and all what I said to myself! There's one thing I want to tell YOU,
and that's what I'm saying to myself NOW, and what my feelings are this
MINUTE!"

He struck the table a great blow with his thin fist, and shook the
damaged knuckles in the air. "I just want to tell you, whatever I did
feel, I don't feel MEAN any more; not to-day, I don't. There's a meaner
man in this world than _I_ am, Mr. Lamb!"

"Oh, so you feel better about yourself to-day, do you, Virgil?"

"You bet I do! You worked till you got me where you want me; and
I wouldn't do that to another man, no matter what he did to me! I
wouldn't----"

"What you talkin' about! How've I 'got you where I want you?'"

"Ain't it plain enough?" Adams cried. "You even got me where I can't
raise the money to pay back what my boy owes you! Do you suppose
anybody's fool enough to let me have a cent on this business after one
look at what you got over there across the road?"

"No, I don't."

"No, you don't," Adams echoed, hoarsely. "What's more, you knew my house
was mortgaged, and my----"

"I did not," Lamb interrupted, angrily. "What do _I_ care about your
house?"

"What's the use your talking like that?" Adams cried. "You got me where
I can't even raise the money to pay what my boy owes the company, so't
I can't show any reason to stop the prosecution and keep him out the
penitentiary. That's where you worked till you got ME!"

"What!" Lamb shouted. "You accuse me of----"

"'Accuse you?' What am I telling you? Do you think I got no EYES?" And
Adams hammered the table again. "Why, you knew the boy was weak----"

"I did not!"

"Listen: you kept him there after you got mad at my leaving the way
I did. You kept him there after you suspected him; and you had him
watched; you let him go on; just waited to catch him and ruin him!"

"You're crazy!" the old man bellowed. "I didn't know there was anything
against the boy till last night. You're CRAZY, I say!"

Adams looked it. With his hair disordered over his haggard forehead and
bloodshot eyes; with his bruised hands pounding the table and flying in
a hundred wild and absurd gestures, while his feet shuffled constantly
to preserve his balance upon staggering legs, he was the picture of a
man with a mind gone to rags.

"Maybe I AM crazy!" he cried, his voice breaking and quavering. "Maybe
I am, but I wouldn't stand there and taunt a man with it if I'd done to
him what you've done to me! Just look at me: I worked all my life for
you, and what I did when I quit never harmed you--it didn't make two
cents' worth o' difference in your life and it looked like it'd mean all
the difference in the world to my family--and now look what you've DONE
to me for it! I tell you, Mr. Lamb, there never was a man looked up to
another man the way I looked up to you the whole o' my life, but I don't
look up to you any more! You think you got a fine day of it now, riding
up in your automobile to look at that sign--and then over here at my
poor little works that you've ruined. But listen to me just this
one last time!" The cracking voice broke into falsetto, and the
gesticulating hands fluttered uncontrollably. "Just you listen!" he
panted. "You think I did you a bad turn, and now you got me ruined for
it, and you got my works ruined, and my family ruined; and if anybody'd
'a' told me this time last year I'd ever say such a thing to you I'd
called him a dang liar, but I DO say it: I say you've acted toward me
like--like a--a doggone mean--man!"

His voice, exhausted, like his body, was just able to do him this final
service; then he sank, crumpled, into the chair by the table, his chin
down hard upon his chest.

"I tell you, you're crazy!" Lamb said again. "I never in the world----"
But he checked himself, staring in sudden perplexity at his accuser.
"Look here!" he said. "What's the matter of you? Have you got another of
those----?" He put his hand upon Adams's shoulder, which jerked feebly
under the touch.

The old man went to the door and called to the foreman.

"Here!" he said. "Run and tell my chauffeur to bring my car over here.
Tell him to drive right up over the sidewalk and across the lot. Tell
him to hurry!"

So, it happened, the great J. A. Lamb a second time brought his former
clerk home, stricken and almost inanimate.


CHAPTER XXIV

About five o'clock that afternoon, the old gentleman came back to
Adams's house; and when Alice opened the door, he nodded, walked
into the "living-room" without speaking; then stood frowning as if he
hesitated to decide some perplexing question.

"Well, how is he now?" he asked, finally.

"The doctor was here again a little while ago; he thinks papa's coming
through it. He's pretty sure he will."

"Something like the way it was last spring?"

"Yes."

"Not a bit of sense to it!" Lamb said, gruffly. "When he was getting
well the other time the doctor told me it wasn't a regular stroke, so to
speak--this 'cerebral effusion' thing. Said there wasn't any particular
reason for your father to expect he'd ever have another attack, if he'd
take a little care of himself. Said he could consider himself well as
anybody else long as he did that."

"Yes. But he didn't do it!"

Lamb nodded, sighed aloud, and crossed the room to a chair. "I
guess not," he said, as he sat down. "Bustin' his health up over his
glue-works, I expect."

"Yes."

"I guess so; I guess so." Then he looked up at her with a glimmer of
anxiety in his eyes. "Has he came to yet?"

"Yes. He's talked a little. His mind's clear; he spoke to mama and me
and to Miss Perry." Alice laughed sadly. "We were lucky enough to get
her back, but papa didn't seem to think it was lucky. When he recognized
her he said, 'Oh, my goodness, 'tisn't YOU, is it!'"

"Well, that's a good sign, if he's getting a little cross. Did he--did
he happen to say anything--for instance, about me?"

This question, awkwardly delivered, had the effect of removing the
girl's pallor; rosy tints came quickly upon her cheeks. "He--yes, he
did," she said. "Naturally, he's troubled about--about----" She stopped.

"About your brother, maybe?"

"Yes, about making up the----"

"Here, now," Lamb said, uncomfortably, as she stopped again. "Listen,
young lady; let's don't talk about that just yet. I want to ask you: you
understand all about this glue business, I expect, don't you?"

"I'm not sure. I only know----"

"Let me tell you," he interrupted, impatiently. "I'll tell you all about
it in two words. The process belonged to me, and your father up and
walked off with it; there's no getting around THAT much, anyhow."

"Isn't there?" Alice stared at him. "I think you're mistaken, Mr. Lamb.
Didn't papa improve it so that it virtually belonged to him?"

There was a spark in the old blue eyes at this. "What?" he cried. "Is
that the way he got around it? Why, in all my life I never heard of such
a----" But he left the sentence unfinished; the testiness went out of
his husky voice and the anger out of his eyes. "Well, I expect maybe
that was the way of it," he said. "Anyhow, it's right for you to stand
up for your father; and if you think he had a right to it----"

"But he did!" she cried.

"I expect so," the old man returned, pacifically. "I expect so,
probably. Anyhow, it's a question that's neither here nor there, right
now. What I was thinking of saying--well, did your father happen to let
out that he and I had words this morning?"

"No."

"Well, we did." He sighed and shook his head. "Your father--well, he
used some pretty hard expressions toward me, young lady. They weren't
SO, I'm glad to say, but he used 'em to me, and the worst of it was he
believed 'em. Well, I been thinking it over, and I thought I'd just have
a kind of little talk with you to set matters straight, so to speak."

"Yes, Mr. Lamb."

"For instance," he said, "it's like this. Now, I hope you won't think I
mean any indelicacy, but you take your brother's case, since we got to
mention it, why, your father had the whole thing worked out in his mind
about as wrong as anybody ever got anything. If I'd acted the way your
father thought I did about that, why, somebody just ought to take me out
and shoot me! Do YOU know what that man thought?"

"I'm not sure."

He frowned at her, and asked, "Well, what do you think about it?"

"I don't know," she said. "I don't believe I think anything at all about
anything to-day."

"Well, well," he returned; "I expect not; I expect not. You kind of look
to me as if you ought to be in bed yourself, young lady."

"Oh, no."

"I guess you mean 'Oh, yes'; and I won't keep you long, but there's
something we got to get fixed up, and I'd rather talk to you than I
would to your mother, because you're a smart girl and always friendly;
and I want to be sure I'm understood. Now, listen."

"I will," Alice promised, smiling faintly.

"I never even hardly noticed your brother was still working for me," he
explained, earnestly. "I never thought anything about it. My sons sort
of tried to tease me about the way your father--about his taking up this
glue business, so to speak--and one day Albert, Junior, asked me if I
felt all right about your brother's staying there after that, and I told
him--well, I just asked him to shut up. If the boy wanted to stay there,
I didn't consider it my business to send him away on account of
any feeling I had toward his father; not as long as he did his work
right--and the report showed he did. Well, as it happens, it looks now
as if he stayed because he HAD to; he couldn't quit because he'd 'a'
been found out if he did. Well, he'd been covering up his shortage for a
considerable time--and do you know what your father practically charged
me with about that?"

"No, Mr. Lamb."

In his resentment, the old gentleman's ruddy face became ruddier and his
husky voice huskier. "Thinks I kept the boy there because I suspected
him! Thinks I did it to get even with HIM! Do I look to YOU like a man
that'd do such a thing?"

"No," she said, gently. "I don't think you would."

"No!" he exclaimed. "Nor HE wouldn't think so if he was himself; he's
known me too long. But he must been sort of brooding over this whole
business--I mean before Walter's trouble he must been taking it to heart
pretty hard for some time back. He thought I didn't think much of
him any more--and I expect he maybe wondered some what I was going
to DO--and there's nothing worse'n that state of mind to make a man
suspicious of all kinds of meanness. Well, he practically stood up there
and accused me to my face of fixing things so't he couldn't ever raise
the money to settle for Walter and ask us not to prosecute. That's the
state of mind your father's brooding got him into, young lady--charging
me with a trick like that!"

"I'm sorry," she said. "I know you'd never----"

The old man slapped his sturdy knee, angrily. "Why, that dang fool of a
Virgil Adams!" he exclaimed. "He wouldn't even give me a chance to talk;
and he got me so mad I couldn't hardly talk, anyway! He might 'a' known
from the first I wasn't going to let him walk in and beat me out of my
own--that is, he might 'a' known I wouldn't let him get ahead of me in
a business matter--not with my boys twitting me about it every few
minutes! But to talk to me the way he did this morning--well, he was out
of his head; that's all! Now, wait just a minute," he interposed, as she
seemed about to speak. "In the first place, we aren't going to push this
case against your brother. I believe in the law, all right, and
business men got to protect themselves; but in a case like this, where
restitution's made by the family, why, I expect it's just as well
sometimes to use a little influence and let matters drop. Of course your
brother'll have to keep out o' this state; that's all."

"But--you said----" she faltered.

"Yes. What'd I say?"

"You said, 'where restitution's made by the family.' That's what seemed
to trouble papa so terribly, because--because restitution couldn't----"

"Why, yes, it could. That's what I'm here to talk to you about."

"I don't see----"

"I'm going to TELL you, ain't I?" he said, gruffly. "Just hold your
horses a minute, please." He coughed, rose from his chair, walked up and
down the room, then halted before her. "It's like this," he said. "After
I brought your father home, this morning, there was one of the things he
told me, when he was going for me, over yonder--it kind of stuck in
my craw. It was something about all this glue controversy not meaning
anything to me in particular, and meaning a whole heap to him and his
family. Well, he was wrong about that two ways. The first one was,
it did mean a good deal to me to have him go back on me after so many
years. I don't need to say any more about it, except just to tell you it
meant quite a little more to me than you'd think, maybe. The other way
he was wrong is, that how much a thing means to one man and how little
it means to another ain't the right way to look at a business matter."

"I suppose it isn't, Mr. Lamb."

"No," he said. "It isn't. It's not the right way to look at anything.
Yes, and your father knows it as well as I do, when he's in his right
mind; and I expect that's one of the reasons he got so mad at me--but
anyhow, I couldn't help thinking about how much all this thing HAD maybe
meant to him;--as I say, it kind of stuck in my craw. I want you to tell
him something from me, and I want you to go and tell him right off, if
he's able and willing to listen. You tell him I got kind of a notion
he was pushed into this thing by circumstances, and tell him I've lived
long enough to know that circumstances can beat the best of us--you tell
him I said 'the BEST of us.' Tell him I haven't got a bit of feeling
against him--not any more--and tell him I came here to ask him not to
have any against me."

"Yes, Mr. Lamb."

"Tell him I said----" The old man paused abruptly and Alice was
surprised, in a dull and tired way, when she saw that his lips had begun
to twitch and his eyelids to blink; but he recovered himself almost
at once, and continued: "I want him to remember, 'Forgive us our
transgressions, as we forgive those that transgress against us'; and if
he and I been transgressing against each other, why, tell him I think
it's time we QUIT such foolishness!"

He coughed again, smiled heartily upon her, and walked toward the door;
then turned back to her with an exclamation: "Well, if I ain't an old
fool!"

"What is it?" she asked.

"Why, I forgot what we were just talking about! Your father wants to
settle for Walter's deficit. Tell him we'll be glad to accept it; but
of course we don't expect him to clean the matter up until he's able to
talk business again."

Alice stared at him blankly enough for him to perceive that further
explanations were necessary. "It's like this," he said. "You see, if
your father decided to keep his works going over yonder, I don't say but
he might give us some little competition for a time, 'specially as he's
got the start on us and about ready for the market. Then I was figuring
we could use his plant--it's small, but it'd be to our benefit to have
the use of it--and he's got a lease on that big lot; it may come in
handy for us if we want to expand some. Well, I'd prefer to make a deal
with him as quietly as possible---no good in every Tom, Dick and Harry
hearing about things like this--but I figured he could sell out to me
for a little something more'n enough to cover the mortgage he put on
this house, and Walter's deficit, too--THAT don't amount to much
in dollars and cents. The way I figure it, I could offer him about
ninety-three hundred dollars as a total--or say ninety-three hundred and
fifty--and if he feels like accepting, why, I'll send a confidential man
up here with the papers soon's your father's able to look 'em over. You
tell him, will you, and ask him if he sees his way to accepting that
figure?"

"Yes," Alice said; and now her own lips twitched, while her eyes filled
so that she saw but a blurred image of the old man, who held out his
hand in parting. "I'll tell him. Thank you."

He shook her hand hastily. "Well, let's just keep it kind of quiet,"
he said, at the door. "No good in every Tom, Dick and Harry knowing all
what goes on in town! You telephone me when your papa's ready to go over
the papers--and call me up at my house to-night, will you? Let me hear
how he's feeling?"

"I will," she said, and through her grateful tears gave him a smile
almost radiant. "He'll be better, Mr. Lamb. We all will."


CHAPTER XXV

One morning, that autumn, Mrs. Adams came into Alice's room, and found
her completing a sober toilet for the street; moreover, the expression
revealed in her mirror was harmonious with the business-like severity
of her attire. "What makes you look so cross, dearie?" the mother asked.
"Couldn't you find anything nicer to wear than that plain old dark
dress?"

"I don't believe I'm cross," the girl said, absently. "I believe I'm
just thinking. Isn't it about time?"

"Time for what?"

"Time for thinking--for me, I mean?"

Disregarding this, Mrs. Adams looked her over thoughtfully. "I can't see
why you don't wear more colour," she said. "At your age it's becoming
and proper, too. Anyhow, when you're going on the street, I think you
ought to look just as gay and lively as you can manage. You want to show
'em you've got some spunk!"

"How do you mean, mama?"

"I mean about Walter's running away and the mess your father made of his
business. It would help to show 'em you're holding up your head just the
same."

"Show whom!"

"All these other girls that----"

"Not I!" Alice laughed shortly, shaking her head. "I've quit dressing at
them, and if they saw me they wouldn't think what you want 'em to. It's
funny; but we don't often make people think what we want 'em to, mama.
You do thus and so; and you tell yourself, 'Now, seeing me do thus and
so, people will naturally think this and that'; but they don't. They
think something else--usually just what you DON'T want 'em to. I suppose
about the only good in pretending is the fun we get out of fooling
ourselves that we fool somebody."

"Well, but it wouldn't be pretending. You ought to let people see you're
still holding your head up because you ARE. You wouldn't want that
Mildred Palmer to think you're cast down about--well, you know you
wouldn't want HER not to think you're holding your head up, would you?"

"She wouldn't know whether I am or not, mama." Alice bit her lip, then
smiled faintly as she said:

"Anyhow, I'm not thinking about my head in that way--not this morning,
I'm not."

Mrs. Adams dropped the subject casually. "Are you going down-town?" she
inquired.

"Yes."

"What for?"

"Just something I want to see about. I'll tell you when I come back.
Anything you want me to do?"

"No; I guess not to-day. I thought you might look for a rug, but I'd
rather go with you to select it. We'll have to get a new rug for your
father's room, I expect."

"I'm glad you think so, mama. I don't suppose he's ever even noticed it,
but that old rug of his--well, really!"

"I didn't mean for him," her mother explained, thoughtfully. "No; he
don't mind it, and he'd likely make a fuss if we changed it on his
account. No; what I meant--we'll have to put your father in Walter's
room. He won't mind, I don't expect--not much."

"No, I suppose not," Alice agreed, rather sadly. "I heard the bell
awhile ago. Was it somebody about that?"

"Yes; just before I came upstairs. Mrs. Lohr gave him a note to me, and
he was really a very pleasant-looking young man. A VERY pleasant-looking
young man," Mrs. Adams repeated with increased animation and a
thoughtful glance at her daughter. "He's a Mr. Will Dickson; he has a
first-rate position with the gas works, Mrs. Lohr says, and he's fully
able to afford a nice room. So if you and I double up in here, then
with that young married couple in my room, and this Mr. Dickson in your
father's, we'll just about have things settled. I thought maybe I could
make one more place at table, too, so that with the other people from
outside we'd be serving eleven altogether. You see if I have to pay this
cook twelve dollars a week--it can't be helped, I guess--well, one more
would certainly help toward a profit. Of course it's a terribly worrying
thing to see how we WILL come out. Don't you suppose we could squeeze in
one more?"

"I suppose it COULD be managed; yes."

Mrs. Adams brightened. "I'm sure it'll be pleasant having that young
married couple in the house and especially this Mr. Will Dickson. He
seemed very much of a gentleman, and anxious to get settled in good
surroundings. I was very favourably impressed with him in every way; and
he explained to me about his name; it seems it isn't William, it's just
'Will'; his parents had him christened that way. It's curious." She
paused, and then, with an effort to seem casual, which veiled nothing
from her daughter: "It's QUITE curious," she said again. "But it's
rather attractive and different, don't you think?"

"Poor mama!" Alice laughed compassionately. "Poor mama!"

"He is, though," Mrs. Adams maintained. "He's very much of a gentleman,
unless I'm no judge of appearances; and it'll really be nice to have him
in the house."

"No doubt," Alice said, as she opened her door to depart. "I don't
suppose we'll mind having any of 'em as much as we thought we would.
Good-bye."

But her mother detained her, catching her by the arm. "Alice, you do
hate it, don't you!"

"No," the girl said, quickly. "There wasn't anything else to do."

Mrs. Adams became emotional at once: her face cried tragedy, and her
voice misfortune. "There MIGHT have been something else to do! Oh,
Alice, you gave your father bad advice when you upheld him in taking a
miserable little ninety-three hundred and fifty from that old wretch! If
your father'd just had the gumption to hold out, they'd have had to pay
him anything he asked. If he'd just had the gumption and a little manly
COURAGE----"

"Hush!" Alice whispered, for her mother's voice grew louder. "Hush!
He'll hear you, mama."

"Could he hear me too often?" the embittered lady asked. "If he'd
listened to me at the right time, would we have to be taking in boarders
and sinking DOWN in the scale at the end of our lives, instead of going
UP? You were both wrong; we didn't need to be so panicky--that was just
what that old man wanted: to scare us and buy us out for nothing! If
your father'd just listened to me then, or if for once in his life he'd
just been half a MAN----"

Alice put her hand over her mother's mouth. "You mustn't! He WILL hear
you!"

But from the other side of Adams's closed door his voice came
querulously. "Oh, I HEAR her, all right!"

"You see, mama?" Alice said, and, as Mrs. Adams turned away, weeping,
the daughter sighed; then went in to speak to her father.

He was in his old chair by the table, with a pillow behind his head,
but the crocheted scarf and Mrs. Adams's wrapper swathed him no more;
he wore a dressing-gown his wife had bought for him, and was smoking his
pipe. "The old story, is it?" he said, as Alice came in. "The same, same
old story! Well, well! Has she gone?"

"Yes, papa."

"Got your hat on," he said. "Where you going?"

"I'm going down-town on an errand of my own. Is there anything you want,
papa?"

"Yes, there is." He smiled at her. "I wish you'd sit down a while and
talk to me unless your errand----"

"No," she said, taking a chair near him. "I was just going down to see
about some arrangements I was making for myself. There's no hurry."

"What arrangements for yourself, dearie?"

"I'll tell you afterwards--after I find out something about 'em myself."

"All right," he said, indulgently. "Keep your secrets; keep your
secrets." He paused, drew musingly upon his pipe, and shook his head.
"Funny--the way your mother looks at things! For the matter o' that,
everything's pretty funny, I expect, if you stop to think about it. For
instance, let her say all she likes, but we were pushed right spang to
the wall, if J. A. Lamb hadn't taken it into his head to make that
offer for the works; and there's one of the things I been thinking about
lately, Alice: thinking about how funny they work out."

"What did you think about it, papa!"

"Well, I've seen it happen in other people's lives, time and time again;
and now it's happened in ours. You think you're going to be pushed right
up against the wall; you can't see any way out, or any hope at all; you
think you're GONE--and then something you never counted on turns up;
and, while maybe you never do get back to where you used to be, yet
somehow you kind of squirm out of being right SPANG against the wall.
You keep on going--maybe you can't go much, but you do go a little. See
what I mean?"

"Yes. I understand, dear."

"Yes, I'm afraid you do," he said. "Too bad! You oughtn't to understand
it at your age. It seems to me a good deal as if the Lord really meant
for the young people to have the good times, and for the old to have
the troubles; and when anybody as young as you has trouble there's a big
mistake somewhere."

"Oh, no!" she protested.

But he persisted whimsically in this view of divine error: "Yes, it
does look a good deal that way. But of course we can't tell; we're never
certain about anything--not about anything at all. Sometimes I look at
it another way, though. Sometimes it looks to me as if a body's troubles
came on him mainly because he hadn't had sense enough to know how not to
have any--as if his troubles were kind of like a boy's getting kept in
after school by the teacher, to give him discipline, or something or
other. But, my, my! We don't learn easy!" He chuckled mournfully. "Not
to learn how to live till we're about ready to die, it certainly seems
to me dang tough!"

"Then I wouldn't brood on such a notion, papa," she said.

"'Brood?' No!" he returned. "I just kind o' mull it over." He chuckled
again, sighed, and then, not looking at her, he said, "That Mr.
Russell--your mother tells me he hasn't been here again--not since----"

"No," she said, quietly, as Adams paused. "He never came again."

"Well, but maybe----"

"No," she said. "There isn't any 'maybe.' I told him good-bye that
night, papa. It was before he knew about Walter--I told you."

"Well, well," Adams said. "Young people are entitled to their own
privacy; I don't want to pry." He emptied his pipe into a chipped saucer
on the table beside him, laid the pipe aside, and reverted to a former
topic. "Speaking of dying----"

"Well, but we weren't!" Alice protested.

"Yes, about not knowing how to live till you're through living--and THEN
maybe not!" he said, chuckling at his own determined pessimism. "I see
I'm pretty old because I talk this way--I remember my grandmother saying
things a good deal like all what I'm saying now; I used to hear her
at it when I was a young fellow--she was a right gloomy old lady, I
remember. Well, anyhow, it reminds me: I want to get on my feet again as
soon as I can; I got to look around and find something to go into."

Alice shook her head gently. "But, papa, he told you----"

"Never mind throwing that dang doctor up at me!" Adams interrupted,
peevishly. "He said I'd be good for SOME kind of light job--if I could
find just the right thing. 'Where there wouldn't be either any physical
or mental strain,' he said. Well, I got to find something like that.
Anyway, I'll feel better if I can just get out LOOKING for it."

"But, papa, I'm afraid you won't find it, and you'll be disappointed."

"Well, I want to hunt around and SEE, anyhow."

Alice patted his hand. "You must just be contented, papa. Everything's
going to be all right, and you mustn't get to worrying about doing
anything. We own this house it's all clear--and you've taken care of
mama and me all our lives; now it's our turn."

"No, sir!" he said, querulously. "I don't like the idea of being the
landlady's husband around a boarding-house; it goes against my gizzard.
_I_ know: makes out the bills for his wife Sunday mornings--works with
a screw-driver on somebody's bureau drawer sometimes--'tends the furnace
maybe--one the boarders gives him a cigar now and then. That's a FINE
life to look forward to! No, sir; I don't want to finish as a landlady's
husband!"

Alice looked grave; for she knew the sketch was but too accurately
prophetic in every probability. "But, papa," she said, to console him,
"don't you think maybe there isn't such a thing as a 'finish,' after
all! You say perhaps we don't learn to live till we die but maybe that's
how it is AFTER we die, too--just learning some more, the way we do
here, and maybe through trouble again, even after that."

"Oh, it might be," he sighed. "I expect so."

"Well, then," she said, "what's the use of talking about a 'finish?' We
do keep looking ahead to things as if they'd finish something, but when
we get TO them, they don't finish anything. They're just part of going
on. I'll tell you--I looked ahead all summer to something I was afraid
of, and I said to myself, 'Well, if that happens, I'm finished!' But it
wasn't so, papa. It did happen, and nothing's finished; I'm going on,
just the same only----" She stopped and blushed.

"Only what?" he asked.

"Well----" She blushed more deeply, then jumped up, and, standing before
him, caught both his hands in hers. "Well, don't you think, since we do
have to go on, we ought at least to have learned some sense about how to
do it?"

He looked up at her adoringly.

"What _I_ think," he said, and his voice trembled;--"I think you're
the smartest girl in the world! I wouldn't trade you for the whole
kit-and-boodle of 'em!"

But as this folly of his threatened to make her tearful, she kissed him
hastily, and went forth upon her errand.

Since the night of the tragic-comic dinner she had not seen Russell, nor
caught even the remotest chance glimpse of him; and it was curious that
she should encounter him as she went upon such an errand as now engaged
her. At a corner, not far from that tobacconist's shop she had just left
when he overtook her and walked with her for the first time, she met him
to-day. He turned the corner, coming toward her, and they were face to
face; whereupon that engaging face of Russell's was instantly reddened,
but Alice's remained serene.

She stopped short, though; and so did he; then she smiled brightly as
she put out her hand.

"Why, Mr. Russell!"

"I'm so--I'm so glad to have this--this chance," he stammered. "I've
wanted to tell you--it's just that going into a new undertaking--this
business life--one doesn't get to do a great many things he'd like to. I
hope you'll let me call again some time, if I can."

"Yes, do!" she said, cordially, and then, with a quick nod, went briskly
on.

She breathed more rapidly, but knew that he could not have detected it,
and she took some pride in herself for the way she had met this little
crisis. But to have met it with such easy courage meant to her something
more reassuring than a momentary pride in the serenity she had shown.
For she found that what she had resolved in her inmost heart was now
really true: she was "through with all that!"

She walked on, but more slowly, for the tobacconist's shop was not far
from her now--and, beyond it, that portal of doom, Frincke's Business
College. Already Alice could read the begrimed gilt letters of the
sign; and although they had spelled destiny never with a more painful
imminence than just then, an old habit of dramatizing herself still
prevailed with her.

There came into her mind a whimsical comparison of her fate with that
of the heroine in a French romance she had read long ago and remembered
well, for she had cried over it. The story ended with the heroine's
taking the veil after a death blow to love; and the final scene again
became vivid to Alice, for a moment. Again, as when she had read
and wept, she seemed herself to stand among the great shadows in the
cathedral nave; smelled the smoky incense on the enclosed air, and heard
the solemn pulses of the organ. She remembered how the novice's father
knelt, trembling, beside a pillar of gray stone; how the faithless lover
watched and shivered behind the statue of a saint; how stifled sobs and
outcries were heard when the novice came to the altar; and how a shaft
of light struck through the rose-window, enveloping her in an amber
glow.

It was the vision of a moment only, and for no longer than a moment did
Alice tell herself that the romance provided a prettier way of taking
the veil than she had chosen, and that a faithless lover, shaking with
remorse behind a saint's statue, was a greater solace than one left on a
street corner protesting that he'd like to call some time--if he could!
Her pity for herself vanished more reluctantly; but she shook it off and
tried to smile at it, and at her romantic recollections--at all of them.
She had something important to think of.

She passed the tobacconist's, and before her was that dark entrance to
the wooden stairway leading up to Frincke's Business College--the very
doorway she had always looked upon as the end of youth and the end of
hope.

How often she had gone by here, hating the dreary obscurity of that
stairway; how often she had thought of this obscurity as something lying
in wait to obliterate the footsteps of any girl who should ascend into
the smoky darkness above! Never had she passed without those ominous
imaginings of hers: pretty girls turning into old maids "taking
dictation"--old maids of a dozen different types, yet all looking a
little like herself.

Well, she was here at last! She looked up and down the street quickly,
and then, with a little heave of the shoulders, she went bravely in,
under the sign, and began to climb the wooden steps. Half-way up the
shadows were heaviest, but after that the place began to seem brighter.
There was an open window overhead somewhere, she found; and the steps at
the top were gay with sunshine.