Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgpd.net.


MOB RULE IN NEW ORLEANS:
ROBERT CHARLES AND HIS FIGHT TO DEATH,
THE STORY OF HIS LIFE,
BURNING HUMAN BEINGS ALIVE,
OTHER LYNCHING STATISTICS

BY

IDA B. WELLS-BARNETT

1900


[Transcriber's Note: This pamphlet was first published in 1900 but was
subsequently reprinted. It's not apparent if the curiosities in spelling
date back to the original or were introduced later; they have been
retained as found, and the reader is left to decide. Please verify with
another source before quoting this material. Of special note are the names
Cantrell/Cantrelle, Porteous/Porteus, and Ziegel/Zeigel.]


+INTRODUCTION+

Immediately after the awful barbarism which disgraced the State of Georgia
in April of last year, during which time more than a dozen colored people
were put to death with unspeakable barbarity, I published a full report
showing that Sam Hose, who was burned to death during that time, never
committed a criminal assault, and that he killed his employer in
self-defense.

Since that time I have been engaged on a work not yet finished, which I
interrupt now to tell the story of the mob in New Orleans, which,
despising all law, roamed the streets day and night, searching for colored
men and women, whom they beat, shot and killed at will.

In the account of the New Orleans mob I have used freely the graphic
reports of the _New Orleans Times-Democrat_ and the _New Orleans
Picayune_. Both papers gave the most minute details of the week's
disorder. In their editorial comment they were at all times most urgent in
their defense of law and in the strongest terms they condemned the
infamous work of the mob.

It is no doubt owing to the determined stand for law and order taken by
these great dailies and the courageous action taken by the best citizens
of New Orleans, who rallied to the support of the civic authorities, that
prevented a massacre of colored people awful to contemplate.

For the accounts and illustrations taken from the above-named journals,
sincere thanks are hereby expressed.

[Illustration]

The publisher hereof does not attempt to moralize over the deplorable
condition of affairs shown in this publication, but simply presents the
facts in a plain, unvarnished, connected way, so that he who runs may
read. We do not believe that the American people who have encouraged such
scenes by their indifference will read unmoved these accounts of
brutality, injustice and oppression. We do not believe that the moral
conscience of the nation--that which is highest and best among us--will
always remain silent in face of such outrages, for God is not dead, and
His Spirit is not entirely driven from men's hearts.

When this conscience wakes and speaks out in thunder tones, as it must, it
will need facts to use as a weapon against injustice, barbarism and wrong.
It is for this reason that I carefully compile, print and send forth these
facts. If the reader can do no more, he can pass this pamphlet on to
another, or send to the bureau addresses of those to whom he can order
copies mailed.

Besides the New Orleans case, a history of burnings in this country is
given, together with a table of lynchings for the past eighteen years.
Those who would like to assist in the work of disseminating these facts,
can do so by ordering copies, which are furnished at greatly reduced
rates for gratuitous distribution. The bureau has no funds and is entirely
dependent upon contributions from friends and members in carrying on the
work.

Ida B. Wells-Barnett
Chicago, Sept. 1, 1900


MOB RULE IN NEW ORLEANS


+SHOT AN OFFICER+

The bloodiest week which New Orleans has known since the massacre of the
Italians in 1892 was ushered in Monday, July 24, by the inexcusable and
unprovoked assault upon two colored men by police officers of New Orleans.
Fortified by the assurance born of long experience in the New Orleans
service, three policemen, Sergeant Aucoin, Officer Mora and Officer
Cantrelle, observing two colored men sitting on doorsteps on Dryades
street, between Washington Avenue and 6th Streets, determined, without a
shadow of authority, to arrest them. One of the colored men was named
Robert Charles, the other was a lad of nineteen named Leonard Pierce. The
colored men had left their homes, a few blocks distant, about an hour
prior, and had been sitting upon the doorsteps for a short time talking
together. They had not broken the peace in any way whatever, no warrant
was in the policemen's hands justifying their arrest, and no crime had
been committed of which they were the suspects. The policemen, however,
secure in the firm belief that they could do anything to a Negro that they
wished, approached the two men, and in less than three minutes from the
time they accosted them attempted to put both colored men under arrest.
The younger of the two men, Pierce, submitted to arrest, for the officer,
Cantrelle, who accosted him, put his gun in the young man's face ready to
blow his brains out if he moved. The other colored man, Charles, was made
the victim of a savage attack by Officer Mora, who used a billet and then
drew a gun and tried to kill Charles. Charles drew his gun nearly as
quickly as the policeman, and began a duel in the street, in which both
participants were shot. The policeman got the worst of the duel, and fell
helpless to the sidewalk. Charles made his escape. Cantrelle took Pierce,
his captive, to the police station, to which place Mora, the wounded
officer, was also taken, and a man hunt at once instituted for Charles,
the wounded fugitive.

In any law-abiding community Charles would have been justified in
delivering himself up immediately to the properly constituted authorities
and asking a trial by a jury of his peers. He could have been certain that
in resisting an unwarranted arrest he had a right to defend his life, even
to the point of taking one in that defense, but Charles knew that his
arrest in New Orleans, even for defending his life, meant nothing short of
a long term in the penitentiary, and still more probable death by lynching
at the hands of a cowardly mob. He very bravely determined to protect his
life as long as he had breath in his body and strength to draw a hair
trigger on his would-be murderers. How well he was justified in that
belief is well shown by the newspaper accounts which were given of this
transaction. Without a single line of evidence to justify the assertion,
the New Orleans daily papers at once declared that both Pierce and Charles
were desperadoes, that they were contemplating a burglary and that they
began the assault upon the policemen. It is interesting to note how the
two leading papers of New Orleans, the _Picayune_ and the
_Times-Democrat_, exert themselves to justify the policemen in the
absolutely unprovoked attack upon the two colored men. As these two papers
did all in their power to give an excuse for the action of the policemen,
it is interesting to note their versions. The _Times-Democrat_ of Tuesday
morning, the twenty-fifth, says:

  Two blacks, who are desperate men, and no doubt will be proven burglars,
  made it interesting and dangerous for three bluecoats on Dryades street,
  between Washington Avenue and Sixth Street, the Negroes using pistols
  first and dropping Patrolman Mora. But the desperate darkies did not go
  free, for the taller of the two, Robinson, is badly wounded and under
  cover, while Leonard Pierce is in jail.

  For a long time that particular neighborhood has been troubled with bad
  Negroes, and the neighbors were complaining to the Sixth Precinct police
  about them. But of late Pierce and Robinson had been camping on a door
  step on the street, and the people regarded their actions as suspicious.
  It got to such a point that some of the residents were afraid to go to
  bed, and last night this was told Sergeant Aucoin, who was rounding up
  his men. He had just picked up Officers Mora and Cantrell, on Washington
  Avenue and Dryades Street, and catching a glimpse of the blacks on the
  steps, he said he would go over and warn the men to get away from the
  street. So the patrolmen followed, and Sergeant Aucoin asked the smaller
  fellow, Pierce, if he lived there. The answer was short and impertinent,
  the black saying he did not, and with that both Pierce and Robinson drew
  up to their full height.

  For the moment the sergeant did not think that the Negroes meant fight,
  and he was on the point of ordering them away when Robinson slipped his
  pistol from his pocket. Pierce had his revolver out, too, and he fired
  twice, point blank at the sergeant, and just then Robinson began
  shooting at the patrolmen. In a second or so the policemen and blacks
  were fighting with their revolvers, the sergeant having a duel with
  Pierce, while Cantrell and Mora drew their line of fire on Robinson, who
  was working his revolver for all he was worth. One of his shots took
  Mora in the right hip, another caught his index finger on the right
  hand, and a third struck the small finger of the left hand. Poor Mora
  was done for; he could not fight any more, but Cantrell kept up his
  fire, being answered by the big black. Pierce's revolver broke down, the
  cartridges snapping, and he threw up his hands, begging for quarter.

  The sergeant lowered his pistol and some citizens ran over to where the
  shooting was going on. One of the bullets that went at Robinson caught
  him in the breast and he began running, turning out Sixth Street, with
  Cantrell behind him, shooting every few steps. He was loading his
  revolver again, but did not use it after the start he took, and in a
  little while Officer Cantrell lost the man in the darkness.

  Pierce was made a prisoner and hurried to the Sixth Precinct police
  station, where he was charged with shooting and wounding. The sergeant
  sent for an ambulance, and Mora was taken to the hospital, the wound in
  the hip being serious.

  A search was made for Robinson, but he could not be found, and even at 2
  o'clock this morning Captain Day, with Sergeant Aucoin and Corporals
  Perrier and Trenchard, with a good squad of men, were beating the weeds
  for the black.

The _New Orleans Picayune_ of the same date described the occurrence, and
from its account one would think it was an entirely different affair. Both
of the two accounts cannot be true, and the unquestioned fact is that
neither of them sets out the facts as they occurred. Both accounts attempt
to fix the beginning of hostilities upon the colored men, but both were
compelled to admit that the colored men were sitting on the doorsteps
quietly conversing with one another when the three policemen went up and
accosted them. The _Times-Democrat_ unguardedly states that one of the two
colored men tried to run away; that Mora seized him and then drew his
billy and struck him on the head; that Charles broke away from him and
started to run, after which the shooting began. The _Picayune_, however,
declares that Pierce began the firing and that his two shots point blank
at Aucoin were the first shots of the fight. As a matter of fact, Pierce
never fired a single shot before he was covered by Aucoin's revolver.
Charles and the officers did all the shooting. The _Picayune_'s account is
as follows:

  Patrolman Mora was shot in the right hip and dangerously wounded last
  night at 11:30 o'clock in Dryades Street, between Washington and Sixth,
  by two Negroes, who were sitting on a door step in the neighborhood.

  The shooting of Patrolman Mora brings to memory the fact that he was one
  of the partners of Patrolman Trimp, who was shot by a Negro soldier of
  the United States government during the progress of the Spanish-American
  war. The shooting of Mora by the Negro last night is a very simple
  story. At the hour mentioned, three Negro women noticed two suspicious
  men sitting on a door step in the above locality. The women saw the two
  men making an apparent inspection of the building. As they told the
  story, they saw the men look over the fence and examine the window
  blinds, and they paid particular attention to the make-up of the
  building, which was a two-story affair. About that time Sergeant J.C.
  Aucoin and Officers Mora and J.D. Cantrell hove in sight. The women
  hailed them and described to them the suspicious actions of the two
  Negroes, who were still sitting on the step. The trio of bluecoats, on
  hearing the facts, at once crossed the street and accosted the men. The
  latter answered that they were waiting for a friend whom they were
  expecting. Not satisfied with this answer, the sergeant asked them where
  they lived, and they replied "down town," but could not designate the
  locality. To other questions put by the officers the larger of the two
  Negroes replied that they had been in town just three days.

  As this reply was made, the larger man sprang to his feet, and Patrolman
  Mora, seeing that he was about to run away, seized him. The Negro took a
  firm hold on the officer, and a scuffle ensued. Mora, noting that he was
  not being assisted by his brother officers, drew his billy and struck
  the Negro on the head. The blow had but little effect upon the man, for
  he broke away and started down the street. When about ten feet away, the
  Negro drew his revolver and opened fire on the officer, firing three or
  four shots. The third shot struck Mora in the right hip, and was
  subsequently found to have taken an upward course. Although badly
  wounded, Mora drew his pistol and returned the fire. At his third shot
  the Negro was noticed to stagger, but he did not fall. He continued his
  flight. At this moment Sergeant Aucoin seized the other Negro, who
  proved to be a youth, Leon Pierce. As soon as Officer Mora was shot he
  sank to the sidewalk, and the other officer ran to the nearest
  telephone, and sent in a call for the ambulance. Upon its arrival the
  wounded officer was placed in it and conveyed to the hospital. An
  examination by the house surgeon revealed the fact that the bullet had
  taken an upward course. In the opinion of the surgeon the wound was a
  dangerous one.

But the best proof of the fact that the officers accosted the two colored
men and without any warrant or other justification attempted to arrest
them, and did actually seize and begin to club one of them, is shown by
Officer Mora's own statement. The officer was wounded and had every reason
in the world to make his side of the story as good as possible. His
statement was made to a _Picayune_ reporter and the same was published on
the twenty-fifth inst., and is as follows:

  I was in the neighborhood of Dryades and Washington Streets, with
  Sergeant Aucoin and Officer Cantrell, when three Negro women came up and
  told us that there were two suspicious-looking Negroes sitting on a step
  on Dryades Street, between Washington and Sixth. We went to the place
  indicated and found two Negroes. We interrogated them as to who they
  were, what they were doing and how long they had been here. They replied
  that they were working for some one and had been in town three days. At
  about this stage the larger of the two Negroes got up and I grabbed him.
  The Negro pulled, but I held fast, and he finally pulled me into the
  street. Here I began using my billet, and the Negro jerked from my grasp
  and ran. He then pulled a gun and fired. I pulled my gun and returned
  the fire, each of us firing about three shots. I saw the Negro stumble
  several times, and I thought I had shot him, but he ran away and I don't
  know whether any of my shots took effect. Sergeant Aucoin in the
  meantime held the other man fast. The man was about ten feet from me
  when he fired, and the three Negresses who told us about the men stood
  away about twenty-five feet from the shooting.

Thus far in the proceeding the Monday night episode results in Officer
Mora lying in the station wounded in the hip; Leonard Pierce, one of the
colored men, locked up in the station, and Robert Charles, the other
colored man, a fugitive, wounded in the leg and sought for by the entire
police force of New Orleans. Not sought for, however, to be placed under
arrest and given a fair trial and punished if found guilty according to
the law of the land, but sought for by a host of enraged, vindictive and
fearless officers, who were coolly ordered to kill him on sight. This
order is shown by the _Picayune_ of the twenty-sixth inst., in which the
following statement appears:

  In talking to the sergeant about the case, the captain asked about the
  Negro's fighting ability, and the sergeant answered that Charles, though
  he called him Robinson then, was a desperate man, and it would be best
  to shoot him before he was given a chance to draw his pistol upon any of
  the officers.

This instruction was given before anybody had been killed, and the only
evidence that Charles was a desperate man lay in the fact that he had
refused to be beaten over the head by Officer Mora for sitting on a step
quietly conversing with a friend. Charles resisted an absolutely unlawful
attack, and a gun fight followed. Both Mora and Charles were shot, but
because Mora was white and Charles was black, Charles was at once declared
to be a desperado, made an outlaw, and subsequently a price put upon his
head and the mob authorized to shoot him like a dog, on sight.

The New Orleans _Picayune_ of Wednesday morning said:

  But he has gone, perhaps to the swamps, and the disappointment of the
  bluecoats in not getting the murderer is expressed in their curses, each
  man swearing that the signal to halt that will be offered Charles will
  be a shot.

In that same column of the _Picayune_ it was said:

  Hundreds of policemen were about; each corner was guarded by a squad,
  commanded either by a sergeant or a corporal, and every man had the word
  to shoot the Negro as soon as he was sighted. He was a desperate black
  and would be given no chance to take more life.

Legal sanction was given to the mob or any man of the mob to kill Charles
at sight by the Mayor of New Orleans, who publicly proclaimed a reward of
two hundred and fifty dollars, not for the arrest of Charles, not at all,
but the reward was offered for Charles's body, "dead or alive." The
advertisement was as follows:

  +$250 REWARD+

  Under the authority vested in me by law, I hereby offer, in the name of
  the city of New Orleans, $250 reward for the capture and delivery, dead
  or alive, to the authorities of the city, the body of the Negro
  murderer,

  +ROBERT CHARLES+,

  who, on Tuesday morning, July 24, shot and killed

  Police Captain John T. Day and Patrolman Peter J. Lamb, and wounded

  Patrolman August T. Mora.

  PAUL CAPDEVIELLE, Mayor

This authority, given by the sergeant to kill Charles on sight, would have
been no news to Charles, nor to any colored man in New Orleans, who, for
any purpose whatever, even to save his life, raised his hand against a
white man. It is now, even as it was in the days of slavery, an
unpardonable sin for a Negro to resist a white man, no matter how unjust
or unprovoked the white man's attack may be. Charles knew this, and
knowing to be captured meant to be killed, he resolved to sell his life as
dearly as possible.

The next step in the terrible tragedy occurred between 2:30 and 5 o'clock
Tuesday morning, about four hours after the affair on Dryades Street. The
man hunt, which had been inaugurated soon after Officer Mora had been
carried to the station, succeeded in running down Robert Charles, the
wounded fugitive, and located him at 2023 4th Street. It was nearly 2
o'clock in the morning when a large detail of police surrounded the block
with the intent to kill Charles on sight. Capt. Day had charge of the
squad of police. Charles, the wounded man, was in his house when the
police arrived, fully prepared, as results afterward showed, to die in his
own home. Capt. Day started for Charles's room. As soon as Charles got
sight of him there was a flash, a report, and Day fell dead in his tracks.
In another instant Charles was standing in the door, and seeing Patrolman
Peter J. Lamb, he drew his gun, and Lamb fell dead. Two other officers,
Sergeant Aucoin and Officer Trenchard, who were in the squad, seeing their
comrades, Day and Lamb, fall dead, concluded to raise the siege, and both
disappeared into an adjoining house, where they blew out their lights so
that their cowardly carcasses could be safe from Charles's deadly aim. The
calibre of their courage is well shown by the fact that they concluded to
save themselves from any harm by remaining prisoners in that dark room
until daybreak, out of reach of Charles's deadly rifle. Sergeant Aucoin,
who had been so brave a few hours before when seeing the two colored men
sitting on the steps, talking together on Dryades Street, and supposing
that neither was armed, now showed his true calibre. Now he knew that
Charles had a gun and was brave enough to use it, so he hid himself in a
room two hours while Charles deliberately walked out of his room and into
the street after killing both Lamb and Day. It is also shown, as further
evidence of the bravery of some of New Orleans' "finest," that one of
them, seeing Capt. Day fall, ran seven blocks before he stopped,
afterwards giving the excuse that he was hunting for a patrol box.

At daybreak the officers felt safe to renew the attack upon Charles, so
they broke into his room, only to find that--what they probably very well
knew--he had gone. It appears that he made his escape by crawling through
a hole in the ceiling to a little attic in his house. Here he found that
he could not escape except by a window which led into an alley, which had
no opening on 4th Street. He scaled the fence and was soon out of reach.

It was now 5 o'clock Tuesday morning, and a general alarm was given.
Sergeant Aucoin and Corporal Trenchard, having received a new supply of
courage by returning daylight, renewed their effort to capture the man
that they had allowed to escape in the darkness. Citizens were called upon
to participate in the man hunt and New Orleans was soon the scene of
terrible excitement. Officers were present everywhere, and colored men
were arrested on all sides upon the pretext that they were impertinent and
"game niggers." An instance is mentioned in the _Times-Democrat_ of the
twenty-fifth and shows the treatment which unoffending colored men
received at the hands of some of the officers. This instance shows
Corporal Trenchard, who displayed such remarkable bravery on Monday night
in dodging Charles's revolver, in his true light. It shows how brave a
white man is when he has a gun attacking a Negro who is a helpless
prisoner. The account is as follows:

