The term is capable of being given a wider meaning.  While no one
could appropriately speak of our having a _right_ to health or
anything that man has not the power to bestow, it is arguable that
there are, independent of and antecedent to law, elementary rights: a
right to freedom; a right to protection against personal violence; a
right to the protection of our property; and a right to the impartial
administration of regulations which are binding upon all. Such a use
of the term _right_ could be justified on the ground that everybody
would be willing to make personal sacrifices, and to combine with his
fellows for the purpose of securing these essentials--an understanding
which would almost amount to legal sanction.

The suffragist who employs the term "Woman's _Rights_" does not employ
the word rights in either of these senses. Her case is analogous to
that of a man who should in a republic argue about the divine _right_
of kings; or that of the Liberal who should argue that it was his
_right_ to live permanently under a Liberal government; or of any
member of a minority who should, with a view of getting what he wants,
argue that he was contending only for his rights.

The woman suffragist is merely bluffing.  Her formula "_Woman's
Rights_" means simply "_Woman's Claims_."

For the moment--for we shall presently be coming back to the question
of the enforcement of rights--our task is to examine the arguments
which the suffragist brings forward in support of her claims.

First and chief among these is the argument that the _Principle of
Justice_ prescribes that women should be enfranchised.

When we inquire what the suffragist understands under the Principle of
Justice, one receives by way of answer only the _petitio principii
[question begging]_ that Justice is a moral principle which includes
woman suffrage among its implications.

In reality it is only very few who clearly apprehend the nature of
Justice. For under this appellation two quite different principles are
confounded.

The primary and correct signification of the term Justice will perhaps
be best arrived at by pursuing the following train of considerations:--

When man, long impatient at arbitrary and quite incalculable
autocratic judgments, proceeded to build up a legal system to take the
place of these, he built it upon the following series of
axioms:--(_a_) All actions of which the courts are to take cognisance
shall be classified. (_b_) The legal consequences of each class of
action shall be definitely fixed. (_c_) The courts shall adjudicate
only on questions of fact, and on the issue as to how the particular
deed which is the cause of action should be classified. And (_d_) such
decisions shall carry with them in an automatic manner the appointed
legal consequences.

For example, if a man be arraigned for the appropriation of another
man's goods, it is an axiom that the court (when once the questions of
fact have been disposed of) shall adjudicate only on the issue as to
whether the particular appropriation of goods in dispute comes under
the denomination of larceny, burglary, or other co-ordinate category;
and that upon this the sentence shall go forth: directing that the
legal consequences which are appointed to that particular class of
action be enforced.

This is the system every one can see administered in every court of
justice.

There is, however, over and above what has just been set out another
essential element in Justice. It is an element which readily escapes
the eye.

I have in view the fact that the classifications which are adopted and
embodied in the law must not be arbitrary classifications. They must
all be conformable to the principle of utility, and be directed to the
advantage of society.

If, for instance, burglary is placed in a class apart from larceny, it
is discriminated from it because this distinction is demanded by
considerations of public advantage. But considerations of utility
would not countenance, and by consequence Justice would not accept, a
classification of theft into theft committed by a poor man and theft
committed by a rich man.

The conception of Justice is thus everywhere interfused with
considerations of utility and expediency.

It will have become plain that if we have in view the justice which is
administered in the courts--we may here term it _Juridical
Justice_--then the question as to whether it is _just_ to refuse the
suffrage to woman will be determined by considering whether the
classification of men as voters and of women as non-voters is in the
public interest. Put otherwise, the question whether it would be just
that woman should have a vote would require the answer "Yes" or "No,"
according as the question whether it would be expedient or inexpedient
that woman should vote required the answer "Yes" or "No." But it would
be for the electorate, not for the woman suffragist, to decide that
question.

There is, as already indicated, another principle which passes under
the name of Justice. I have in view the principle that in the
distribution of wealth or political power, or any other privileges
which it is in the power of the State to bestow, every man should
share equally with every other man, and every woman equally with every
man, and that in countries where Europeans and natives live side by
side, these latter should share all privileges equally with the
white--the goal of endeavour being that all distinctions depending
upon natural endowment, sex, and race should be effaced.

We may call this principle the _Principle of Egalitarian
Equity_--first, because it aims at establishing a quite artificial
equality; secondly, because it makes appeal to our ethical instincts,
and claims on that ground to override the distinctions of which formal
law takes account.

But let us reflect that we have here a principle which properly
understood, embraces in its purview all mankind, and not mankind only
but also the lower animals. That is to say, we have here a principle,
which consistently followed out, would make of every man and woman _in
primis [at first]_ a socialist; then a woman suffragist; then a
philo-native, negrophil, and an advocate of the political rights of
natives and negroes; and then, by logical compulsion ant
anti-vivisectionist, who accounts it _unjust_ to experiment on an
animal; a vegetarian, who accounts it _unjust_ to kill animals for
food; and findly one who, like the Jains, accounts it unjust to take
the life of even verminous insects.

If we accept this principle of egalitarian equity as of absolute
obligation, we shall have to accept along with woman's suffrage all
the other "isms" believed in, and agitated for, by the cranks who are
so numerously represented in the ranks of woman suffragists.

If, on the other hand, we accept the doctrine of egalitarian equity
with the qualification that it shall apply only so far as what it
enjoins is conformable to public advantage, we shall again make
expediency the criterion of the justice of woman's suffrage.

Before passing on it will be well to point out that the argument from
Justice meets us not only in the form that Justice requires that woman
should have a vote, but also in all sorts of other forms. We encounter
it in the writings of publicists, in the formula _Taxation_ _carries
with it a Right to Representation_; and we encounter it in the
streets, on the banners of woman suffrage processions, in the form
_Taxation without Representation is Tyranny_.

