not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication
was renewed.


   [Illustration: _Something--like an inner eye--glowed for just a
                   moment as the sphere advanced._]


                       The Whispering Spheres


       _An alien life-form--metallic sinister--threatening all
        mankind with annihilation._


                        by R. R. WINTERBOTHAM

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER I

THE CAULDRON


The factory saw-toothed the horizon with its hideous profile as
the moon rose in the east. The red glow of the furnaces bathed
the tall buildings, the gigantic scaffolds, the cord-like
elevated pipelines and the columnar smokestacks in the crimson of
anger. Even the moon seemed to fade as the long-fingered
smokestacks reached toward it belching their pollution. The air,
which should have been clean, was filled with the reek of
unfamiliar odors.

From the machine shop, where giant cannon were forged into
smooth, sleek instruments of death, came noise: unchecked,
unmuffled, blasphemous din. But something odd was afoot. There
was a sudden hush. It seemed as if a giant hand had covered the
metal city to muffle its screams.

In the nearby city of box-like houses, where the workers lived,
there was an echoing stir. Lights glowed in the windows of the
tiny homes. People were awakened in the night by the sudden
cessation of din.

Something was wrong in the factory.

But there couldn't be anything wrong. The factory was enclosed by
a high, electrified fence. There were guards on duty night and
day, armed to the teeth and ready to shoot an intruder who failed
to give an account of himself. There were wars and rumors of wars
on the face of the earth and there was need for the uninterrupted
production of sleek cannon.

But, if something were wrong, why didn't the whistle blow? There
were signals: three short blasts, repeated many times, meant
fire; one long blast meant a breakdown; five toots meant a
layoff. But now the whistle was silent.

Heads popped from the windows of the houses in the city. They
listened. Was it a whistle that the workers heard? No. It was a
whispering, barely audible at first, then louder. It was the
whisper of tongues of flame. But no flames were visible. Only the
red glow of the furnaces lighted up the factory's profile.

One by one the lights of the city went out as workers went back
to bed, to toss restlessly. Without noise there could be no
sleep.

The tongues of flame still whispered.

       *       *       *       *       *

A car moved rapidly through the streets of the city. At the wheel
was a man dressed in a captain's uniform. The machine whirled
onto the highway that led toward the factory. A barricade,
lighted by torch-lanterns, barred his path. A sentry with a
bayoneted gun stood to one side, signaling a halt.

The car slowed.

"Captain Ted Taylor, ordnance department!" the captain said,
extending his pass toward the sentry.

The sentry signaled him on.

The car came within a stone's throw of the factory, where it
turned into a parking lot. The officer climbed out, noiselessly,
and moved into the shadows.

Once Captain Taylor had been a scientist, but that was long ago,
before wars had made biology very unexciting.

Out of the shadows a second figure moved. He was a short, stocky
man, compared with the slender, graceful figure of the captain.

"Ps-st! Captain!"

"Masters!"

"You got my short-wave call, I see. I was afraid you would be
asleep. He came late, but he's in the tunnel now."

"Who is it?"

"The fellow we've suspected all along. Poses as an ignorant
laborer, but he's not ignorant by a long shot. His name is Hank
Norden."

Masters pointed toward a clump of bushes. As he did, he caught
the captain's arm with his left hand. The bushes were moving.

A black hole appeared at the base of the bushes and from it
emerged the head and shoulders of a man. Taylor drew his pistol.
The man's head turned, searching the shadows to see if he was
observed. He failed to detect the figures of Taylor and Masters,
huddled nearby in the shadows.

The man scrambled from the hole. He closed the trap door behind
him and then started to move rapidly away.

"Halt!" barked Taylor.

The man began to run. The captain's pistol spat, kicking up dust
beside the running feet. The fleeing man jumped to one side, to
spoil Taylor's aim on the next shot, but as he did so, he
stumbled and fell.

A moment later Taylor had landed on top of him, pinning him to
the ground.

The faded moonlight showed angry eyes, a jutting, undershot jaw
and a sharp, pointed nose.

"Damn you!" spat the captive.

Taylor removed a revolver from the prisoner's clothing and tossed
it to Masters.

"It's Norden, all right," Masters said, scrutinizing the captive.
"I'd know that jaw in a million. What are you doing here,
fellah?"

"I'm blowing the factory to hell!" Norden said between his teeth.
"You can't stop me. Everything's fixed. In a minute a bomb'll go
off. You, I, everyone will be smashed to atoms. And I'm glad. For
the fatherland."

"We know why you're doing it," Taylor said. "Come on, Masters.
Get your short-wave working. Notify the factory office. Where's
the bomb, Norden? Come on, speak up, or I'll pull you to pieces!"

Norden said nothing. Masters was calling the office. He turned to
the captain:

"I can't raise anyone."

"We'll go to the gate." Taylor prodded the prisoner ahead on the
run.

"You can't make it in time," Norden panted.

"We'll die trying!"

A floodlight turned the area in front of the gate into a patch of
daylight. An armed sentry challenged from a small building. The
captain answered.

"Sorry, but you can't come in. Strict Orders. After hours," the
sentry said, when the captain asked to be allowed to pass.

"But it's urgent--life or death. We've got to use your telephone.
Or--you call the office. Tell the super there's a bomb in the
plant--"

The sentry's jaws gaped, but only for an instant. Down the road
inside the plant came a running, bareheaded figure--screaming:

"Let me out! Let me out of here!"

"Halt!" shouted the sentry.

The figure stumbled to a stop at the gate. The light showed the
pale, sweating face trembling with fear.

"What's the matter with you?" the sentry asked.

"The metal pots! They're alive! Big, orange bubbles are floating
from the cauldrons!"

"Nuts!" said the sentry. "You're drunk."

But as the soldier spoke there was a trembling movement of the
ground beneath the feet of the men at the gate. Captain Taylor
threw himself on the ground. But there was no blast.

The red of the sky-glow suddenly faded to orange. Up through the
roof of the casting room crashed a huge, glowing sphere then
floated like a will-o'-the wisp in the moonlight.


CHAPTER II

THE SPHERES


When the sentry faced the captain again, he stared into the mouth
of a service pistol.

"Sorry," said the officer, "but I've got to get inside." Captain
Taylor turned to Masters. "Keep him covered. I'll be back unless
the bomb goes off."

"The bomb," whispered Norden, fearfully, "should have exploded. I
was double-crossed. They sent me here to get caught! The dirty--"

"Watch Norden, and you might keep your eye on Funky, here,"
Taylor said, pointing to the slobbering man who had dropped to
his knees at the sight of the orange sphere. "I'm going inside."

The captain moved through the gate. The silence was uncanny.
Since the war began this factory had never been idle. Thousands
of cannon made; contracts for countless more! But now quiet, save
for an undescribable, whispering overtone that seemed to permeate
the air.

Something glowed in the semi-darkness ahead like a pile of hot
ashes on the ground.

Taylor entered the long forge room. A white hot splinter of metal
hung from the crane. There were a dozen heaps of the glowing
ashes scattered about the room, but no sign of life.

He moved on into the finishing room, where the long tubes of
howitzers and field pieces lay in various stages of construction.
Still there was silence.

The whispering grew louder, like a breeze stirring dry cornstalks.

The silence suddenly was broken by a scream. Then another. There
was a sound of running footsteps.

Taylor dropped behind a lathe.

Through the door came an orange glow. Sharply outlined against
the eerie light ran a human figure, a man in overalls, carrying a
hammer. On the fellow's face was frozen fear. He halted, turned
and looked behind him.

The darkness vanished as through the doorway floated a huge,
orange sphere of light.

"Stop! Go back! I mean you no harm!" screamed the workman.

The ball of orange fire floated on toward him. The man's arm
raised. He hurled the hammer straight at the sphere.

The missile rang, bounced back and fell to the sandy floor.

A small flicker of flame wafted over the surface of the sphere.
Then it lashed out like a whip toward the trembling man. His
entire body glowed like a torch, then crumpled to the floor in a
heap of ashes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scarcely daring to breathe, the captain watched the sphere float
over the ashes of its victim for a moment; then, apparently
satisfied that the man no longer lived, floated back through the
doorway.

Taylor took a deep breath. It might be well if the bomb would
explode, but he knew now it had been silenced.

In an insulated panel on the wall were the remains of an electric
switchboard. The copper switches were fused, the wires burned
through. The huge cables that brought the electric current to the
switchboard lay molten on the floor.

The bomb probably was electrical and undoubtedly had been fused
like the switchboard.

The captain had one objective now, to get out of the plant before
the orange spheres discovered him. He didn't know what he faced,
but something told him that it had never faced mankind before. He
had no weapon to combat the sphere.

Taylor reached the forge room again. He stepped over more
glowing piles of ashes.

Then his ears caught a crescendo of the whispering that he had
heard before. He looked behind him. In the doorway was an orange
glow. The sphere was coming--looking for him!

Behind the forge was a machine which had been used to operate the
crane. Beyond it was stygian darkness. He might hide there.

The captain slipped toward the machine. Every bit of electrical
wiring on the controls had been fused.

The room grew lighter, the whispering louder and then, through
the doorway, floated the dazzling sphere.

Something gripped Taylor's shoulder muscles. A mild electrical
shock coursed through his body, as if an invisible feeler had
passed over him.

The sphere halted, changed its direction and floated slowly
toward the captain.

Instinctively, Taylor backed into the corner behind the machine.
He dropped to his hands and knees and was free of the invisible
feeler! Again the orange sphere halted, as if trying to relocate
its victim.

Taylor rounded a pillar which supported the track for the crane.
His fingers struck an accumulation of rubbish that had been
tossed into the corner. He started to push it out of the way,
when the floor beneath it moved. It was a trap door!

A gasp of surprise came from Taylor's lips. He had a chance. But
the sound gave him away. The electrical feeler touched him again.
The shock jerked at his muscles and the sphere started floating
nearer.

The trap door swung back. Taylor's right boot touched the top
rung of the ladder. He moved his left boot down to the next rung.
Each movement seemed to take ages and every exertion of his
muscles was agony as the electrical shock gripped him with
increasing intensity.

He forced his body down into the opening. He saw the flame
flickering over the surface of the sphere as the thing prepared
to strike.

The sphere seemed to pulse briefly as he released his grasp on
the rim of the opening and shoved himself downward into the hole.
He dropped several feet.

Above him a brilliant flash of fire lit the opening.

The sphere itself hovered above the hole.


CHAPTER III

PRIMARY OBJECTIVES


The sphere pulsed again. But this time no flaming whip sprang
from its surface. There was a single flash. For an instant Taylor
caught a glimpse of bestial eyes, looking angrily at him from the
center of the flash. Then there was nothing. He was in the
darkness of a tunnel. Even the charred embers of the wooden trap
door above him seemed dimmed by a cloud of dust.

The sphere had simply exploded.

Taylor had no time to analyze the situation. His hands groped
along the side of the tunnel, the one Norden had used to enter
the plant on his spying expeditions. Taylor crawled slowly,
feeling his way. It seemed eternity until at last he reached the
end of the passage and felt the trap door overhead.

A minute later he rejoined the others, huddled in darkness
outside the gate.

"The searchlight went out," Masters explained. "Something wrong
with the power, I guess."

"I know what it was," Taylor said gruffly. He turned to the
disarmed sentry. "Has anyone come out of here since the factory
stopped working?"

"Nobody but him, sir," the soldier said, jerking his thumb at the
sobbing man huddled against Norden. "He said his name was
Orkins--Jim Orkins. He works in the warehouse. But you can't tell
anything about the rest o' what he says. He just babbles, sir.
Something about livin' lightnin' and balls of fire. He ain't
drunk, sir, so he must be crazy."

"Help him get up," Taylor ordered. "Masters, you take charge of
Norden. We're going back to the car."

"Excuse me, sir," the sentry said, hesitantly. "But that's
against orders. I can't leave. I'm to guard this gate, sir."

"Your orders are canceled," the captain said.

"If I desert my post, it's court martial," the sentry explained.
"How do I know you aren't a spy? Captains don't go around making
privates break the orders of the day. If you've got business in
the plant, why was I told to keep _everyone_ out? Why didn't they
tell me to pass Captain Taylor? I got a duty here and I'll do it
if it kills me. So help me, sir. Sergeant o' the guard!"

The echo of the sentry's bellow rattled against the bleak factory
buildings. A sphere bobbed up through the hole in the roof.
Orkins opened his mouth to scream, but Norden clapped his hand
over the man's lips, choking him off.

"Quiet!" Taylor ordered hoarsely. He addressed the sentry: "See
that thing? It means death to you, to all of us if it finds us.
The sergeant of the guard, probably all of the other sentries are
dead. Every workman in the plant is dead. Somehow we were missed.
The searchlight power went off before they found this post, I
suppose. Now then, all of you follow Masters back to the car.
I'll bring up the rear."

"I won't leave," the sentry said, stubbornly.

Masters stepped forward and put his pistol against the soldier's
back.

"You'll go," he said. "Maybe this ain't regulation, but neither
are the spheres."

The stubby little secret service man pushed the soldier ahead of
him. The sentry marched with his hands in the air.

Drawing his own pistol, Taylor turned to Norden.

"Help Orkins to the car," he said.

Norden drew himself up stiffly.

"Go ahead and shoot," he said. "It'll save the firing squad some
trouble."

Taylor took one step forward. Norden faced him unflinchingly.
Taylor's hand shot out, caught Norden's coat and threw him after
Masters.

"Don't leave me alone!" Orkins cried, crawling after Norden and
clasping him about the legs. Norden kicked him aside.

"Keep moving!" Taylor ordered Norden, who had halted.

Norden did not move.

Taylor swung his fist. The blow connected and the officer caught
the falling man, swung him over his shoulder, then turned to the
cringing Orkins.

"If you don't want to be left here alone, follow us," he said.

Orkins suddenly regained his ability to use his muscles.

Masters, watching over his shoulder, chuckled. There was a faint
wink of one eye visible in the moonlight.

"Kinda screwy, ain't he?" he said, jerking his head in Orkins'
direction.

"I don't know that I blame him, much," Taylor said. "Look at the
plant."

Over the roof and the smokestacks floated the yellowish-red ball
of fire. Another sphere was emerging from the hole in the roof.

"What are they? A new kind of bomb?" Masters asked.

"Norden's bomb never had a chance. Compared with what actually
happened in there, a bomb would have been a picnic. There's not a
living person left in the whole place."

"Not a--hold on there, Cap! Do you know how many were working?"

"They're all dead," Taylor said. Briefly he outlined what he had
seen in the plant.

"Norden, the blankety-blank!" Masters swore. "Shooting's too good
for him."

"This isn't connected with the war--at least not directly. It's
something else, Masters. What, I don't know yet, but I'm
beginning to think that it's something the human race has never
met before. Those spheres have killed a couple of hundred workers
with bolts of energy--"

"I'm no scientist, captain."

"That's the best I can describe this force, Masters. I might call
it heat-bolts, but it's probably partly electric and partly heat,
not entirely either. You see, Masters, heat is energy, just like
electricity and light. The energy these spheres shoot out is a
mixture of energies. We can imagine a spark of electricity
shooting out and striking a man like a bolt of lightning, but
it's hard to visualize heat behaving that way."

"Say, mister," the sentry interrupted, "my arms are getting
tired."

"Okay, buddy," Masters replied. "If I let you put your arms down,
will you behave like a nice little boy?"

"I'll be a perfect angel," the sentry said, lowering his arms.

"You'll be an angel if you aren't, too," Masters added.

"What's your name, soldier?" Taylor asked the sentry.

"Private Pember, sir. Company A, 110th infantry--"

"All right, Private Pember, you can carry this fellow."

Taylor shifted the faintly stirring Norden to the shoulders of
the soldier.

"If it will make you feel any easier, Pember," the captain went
on, "I can assure you that exigencies demanded your removal from
your post. Your life was in danger and you could do no good by
remaining there. In fact, there was nothing left to guard. You
can do more good for your country by coming with us."

"Yes, sir," Pember said. "I guess you are right, captain."

"You're a good soldier, Pember," Taylor went on. "A situation
like this is unique. It demands use of individual initiative,
rather than blind obedience to orders. Do you understand?"

"Yes, sir," Pember said, adjusting the burden on his shoulder.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the car.

A dozen of the orange-red globes now floated above the plant.
They were circling slowly, in widening arcs, toward the limits of
the factory grounds.

"Searching for human beings," Taylor decided, watching them.

Orkins clutched Taylor's coat tails.

"They're coming out!" he cried. "There's hell to pay."

Taylor took Orkins' arm and forced him down on the running board
of the car, where Norden already was coming out of his daze.

"Keep quiet!" Taylor ordered. "They'll discover us."

"They'll find us anyway!" Orkins said, frantic with fear. He
groaned loudly.

"Okay. He asked for it," Masters said.

There was a splatting sound as Masters' fist landed. Masters made
a face over a distasteful duty done and turned to Pember:

"Put them both in the car." He indicated Norden. "Here's
handcuffs. Lock them together."

Taylor and Masters watched the circling spheres. Suddenly one
darted down. From its pulsating body shot a flash of flame. A
human scream rent the air.

"It's the darnedest thing I ever saw," Masters said with a
shudder. "Those fireballs squirt heat-electricity out at a guy
and roast him!"

"Yes," Taylor said with a nod, "and that isn't all. Those spheres
act as though they were alive. When that one went out above the
opening of the tunnel, I thought I saw a pair of eyes."

Masters studied the assertion, then spoke:

"Captain, I may look dumb, but I've been in the secret service
long enough to be found out if I really am. I've a hunch you
killed that sphere."

"I've thought of that, but how could I? I didn't touch him."

"Maybe you don't have to touch 'em to kill 'em. We don't know
what they are, except they're different--"

"We don't know the real natures of anything, as far as that
goes. Man's a mixture of chemicals, but that doesn't explain him.
The spheres are a mixture of energies--we can observe that much,
but it still doesn't explain them. Where are they from? Why did
they come here? What are their primary objectives?"

"Primary objectives? That's a military term, ain't it?"

"Partly military, and partly scientific. We know the secondary
objective of the spheres. It's the same as man's or any other
living creature. The spheres are alive and their objective is to
keep on living, but that isn't their primary motif. The primary
objective is the difference between a good man and a bad one.
Whatever is more important to a man than life itself is his
primary objective."

"Life's pretty important," Masters said, solemnly.

"Yes, but life isn't everything. Any man, no matter how yellow or
mean he is, has some ideal he's willing to die for--or at least
he's willing to risk dying to attain. Look at Norden. He's hard,
cold-blooded and he doesn't think twice about putting a bomb in a
plant to wipe out scores of lives. He dared me to kill him,
rather than help us. His code as a spy is his primary objective.
Look at Pember. He must have been frightened by the spheres, but
we had to force him to leave his post. We've shown him that his
duty now is with us--he realizes that the spheres are the
immediate enemy of his country and he'll do his best fighting
them. And you and I have ideals--we know each other too well to
list them."

"I getcha so far, but what about Orkins?"

"The man's not afraid of death, but afraid of the unknown. Men
like him commit suicide rather than face reality. He wants
security. He's afraid of uncertainty. He lives in an unreal,
imaginary world and when uncertainty, which is reality, intrudes,
he is completely lost."

"You make me feel sorry for the poor devil."

"That's because you understand why he's funky. Primary objectives
make men do what they do--but understanding Orkins doesn't solve
our problem."

"No. What are the spheres? Are they alive? If so, they must want
something. What do they want?"

"A conquest of the human race?" Taylor pondered. "Maybe. But it
isn't likely. They can't gain much by conquering us. It wouldn't
do man any good to stage a conquest of earthworms and swordfish,
since neither could pay taxes. The spheres are as different from
man as man from an angle-worm. Are we a menace to the spheres?
Apparently the only time we really menace them is when we crawl
into a hole like a rabbit--maybe there's something in that that
will help us, but I don't think that's why they kill us. Are we a
nuisance? If so, why? Are we a food? There is energy in sunlight
and chemicals in the human body. A creature of energy would feed
on something like sunlight, not chemicals. His menu would be
electric wires, storage batteries--"

"Great Scott, Captain!" Masters interrupted. "Let's get away from
this car. There's a battery in it--food for the spheres!"

Masters looked nervously up at the circling globes. Taylor, deep
in thought, did not stir. Instead, he continued his speculation:

"Maybe they kill us for sport."

He was thinking of small boys torturing frogs; of Roman emperors
at the circus; of sportsmen exterminating game; of the mob
watching the guillotine on the streets of Paris. It was
Zarathustra who said that when gazing at tragedies, bull fights
and crucifixions, man has felt his happiest; and when man
invented hell, he made hell his heaven on earth. Couldn't this be
a characteristic of all life? Couldn't the spheres be cruel and
ruthless, too?

Man, the mighty hunter, had become the prey.

A sphere detached itself from the group and circled toward the
car.

"I guess you're right, Masters," Taylor decided as he watched the
spheres. "We'd better move."


CHAPTER IV

PREY


Masters unlocked the handcuffs of the two men in the car. He
disposed of his short-wave set in a ditch, for it, too, had
batteries which might attract the spheres.

"Get out of the car, Orkins," he ordered.

"Watch him, Masters," Taylor warned. "If he starts yelling, choke
him."

"But not too hard," Masters added. "If we're going to be rabbits,
human values will change. Men who run into holes will live to eat
turnips, those who bare their teeth won't. Orkins might be the
forefather of a new race--a helluva race. Come on, Orkins. Get
out. Hurry up, Father Abraham, or I'll drag you out."

Orkins, cringing, emerged.

Taylor took charge of Norden, who followed Orkins out of the
machine.

"I hate your guts, Norden," he said. "You're a dirty, lousy rat
and you ought to be shot. But after all, you're a man. You've
courage and I admire it, as much as I hate the way you use it.
Overseas there's a war between countries. Here there's another
war between humanity and a species of alien monsters. Whether we
like it or not, we're allies."

Norden's undershot jaw moved in a grin.

"I know about the spheres, Captain," Norden replied. "I overheard
your remarks to Mr. Masters. I've listened to Orkins' babble."

"Will you help us?"

"I will bargain with you."

"For your life? You know I can't do anything about that. I'll do
my best--I'll speak a good word at your trial, try to save you
from the firing squad, but I'm only a captain. That's all I can
do. I haven't the power to do anything more."

"Then I will not help."

"Do you know what we're up against?"

"It looks pretty bad, doesn't it, Captain? But consider my
hopeless case."

"We have a chance, Norden. I know, more than any other living man
perhaps, what those spheres are. I've seen them close at hand.
Any hope of defeating them rests in us, using the meager
knowledge I've gained from contact. What happens to your
fatherland after the spheres finish on this side of the ocean
depends on whether we conquer them, or they exterminate us."

Norden stopped smiling.

"When you put it that way, Captain, how could I refuse?" he
asked. "I'll cooperate, not to help you, but to help the
fatherland."

The moonlight showed a gleam in Norden's deep-set eyes that
Taylor did not like.

       *       *       *       *       *

They moved to a wooded spot in a nearby field. There was a
feeling of semi-security as they settled down to rest under the
trees. Orkins' moans of fear were silenced by sleep. Norden sat
motionless and Taylor could not tell whether he was asleep or
awake. Pember removed his pack and used it for a pillow. Masters
snored peacefully on the grass.

Only Taylor remained awake. A sphere floated overhead. Taylor,
watching, saw the leaves of the tree stir restlessly as the
invisible feelers probed toward the earth.

It was a reddish-orange orb, like the setting sun. Taylor once
more got the impression of deeply embedded eyes glowering beneath
the shining surface.

Were the eyes an illusion? Did the creatures really have eyes,
like those of higher forms of animal life? Illusion or not, the
eyes seemed to be there, intense, glaring and savage. They
seemed to peer into the depths of Taylor's soul.

Taylor sat motionless, almost positive he was under observation.
He expected to feel the jerk of the electric shock of the feeler.
Instead, the sphere drifted on. The eyes had not seen.

A moment later flame streaked down from the sphere toward the
parking lot. There was a roar as a gasoline tank exploded and
flame shot skyward.

"There goes the battery!" Taylor muttered.

The others were roused by the explosion. Orkins sobbed
hysterically. Masters, Pember and Norden watched the roaring
flame.

"We'll never escape them!" Orkins moaned. "They'll find us sooner
or later. They can sense us."

"They're not infallible," Taylor said. "Remember I got away from
them in the tunnel." He turned knowingly toward the others.
"Perhaps, if we dug a cave--"

"Sure!" said Masters. "It's a good idea."

"Yes, sir!" Pember said with a nod. He pulled his trench tool
from his pack and handed it to Orkins. "Maybe you'd like to dig,
Mr. Orkins. It'll keep your mind off them things."

Orkins seized the small shovel almost instantly. Taylor
half-smiled. He had made the suggestion for Orkins' benefit. The
cave probably would never be finished. One deep enough to offer a
refuge for five men could hardly be dug in a practical length of
time.

Dawn was not far off and the spheres were drifting over the town.
Already streets were filled with panic-stricken people. The
appearance of the strange balls of fire brought residents from
their homes in the middle of the night. Some fled in terror,
believing a new type of raider had been invented by the enemy.
Others stood watching.

The spheres circled. Taylor watched them, realizing he could do
nothing to stop what would happen. There was no way to warn these
helpless people that the spheres dealt death in a most sudden and
violent form.

Something nagged at Taylor's mind. Why had the sphere gone out
when he crept into the tunnel? What had caused it to die? Had the
sphere been grounded, trying to reach him under the surface of
the earth? Not likely, otherwise the creatures would not be able
to attack a man standing on the ground. The bolt, besides, was
not electricity, like lightning, but heat, which is not grounded
easily.

Where had the spheres come from? They surely were not of this
world. On the basis of biological evolution they could not be the
children of any life known to science. Had they evolved suddenly,
by accident? Some scientists thought all life had grown by
accident; the right combination of circumstances had occurred and
a chemical action had followed. Had the right combination for the
spheres come about as the result of the war and the releasing of
untold amounts of energy?

But even if life had begun on earth by accident, all other types
had taken ages to develop. These spheres, thinking creatures,
could not have evolved overnight.

These seemingly invincible creatures could not have come from
this world. Biological development comes through struggle and
survival. An invincible creature does not have to worry about its
existence--in fact, struggle was necessary to develop an
invincible being. These spheres must be from another world.
Refugees, perhaps, from another, even more powerful race; or
maybe they were seeking a new world to conquer.

One was circling overhead again. The leaves rustled. Taylor
thought he heard a choked-off scream. Orkins. He gritted his
teeth grimly.

