  Rise, Britons, rise, if manhood be not dead;
  The world's last tempest darkens overhead;
          The Pope has bless'd him;
          The Church caress'd him;
  He triumphs; maybe, we shall stand alone:
          Britons, guard your own.

  His ruthless host is bought with plunder'd gold,
  By lying priest's the peasant's votes controlled.
          All freedom vanish'd,
          The true men banished,
  He triumphs; maybe, we shall stand alone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Peace-lovers we--sweet Peace we all desire--
  Peace-lovers we--but who can trust a liar?--
         Peace-lovers, haters
         Of shameless traitors,
  We hate not France, but this man's heart of stone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  We hate not France, but France has lost her voice
  This man is France, the man they call her choice.
          By tricks and spying,
          By craft and lying,
  And murder was her freedom overthrown.
          Britons, guard your own.

  'Vive l'Empereur' may follow by and bye;
  'God save the Queen' is here a truer cry.
          God save the Nation,
          The toleration,
  And the free speech that makes a Briton known.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Rome's dearest daughter now is captive France,
  The Jesuit laughs, and reckoning on his chance,
          Would, unrelenting,
          Kill all dissenting,
  Till we were left to fight for truth alone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Call home your ships across Biscayan tides,
  To blow the battle from their oaken sides.
          Why waste they yonder
          Their idle thunder?
  Why stay they there to guard a foreign throne?
          Seamen, guard your own.

  We were the best of marksmen long ago,
  We won old battles with our strength, the bow.
          Now practise, yeomen,
          Like those bowmen,
  Till your balls fly as their true shafts have flown.
          Yeomen, guard your own.

  His soldier-ridden Highness might incline
  To take Sardinia, Belgium, or the Rhine:
         Shall we stand idle,
         Nor seek to bridle
  His vile aggressions, till we stand alone?
          Make their cause your own.

  Should he land here, and for one hour prevail,
  There must no man go back to bear the tale:
          No man to bear it--
          Swear it! We swear it!
  Although we fought the banded world alone,
          We swear to guard our own.


XLVIII

=Hands all Round=

[Published in _The Examiner_, February 7, 1852. Reprinted, slightly
altered, in Life, vol. I, p. 345. Included, almost entirely
re-written, in collected Works.]

  First drink a health, this solemn night,
    A health to England, every guest;
  That man's the best cosmopolite
    Who loves his native country best.
  May Freedom's oak for ever live
    With stronger life from day to day;
  That man's the best Conservative
    Who lops the mouldered branch away.
          Hands all round!
  God the tyrant's hope confound!
  To this great cause of Freedom drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  A health to Europe's honest men!
    Heaven guard them from her tyrants' jails!
  From wronged Poerio's noisome den,
    From iron limbs and tortured nails!
  We curse the crimes of Southern kings,
    The Russian whips and Austrian rods--
  We likewise have our evil things;
    Too much we make our Ledgers, Gods.
          Yet hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To Europe's better health we drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  What health to France, if France be she
    Whom martial progress only charms?
  Yet tell her--better to be free
    Than vanquish all the world in arms.
  Her frantic city's flashing heats
    But fire, to blast the hopes of men.
  Why change the titles of your streets?
    You fools, you'll want them all again.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To France, the wiser France, we drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  Gigantic daughter of the West,
    We drink to thee across the flood,
  We know thee most, we love thee best,
    For art thou not of British blood?
  Should war's mad blast again be blown,
    Permit not thou the tyrant powers
  To fight thy mother here alone,
    But let thy broadsides roar with ours.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our great kinsmen of the West, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  O rise, our strong Atlantic sons,
    When war against our freedom springs!
  O speak to Europe through your guns!
  They _can_ be understood by kings.
  You must not mix our Queen with those
    That wish to keep their people fools;
  Our freedom's foemen are her foes,
    She comprehends the race she rules.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our dear kinsmen of the West, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.


XLIX

=Suggested by Reading an Article in a Newspaper=

[Published in _The Examiner_, February 14, 1852, and never reprinted
nor acknowledged. The proof sheets of the poem, with alterations in
Tennyson's autograph, were offered for public sale in 1906.]

To the Editor of _The Examiner_.

SIR,--I have read with much interest the poems of Merlin. The enclosed
is longer than either of those, and certainly not so good: yet as I
flatter myself that it has a smack of Merlin's style in it, and as I
feel that it expresses forcibly enough some of the feelings of our
time, perhaps you may be induced to admit it.

TALIESSEN.


  How much I love this writer's manly style!
    By such men led, our press had ever been
  The public conscience of our noble isle,
    Severe and quick to feel a civic sin,
  To raise the people and chastise the times
  With such a heat as lives in great creative rhymes.

  O you, the Press! what good from you might spring!
    What power is yours to blast a cause or bless!
  I fear for you, as for some youthful king,
    Lest you go wrong from power in excess.
  Take heed of your wide privileges! we
  The thinking men of England, loathe a tyranny.

  A freeman is, I doubt not, freest here;
    The single voice may speak his mind aloud;
  An honest isolation need not fear
    The Court, the Church, the Parliament, the crowd.
  No, nor the Press! and look you well to that--
  We must not dread in you the nameless autocrat.

  And you, dark Senate of the public pen,
    You may not, like yon tyrant, deal in spies.
  Yours are the public acts of public men,
    But yours are not their household privacies.
  I grant you one of the great Powers on earth,
  But be not you the blatant traitors of the hearth.

  You hide the hand that writes: it must be so,
    For better so you fight for public ends;
  But some you strike can scarce return the blow;
    You should be all the nobler, O my friends.
  Be noble, you! nor work with faction's tools
    To charm a lower sphere of fulminating fools.

  But knowing all your power to heat or cool,
    To soothe a civic wound or keep it raw,
  Be loyal, if you wish for wholesome rule:
    Our ancient boast is this--we reverence law.
  We still were loyal in our wildest fights,
  Or loyally disloyal battled for our rights.

  O Grief and Shame if while I preach of laws
    Whereby to guard our Freedom from offence--
  And trust an ancient manhood and the cause
    Of England and her health of commonsense--
  There hang within the heavens a dark disgrace,
  Some vast Assyrian doom to burst upon our race.

  I feel the thousand cankers of our State,
    I fain would shake their triple-folded ease,
  The hogs who can believe in nothing great,
    Sneering bedridden in the down of Peace
  Over their scrips and shares, their meats and wine,
  With stony smirks at all things human and divine!

  I honour much, I say, this man's appeal.
    We drag so deep in our commercial mire,
  We move so far from greatness, that I feel
    Exception to be character'd in fire.
  Who looks for Godlike greatness here shall see
  The British Goddess, sleek Respectability.

  Alas for her and all her small delights!
    She feels not how the social frame is rack'd.
  She loves a little scandal which excites;
    A little feeling is a want of tact.
  For her there lie in wait millions of foes,
  And yet the 'not too much' is all the rule she knows.

  Poor soul! behold her: what decorous calm!
    She, with her week-day worldliness sufficed,
  Stands in her pew and hums her decent psalm
    With decent dippings at the name of Christ!
  And she has mov'd in that smooth way so long,
    She hardly can believe that she shall suffer wrong.

  Alas, our Church! alas, her growing ills,
    And those who tolerate not her tolerance,
  But needs must sell the burthen of their wills
    To that half-pagan harlot kept by France!
  Free subjects of the kindliest of all thrones,
  Headlong they plunge their doubts among old rags and bones.

  Alas, Church writers, altercating tribes--
    The vessel and your Church may sink in storms.
  Christ cried: Woe, woe, to Pharisees and Scribes!
    Like them, you bicker less for truth than forms.
  I sorrow when I read the things you write,
  What unheroic pertness! what un-Christian spite!

  Alas, our youth, so clever yet so small,
    Thin dilletanti deep in nature's plan,
  Who make the emphatic One, by whom is all,
    An essence less concentred than a man!
  Better wild Mahmoud's war-cry once again!
  O fools, we want a manlike God and Godlike men!

  Go, frightful omens. Yet once more I turn
    To you that mould men's thoughts; I call on you
  To make opinion warlike, lest we learn
    A sharper lesson than we ever knew.
  I hear a thunder though the skies are fair,
  But shrill you, loud and long, the warning-note:
      Prepare!


L

[Lord Tennyson wrote, by Royal request, two stanzas which were sung as
part of _God Save the Queen_ at a State concert in connection with the
Princess Royal's marriage: these were printed in the _Times_ of
January 26, 1858.]

  God bless our Prince and Bride!
  God keep their lands allied,
    God save the Queen!
  Clothe them with righteousness,
  Crown them with happiness,
  Them with all blessings bless,
    God save the Queen.

  Fair fall this hallow'd hour,
  Farewell our England's flower,
    God save the Queen!
  Farewell, fair rose of May!
  Let both the peoples say,
  God bless thy marriage-day,
    God bless the Queen.


LI

=The Ringlet=

[Published in _Enoch Arden_ volume (London: E. Moxon & Co, 1864) and
never reprinted.]

  'Your ringlets, your ringlets,
    That look so golden-gay,
  If you will give me one, but one,
    To kiss it night and day,
  Then never chilling touch of Time
    Will turn it silver-gray;
  And then shall I know it is all true gold
  To flame and sparkle and stream as of old,
  Till all the comets in heaven are cold,
    And all her stars decay.'
  'Then take it, love, and put it by;
  This cannot change, nor yet can I.'

  'My ringlet, my ringlet,
    That art so golden-gay,
  Now never chilling touch of Time
    Can turn thee silver-gray;
  And a lad may wink, and a girl may hint,
    And a fool may say his say;
  For my doubts and fears were all amiss,
  And I swear henceforth by this and this,
  That a doubt will only come for a kiss,
    And a fear to be kissed away.'
  'Then kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I kiss'd you night and day,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You still are golden-gay,
  But Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You should be silver-gray:
  For what is this which now I'm told,
  I that took you for true gold,
  She that gave you's bought and sold,
          Sold, sold.

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She blush'd a rosy red,
  When Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She clipt you from her head,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She gave you me, and said,
  'Come, kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'
  O fie, you golden nothing, fie
          You golden lie.

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I count you much to blame,
  For Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You put me much to shame,
  So Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I doom you to the flame.
  For what is this which now I learn,
  Has given all my faith a turn?
  Burn, you glossy heretic, burn,
            Burn, burn.


LII

=Song=

[This first form of the Song in _The Princess_ ('Home they brought her
warrior dead') was published only in _Selections from Tennyson_.
London: E. Moxon & Co, 1864.]

  Home they brought him slain with spears.
    They brought him home at even-fall:
  All alone she sits and hears
    Echoes in his empty hall,
      Sounding on the morrow.

  The Sun peeped in from open field,
    The boy began to leap and prance,
    Rode upon his father's lance,
  Beat upon his father's shield--
      'Oh hush, my joy, my sorrow.'


LIII

=1865-1866=

[Published in _Good Words_ for March 1, 1868 as a decorative page,
with an accompanying full page plate by T. Dalziel. The lines were
never reprinted.]

  I stood on a tower in the wet,
  And New Year and Old Year met,
  And winds were roaring and blowing;
  And I said, 'O years that meet in tears,
  Have ye aught that is worth the knowing?

  'Science enough and exploring
  Wanderers coming and going
  Matter enough for deploring
  But aught that is worth the knowing?'

  Seas at my feet were flowing
  Waves on the shingle pouring,
  Old Year roaring and blowing
  And New Year blowing and roaring.


=The Lover's Tale=
1833

[It was originally intended by Tennyson that this poem should
form part of his 1833 volume. It was put in type and, according to
custom, copies were distributed among his friends, when, on the eve of
publication, he decided to omit it. Again, in 1869, it was sent to
press with a new third part added, and was again withdrawn, the third
part only--'The Golden Supper,' founded on a story in Boccaccio's
_Decameron_--being published in the volume, 'The Holy Grail.' In 1866,
1870 and 1875, attempts had been made by Mr Herne Shepherd to publish
editions of 'The Lover's Tale,' reprinted from stray proof copies of
the 1833 printing. Each of these attempts was repressed by Tennyson,
and at last in 1879 the complete poem, as now included in the
collected Works, was issued, with an apologetic reference to the
necessity of reprinting the poem to prevent its circulation in an
unauthorised form. But the 1879 issue is considerably altered from the
original issue of 1833, as written by Tennyson in his nineteenth year.
Since only as a product of Tennyson's youth does the poem merit any
attention, it has seemed good to reprint it here as originally
written.]

A FRAGMENT

The Poem of the Lover's Tale (the lover is supposed to be himself a
poet) was written in my nineteenth year, and consequently contains
nearly as many faults as words. That I deemed it not wholly unoriginal
is my only apology for its publication--an apology lame and poor, and
somewhat impertinent to boot: so that if its infirmities meet with
more laughter than charity in the world, I shall not raise my voice in
its defence. I am aware how deficient the Poem is in point of art, and
it is not without considerable misgivings that I have ventured to
publish even this fragment of it. 'Enough,' says the old proverb, 'is
as good as a feast.'--(Tennyson's original introductory note.)

  Here far away, seen from the topmost cliff,
  Filling with purple gloom the vacancies
  Between the tufted hills the sloping seas
  Hung in mid-heaven, and half-way down rare sails,
  White as white clouds, floated from sky to sky.
  Oh! pleasant breast of waters, quiet bay,
  Like to a quiet mind in the loud world,
  Where the chafed breakers of the outer sea
  Sunk powerless, even as anger falls aside,
  And withers on the breast of peaceful love,
  Thou didst receive that belt of pines, that fledged
  The hills that watch'd thee, as Love watcheth Love,--
  In thine own essence, and delight thyself
  To make it wholly thine on sunny days.
  Keep thou thy name of 'Lover's bay': See, Sirs,
  Even now the Goddess of the Past, that takes
  The heart, and sometimes toucheth but one string,
  That quivers, and is silent, and sometimes
  Sweeps suddenly all its half-moulder'd chords
  To an old melody, begins to play
  On those first-moved fibres of the brain.
  I come, Great mistress of the ear and eye:
  Oh! lead me tenderly, for fear the mind
  Rain thro' my sight, and strangling sorrow weigh
  Mine utterance with lameness. Tho' long years
  Have hallowed out a valley and a gulf
  Betwixt the native land of Love and me,
  Breathe but a little on me, and the sail
  Will draw me to the rising of the sun,
  The lucid chambers of the morning star,
  And East of life.
                    Permit me, friend, I prithee,
  To pass my hand across my brows, and muse
  On those dear hills, that nevermore will meet
  The sight that throbs and aches beneath my touch,
  As tho' there beat a heart in either eye;
  For when the outer lights are darken'd thus,
  The memory's vision hath a keener edge.
  It grows upon me now--the semicircle
  Of dark blue waters and the narrow fringe
  Of curving beach--its wreaths of dripping green--
  Its pale pink shells--the summer-house aloft
  That open'd on the pines with doors of glass,
  A mountain nest the pleasure boat that rock'd
  Light-green with its own shadow, keel to keel,
  Upon the crispings of the dappled waves
  That blanched upon its side.
                               O Love, O Hope,
  They come, they crowd upon me all at once,
  Moved from the cloud of unforgotten things,
  That sometimes on the horizon of the mind
  Lies folded--often sweeps athwart in storm--
  They flash across the darkness of my brain,
  The many pleasant days, the moolit nights,
  The dewy dawnings and the amber eyes,
  When thou and I, Camilla, thou and I
  Were borne about the bay, or safely moor'd
  Beneath some low brow'd cavern, where the wave
  Plash'd sapping its worn ribs (the while without,
  And close above us, sang the wind-tost pine,
  And shook its earthly socket, for we heard,
  In rising and in falling with the tide,
  Close by our ears, the huge roots strain and creak),
  Eye feeding upon eye with deep intent;
  And mine, with love too high to be express'd
  Arrested in its sphere, and ceasing from
  All contemplation of all forms, did pause
  To worship mine own image, laved in light,
  The centre of the splendours, all unworthy
  Of such a shrine--mine image in her eyes,
  By diminution made most glorious,
  Moved with their motions, as those eyes were moved
  With motions of the soul, as my heart beat
  Twice to the melody of hers. Her face
  Was starry-fair, not pale, tenderly flush'd
  As 'twere with dawn. She was dark-hair'd, dark-eyed;
  Oh, such dark eyes! A single glance of them
  Will govern a whole life from birth to death,
  Careless of all things else, led on with light
  In trances and in visions: look at them,
  You lose yourself in utter ignorance,
  You cannot find their depth; for they go back,
  And farther back, and still withdraw themselves
  Quite into the deep soul, that evermore,
  Fresh springing from her fountains in the brain,
  Still pouring thro', floods with redundant light
  Her narrow portals.

                      Trust me, long ago
  I should have died, if it were possible
  To die in gazing on that perfectness
  Which I do bear within me; I had died
  But from my farthest lapse, my latest ebb,
  Thine image, like a charm of light and strength
  Upon the waters, pushed me back again
  On these deserted sands of barren life.
  Tho' from the deep vault, where the heart of hope
  Fell into dust, and crumbled in the dark--
  Forgetting who to render beautiful
  Her countenance with quick and healthful blood--
  Thou didst not sway me upward, could I perish
  With such a costly casket in the grasp
  Of memory? He, that saith it, hath o'erstepp'd
  The slippery footing of his narrow wit,
  And fall'n away from judgment. Thou art light,
  To which my spirit leaneth all her flowers,
  And length of days, and immortality
  Of thought, and freshness ever self-renew'd.
  For Time and Grief abode too long with Life,
  And like all other friends i' the world, at last
  They grew aweary of her fellowship:
  So Time and Grief did beckon unto Death,
  And Death drew nigh and beat the doors of Life;
  But thou didst sit alone in the inner house,
  A wakeful port'ress and didst parle with Death,
  'This is a charmed dwelling which I hold';
  So Death gave back, and would no further come.
  Yet is my life nor in the present time,
  Nor in the present place. To me alone,
  Pushed from his chair of regal heritage,
  The Present is the vassal of the Past:
  So that, in that I _have_ lived, do I live,
  And cannot die, and am, in having been,
  A portion of the pleasant yesterday,
  Thrust forward on to-day and out of place;
  A body journeying onward, sick with toil,
  The lithe limbs bow'd as with a heavy weight
  And all the senses weaken'd in all save that
  Which, long ago, they had glean'd and garner'd up
  Into the granaries of memory--
  The clear brow, bulwark of the precious brain,
  Now seam'd and chink'd with years--and all the while
  The light soul twines and mingles with the growths
  Of vigorous early days, attracted, won,
  Married, made one with, molten into all
  The beautiful in Past of act or place.
  Even as the all-enduring camel, driven
  Far from the diamond fountain by the palms,
  Toils onward thro' the middle moonlight nights,
  Shadow'd and crimson'd with the drifting dust,
  Or when the white heats of the blinding noons
  Beat from the concave sand; yet in him keeps
  A draught of that sweet fountain that he loves,
  To stay his feet from falling, and his spirit
  From bitterness of death.

                            Ye ask me, friends,
  When I began to love. How should I tell ye?
  Or from the after fulness of my heart,
  Flow back again unto my slender spring
  And first of love, tho' every turn and depth
  Between is clearer in my life than all
  Its present flow. Ye know not what ye ask.
  How should the broad and open flower tell
  What sort of bud it was, when press'd together
  In its green sheath, close lapt in silken folds?
  It seemed to keep its sweetness to itself,
  Yet was not the less sweet for that it seem'd.
  For young Life knows not when young Life was born,
  But takes it all for granted: neither Love,
  Warm in the heart, his cradle can remember
  Love in the womb, but resteth satisfied,
  Looking on her that brought him to the light:
  Or as men know not when they fall asleep
  Into delicious dreams, our other life,
  So know I not when I began to love.
  This is my sum of knowledge--that my love
  Grew with myself--and say rather, was my growth,
  My inward sap, the hold I have on earth,
  My outward circling air wherein I breathe,
  Which yet upholds my life, and evermore
  Was to me daily life and daily death:
  For how should I have lived and not have loved?
  Can ye take off the sweetness from the flower,
  The colour and the sweetness from the rose,
  And place them by themselves? or set apart
  Their motions and their brightness from the stars,
  And then point out the flower or the star?
  Or build a wall betwixt my life and love,
  And tell me where I am? 'Tis even thus:
  In that I live I love; because I love
  I live: whate'er is fountain to the one
  Is fountain to the other; and whene'er
  Our God unknits the riddle of the one,
  There is no shade or fold of mystery
  Swathing the other.

                      Many, many years,
  For they seem many and my most of life,
  And well I could have linger'd in that porch,
  So unproportioned to the dwelling place,
  In the maydews of childhood, opposite
  The flush and dawn of youth, we lived together,
  Apart, alone together on those hills.
  Before he saw my day my father died,
  And he was happy that he saw it not:
  But I and the first daisy on his grave
  From the same clay came into light at once.
  As Love and I do number equal years
  So she, my love, is of an age with me.
  How like each other was the birth of each!
  The sister of my mother--she that bore
  Camilla close beneath her beating heart,
  Which to the imprisoned spirit of the child,
  With its true touched pulses in the flow
  And hourly visitation of the blood,
  Sent notes of preparation manifold,
  And mellow'd echoes of the outer world--
  My mother's sister, mother of my love,
  Who had a twofold claim upon my heart,
  One twofold mightier than the other was,
  In giving so much beauty to the world,
  And so much wealth as God had charged her with,
  Loathing to put it from herself for ever,
  Crown'd with her highest act the placid face
  And breathless body of her good deeds past.
  So we were born, so orphan'd. She was motherless,
  And I without a father. So from each
  Of those two pillars which from earth uphold
  Our childhood, one had fall'n away, and all
  The careful burthen of our tender years
  Trembled upon the other. He that gave
  Her life, to me delightedly fulfill'd
  All loving-kindnesses, all offices
  Of watchful care and trembling tenderness.
  He worked for both: he pray'd for both: he slept
  Dreaming of both; nor was his love the less
  Because it was divided, and shot forth
  Boughs on each side, laden with wholesome shade,
  Wherein we rested sleeping or awake,
  And sung aloud the matin-song of life.

  She was my foster-sister: on one arm
  The flaxen ringlets of our infancies
  Wander'd, the while we rested: one soft lap
  Pillow'd us both: one common light of eyes
  Was on us as we lay: our baby lips,
  Kissing one bosom, ever drew from thence
  The stream of life, one stream, one life, one blood,
  One sustenance, which, still as thought grew large,
  Still larger moulding all the house of thought,
  Perchance assimilated all our tastes
  And future fancies. 'Tis a beautiful
  And pleasant meditation, what whate'er
  Our general mother meant for me alone,
  Our mutual mother dealt to both of us:
  So what was earliest mine in earliest life,
  I shared with her in whom myself remains.
  As was our childhood, so our infancy,
  They tell me, was a very miracle
  Of fellow-feeling and communion.
  They tell me that we would not be alone,--
  We cried when we were parted; when I wept,
  Her smile lit up the rainbow on my tears,
  Stay'd on the clouds of sorrow; that we loved
  The sound of one another's voices more
  Than the grey cuckoo loves his name, and learn'd
  To lisp in tune together; that we slept
  In the same cradle always, face to face,
  Heart beating time to heart, lip pressing lip,
  Folding each other, breathing on each other,
  Dreaming together (dreaming of each other
  They should have added) till the morning light
  Sloped thro' the pines, upon the dewy pane
  Falling, unseal'd our eyelids, and we woke
  To gaze upon each other. If this be true,
  At thought of which my whole soul languishes
  And faints, and hath no pulse, no breath, as tho'
  A man in some still garden should infuse
  Rich attar in the bosom of the rose,
  Till, drunk with its own wine and overfull
  Of sweetness, and in smelling of itself,
  It fall on its own thorns--if this be true--
  And that way my wish leaneth evermore
  Still to believe it--'tis so sweet a thought,
  Why in the utter stillness of the soul
  Doth question'd memory answer not, nor tell,
  Of this our earliest, our closest drawn,
  Most loveliest, most delicious union?
  Oh, happy, happy outset of my days!
  Green springtide, April promise, glad new year
  Of Being, which with earliest violets,
  And lavish carol of clear-throated larks,
  Fill'd all the march of life.--I will not speak of thee;
  These have not seen thee, these can never know thee,
  They cannot understand me. Pass on then
  A term of eighteen years. Ye would but laugh
  If I should tell ye how I heard in thought
  Those rhymes, 'The Lion and the Unicorn'
  'The Four-and-twenty Blackbirds' 'Banbury Cross,'
  'The Gander' and 'The man of Mitylene,'
  And all the quaint old scraps of ancient crones,
  Which are as gems set in my memory,
  Because she learn'd them with me. Or what profits it
  To tell ye that her father died, just ere
  The daffodil was blown; or how we found
  The drowned seaman on the shore? These things
  Unto the quiet daylight of your minds
  Are cloud and smoke, but in the dark of mine
  Show traced with flame. Move with me to that hour,
  Which was the hinge on which the door of Hope,
  Once turning, open'd far into the outward,
  And never closed again.

                        I well remember,
  It was a glorious morning, such a one
  As dawns but once a season. Mercury
  On such a morning would have flung himself
  From cloud to cloud, and swum with balanced wings
  To some tall mountain. On that day the year
  First felt his youth and strength, and from his spring
  Moved smiling toward his summer. On that day,
  Love working shook his wings (that charged the winds
  With spiced May-sweets from bound to bound) and blew
  Fresh fire into the sun, and from within
  Burst thro' the heated buds, and sent his soul
  Into the songs of birds, and touch'd far-off
  His mountain-altars, his high hills, with flame
  Milder and purer. Up the rocks we wound;
  The great pine shook with lovely sounds of joy,
  That came on the sea-wind. As mountain brooks
  Our blood ran free: the sunshine seem'd to brood
  More warmly on the heart than on the brow.
  We often paused, and looking back, we saw
  The clefts and openings in the hills all fill'd
  With the blue valley and the glistening brooks,
  And with the low dark groves--a land of Love;
  Where Love was worshipp'd upon every height,
  Where Love was worshipp'd under every tree--
  A land of promise, flowing with the milk
  And honey of delicious memories
  Down to the sea, as far as eye could ken,
  From verge to verge it was a holy land,
  Still growing holier as you near'd the bay,
  For where the temple stood. When we had reach'd
  The grassy platform on some hill, I stoop'd,
  I gather'd the wild herbs, and for her brows
  And mine wove chaplets of the self-same flower,
  Which she took smiling, and with my work there
  Crown'd her clear forehead. Once or twice she told me
  (For I remember all things), to let grow
  The flowers that run poison in their veins.
  She said, 'The evil flourish in the world';
  Then playfully she gave herself the lie:
  'Nothing in nature is unbeautiful,
  So, brother, pluck and spare not.' So I wove
  Even the dull-blooded poppy, 'whose red flower
  Hued with the scarlet of a fierce sunrise,
  Like to the wild youth of an evil king,
  Is without sweetness, but who crowns himself
  Above the secret poisons of his heart
  In his old age'--a graceful thought of hers
  Graven on my fancy! As I said, with these
  She crown'd her forehead. O how like a nymph,
  A stately mountain-nymph, she look'd! how native
  Unto the hills she trod on! What an angel!
  How clothed with beams! My eyes, fix'd upon hers,
  Almost forgot even to move again.
  My spirit leap'd as with those thrills of bliss
  That shoot across the soul in prayer, and show us
  That we are surely heard. Methought a light
  Burst from the garland I had woven, and stood
  A solid glory on her bright black hair:
  A light, methought, broke from her dark, dark eyes,
  And shot itself into the singing winds;
  A light, methought, flash'd even from her white robe,
  As from a glass in the sun, and fell about
  My footsteps on the mountains.

                      About sunset
  We came unto the hill of woe, so call'd
  Because the legend ran that, long time since,
  One rainy night, when every wind blew loud,
  A woful man had thrust his wife and child
  With shouts from off the bridge, and following, plunged
  Into the dizzy chasm below. Below,
  Sheer thro' the black-wall'd cliff the rapid brook
  Shot down his inner thunders, built above
  With matted bramble and the shining gloss
  Of ivy-leaves, whose low-hung tresses, dipp'd
  In the fierce stream, bore downward with the wave.
  The path was steep and loosely strewn with crags
  We mounted slowly: yet to both of us
  It was delight, not hindrance: unto both
  Delight from hardship to be overcome,
  And scorn of perilous seeming: unto me
  Intense delight and rapture that I breathed,
  As with a sense of nigher Deity,
  With her to whom all outward fairest things
  Were by the busy mind referr'd, compared,
  As bearing no essential fruits of excellence.
  Save as they were the types and shadowings
  Of hers--and then that I became to her
  A tutelary angel as she rose,
  And with a fearful self-impelling joy
  Saw round her feet the country far away,
  Beyond the nearest mountain's bosky brows,
  Burst into open prospect--heath and hill,
  And hollow lined and wooded to the lips--
  And steep down walls of battlemented rock
  Girded with broom or shiver'd into peaks--
  And glory of broad waters interfused,
  Whence rose as it were breath and steam of gold;
  And over all the great wood rioting
  And climbing, starr'd at slender intervals
  With blossom tufts of purest white; and last,
  Framing the mighty landskip to the West,
  A purple range of purple cones, between
  Whose interspaces gush'd, in blinding bursts,
  The incorporate light of sun and sea.

