"Oh, well," returned John, "I've thought of that too. And you'll find
that when, the county treasury changes hands in '79, you'll have to
look after the bond account and the treasurer's books and make a
little entry to satisfy the bonds when they really fall due;
then--I'll show you about it when we're over at the court-house. But
if we can't get the money back with Gabe or the next man, the time
will come when we can."

And Bob Hendricks looked at the natty little man before him and
sighed, and began working for the Larger Good also. And afterwards as
the months flew by the Golden Belt Wheat Company paid the interest on
the forged note, and the bank paid the Golden Belt Wheat Company
interest on a daily ledger balance of nine thousand, and all went
happily. The Larger Good accepted the sacrifices of truth, and went on
its felicitous way.

After Barclay left the bank that night, Hendricks found still more of
the truth. And the devil in the background of his soul came out and
glared through the young man's sleepless eyes as he appeared in
Barclay's office in the morning and said, before he had found a chair,
"John, what's your idea about those farmers' mortgages? Are you going
to let them pay them, or are you going to make them sell under that
option that you've got in them?"

"Why," asked Barclay, "what's it to us? Haven't the courts decided
that that kind of an option is a sale--clear through to the United
States Supreme Court?"

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" persisted Hendricks.

Barclay squinted sidewise at his partner for a few seconds and said,
"Well, it's no affair of ours; we've sold all the mortgages anyway."

Hendricks wagged his head impatiently and exclaimed, "Quit your
dodging and give me a square answer--what have you got up your sleeve
about those options?"

Barclay rose, limped to the window, and looked out as he answered:
"Well, I've always supposed we'd fix it up some way to buy back those
mortgages and then take the land we want for ourselves--for you and
me personally--and give the poor land back to the farmers if they pay
the money we lent them."

"Well," returned Hendricks, "just count me out on that. Whatever I
make in this deal, and you seem to think our share will be plenty,
goes to getting those farmers back their land. So far as I'm concerned
that money we paid them was rent, not a loan!"

Barclay dropped his hands in astonishment and gaped at Hendricks.

"Well, my dear Miss Nancy," he exclaimed, "when did you get religion?"

The two men glared at each other a moment, and Hendricks grappled his
devil and drew a long breath and replied: "Well, you heard what I
said." And then he added: "I'm pretty keen for money, John, but when
it comes to skinning a lot of neighbours out of land that you and
every one says is going to raise thirty dollars' worth of wheat to the
acre this year alone, and only paying them ten dollars an acre for the
title to the land itself--" He did not finish. After a pause he
added: "Why, they'll mob you, man. I've got to live with those
farmers." Barclay sneered at Hendricks without speaking and Hendricks
stepped over to him and drew back his open hand as he said angrily,
"Stop it--stop it, I say." Then he exclaimed: "I'm not what you'd
call nasty nice, John--but I'm no robber. I can't take the rent of
that land for nothing, raise a thirty-dollar crop on every acre of it,
and make them pay me ten dollars an acre to get back the poor land and
steal the good land, on a hocus-pocus option."

"'I do not use the nasty weed, said little Robert Reed,'" replied
Barclay, with a leer on his face. Then, he added: "I've held your
miserable little note-shaving shop up by main strength for a year, by
main strength and awkwardness, and now you come home with your mouth
all fixed for prisms and prunes, and want to get on a higher plane.
You try that," continued Barclay, and his eyes blazed at Hendricks,
"and you'll come down town some morning minus a bank."

Then the devil in Bob Hendricks was freed for an exultant moment, as
his hands came out of his pockets and clamped down on Barclay's
shoulders, and shook him till his teeth rattled.

"Not with me, John, not with me," he cried, and he felt his fingers
clutching for the thin neck so near them, and then suddenly his hands
went back to his pockets. "Now, another thing--you got Brownwell to
lend the colonel that money?" Hendricks was himself.

Barclay nodded.

"And you got Brownwell to sign a lot of accommodation paper there at
the bank?"

"Yes--to cover our own overdrafts," retorted Barclay. "It was either
that or bust--and I preferred not to bust. What's more, if we had
gone under there at one stage of the game when Brownwell helped us, we
could have been indicted for obtaining money under false
pretences--you and I, I mean. I'm perfectly willing to stick my head
inside the jail and look around," Barclay grinned, "but I'll be damned
if I'm going clear inside for any man--not when I can find a way to
back out." Barclay tried to laugh, but Hendricks would not let him.

"And so you put up Molly to bail you out." Barclay did not answer and
Hendricks went on bitterly: "Oh, you're a friend, John Barclay, you're
a loyal friend. You've sold me out like a dog, John--like a dog!"

Barclay, sitting at his desk, playing with a paper-weight, snarled
back: "Why don't you get in the market yourself, if you think I've
sold you out? Why don't you lend the old man some money?"

"And take it from the bank you've just got done robbing of everything
but the wall-paper?" Hendricks retorted.

"No," cried Barclay, in a loud voice. "Come off your high horse and
take the profits we'll make on our wheat, pay off old Brownwell and
marry her."

"And let the bank bust and the farmers slide?" asked Hendricks, "and
buy back Molly with stolen money? Is that your idea?"

"Well," Barclay snapped, "you have your choice, so if you think more
of the bank and your old hayseeds than you do of Molly, don't come
blubbering around me about selling her."

"John," sighed Hendricks, after a long wrestle--a final contest with
his demon, "I've gone all over that. And I have decided that if I've
got to swindle seventy-five or a hundred farmers--most of them old
soldiers on their homesteads--out of their little all, and cheat five
hundred depositors out of their money to get Molly, she and I wouldn't
be very happy when we thought of the price, and we'd always think of
the price." His demon was limp in the background of his soul as he
added: "Here are some papers I brought over. Let's get back to the
settlement--fix them up and bring them over to the bank this morning,
will you?" And laying a package carefully on the table, Hendricks
turned and went quickly out of the room.

After Hendricks left the office that May morning, Barclay sat
whistling the air of the song of the "Evening Star," looking blankly
at a picture of Wagner hanging beside a picture of Jay Gould. The tune
seemed to restore his soul. When he had been whistling softly for five
minutes or so, the idea flashed across his mind that flour was the one
thing used in America more than any other food product and that if a
man had his money invested in the manufacture and sale of flour, he
would have an investment that would weather any panic. The idea
overcame him, and he shut his eyes and his ears and gripped his chair
and whistled and saw visions. Molly Culpepper came into the room, and
paused a moment on the threshold as one afraid to interrupt a sleeper.
She saw the dapper little man kicking the chair rounds with his
dangling heels, his flushed face reflecting a brain full of blood, his
eyes shut, his head thrown far back, so that his Adam's apple stuck up
irrelevantly, and she knew only by the persistence of the soft low
whistle that he was awake, clutching at some day-dream. When she
cleared her throat, he was startled and stared at her foolishly for a
moment, with the vision still upon him. His wits came to him, and he
rose to greet her.

"Well--well--why--hello, Molly--I was just figuring on a matter,"
he said as he put her in a chair, and then he added, "Well--I wasn't
expecting you."

Even before she could speak his lips were puckering to pick up the
tune he had dropped. She answered, "No, John, I wanted to see you--so
I just came up."

"Oh, that's all right, Molly--what is it?" he returned.

"Well--" answered the young woman, listlessly, "it's about; father.
You know he's badly in debt, and some way--of course he sells lots of
land and all, but you know father, John, and he just doesn't--oh, he
just keeps in debt."

Barclay had been lapsing back into his revery as she spoke, but he
pulled himself out and replied: "Oh, yes, Molly--I know about father
all right. Can't you make him straighten things out?"

"Well, no. John, that's just it. His money comes in so irregularly,
this month a lot and next month nothing, that it just spoils him. When
he gets a lot he spends it like a prince," she smiled sadly and
interjected: "You know he is forever giving away--and then while he's
waiting he gets in debt again. Then we are as poor as the people for
whom he passes subscription papers, and that's just what I wanted to
see you about."

Barclay took his eyes off Jay Gould's picture long enough to look at
the brown-eyed girl with an oval face and a tip of a chin that just
fitted the hollow of a man's hand; there were the smallest brown
freckles in the world across the bridge of her nose, and under her
eyes there was the faintest suggestion of dark shading. Youth was in
her lips and cheeks, and when she smiled there were dimples. But
John's eyes went back to Jay Gould's solemn black whiskers and he said
from his abstraction, "Well, Molly, I wish I could help you."

"Well, I knew you would, John, some way; and oh, John, I do need help
so badly." She paused a moment and gazed at him piteously and
repeated, "So badly." But his eyes did not move from the sacred
whiskers of his joss. The vision was flaming in his brain, and with
his lips parted, he whistled "The Evening Star" to conjure it back and
keep it with him. The girl went on:--

"About that money Mr. Brownwell loaned father, John." She flushed and
cried, "Can't you find some way for father to borrow the money and pay
Mr. Brownwell--now that your wheat is turning out so well?"

The young man pulled himself out of his day-dream and said,
"Well--why--you see, Molly--I--Well now, to be entirely frank with
you, Molly, I'm going into a business that will take all of my
credit--and every cent of my money."

He paused a moment, and the girl asked, "Tell me, John, will the wheat
straighten things up at the bank?"

"Well, it might if Bob had any sense--but he's got a fool notion of
considering a straight mortgage that those farmers gave on their land
as rent, and isn't going to make them redeem their land,--his share
of it, I mean,--and if he doesn't do that, he'll not have a cent, and
he couldn't lend your father any money." Barclay was anxious to get
back to his "Evening Star" and his dream of power, so he asked, "Why,
Molly, what's wrong?"

"John," she began, "this is a miserable business to talk about; but it
is business, I guess." She stopped and looked at him piteously. "Well,
John, father's debt to Mr. Brownwell--the ten-thousand-dollar loan on
the house--will be due in August." The young man assented. And after
a moment she sighed, "That is why I'm to be married in August." She
stood a moment looking out of the window and cried, "Oh, John, John,
isn't there some way out--isn't there, John?"

Barclay rose and limped to her and answered harshly: "Not so long as
Bob is a fool--no, Molly. If he wants to go mooning around releasing
those farmers from their mortgages--there's no way out. But I
wouldn't care for a man who didn't think more of me than he did of a
lot of old clodhoppers."

The girl looked at the hard-faced youth a moment in silence, and
turned without a word and left the room. Barclay floated away on his
"Evening Star" and spun out his dream as a spider spins his web, and
when Hendricks came into the office for a mislaid paper half an hour
later, Barclay still was figuring up profits, and making his web
stronger. As Hendricks, having finished his errand, was about to go,
Barclay stopped him.

"Bob, Molly's been up here. As nearly as I can get at it, Brownwell
has promised to renew the colonel's mortgage in August. If he and
Molly aren't married by then--no more renewals from him. Don't be a
fool, Bob; let your sod-busters go hang. If you don't get their farms,
some one else will!"

Hendricks looked at his partner a minute steadily, grunted, and strode
out of the room. And the incident slipped from John Barclay's mind,
and the web of the spider grew stronger and stronger in his brain, but
it cast a shadow that was to reach across his life.

After Hendricks went from his office that morning, Barclay bounded
back, like a boy at play, to the vision of controlling the flour
market. He saw the waving wheat of Garrison County coming to the
railroad, and he knew that his railroad rates were so low that the
miller on the Sycamore could not ship a pound of flour profitably, and
Barclay's mind gradually comprehended that through railroad rates he
controlled the mill, and could buy it at his leisure, upon his own
terms. Then the whole scheme unfolded itself before his closed eyes as
he sat with his head tilted back and pillowed in his hands. If his
railroad concession made it possible for him to underbid the miller at
the Ridge, why could he not get other railroad concessions and
underbid every miller along the line of the Corn Belt road, by
dividing profits with the railroad officials? As he spun out his
vision, he could hear the droning voices of General Ward and Colonel
Culpepper in the next room; but he did not heed them.

They were discussing the things of the day,--indeed, the things of a
fortnight before, to be precise,--the reception given by the
Culpeppers to celebrate their silver wedding anniversary. The windows
were open, and Barclay could hear the men's voices, and he knew
vaguely that they were talking of Lige Bemis. For Barclay had
tactfully asked the colonel as a favour to invite Mr. and Mrs. Bemis
to the silver wedding reception. So the Bemises came. Mrs. Bemis, who
was rather stout, even for a woman in her early forties, wore black
satin and jet ornaments, including black jet ear bobs of tremendous
size. And Watts McHurdie was so touched by the way ten years under a
roof had tamed the woman whom he had known of old as "Happy Hallie,"
that he wrote a poem for the _Banner_ about the return of the
"Prodigal Daughter," which may be found in Garrison County scrap-books
of that period. As for Mr. Bemis, he went slinking about the outskirts
of the crowd, showing his teeth considerably, and making it obvious
that he was there.

So as John Barclay rode his "Evening Star" to glory, in the next room
General Ward turned to the colonel, who stood puffing in the doorway
of the general's law-office. "Martin, did John Barclay make you invite
that woman to your house--that Bemis woman?"

The colonel got his breath slowly after climbing the stair, and he did
not reply at once. But he smiled, and stood with his arms akimbo a few
seconds before he spoke. "Well now, General--since you ask it, I may
as well confess it pointedly--I am ashamed to say he did!"

Ward motioned the colonel to a seat and asked impatiently, "Ashamed?"

"Well," responded Culpepper, as he put his feet in the window ledge,
"she's as good as I am--if you come down to that! Why shouldn't I,
who pretend to be a gentleman,--a Virginia gentleman, I may say,
sir,--why shouldn't I be ashamed, disgraced, sir, disgraced in point
of fact, that I had to be forced to invite any person in all God's
beautiful world to my home?"

Ward looked at the colonel coldly a moment and then blurted out: "Ah,
shucks, sir--stuff and nonsense! You know what she was before the
war--Happy Hally! My gracious, Martin, how could you?"

Martin Culpepper brought his chair down with a bang and turned
squarely to Ward. "General, the war's over now. I knew Happy
Hally--and I knew the Red Legs she trained with. And we're making
senators and governors and state officers and indeed, I may say,
prominent citizens out of them. Why not give Hally her show? You damn
cold-nosed Yankee Brahmins--you have Faith and you have Hope, but you
have no more Charity than a sausage-grinder." The colonel rose, and
cried with some asperity, "General, if you'd preach about the poor
less, and pray with 'em more, you'd know more about your fellow-men,
sir!"

Perhaps this conversation should not have been set down here; for it
has no direct relation to the movement of this narrative. The
narrative at this point should be hurrying along to tell how John
Barclay and Bob Hendricks cleared up a small fortune on their wheat
deal, and how that autumn Barclay bought the mill at Sycamore Ridge by
squeezing its owner out, and then set about to establish four branches
of the Golden Belt Wheat Company's elevator service along the line of
the new railroad, and how he controlled the wheat output of three
counties the next year through his enterprise. These facts carry John
Barclay forward toward his life's goal. And while these two
middle-aged gentlemen--the general and the colonel--were in the next
room wrangling over the youthful love affairs of a middle-aged lady, a
great dream was shaping in Barclay's head, and he did not heed them.
He was dreaming of controlling the wheat market of the Golden Belt
Railroad, through railroad-rate privileges, and his fancy was feeling
its way into flour, and comprehending what might be done with wheat
products.

It was a crude dream, but he was aflame with it, and yet--John
Barclay, aged twenty-five, was a young man with curly hair and
flattered himself that he could sing. And there was always in him that
side of his nature, so the reader must know that when Nellie Logan
came to his office that bright summer morning and found him wrapped in
his day-dream of power, she addressed herself not to the Thane of
Wheat who should be King hereafter, but to the baritone singer in the
Congregational choir, and the wheat king scampered back to the dream
world when John replied to Nellie's question.

"So it's _your_ wedding, is it, Nellie--your wedding," he repeated.
"Well, where does Watts come in?" And then, before she answered, he
went on, "You bet I'll sing at your wedding, and what's more, I'll
bring along my limping Congregational foot, and I'll dance at your
wedding."

"Well, I just knew you would," said the young woman.

"So old Watts thought I wouldn't, did he?" asked Barclay. "The old
skeezicks--Well, well! Nellie, you tell him that the fellow who was
with Watts when he was shot ten miles from Springfield isn't going to
desert him when he gets a mortal wound in the heart." Then Barclay
added: "You get the music and take it down to Jane, and tell her to
teach me, and I'll be there. Jane says you're going to put old Watts
through all the gaits."

He leaned back in his swivel chair and smiled at his visitor. He had a
slow drawl that he used in teasing, and one who heard that voice and
afterward heard the harsh bark of the man in driving a bargain or
browbeating an adversary would have to look twice to realize that the
same man was talking. A little over an hour before in that very room
he had looked at Bob Hendricks from under wrinkled brows with the
vertical line creased between his eyes and snarled, "Well, then, if
you think she's going to marry that fellow because I got him to lend
the colonel some money, why don't you go and lend the colonel some
more money and get her back?"

But there was not a muscle twitching in his face as he talked to
Nellie Logan, not a break in his voice, not a ruffle of a hair, to
tell her that John Barclay had broken with the friend of his boyhood
and the partner of his youth, and that he had closed and bolted the
Door of Hope on Molly Culpepper. He drawled on: "Jane was saying that
you were going to have Bob and Molly for best man and bridesmaid.
Ought you to do that? You know they--"

He did not finish the sentence, but she replied: "Oh, yes, I know
about that. I told Watts he ought to have Mr. Brownwell; but he's as
stubborn as a mule about just that one thing. Everything else--the
flower girls and the procession and the ring service and all--he's so
nice about. And you know I just had to have Molly."

John slapped the arms of his chair and laughed. "As old Daddy Mason
says, 'Now hain't that just like a woman!' Well, Nellie, it's your
wedding, and a woman is generally not married more than once, so it's
all right. Go it while you're young."

And so he teased her out of the room, and when Sycamore Ridge packed
itself into the Congregational Church one June night, to witness the
most gorgeous church wedding the town ever had seen, John opened the
ceremonies by singing the "Voice that breathed o'er Eden" most
effectively, and Sycamore Ridge in its best clothes, rather stuffed
and uncomfortable thereby, was in that unnatural attitude toward the
world where it thought John Barclay's voice, a throaty baritone, with
much affectation in the middle register, a tendency to flat in the
upper register, and thick fuzz below "C," was beautiful, though John
often remembered that night with unalloyed shame. He saw himself as he
stood there, primped to kill, like a prize bull at a fair, bellowing
out a mawkish sentiment in a stilted voice, and he wondered how the
Ridge ever managed to endure him afterwards.

But this is a charitable world, and his temperament was such that he
did not realize that no one paid much attention to him, after the real
ceremony started. When the bride and the bridesmaid came down the
aisle, Nellie Logan radiant in the gown which every woman in the
church knew had come from Chicago and had been bought of the drummer
at wholesale cost, saving the bride over fifteen dollars on the
regular price--what did the guests care for a dapper little man
singing a hymn tune through his nose, even if he was the richest young
man in town? And when Molly Culpepper--dear little Molly
Culpepper--came after the bride, blushing through her powder, and
looking straight at the floor for fear her eyes would wander after her
heart and wondering if the people knew--it was of no consequence that
John Barclay's voice frazzled on "F"; for if the town wished to notice
a man at that wedding, there was Watts McHurdie in a paper collar,
with a white embroidered bow tie and the first starched shirt the town
had ever seen him wear, badly out of step with the procession, while
the best man dragged him like an unwilling victim to the altar; and of
course there was the best man,--and a handsome best man as men
go,--fair-skinned, light-haired, blue-eyed, with a good glow on his
immobile face and rather sad eyes that, being in a man's head, went
boldly where they chose and where all the women in the town could see
them go. So there were other things to remember that night besides
John Barclay's singing and the festive figure he cut at that wedding:
there was the wedding supper at the Wards', and the wedding reception
at the Culpeppers', and after it all the dance in Culpepper Hall. And
all the town remembers these things, but only two people remember a
moment after the reception when every one was hurrying away to the
dance and when the bridesmaid--such a sweet, pretty little
bridesmaid--was standing alone in a deserted room with a tall
groomsman--just for a moment--just for a moment before Adrian
Brownwell came up bustling and bristling, but long enough to say,
"Bob--did you take my gloves there in the carriage as we were coming
home from the church?" and long enough for him to answer, "Why, did
you lose them?" and then to get a good square look into her eyes. It
was only a few seconds in the long evening--less than a second that
their eyes met; but it was enough to be remembered forever; though
why--you say! It was all so commonplace; there was nothing in it that
you would have thought worth remembering for a moment. "Bob, did you
take my gloves?" "Why, did you lose them?" and then a glance of the
eyes. Surely there are more romantic words than these. But when a man
and a woman go in for collecting antiques in their dialogues, Heaven
only knows what old rubbish you will find in their attics, scoured off
and rebuilt and polished with secret tears until the old stuff glows
like embers.

And that is why, when the music was silent in Culpepper Hall, and the
tall young man walked slowly home alone, as he clicked his own gate
behind him, he brought from his pocket two little white gloves,--just
two ordinary white gloves,--and held them to his lips and lifted his
arms in despair once and let them drop as he stood before his
doorstep. And that is why a girl, a little girl with the weariest face
in the town, looked out of her bedroom window that night and whispered
over and over to herself the name she dared not speak. And all this
was going on while the town was turning over in its bed, listening to
the most tumultuous charivari that Sycamore Ridge has ever known.

Night after night that summer faithful Jake Dolan walked the streets
of Sycamore Ridge with Bob Hendricks. By day they lived apart, but at
night the young man often would look up the elder, and they would walk
and walk together, but never once did Hendricks mention Molly's name
nor refer to her in any way; yet Jake Dolan knew why they walked
abroad. How did he know? How do we know so many things in this world
that are neither seen nor heard? And the Irish--they have the drop of
blood that defies mathematics; the Irish are the only people in the
world whom kind Providence permits to add two and two together to make
six. "You say 'tis four," said Dolan, one night, as he and Hendricks
stood on the bridge listening to the roar from the dam. "I say 'tis
six. There is this and there is that and you say they make the other.
Not at all; they make something else entirely different. You take your
two and your two and make your four and try your four on the world,
and it works--yes, it works up to a point; but there is something
left over, something unexplained; you don't know what. I do. It's the
other two. Therefore I say to you, Mr. Robert Hendricks, that two and
two make six, because God loves the Irish, and for no other reason on
earth."

So much for the dreams of Molly, the memories of Bob, and the vagaries
of Mr. Dolan. They were as light as air. But in John Barclay's life a
vision was rising--a vision that was real, palpable, and vital; a
vision of wealth and power,--and as the days and the months passed,
the shadow of that vision grew big and black and real in a score of
lives.


CHAPTER XV


As June burned itself gloriously into July, Robert Hendricks no longer
counted the weeks until Molly Culpepper should be married, but counted
the days. So three weeks and two days, from the first of July, became
three weeks, then two weeks and six days, and then one week and six
days, and then six days, five days, four days, three days; and then it
became seventy-two hours. And the three threshing machines of the
Golden Belt Wheat Company were pouring their ceaseless stream into the
company's great bins. The railroad was only five miles away, and
Hendricks was sitting in his office in the bank going over and over
his estimates of the year's crop which was still lying in the
field,--save the crop from less than two thousand acres that was
harvested and threshed. From that he judged that there would be enough
to redeem his share of the farmers' mortgages, which in Hendricks'
mind could be nothing but rent for the land, and to pay his share of
the bank's fraudulent loans to the company--and leave nothing more.

The fact that John expected to buy back the mortgages from Eastern
investors who had bought them, and then squeeze the farmers out of
their land by the option to buy hidden in the contract, did not move
Hendricks. He saw his duty in the matter, but as the golden flood rose
higher in the bins, and as hour after hour rolled by bringing him
nearer and nearer to the time when Molly Culpepper should marry Adrian
Brownwell, a temptation came to him, and he dallied with it as he sat
figuring at his desk. The bank was a husk. Its real resources had been
sold, and a lot of bogus notes--accommodation paper, they called
it--had taken the place of real assets. For Hendricks to borrow money
of any other institution as the officer of the Exchange National Bank
of Sycamore Ridge would be a crime. And yet he knew that ten thousand
dollars would save her, and his brain was wrought with a madness. And
so he sat figuring while the hours slipped by, trying to discount his
future income from the wheat to justify himself in taking the money
from the bank's vaults. His figures did not encourage him. They showed
him that to be honest with the farmers he might hope for no profit
from that year's crop, and with two years of failure behind him, he
knew that to discount the next year's crop would be nothing less than
stealing. Then, strong and compelling, came the temptation to let the
farmers fight it out with the Eastern investors. The temptation rocked
the foundations of his soul. He knew it was wrong; he knew he would be
a thief, if he did it, no matter what the law might say, no matter
what the courts might adjudge. To Barclay what was legal was right,
and what the courts had passed upon--that was legal. But Hendricks
sat with his pencil in his hand, going over and over his figures,
trying to silence his conscience.

It was a hot afternoon that he sat there, and idly through his mind
went the computation that he had but sixty-six more hours of hope, and
as he looked at the clock he added, "and thirty-eight minutes and
twenty-seven seconds," when Martin Culpepper came ambling into the
back room of the bank.

"Robert," began the colonel, with his eyes on the floor and his hands
deep in his trousers pockets, "I've just been talking to John." The
colonel rubbed his neck absent-mindedly and went on, "John's a Yankee,
Robert--the blue stripe on his belly is fast blue, sir; it won't
fade, change colour, or crock, in point of fact, not a damned bit,
sir, not till the devil covers it with a griddle stripe, sir, I may
say." The colonel slouched into a chair and looked into Hendricks'
face with a troubled expression and continued, "That John certainly is
Yankee, Robert, and he's too many for me. Yes, sir, certainly he's got
me up in the air, sir--up in the air, and as I may say a mile west,
on that wheat deal." Hendricks leaned forward unconsciously, and the
colonel dropped both hands to his knees and leaned toward Hendricks.
"Robert Hendricks," asked the colonel, as he bored his deep black eyes
into the younger man, "did you know about that option in the wheat
land mortgage? Answer me, sir!"

"Not at the time, Colonel," returned Hendricks, and began, "but I--"

"Well, neither did I. And I got half of those mortgages myself. Lige
and I did it all, sir. And Lige knew--Lige, he says it's legal, but I
say it's just common stealing." Hendricks moistened his lips and sat
with mute face gazing at the colonel. The colonel went on, "And now
the farmers have found it out, and the devil's to pay, sir, with no
pitch hot!"

Hendricks cleared his throat and began, "Well, Colonel--I don't know;
of course I--"

The elder man rose to his full height and glared at the younger, and
cried, "Ah, Robert, Robert, fire in the mountain, snakes in the
grass--you do know--you do know, sir. You know that to hold up the
farmers of this county in the midst of what amounted to a famine, not
to let them borrow a dollar in the county except on a gouging
mortgage, and then to slip into that mortgage a blind option to sell
for ten dollars an acre land that is worth three times that, is
stealing, and so does John Barclay know that, and, worst of all, so
does Martin Culpepper know that, and the farmers are finding it
out--my neighbours and comrades that I helped to swindle, sir--to
rob, I may say--they know what it is."

The colonel's voice was rising, and he stood glaring and puffing
before the young man, shaking his head furiously. Young Hendricks was
engaged in swallowing his Adam's apple and blinking unsteadily, and
just as he started to reply, the colonel, who had caught his temper by
the horn and was shaking it into submission, cried: "Yes, sir, Robert,
that's what I said, sir; those were my very words in point of fact.
And," he began as he sat down and sighed, "what galls me most of all,
Robert, is that John laughs at me. Here you've been gagging and
gulping and sputtering, boy, to keep down your conscience, and so I
know--yes, Robert, I'm dead sure, I may say, that you're all right;
but John giggles--giggles, sir, snickers in point of fact, as though
he had done something smart in getting me to go out among my old
soldier friends and rob 'em of their homesteads. He doesn't care for
my good name any more than for his own."

Hendricks drummed with his fingers on the desk before him. His blue
eyes looked into nothing, and his mind's eye saw the house of cards he
had been dallying with totter and fall. He drew a deep breath before
he looked up at the colonel, and said rather sadly: "Well, Colonel,
you're right. I told John the day after I came home that I wouldn't
stand it." He drummed with his fingers for a moment before continuing,
"I suppose you got about half of those contracts, didn't you?"

The colonel pulled from his pocket a crumpled paper and handed it to
Hendricks, "Here they are, sir--and every one from a soldier or a
soldier's widow, every one a homestead, sir."

Hendricks walked to the window, and stood looking out with his eyes
cast down. He fumbled his Masonic watch-charm a moment, and then
glancing at it, caught the colonel's eye and smiled as he said: "I'm
on the square, Colonel, in this matter. I'll protect you." He went to
the elder man and put his hands on his shoulder as he said: "You go to
your comrades and tell them this, Colonel, that between now and
snowfall every man will have his land clear. But," he added, picking
up the list of the colonel's contracts, "don't mention me in the
matter." He paused and continued, "It might hurt the bank. Just tell
them you'll see that it's taken care of."

The colonel put out his hand as he rose. When their hands met he was
saying: "Blood tells, Robert Hendricks, blood tells. Wasn't your
sainted father a Democrat, boy, a Democrat like me, sir,--a Union
Democrat in point of fact?" The colonel squeezed the younger man's
hand as he cried: "A Union Democrat, sir, who could shoot at his
party, sir, but never could bring himself to vote against it--not
once, sir--not once. And Robert Hendricks, when I see you acting as
you've acted just now, sir, this very minute in point of fact, I may
say, sir, that you're almost honest enough to be a Democrat,
sir--like your sainted father." The colonel held the young man's hand
affectionately for a time and then dropped it, sighing, "Ah, sir--if
it wasn't for your damned Yankee free schools and your damned Yankee
surroundings, what a Democrat you would have made, Robert--what a
grand Democrat!" The colonel waved his silver tobacco box proudly and
made for the door and left Hendricks sitting at his desk, drumming on
the board with one hand, and resting his head in the other, looking
longingly into the abyss from which he had escaped; for the lure of
the danger still fluttered his soul.

Strength had come to him in that hour to resist the temptation. But
the temptation still was there. For he was a young man, giving up for
an intangible thing called justice the dearest thing in his life. He
had opened the door of his life's despair and had walked in, as much
like a man as he could, but he kept looking back with a heavy heart,
hungering with his whole body and most of his soul for all that he had
renounced. And so, staring at the light of other days, and across the
shadow of what might have been, he let ten long minutes tick past
toward the inevitable hour, and then he rose and put his hand to the
plough for the long furrow.

They are all off the stage now, as Bob Hendricks is standing in the
front door of the bank that August night with his watch in his hand
reckoning the minutes--some four thousand three hundred of
them--until Molly Culpepper will pass from him forever, and as the
stage is almost deserted, we may peep under the rear curtain for a
minute. Observe Sycamore Ridge in the eighties, with Hendricks its
moving spirit, controlling its politics, dominating its
business,--for John Barclay's business has moved to the City and Bob
Hendricks has become the material embodiment of the town. And the town
there on the canvas is a busy town of twenty thousand people. Just
back of that scene we find a convention spread on the canvas, a
political convention wherein Robert Hendricks is struggling for good
government and clean politics. Observe him a taciturn, forceful man,
with his hands on the machinery of his party in the state, shaping its
destinies, directing its politics, seeking no office, keeping himself
in the background, desiring only to serve, and not to advertise his
power. So more and more power comes to him, greater and wider
opportunities to serve his state. His business grows and multiplies,
and he becomes a strong man among men; always reserved, always
cautious, a man whose self-poise makes people take him for a cynic,
though his heart is full of hope and of the joy of life to the very
last. Let us lift up one more rag--one more painted rag in the
scenery of his life--and see him a reformer of national fame; see him
with an unflinching hand pull the wires that control a great national
policy of his party, and watch in that scene wherein he names a
president--even against the power and the money and the organization
of rich men, brutally rich men like John Barclay. Hendricks' thin hair
is growing gray in this scene, and his skin is no longer fresh and
white; but his eyes have a twinkle in them, and the ardour of his soul
glows in a glad countenance. And as he sits alone in his room long
after midnight while the bands are roaring and the processions
cheering and the great city is ablaze with excitement, Robert
Hendricks, turning fifty, winds his watch--the same watch that he
holds in his hand here while we pause to peek under the canvas behind
the scenes--and wonders if Molly will be glad that his side won. He
has not seen her for months, nor talked with her for years, and yet as
he sits there winding his watch after his great strategic victory in
national politics, he hopes fondly that perhaps Molly will know that
he played a clean hand and won a fair game.

Now let us crawl out from under this rubbish of the coming years, back
into Sycamore Ridge. And while the street is deserted, let us turn the
film of events forward, letting them flit by unnoticed past the
wedding of Molly Culpepper and Adrian Brownwell until we come to the
August day when the railroad came to Sycamore Ridge.

Jacob Dolan, sheriff in and for Garrison County for four years,
beginning with 1873, remembered the summer of 1875 to his dying day,
as the year when he tore his blue soldier coat, and for twenty-five
years, after the fight in which the coat was torn, Dolan never put it
on for a funeral or a state occasion, that he did not smooth out the
seam that Nellie Logan McHurdie made in mending the rent place, and
recall the exigencies of the public service which made it necessary to
tear one's clothes to keep the peace.

"You may state to the court in your own way," said the judge at the
trial of the sheriff for assault, "just how the difficulty began."

"Well, sir," answered Dolan, "there was a bit of a celebration in
town, on August 30, it being the day the railroad came in, and in
honour of the occasion I put on my regimentals, and along about--say
eleven o'clock--as the crowd began to thicken up around the bank
corner, and in front of the hardware store, I was walking along, kind
of shoving the way clear for the ladies to pass, when some one behind
me says, 'General Hendricks was an old thief, and his son is no
better,' and I turned around and clapt my eye on this gentleman here.
I'd never seen him before in my whole life, but I knew by the bold
free gay way he had with his tongue that he was from Minneola and bent
on trouble. 'Keep still,' says I, calm and dignified like, bent on
preserving the peace, as was my duty. 'I'll not,' says he. 'You will,'
says I. 'Tis a free country,' says he, coming toward me with one
shoulder wiggling. 'But not for cowards who malign the dead,' says I.
'Well, they were thieves,' says he, shaking his fist and getting more
and more into contempt of court every minute. 'You're a liar,' says I,
maintaining the dignity of my office. 'And you're a thief too,' says
he. 'A what?' says I. 'A thief,' says he. 'Whack,' says I, with my
stick across his head, upholding the dignity of the court. 'Biff,'
says he, with a brick that was handy, more and more contemptuous. 'You
dirty, mangy cur,' says I, grabbing him by the ears and pounding his
head against the wall as I spoke, hoping to get some idea of the
dignity of the court into his rebellious head. 'Whoop,' says he, and,
as he tore my coat, 'Yip yip,' says I, and may it please the court it
was shortly thereafter that the real trouble started, though I
misremember just how at this time." And as there were three "E"
Company men on the jury, they acquitted Dolan and advised the court to
assess a fine on the prosecuting witness for contributory negligence
in resisting an officer.

But the coat--the blue coat with brass buttons, with the straps of a
lieutenant on the shoulders, was mended and even in that same summer
did active service many times. For that was a busy summer for Sycamore
Ridge, and holidays came faster than the months. When the supreme
court decided the Minneola suit to enjoin the building of the
court-house, in favour of Syeamore Ridge, there was another holiday,
and men drew John Barclay around in the new hack with the top down,
and there were fireworks in the evening. For it was John Barclay's
lawsuit. Lige Bemis, who was county attorney, did not try to claim
credit for the work, and when the last acre of the great wheat crop of
the Golden Belt Wheat Company was cut, and threshed, there was a big
celebration and the elevator of the Golden Belt Wheat Company was
formally turned over to the company, and John Barclay was the hero of
another happy occasion. For the elevator, standing on a switch by the
railroad track, was his "proposition." And every one in town knew that
the railroad company had made a rate of wheat to Barclay and his
associates, so low that Minneola could not compete, even if she hauled
her wheat to another station on the road, so Minneola teams lined up
at Barclay's elevator. That autumn Minneola, without a railroad,
without a chance for the county-seat, and without a grain market,
began to fag, and during the last of September, the Mason House came
moving out over the hill road, from Minneola to Sycamore Ridge,
surrounded by a great crowd of enthusiastic men from the Ridge. Every
evening, of the two weeks in which the house was moving, people drove
out from Sycamore Ridge to see it, and Lycurgus Mason, sitting on the
back step smoking,--he could not get into the habit of using the
front steps even in his day of triumph,--was a person of considerable
importance.

Money was plentiful, and the Exchange National Bank grew with the
country. The procession of covered wagons, that had straggled and
failed the year before, began to close ranks in the spring; and in
place of "Buck" and "Ball" and "Star," and "Bright" and "Tom" and
"Jerry," who used to groan under the yoke, horses were hitched to the
wagons, and stock followed after them, and thus Garrison County was
settled, and Sycamore Ridge grew from three to five thousand people in
three years. In the spring of '75 the _Banner_ began to publish a
daily edition, and Editor Brownwell went up and down the railroad on
his pass, attending conventions and making himself a familiar figure
in the state. Times were so prosperous that the people lost interest
in the crime of '73, and General Ward had to stay in his law-office,
but he joined the teetotalers and helped to organize the Good Templars
and the state temperance society. Colonel Culpepper in his prosperity
took to fancy vests, cut extremely low, and the Culpepper women became
the nucleus of organized polite society in the Ridge.

The money that John Barclay made in that first wheat transaction was
the foundation of his fortune. For that money gave him two important
things needed in making money--confidence in himself, and prestige.
He was twenty-five years old then, and he had demonstrated to his
community thoroughly that he had courage, that he was crafty, and that
he went to his end and got results, without stopping for overnice
scruples of honour. Sycamore Ridge and Garrison County, excepting a
few men like General Ward, who were known as cranks, regarded John as
the smartest man in the county--smarter even than Lige Bemis. And the
whole community, including some of the injured farmers themselves,
considered Hendricks a sissy for his scruples, and thought Barclay a
shrewd financier for claiming all that he could get. Barclay got hold
of eight thousand acres of wheat land, in adjacent tracts, and went
ahead with his business. In August he ploughed the ground for another
crop. Also he persuaded his mother to let him build a new home on the
site of the Barclay home by the Sycamore tree under the ridge, and
when it was done that winter Mr. and Mrs. John Barclay moved out of
their rooms at the Thayer House and lived with John's mother. The
house they built cost ten thousand dollars when it was finished, and
it may still be seen as part of the great rambling structure that he
built in the nineties. John put five hundred dollars' worth of books
into the new house--sets of books, which strangely enough he forced
himself to wade through laboriously, and thus he cultivated a habit of
reading that always remained with him. In those days the books with
cracked backs in his library were Emerson, Browning, and Tennyson. And
after a hard day's work he would come home to his poets and his piano.
He thought out the whole plan of the Barclay Economy Car Door Strip
about midnight, sitting in his night clothes at the piano after
reading "Abt Vogler," and the central idea for the address on the
"Practical Transcendentalist," which he delivered at the opening of
the state university the next year, came to him one winter night after
he had tried to compose a clanging march as an air to fit Emerson's
"The Sphinx." After almost a quarter of a century that address became
the first chapter of Barclay's famous book, which created such
ribaldry in the newspapers, entitled "The Obligations of Wealth."

It was in 1879 that Barclay patented his Economy Door Strip, and put
it in his grain cars. It saved loss of grain in shipping, and Barclay,
being on terms of business intimacy with the railroad men, sold the
Economy Strip to the railroads to use on every car of grain or flour
he shipped. And Lycurgus Mason, taken from the kitchen of the Mason
House, hired a room over McHurdie's harness shop, and made the strips
there. His first day in his new shop is impressed upon his memory by
an incident that is the seed of a considerable part of this story.

He always remembers that day, because, when he got to the Thayer
House, he found John there in the buggy waiting for him, and a crowd
of men sitting around smoking cigars. In the seat by Barclay was a
cigar-box, and Lycurgus cut in, before John could speak, with, "Well,
which is it?"

And John returned, "A girl--get in; Mother Mason needs you."

Lycurgus fumbled under the box lid for a cigar as he got into the
buggy, and repeated: "Mother needs me, eh? Well, now, ain't that just
like a woman, taking a man from his work in the middle of the day?
What are you going to name her?"

"How do you like Jeanette?" asked Barclay, as he turned the horse.
"You know we can't have two Janes," he explained.

"Well," asked the elder man, tentatively, "how does mother stand on
Jeanette?"

"Mother Mason," answered Barclay, "is against it."

"All right," replied Lycurgus, "I vote aye. What does she want?" he
asked.

"Susan B.," returned Barclay.

"Susan B. Anthony?" queried the new grandfather.

"Exactly," replied the new father.

The two rode down the street in silence; as they turned into the
Barclay driveway Lycurgus chuckled, "Well--well--Susan B. Wants to
put breeches on that child before she gets her eyes open." Then he
turned on Barclay with a broad grin of fellowship, as he pinched the
young man's leg and laughed, "Say--John--honest, ain't that just
like a woman?"

And so Jeanette Thatcher Barclay came into this world, and what with
her Grandmother Barclay uncovering her to look at the Thatcher nose,
and her Grandmother Mason taking her to the attic so that she could go
upstairs before she went down, that she might never come down in the
world, and what with her Grandfather Mason rubbing her almost raw with
his fuzzy beard before the women could scream at him, and what with
her father trying to jostle her on his knee, and what with all the
different things Mrs. Ward, the mother of six, would have done to her,
and all the things Mrs. Culpepper, mother of three, would have done to
her, and Mrs. McHurdie, mother of none, prevented the others from
doing, Jeanette had rather an exciting birthday. And Jeanette Barclay
as a young woman often looks at the scrap-book with its crinkly leaves
and reads this item from the _Daily Banner_: "The angels visited our
prosperous city again last Thursday, June 12, and left a little one
named Jeanette at the home of our honoured townsman, John Barclay.
Mother and child progressing nicely." But under this item is a long
poem clipped from a paper printed a week later,--Jeanette has counted
the stanzas many times and knows there are seventeen, and each one
ends with "when the angels brought Jeanette." Her father used to read
the verses to her to tease her when she was in her teens, and once
when she was in her twenties, and Jeanette had the lonely poet out to
dinner one Sunday, she sat with him on the sofa in the library,
looking at the old scrap-book. Their eyes fell upon the verses about
the angels bringing Jeanette, and the girl noticed the old man mumming
it over and smiling.

"Tell me, Uncle Watts," she asked, "why did you make such a long poem
about such a short girl?"

The poet ran his fingers through his rough gray beard, and went on
droning off the lines, and grinning as he read. When he had finished,
he took her pretty hand in his gnarly, bony one and patted the white
firm flesh tenderly as he peered back through the years. "U-h-m, that
was years and years ago, Jeanette--years and years ago, and Nellie
had just bought me my rhyming dictionary. It was the first time I had
a chance to use it." The lyrical artist drummed with his fingers on
the mahogany arm of the sofa. "My goodness, child--what a long column
there was of words rhyming with 'ette.'" He laughed to himself as he
mused: "You know, my dear, I had to let 'brevet' and 'fret' and
'roulette' go, because I couldn't think of anything to say about them.
You don't know how that worries a poet." He looked at the verses in
the book before him and then shook his head sadly: "I was young
then--it seems strange to think I could write that. Youth, youth," he
sighed as he patted the fresh young hand beside him, "it is not by
chance you rhyme with truth."

His eyes glistened, and the girl put her cheek against his and
squeezed the thin, trembling hand as she cried, "Oh, Uncle Watts,
Uncle Watts, you're a dear--a regular dear!"

"In his latter days," writes Colonel Culpepper, in the second edition
of the Biography, "those subterranean fires of life that flowed so
fervently in his youth and manhood smouldered, and he did not write
often. But on occasion the flames would rise and burn for a moment
with their old-time ardour. The poem 'After Glow' was penned one night
just following a visit with a young woman, Jeanette, only daughter of
Honourable and Mrs. John Barclay, whose birth is celebrated elsewhere
in this volume under the title 'When the Angels brought Jeanette.' The
day after the poem 'After Glow' was composed I was sitting in the
harness shop with the poet when the conversation turned upon the
compensations of age. I said: 'Sir, do you not think that one of our
compensations is that found in the freedom and the rare intimacy with
which we are treated by the young women? They no longer seem to fear
us. Is it not sweet?' I asked. Our hero turned from his bench with a
smile and a deprecating gesture as he replied softly, 'Ah,
Colonel--that's just it; that's just the trouble.' And then he took
from a box near by this poem, 'The After Glow,' and read it to me. And
I knew the meaning of the line--

"'Oh, drowsy blood that tosses in its sleep.'

"And so we fell to talking of other days. And until the twilight came
we sat together, dreaming of faded moons."


CHAPTER XVI


Colonel Martin Culpepper was standing with, one foot on the window
ledge in the office of Philemon R. Ward one bright spring morning
watching the procession of humanity file into the post-office and out
into the street upon the regular business of life. Mrs. Watts
McHurdie, a bride of five years and obviously proud of it, hurried by,
and Mrs. John Barclay drove down the street in her phaeton; Oscar
Fernald, with a pencil behind his ear, came out of his office licking
an envelope and loped into the post-office and out like a dog looking
for his bone; and then a lank figure sauntered down the street,
stopping here and there to talk with a passerby, stepping into a
stairway to light a cigar, and betimes leaning languidly against an
awning post in the sun and overhauling farmers passing down Main
Street in their wagons.

"He's certainly a gallus-looking slink," ejaculated the colonel.

The general, writing at his desk, asked, "Who?"

"Our old friend and comrade in arms, Lige Bemis." At the blank look on
the general's face the colonel shook his head wearily. "Don't know
what a gallus-looking slink is, do you? General, the more I live with
you damn Yankees and fight for your flag and die for your country,
sir, the more astonished I am at your limited and provincial knowledge
of the United States language. Here you are, a Harvard graduate, with
the Harvard pickle dripping off your ears, confessing such ignorance
of your mother-tongue. General, a gallus-looking slink is four hoss
thieves, three revenue officers, a tin pedler, and a sheep-killing
dog, all rolled into one man. And as I before remarked, our beloved
comrade, Lige Bemis, is certainly a gallus-looking slink."

"Far be it from me," continued the colonel, "residing as I may say in
a rather open and somewhat exposed domicile--a glass house in
fact--to throw stones at Elijah Westlake Bemis,--far be it." The
colonel patted himself heroically on the stomach and laughed.
"Doubtless, while I haven't been a professional horse thief, nor a
cattle rustler, still, probably, if the truth was known, I've done a
number of things equally distasteful--I was going to say
obnoxious--in the sight of Mr. Bemis, so we'll let that pass." The
colonel stretched his suspenders out and let them flap against the
plaits of his immaculate shirt. "But I will say, General, that as I
see it, it will be a heap handier for me to explain to St. Peter at
the gate the things I've done than if he'd ask me about Lige's
record."

The general scratched along, without answering, and the colonel looked
meditatively into the street; then he began to smile, and the smile
glowed into a beam that bespread his countenance and sank into a mood
that set his vest to shaking "like a bowl full of jelly." "I was just
thinking," he said to nobody in particular, "that if Lige was jumped out
of his grave right quick by Gabriel and hauled up before St. Peter and
asked to justify my record, he'd have some trouble too--considerable
difficulty, I may say. I reckon it's all a matter of having to live with
your sins till you get a good excuse thought up."

The general pushed aside his work impatiently and tilted back in his
chair. "Come, Martin Culpepper, come, come! That won't do. You know
better than that. What's the use of your pretending to be as bad as
Lige Bemis? You know better and I know better and the whole town knows
better. He's little, and he's mean, and snooping, and crooked as a
dog's hind leg. Why, he was in here yesterday--actually in here to
see me. Yes, sir--what do you think of that? Wants to be state
senator."

"So I hear," smiled the colonel.

"Well," continued the general, "he came in here yesterday as pious as
a deacon, and he said that his friends were insisting on his running
because his enemies were bringing up that 'old trouble' on him. He
calls his horse stealing and cattle rustling 'that old trouble.'
Honestly, Martin, you'd think he was being persecuted. It was all I
could do to keep from sympathizing with him. He said he couldn't
afford to retreat under fire, and then he told me how he had been
trying to be a better man, and win the respect of the people--and I
couldn't stand it any longer, and I rose up and shook my fist in his
face and said: 'Lige Bemis, you disreputable, horse-stealing cow
thief, what right have you to ask my help? What right have you got to
run for state senator, anyway?' And, Martin, the brazen whelp reared
back and looked me squarely in the eye and answered without blinking,
'Because, Phil Ward, I want the job.' What do you think of that for
brass?"

The colonel slapped his campaign hat on his leg and laughed. There was
always, even to the last, something feminine in Martin Culpepper's
face when he laughed--a kind of alternating personality of the other
sex seemed to tiptoe up to his consciousness and peek out of his kind
eyes. As he laughed with Ward the colonel spoke: "Criminy, but that's
like him. He's over there talking to Gabe Carnine on the corner now. I
know what he's saying. He has only one speech, and he gets it off to
all of us. He's got his cigar chawed down to a rag, stuck in one
corner of his mouth, and he's saying, 'Gabe--this is the fight of my
life. This is the last time I'm going to ask my friends for help.'
General, I've heard that now, off and on, first and last, from old
Lige at every city, state, county, and lodge election since the war
closed, and I can see how Gabe is twisting and wiggling trying to get
away from it. He's heard it too. Now Lige is saying: 'Gabe, I ain't
going to lie to you; you know me, and you know I've made
mistakes--but they were errors of judgment, and I want to get a
chance to live 'em down. I want to show the young men of this state
that Lige Bemis of the Red Legs is a man--even if he was wild as a
young fellow; it'll prove that a man can rise.' Poor old Gabe--Lige
has got him by the coat front, now. That's the third degree. When he
gets him by the neck and begins to whisper, he's giving him the work
in the uniform rank. He's saying: 'Gabe, I've got to have you with me.
I can't win without you, and I would rather lose than win with you
against me. You stand for all that's upright in this county, and if
you'll come to my aid, I can win.' Here, General--look--Lige's got
him by the neck and the hand. Now for the password right from the
grand lodge, 'Gabe, you'd make a fine state treasurer--I can land it
for you. Make me state senator, and with my state acquaintance, added
to the prestige of this office, I can make a deal that will land you.'
Oh, I know his whole speech," laughed the colonel. "Bob Hendricks is
to be secretary of state, John Barclay is to be governor, Oscar
Fernald is to be state auditor, and the boys say that Lycurgus Mason
has the refusal of warden of the Penitentiary." The colonel chuckled
as he added: "So far as the boys have been able to learn, Lige still
has United States senator, president, and five places in the cabinet
to go on, but Minneola township returns ain't all in yet, and they may
change the result. By the way, General, what did you get?"

The general flushed and replied, "Well, to be perfectly honest with
you, Mart--he did promise me to vote for the dram-shop law."

And in the convention that summer Lige Bemis strode with his ragged
cigar sticking from the corner of his mouth, with his black eyes
blazing, and his shock of black hair on end, begging, bulldozing, and
buying delegates to vote for him. He had the river wards behind him to
a man, and he had the upland townships where the farmers needed a
second name on their notes at the bank; and in the gentleman's
ward--the silk-stocking ward--he had Gabriel Carnine, chairman of
the first ward delegation, casting the solid vote of that ward for
Bemis ballot after ballot. And when Bemis got Minneola township for
fifty dollars,--and everybody in the convention knew it,--he was
declared the nominee of the party with a whoop.

But behind Bemis was the sinister figure of young John Barclay working
for his Elevator Company. He needed Bemis in politics, and Bemis
needed Barclay in business. And there the alliance between Barclay and
Bemis was cemented, to last for a quarter of a century. Barclay and
Bemis went into the campaign together and asked the people to rally to
the support of the party that had put down the rebellion, that had
freed four million slaves, and had put the names of Lincoln and of
Grant and Garfield as stars in the world's firmament of heroes. And
the people of Garrison County responded, and State Senator Elijah
Westlake Bemis did for Barclay in the legislature the things that
Barclay would have preferred not to do for himself, and the Golden
Belt Elevator Company throve and waxed fat. And Lige Bemis, its
attorney, put himself in the way of becoming a "general counsel," with
his name on an opaque glass door. For as Barclay rose in the world, he
found the need of Bemis more and more pressing every year. In politics
the favours a man does for others are his capital, and Barclay's
deposit grew large. He was forever helping some one. His standing with
the powers in the state was good. He was a local railroad attorney,
and knew the men who had passes to give, and who were responsible for
the direction which legislation took during the session. Barclay saw
that they put Bemis on the judiciary committee, and by manipulating
the judiciary committee he controlled a dozen votes through Bemis. He
changed a railroad assessment law, secured the passage of a law
permitting his Elevator Company to cheat the farmers by falsely
grading their wheat, and prevented the passage of half a dozen laws
restricting the powers of railroads. So at the close of the
legislative session his name appeared under a wood-cut picture in the
_Commonwealth_ newspaper, and in the article thereunto appended
Barclay was referred to as one of the "money kings of our young
state." That summer he turned his wheat into his elevator early and at
a low price, and borrowed money on it, and bought five new elevators
and strained his credit to the limit, and before the fall closed he
had ten more, and controlled the wheat in twenty counties. Strangers
riding through the state on the Corn Belt Railroad saw the words, "The
Golden Belt Elevator Company" on elevators all along the line. But few
people knew then that the "Company" had become a partnership between
John Barclay of Sycamore Ridge and less than half a dozen railroad
men, with Barclay owning seventy-five per cent of the partnership and
with State Senator Bemis the attorney for the company.

That year the railroad officials who were making money out of the
Golden Belt Elevator Company were obliging, and Barclay made a
contract with them to ship all grain from the Golden Belt Company's
elevators in cars equipped with the Barclay Economy Rubber Strip, and
he sold these strips to the railroads for four dollars apiece and put
them on at the elevators. He shipped ten thousand cars that year, and
Lycurgus Mason hired two men to help him in the strip factory. And
John Barclay, in addition to the regular rebate, made forty thousand
dollars that he did not have to divide. The next year he leased three
large mills and took over a score of elevators and paid Lycurgus
twenty dollars a week, and Lycurgus deposited money in the bank in his
own name for the first time in his life.

As the century clanged noisily into its busy eighties, Adrian P.
Brownwell creaked stiffly into his forties. And while all the world
about him was growing rich,--or thought it was, which is the same
thing,--Brownwell seemed to be struggling to keep barely even with
the score of life. The _Banner_ of course ran as a daily, but it was a
miserable, half-starved little sheet, badly printed, and edited, as
the printers used to say, with a pitchfork. It looked shiftless and
dirty-faced long before Brownwell began to look seedy. Editor
Brownwell was forever going on excursions--editorial excursions,
land-buyers' excursions, corn trains, fruit trains, trade trains,
political junkets, tours of inspection of new towns and new fields,
and for consideration he was forever writing grandiloquent accounts of
his adventures home to the _Banner_. But from the very first he
ostentatiously left Molly, his wife, at home. "The place for a woman,"
said Brownwell to the assembled company on the Barclay veranda one
evening, when Jane had asked him why he did not take Molly to the
opening of the new hotel at Garden City, "the place for woman is in
the sacred precincts of home, 'far from the madding crowd's ignoble
throng.' The madame and I," with a flourish of his cane, "came to that
agreement early, eh, my dear, eh?" he asked, poking her masterfully
with his cane. And Molly Brownwell, wistful-eyed and fading, smiled
and assented, and the incident passed as dozens of other incidents
passed in the Ridge, which made the women wish they had Adrian
Brownwell, to handle for just one day. But the angels in that
department of heaven where the marriages are made are exceedingly
careful not to give to that particular kind of women the Adrian
Brownwell kind of men, so the experiment which every one on earth for
thousands of years has longed to witness, still remains a theory, and
Adrian Brownwell traipsed up and down the earth, in his lavender
gloves, his long coat and mouse-coloured trousers, his high hat, with
his twirling cane, and the everlasting red carnation in his
buttonhole. His absence made it necessary for Molly Brownwell to leave
the sacred precincts of the home many and many a Saturday afternoon,
to go over the books at the _Banner_ office, make out bills, take them
out, and collect the money due upon them and pay off the printers who
got out the paper. But Adrian Brownwell ostentatiously ignored such
services and kept up the fiction about the sacred precincts, and often
wrote scorching editorials about the "encroachment of women" and grew
indignant editorially at the growth of sentiment for woman's suffrage.
On one occasion he left on the copy-hook a fervid appeal for women to
repulse the commercialism which "was sullying the fair rose of
womanhood," and taking "from woman the rare perfume of her chiefest
charm," and then he went away on a ten days' journey, and the foreman
of the _Banner_ had to ask Mrs. Brownwell to collect enough money from
the sheriff and a delinquent livery-stable keeper to pay the freight
charges on the paper stock needed for that week's issue of the paper.

The town came to know these things, and so when Brownwell, who, since
his marriage, had taken up his abode at the Culpeppers', hinted at his
"extravagant family," the town refused to take him seriously. And the
strutting, pompous little man, who referred grandly to "my wife," and
then to "the madame," and finally to "my landlady," in a rather
elaborate attempt at jocularity, laughed alone at his merriment along
this line, and never knew that no one cared for his humour.

So in his early forties Editor Brownwell dried up and grew yellow and
began to dye his mustaches and his eyebrows, and to devote much time
to considering his own importance. "Throw it out," said Brownwell to
the foreman, "not a line of it shall go!" He had just come home from a
trip and had happened to glance over the proof of the article
describing the laying of the corner-stone of Ward University.

"But that's the only thing that happened in town this week, and Mrs.
Brownwell wrote it herself."

"Cut it out, I say," insisted Brownwell, and then threw back his
shoulders and marched to his desk, snapping his eyes, and
demonstrating to the printers that he was a man of consequence. "I'll
teach 'em," he roared. "I'll teach 'em to make up their committees and
leave me out."

He raged about the office, and finally wrote the name of Philemon R.
Ward in large letters on the office blacklist hanging above his desk.
This list contained the names which under no circumstances were to
appear in the paper. But it was a flexible list. The next day John
Barclay, who desired to have his speech on the laying of the
corner-stone printed in full, gave Brownwell twenty dollars, and a
most glowing account of the event in question appeared in the
_Banner_, and eloquence staggered under the burden of praise which
Brownwell's language loaded upon the shoulders of General Ward.

It is now nearly a generation since that corner-stone was laid. Boys and
girls who then were children have children in the university, and its
alumni include a brigadier in the army, a poet, a preacher of national
renown, two college presidents, an authority upon the dynamics of living
matter, and two men who died in the American mission at Foo Chow during
the uprising in 1900. When General Ward was running for President of the
United States on one of the various seceding branches of the prohibition
party, while Jeanette Barclay was a little girl, he found the money for
it; two maiden great-aunts on his mother's side of the family had half a
million dollars to leave to something, and the general got it. They
willed it to him to hold in trust during his lifetime, but the day after
the check came for it, he had transferred the money to a university
fund, and had borrowed fifty dollars of Bob Hendricks to clean up his
grocery bills and tide him over until his pension came. But he was a
practical old fox. He announced that he would give the money to a
college only if the town would give a similar sum, and what with John
Barclay's hundred-thousand-dollar donation, and Bob Hendricks' ten
thousand, and what with the subscription paper carried around by Colonel
Culpepper, who proudly headed it with five thousand dollars, and after
the figure wrote in red ink "in real estate," much to the town's
merriment, and what with public meetings and exhortations in the
churches, and what with voting one hundred thousand dollars in bonds by
Garrison County for the privilege of sending students to the college
without tuition, the amount was raised; and as the procession wheeled
out of Main Street to attend the ceremonies incident to laying the
corner-stone that beautiful October day, it is doubtful which was the
prouder man--Martin Culpepper, the master of ceremonies, in his plumed
hat, flashing sword, and red sash, or General Philemon Ward, who for the
first time in a dozen years heard the crowd cheer his name when the
governor in his speech pointed at the general's picture--his campaign
picture that had been hooted with derision and spattered with filth on
so many different occasions in the town. The governor's remarks were of
course perfunctory; he devoted five or ten minutes to the praise of
General Ward, of Sycamore Ridge, of John Barclay, and of education in
general, and then made his regular speech that he used for college
commencements, for addresses of welcome to church conferences, synods,
and assemblies, and for conclaves of the grand lodge. General Ward spoke
poorly, which was to his credit, considering the occasion, and Watts
McHurdie's poem got entangled with Juno and Hermes and Minerva and a
number of scandalous heathen gods,--who were no friends of Watts,--and
the crowd tired before he finished the second canto. But many
discriminating persons think that John Barclay's address, "The Time of
True Romance," was the best thing he ever wrote. It may be found in his
book as Chapter XI. "The Goths," he said, "came out of the woods, pulled
the beards of the senators, destroyed the Roman state, murdered and
pillaged the Roman people, and left the world the Gothic arch; the
Vikings came over the sea, roaring their sagas of rapine and slaughter;
the conquerors came to Europe with spear and sword and torch and left
the outlines of the map, the boundaries of states. Luther married his
nun, and set Christendom to fighting over it for a hundred years, but he
left a free conscience. Cromwell thrust his pikes into the noble heads
of England, snapped his fingers at law, and left civil liberty.
Organized murder reached its sublimity in the war that Lincoln waged,
and in that murdering and pillage true romance came to mankind in its
flower. Murder for the moment in these piping times has become impolite.
But true romance is here. Our heroes rob and plunder, and build cities,
and swing gayly around the curves of the railroads they have stolen, and
swagger through the cities they have levied upon the people to build. Do
we care to-day whether Charlemagne murdered his enemies with a sword or
an axe; do we ask if King Arthur used painless assassination or burned
his foes at the stake? Who cares to know that Cæsar was a rake, and that
William the Conqueror was a robber? They did their work and did it well,
and are snugly sitting on their monuments where no moralist can reach
them. So those searching for true romance to-day, who regard the
decalogue as mere persiflage, and the moral code as a thing of archaic
interest, will get their day's work done and strut into posterity in
bronze and marble. They will cheat and rob and oppress and grind the
faces off the poor, and do their work and follow their visions, and live
the romance in their hearts. To-morrow we will take their work,
disinfect it, and dedicate it to God's uses."

There was more of it--four thousand words more, to be exact, and when
General Ward went home that night he prayed his Unitarian God to
forgive John Barclay for his blasphemy. And for years the general
shuddered when his memory brought back the picture of the little man,
with his hard tanned face, his glaring green eyes, his brazen voice
trumpeting the doctrine of materialism to the people.

"John," said the general, the next day, as he sat in the mill, going
over the plans of the college buildings with Barclay, who was chairman
of the board of directors, "John, why are you so crass, so gross a
materialist? You have enough money--why don't you stop getting it and
do something with it worth while?"

"Because, General, I'm not making money--that's only an incident of
my day's work. I'm organizing the grain industry of this country as it
is organized in no other country on this planet." Barclay rose as he
spoke and began limping the length of the room. It was his habit to
walk when he talked, and he knew the general had come to catechize
him.

"Yes, but then, John--what then?"

"What then?" repeated Barclay, with his hands in his pockets and his
eyes on the floor. "Coffee, maybe--perhaps sugar, or tobacco. Or why
not the whole food supply of the people--let me have meat and sugar
where I will have flour and grain, and in ten years no man in America
can open his grocery store in the morning until he has asked John
Barclay for the key." He snapped his eyes good-naturedly at the
general, challenging the man's approval.

The general smiled and replied: "No, John, you'll get the social bug
and go around in knee-breeches, riding a horse after a scared fox, or
keeping a lot of hussies on a yacht. They all get that way sooner or
later."

Barclay leaned over Ward, stuck out his hard jaw and growled: "Well, I
won't. I'm going to be a tourist-sleeper millionaire. I stick to
Sycamore Ridge; Jeanette goes to the public schools; Jane buys her
clothes at Bob Hendricks' or Dorman's, or at the most of Marshall
Field in Chicago; I go fishing down at Minneola when I want rest."
Ward started to protest, but Barclay headed him off. "I made a million
last year. What did I do with it? See any yachts on the Sycamore?
Observe any understudies for Jane around the place? Have you heard of
any villas for the Barclays in Newport? No--no, you haven't, but you
may like to know that I have control of a railroad that handles more
wheat than any other hundred miles in the world, and it is the key to
the lake situation. And I've put the price of my Economy Door Strip up
to ten dollars, and they don't dare refuse it. What's more, I'm going
to hire a high-priced New York sculptor to make a monument for old
Henry Schnitzler, who fell at Wilson's Creek, and put it in the
cemetery. But I am giving none of my hard-earned cash to cooks and
florists and chorus ladies. So if I want to steal a mill or so every
season, and gut a railroad, I'm going to do it, but no one can rise up
and say I am squandering my substance on riotous living."

Barclay shook his head as he spoke and gesticulated with his hands,
and the general, seeing that he could not get the younger man to talk
of serious things, brought out the plans for the college buildings,
and the men fell to the work in hand with a will.

Barclay's spirit was the spirit of his times--growing out of a
condition which, as Barclay said in his speech, was like Emersonian
optimism set to Wagnerian music. In Sycamore Ridge factories rose in
the bottoms near the creek, and shop hands appeared on the streets at
night; new people invaded Lincoln Avenue, and the Culpeppers, to
maintain their social supremacy, had to hire a coloured man to open
the door for an afternoon party, and for an evening reception it took
two, one for the door and one to stand at the top of the stairs.

Those were the palmy days of the colonel's life. Money came easily,
and went easily. The Culpepper Mortgage Company employed fifty men,
who handled money all over the West, and one of the coloured men who
opened the door at the annual social affair at the Culpepper home also
took care of the horses, and drove the colonel down to his office in
the Barclay block every morning, and drove him home in the evening.

"Well," said Watts McHurdie to Gabriel Carnine as the two walked down
the hill into the business section of the town, a few days after the
corner-stone of Ward College was laid, "old Phil has got his college
started and Mart's got his church a-going."

"You mean the East End Mission? Yes, and I don't know which, of 'em is
happier over his work," replied Carnine.

"Well, Mart certainly is proud; he's been too busy to loaf in the shop
for six months," said McHurdie.

Carnine smiled, and stroked his chestnut beard reflectively before he
added: "Probably that's why he hasn't been in to renew his last two
notes. But I guess he does a lot of good to the poor people over there
along the river. Though I shouldn't wonder if he was encouraging them
to be paupers." Carnine paused a moment and then added, "Good old
Mart--he's got a heart just like a woman's."

They were passing the court-house square, and Bailiff Jacob Dolan,
with a fist full of legal papers, caught step with Carnine and
McHurdie. "We were talking about Mart Culpepper and his Mission
Church," said Carnine. "Don't you suppose, Jake, that Mart, by
circulating down there with his basket so much, encourages the people
to be shiftless? We were just wondering."

"Oh, you were, were you?" snapped Dolan. "There you go, Gabe Carnine;
since you've moved to town and got to be president of a bank, you're
mighty damn scared about making paupers. When Christ told the young
man to sell his goods and give them to the poor, He didn't tell him to
be careful about making them paupers. And Mr. Gabriel Carnine,
Esquire, having the aroma of one large morning's drink on my breath
emboldens me to say, that if you rich men will do your part in giving,
the Lord will manage to keep His side of the traces from scraping on
the wheel. And if I had one more good nip, I'd say, which Heaven
forbid, that you fellows are asking more of the Lord by expecting Him
to save your shrivelled selfish little souls from hell-fire because of
your squeeze-penny charities, than you would be asking by expecting
Him to keep the poor from becoming paupers by the dribs you give them.
And if Mart Culpepper can give his time and his money every day
helping them poor devils down by the track, niggers and whites, good
and bad, male and female, I guess the Lord will put in lick for lick
with Mart and see that his helping doesn't hurt them." Dolan shook his
head at the banker, and then smiled at him good-naturedly as he
finished, "Put that in your knapsack, you son of a gun, and chew on it
till I see you again." Whereupon he turned a corner and went his way.

Carnine laughed rather unnaturally and said to McHurdie, "That's why
he's never got on like the other boys. Whiskey's a bad partner."

McHurdie agreed, and went chuckling to his work, when Carnine turned
into the bank. Later in the forenoon Bailiff Dolan came in grinning,
and took a seat by the stove in McHurdie's shop and said as he reached
into the waste-basket for a scrap of harness leather, and began
whittling it, "What did Gabe say when I left you this morning?" and
without waiting for a reply, went on, "I've thought for some time Gabe
needed a little something for what ails him, and I gave it to him, out
of the goodness of my heart."

McHurdie looked at Dolan over his glasses and replied, "Speech is
silver, but silence is golden."

"The same," answered Dolan, "the same it is, and by the same authority
apples of gold in pictures of silver is a word fitly spoken to a man
like Gabe Gamine." He whittled for a few minutes while the harness
maker worked, and then sticking his pocket-knife into the chair
between his legs, said: "But what I came in to tell you was about Lige
Bemis; did you know he's in town? Well, he is. Johnnie Barclay wired
him to leave the dump up in the City and come down here, and what for,
do you think? 'Tis this. The council was going to change the name of
Ellen Avenue out by the college to Garfield, and because it was named
for that little girl of Mart's that died right after the war, don't
you think Johnnie's out raising hell about it, and brought Lige down
here to beat the game. He'll be spending a lot of money if he has to.
Now you wouldn't think he'd do that for old Mart, would you? He's too
many for me--that Johnny boy is. I can't make him out." The Irishman
played with his knife, sticking it in the chair and pulling it out for
a while, and then continued: "Oh, yes, what I was going to tell you
was the little spat me and Lige had over Johnnie. Lige was in my room
in the court-house waiting to see a man in the court, and was bragging
to me about how smart John was, and says Lige, 'He's found some earth
over in Missouri--yellow clay,' he says, 'that's just as good as
oatmeal, and he ships it all over the country to his oatmeal mills and
mixes it with the real stuff and sells it.' I says: 'He does, does he?
Sells mud mixed with oatmeal?' and Lige says, 'Yes, sir, he's got a
whole mountain of it, and he's getting ten dollars a ton net for it,
which is better than a gold mine.' 'And you call that smart?' says I.
'Yes,' says he, 'yes, sir, that's commercial instinct; it's perfectly
clean mud, and our chemist says it won't harm any one,' says he. 'And
him president of the Golden Belt Elevator Co.?' says I. 'He is,' says
Lige. 'And don't need the money at all?' says I. 'Not a penny of it,'
says he. 'Well,' says I, 'Lige Bemis,' says I, 'when Johnnie gets to
hell,--and he'll get there as sure as it doesn't freeze over,' says
I, 'may the devil put him under that mountain of mud and keep his
railroad running night and day dumping more mud on while he eats his
way out as a penance,' says I. And you orto heard 'em laugh." Dolan
went on cutting curly-cues from the leather, and McHurdie kept on
sewing at his bench. "It is a queer world--a queer world; and that
Johnnie Barclay is a queer duck. Bringing Lige Bemis clear down here
to help old Mart out of a little trouble there ain't a dollar in; and
then turning around and feeding the American people a mountain of mud.
Giving the town a park with his mother's name on it, and selling
little tin strips for ten dollars apiece to pay for it. He's a queer
duck. I'll bet it will keep the recording angel busy keeping books on
Johnnie Barclay."

"Oh, well, Jake," replied McHurdie, after a silence, "maybe the angels
will just drop a tear and wipe much of the evil off."

"Maybe so, Watts McHurdie, maybe so," returned Dolan, "but there won't
be a dry eye in the house, as the papers say, if they keep up with
him." And after delivering himself of this, Dolan rose and yawned, and
went out of the shop singing an old tune which recited the fact that
he had "a job to do down in the boulevard."

Looking over the years that have passed since John Barclay and
Sycamore Ridge were coming out of raw adolescence into maturity, one
sees that there was a miracle of change in them both, but where it was
and just how it came, one may not say. The town had no special
advantages. It might have been one of a thousand dreary brown
unpainted villages that dot the wind-swept plain to-day, instead of
the bright, prosperous, elm-shaded town that it is. John Barclay in
those days of his early thirties might have become a penny-pinching
dull-witted "prominent citizen" of the Ridge, with no wider sphere of
influence than the Sycamore Valley, or at most the Corn Belt Railroad.
But he and the town grew, and whether it was destiny that guided them,
or whether they made their own destiny, one cannot say. The town
seemed to be struggling and fighting its way to supremacy in the
Sycamore Valley; and the colonel and the general and Watts McHurdie,
sitting in the harness shop a score of years after those days of the
seventies, used to try to remember some episode or event that would
tell them how John fought his way up. But they could not do so. It was
a fight in his soul. Every time his hand reached out to steal a mill
or crush an opponent with the weapon of his secret railroad rebates,
something caught his hand and held it for a moment, and he had to
fight his way free. At first he had to learn to hate the man he was
about to ruin, and to pretend that he thought the man was about to
ruin him. Then he could justify himself in his greedy game. But at
last he worked almost merrily. He came to enjoy the combat for its own
sake. And sometimes he would play with a victim cat-wise, and after a
victory in which the mouse fought well, John would lick his chops with
some satisfaction at his business prowess. Mill after mill along the
valley and through the West came under his control. And his skin grew
leathery, and the brass lustre in his eyes grew hard and metallic.
When he knew that he was the richest man in Garrison County, he saw
that there were richer men in the state, and in after years when he
was the richest man in the state, and in the Missouri Valley, the rich
men in other states moved him by their wealth to work harder. But
before he was thirty, his laugh had become a cackle, and Colonel
Martin Culpepper, who would saunter along when Barclay would limp by
on Main Street, would call out after him, "Slow down, Johnnie, slow
down, boy, or you'll bust a biler." And then the colonel would pause
and gaze benignly after the limping figure bobbing along in the next
block, and if there was a bystander to address, the colonel would say,
"For a flat-wheel he does certainly make good time." And then if the
bystander looked worth the while, the colonel, in seven cases out of
ten, would pull out a subscription paper for some new church building,
or for some charitable purpose, and proceed to solicit the needed
funds.


BOOK II

BEING NO CHAPTER AT ALL, BUT AN INTERLUDE FOR THE ORCHESTRA


And so the years slipped by--monotonous years they seem now, so far
as this story goes. Because little happened worth the telling; for
growth is so still and so dull and so undramatic that it escapes
interest and climax; yet it is all there is in life. For the roots of
events in the ground of the past are like the crowded moments of our
passing lives that are recorded only in our under-consciousnesses, to
rise in other years in character formed, in traits established, in
events fructified. And in the years when the evil days came not, John
Barclay's tragedy was stirring in the soil of his soul.

And now, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the management, let us
thank you for your kind attention, during the tedious act which has
closed. We have done our best to please you with the puppets and have
cracked their heads together in fine fashion, and they have danced and
cried and crackled, while we pulled the strings as our mummers
mumbled. But now they must have new clothes on. Time, the great
costumer, must change their make-up. So we will fold down the curtain.
John Barclay, a Gentleman, must be painted yellow with gold. Philemon
Ward, a Patriot, must be sprinkled with gray. Martin Culpepper's Large
White Plumes must be towsled. Watts McHurdie, a Poet, must be bent a
little at the hips and shoulders. Adrian Brownwell, a Gallant, must
creak as he struts. Neal Dow Ward, an Infant, must put on long
trousers. E. W. Bemis, a Lawyer, must be dignified; Jacob Dolan, an
Irishman and a Soldier, must grow unkempt and frowsy. Robert
Hendricks, Fellow Fine, must have his blond hair rubbed off at the
temples, and his face marked with maturity. Lycurgus Mason, a Woman
Tamer, must get used to wearing white shirts. Gabriel Carnine, a Money
Changer, must feel his importance; and Oscar Fernald, a Tavern Keeper,
must be hobbled by the years. All but the shades must be refurbished.
General Hendricks and Elmer, his son, must fade farther into the mists
of the past, while Henry Schnitzler settles comfortably down in
storied urn and animated bust.

There they hang together on the line, these basswood folk, and beside
them wave their womankind. These also must be repaired and refitted
throughout, as Oscar Fernald's letter-heads used to say of the Thayer
House. Jane Barclay, Wife of John, must have the "star light, star
bright" wiped out of her eyes. Mary Barclay, Mother of the Same, must
have her limbs trimmed gaunt, and her face chiselled strong and
indomitable. Jeanette Barclay, a Toddler, must grow into dresses.
Molly Culpepper, a Dear, must have her heart taken out, and her face
show the shock of the operation. Nellie Logan, a poet's Wife, must
join all the lodges in the Ridge to help her husband in politics.
Trixie Lee, little Beatrix Lee, daughter of J. Lord and Lady Lee, must
have her childish face scarred and her eyes glazed. Mrs. Hally Bemis,
a Prodigal, must be swathed in silk. Elizabeth Cady Stanton Ward and
all her sisters must be put in the simple garb of school-teachers.
Miss Hendricks, a Mouse, must hide in the dusky places; and Ellen
Culpepper, a Memory, must come to life.

And so, ladies and gentlemen, while we have been diverting you, Time
has been at work on the little people of the passing show, and now
before we draw back the curtain to let them caper across your hearts,
let us again thank you one and all for your courtesy in staying, and
hope that what you see and hear may make you wiser and kinder and
braver; for this is a moral entertainment, good people, planned to
show you that yesterday makes to-day and they both make to-morrow, and
so the world spins round the sun.


CHAPTER XVII


The rumble of the wheels in the great stone mill across the Sycamore
and the roar of the waters over the dam seem to have been in Jeanette
Barclay's ears from the day of her birth; for she was but a baby when
the stone mill rose where the little red mill had stood, and beside
the stone mill there had grown up the long stone factory wherein
Lycurgus Mason was a man of consequence. As the trains whirled by
strangers could see the signs in mammoth letters, "The Golden Belt
Mills" on the larger building and on the smaller, "The Barclay Economy
Door Strip Factory." Standing on the stone steps of her father's house
the child could read these signs clear across the mill-pond, and from
these signs she learned her letters. For her father had more pride in
that one mill on the Sycamore than in the scores of other mills that
he controlled. And even in after years, when he controlled mills all
over the West, and owned railroads upon which to take his flour to the
sea, and ships in which to carry his flour all over the world, the
Golden Belt Mill at Sycamore Ridge was his chief pride. The rumble of
the wheels and the hoarse voice of the dam that seemed to Jeanette
like the call of the sea, were so sweet to her father's ears that when
he wearied of the work of the National Provisions Company, with its
two floors of busy offices in the Corn Exchange Building in the great
city, he would come home to Sycamore Ridge, and go to his private
office in the mill. The child remembers what seemed like endless days,
but what in truth were only a few hours in a few days in a few years,
when Daddy Barclay carried her on his shoulders across the bridge and
sat her down barefooted and bareheaded to play upon the dam, while he
in his old clothes prodded among the great wheels near by or sat
beside her telling her where he caught this fish or that fish or a
turtle or a water moccasin when he was a little boy. At low water, she
remembers that he sometimes let her wade in the clear stream, while he
sat in his office near by watching her from the window. That was when
she was only four years old, and she always had the strangest memory
of a playfellow on the dam, a big girl, who fluttered in and out of
the shadows on the stones. Jeanette talked with her, but no one else
could see her, and once the big girl, who could not talk herself,
stamped her feet and beckoned Jeanette to come away from a rock on
which she was playing, and her father, looking out of a window, turned
white when he saw a snake coiled beside the rock. But Jeanette saw the
snake and was frightened, and told her father that Ellen saw it too,
and she could not make him understand who Ellen was. So he only
trembled and hugged his little girl to him tightly, and mother would
not let the child play on the dam again all that summer.

She made songs to fit the rhythmic murmur of the wheels. And always
she remembered the days she had spent with Daddy Mason in the factory
where the machines thumped and creaked, and where the long rubber
sheets were cut and sewed, and the clanking rolls of tin and zinc
curled into strips, and Daddy Mason made her a little set of dishes
and all the things she needed in her playhouse from the scraps of tin
and rubber, and she learned to twist the little tin strips on a stick
and make the prettiest bright shiny tin curls for her dolls that a
little girl ever saw in all the world. And once Ellen came from among
the moving shadows of the wheels and drew Jeanette from beneath a
great knife that fell at her feet, and when Daddy Mason saw what had
happened he fainted, poor man, and made her promise never, never, so
long as she lived, to tell Grandma Mason. And then he drove her up
town, and they had some ice-cream, and she was sent to bed without her
lunch because she would not tell Grandma Mason why grandpa bought
ice-cream for her.

It was such a beautiful life, so natural and so exactly what a little
girl should have, that even though she went to the ocean and crossed
it as a child with her mother and grandmother, and even though she
went to the mountains many times, her childish heart always was
homesick for the mill, and at night in her dreams her ears were filled
with the murmur of waters and the wordless song of ceaseless wheels.
And once when she came back a big girl,--an exceedingly big girl with
braids down her back, a girl in the third reader in fact, who could
read everything in the fourth reader, because she had already done so,
and who could read Eugene Aram in the back of the sixth, only she
never did find out what "gyves upon his wrists" meant,--once when she
came back to the dam and was sitting there looking at the sunset
reflected in the bubbling, froth-flecked water at her feet, Ellen came
suddenly, under the noise of the roaring water, and frightened
Jeanette so that she screamed and jumped; and Ellen, who was much
older than Jeanette--four or five and maybe six years older--ran
right over the slippery, moss-covered ridge of the dam, and was gone
before Jeanette could call her back. The child never saw her playmate
again, though often Jeanette would wonder where Ellen lived and who
she was. As the years went by, Jeanette came to remember her playmate
as her dream child, and once when she was a young miss of eighteen,
and something in her hurt to be said, she tried to make a little poem
about her dream-child playmate, but all she ever got was:--

"O eyes, so brown and clear like water sparkling over mossy stones."

So she gave it up and wrote a poem about a prince who carried away a
maiden, and then she tore up the prince and the maiden, and if it were
not for that line about the eyes in the back of her trigonometry, with
a long list of words under it rhyming with "stones," she would have
forgotten about her playfellow, and much of the memory of the dam and
the pride she took as a child in the great letters upon the high stone
walls of the mills, and of the word "Barclay" on the long low walls of
the factory, might have passed from her consciousness altogether. By
such frail links does memory bind us to our past; and yet, once
formed, how like steel they hold us! What we will be, grows from what
we are, and what we are has grown from what we were. If Jeanette
Barclay, the only child of a man who, when she was in her twenties,
was to be one of the hundred richest men in his country,--so far as
mere money goes,--had been brought up with a governess and a maid,
and with frills and furbelows and tucks and Heaven knows what of silly
kinks and fluffy stuff in her childish head, instead of being brought
up in the Sycamore Ridge public schools, with Grandmother Barclay to
teach her the things that a little girl in the fourth reader should
know, and with a whole community of honest, hard-working men and women
about her to teach her what life really is, indeed she would have
lived a different life, and when she was ready to marry--But there we
go looking in the back of the book again, and that will not do at all;
and besides, a little blue-eyed girl in gingham aprons, sitting on a
cool stone with moss on its north side, watching the bass play among
the rocks in a clear, deep, sun-mottled pool under a great elm tree,
has a right to the illusions of her childhood and should not be
hustled into long dresses and love affairs until her time has come.

But the recollection of those days, so vivid and so sweet, is one of
her choicest treasures. Of course things were not as she saw them.
Jake Dolan was only in his forties then, and considered himself a
young man. But the child remembers him as a tall, brown-eyed man whom
she saw on state occasions in his faded blue army clothes, and to her
he has always been the picture of a veteran. Some one must have told
her--though she cannot remember who it was--that as Jake Dolan
gently descended the social and political scale, he sloughed off his
worldly goods, and as he moved about in the court-house from the
sheriff's office to the deputy's office, and from the deputy's to the
bailiff's, and from the bailiff's to the constable's, and from the
constable's to the janitor's room in the basement, he carried with him
the little bundle that contained all his worldly goods, the thin blue
uniform, spotless and trim, and his lieutenant's commission, and
mustering-out papers from the army. It is odd, is it not, that this
prosaic old chap, who smoked a clay pipe, and whose only
accomplishment was the ability to sing "The Hat me Father Wore," under
three drinks, and the "Sword of Bunker Hill," under ten, should have
epitomized all that was heroic in this child's memory. As for General
Philemon Ward,--a dear old crank who, when Jeanette was born, was
voting with the Republican party for the first time since the war, and
who ran twice for President on some strange issue before she was in
long dresses,--General Ward, whose children's ages could be guessed
by the disturbers of the public peace, whose names they bore,--Eli
Thayer, Mary Livermore, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Frances Willard, Neal
Dow, Belva Lockwood, and Helen Gougar,--General Ward, who scorned her
father's offer of ten thousand dollars a year as state counsel for the
National Provisions Company, and went out preaching fiat money and a
subtreasury for the farmers' crops, trusting to God and the flower
garden about his little white house, to keep the family alive--it is
odd that Jeanette's childish impression was that General Ward was a
man of consequence in the world. Perhaps his white necktie, his long
black coat, and his keen lean face, or his prematurely gray hair, gave
her some sort of a notion of his dignity, but whatever gave her that
notion she kept it, and though in her later life there came a passing
time when she hated him, she did not despise him. And what with the
song that she heard the bands playing all over the country, the song
that the bands sometimes played for Americans in Europe, very badly,
as though it was being translated from English into broken French or
Italian, what with Watts McHurdie's fame and with his verses that
appeared in the _Banner_ on formal occasions, the girl built a fancy
of him as one of the world's great poets--some one like Shakespeare
or Milton; and she was well into her teens before she realized the
truth, that he was an excellent harness maker who often brought out of
his quaint little dream world odd-shaped fancies in rhyme,--some
grotesque, some ridiculous, and some that seemed pretty for a
moment,--and who under the stress of a universal emotion had rhymed
one phase of our common nature and set it to a simple tune that moved
men deeply without regard to race or station. So she lived in her
child world--a world quite different from the real world--a world
gilded by the sunrise of consciousness; and because the angels loved
her and kept her heart clean, the gilding never quite wore off her
heroes. And nothing that Heaven gives us in this world is so blessed
as to have the gilding stick to the images of our youth. In Jeanette's
case even Lige Bemis--Judge Bemis, she had been taught to call
him--never showed the tar under the gilding to her eyes. Her first
memory of him was in her father's office in the big City. He was a
tall man, with gray hair that became him well, with sharp black eyes,
and enough flesh on his bones to carry the frock-coats he always wore
and give him a corporosity just escaping the portly. She remembers
seeing the name "E. W. Bemis" in gold letters on the door of his room,
and not being able to figure out how a man whose name began with "E"
or "W" could be called Lige. He was General Counsel of the Corn Belt
Railroad in those days, when her father was president of the road, and
she knew that he was a man always to be considered. And when, as a
woman grown, she learned the truth about Lige Bemis, it was hard to
believe, for all she could find against him was his everlasting smile.

It is a curious and withal a beautiful thing to see a child come into
the worn and weary world that we grownups have made, and make it over
into another world altogether. Perhaps the child's eye and the child's
heart, fresh from God, see and feel more clearly and more justly than
we do. For this much is sure--Jeanette was right in keeping to the
end the image of Colonel Martin Culpepper as a knight-errant, who
needed only a bespangled steed, a little less avoirdupois, and a
foolish cause to set him battling in the tourney. As it was, in this
humdrum world, the colonel could do nothing more heroic than come
rattling down Main Street into the child's heart, sitting with some
dignity in his weather-beaten buggy, while instead of shining armour
and a glistening helmet he wore nankeen trousers, a linen coat, and a
dignified panama hat. Moreover, it is stencilled into her memory
indelibly that the colonel was the first man in this wide world to
raise his hat to her.

Now it should not be strange that this world was a sad jumble of
fiction and of facts to a child's eyes; for to many an older pair of
eyes it has all seemed a puzzle. Even the shrewd, kind brown eyes of
Jacob Dolan often failed to see things as they were, and what his eyes
did see sometimes bewildered him. By day Dolan saw Robert Hendricks,
president of the Exchange National Bank, president and manager of the
Sycamore Ridge Light, Heat, and Power Company, proprietor of the
Hendricks Mercantile Company, treasurer and first vice-president of
the new Western Wholesale Grocery, and chairman of his party's
congressional central committee, and Dolan's eyes saw a hard, busy
man--a young man, it is true; a tall, straight, rather lean,
rope-haired young man in his thirties, with frank blue eyes, that
turned rather suddenly upon one as if to frighten out a secret. The
man seemed real enough to Dolan, from the wide crown of his slightly
bald, V-shaped head, to his feet with the hard click in the heels; and
yet that man paid no particular attention to Dolan. It was "Hello,
Jake," with a nod, as they passed, maybe only an abstracted stare and
a grunt. But at night, as they walked together over the town under the
stars or moon, a lonely soul rose out of the tall body and spread over
the face.

Dolan kept to his pipe and Hendricks to his cigar. But these were the
only marks of caste between them. One night Hendricks led the way
across the bridge down the river road and into the fields. They walked
far up the stream and their conversation had consisted largely of
"Watch out," "All right," "I see," "This is the best way." They
loitered down a dark lane shaded by hedgerows until they came to a
little wooden bridge and sat down. Dolan looked at the stars, while a
pipe and a cigar had burned out before Hendricks spoke, "Well,
chatterbox?"

"I was bothered with a question of mistaken identity," replied Dolan.
To the silence he answered: "Me myself. I'm the man. Do you happen to
know who I am?" Hendricks broke a splinter from the wood under him,
and Dolan continued: "Of course you don't, and neither do I. For
example, I go down into Union township before election and visit with
the boys. I bring a box of cigars and maybe a nip under the buggy
seat, and maybe a few stray five-dollar bills for the lads that drive
the wagons that haul the voters to the polls. I go home, and I says to
myself: 'I have that bailiwick to a man. No votes there against Jake.'
But the morning after election I see Jake didn't get but two votes in
the township. Very well. Now who did they vote against? Surely not
against the genial obliging rollicking Irish lad whose face I shave
every other morning. What could they possibly have against him?
No--they voted against that man Dolan, who got drunk, at the Fair and
throwed the gate receipts into the well, and tried to shoo the horses
off the track into the crowd at the home-stretch of the trotting race.
He's the man they plugged. And there's another one--him that
confesses to Father Van Sandt." Dolan shook his head sadly and sighed.
"He's a black-hearted wretch. If you want to see how a soul will look
in its underwear, get an Irishman to confess to a Dutchman." The chirp
of crickets arose in the silence, and after a time Dolan concluded,
"And now there abideth these three, me that I shave, me that they vote
against, and me that the Father knows; and the greatest of these is
charity--I dunno."

The soul beside him on the bridge came back from a lilac bower of
other years, with a girl's lips glowing upon his and the beat of a
girl's heart throbbing against his own. The soul was seared with
images that must never find spoken words, and it moved the lips to say
after exhaling a deep breath from its body, "Well, let's go home."
There, too, was a question of identity. Who was Robert Hendricks? Was
he the man chosen to lead his party organization because he was clean
above reproach and a man of ideals; was he the man who was trusted
with the money of the people of his town and county implicitly; or was
he the man who knew that on page 234 of the cash ledger for 1879 in
the county treasurer's office in the Garrison County court-house there
was a forgery in his own handwriting to cover nine thousand dollars of
his father's debt? Or was he the man who for seven years had crept
into a neighbour's garden on a certain night in April to smell the
lilac blossoms and always had found them gone, and had stood there
rigid, with upturned face and clenched fists, cursing a fellow-man? Or
was he the man who in the county convention of his party had risen
pale with anger, and had walked across the floor and roared his
denunciation of Elijah W. Bemis as a boodler and a scoundrel squarely
to the man's gray, smirking face and chattering teeth, and then had
reached down, and grabbed the trapped bribe-giver by the scruff of the
neck and literally thrown him out of the convention, while the crowd
went mad with applause? As he went home that night following the
convention, walking by the side of Dolan in silence, he wondered which
of all his _aliases_ he really was. At the gate of the Hendricks home
the two men stopped. Hendricks smiled quizzically as he asked: "Well,
I give it up, Jake. By the way, did you ever meet me?"

The brown eyes of the Irishman beamed an instant through the night,
before he hurried lightly down the street.

And so with all of this hide-and-seek of souls, now peering from
behind eyes and now far away patting one--two--three upon some
distant base, with all these queer goings-on inside of people here in
this strange world, it is no wonder that when the angels brought
Jeanette to the Barclays, they left her much to learn and many things
to study about. So she had to ask questions. But questions often
reveal more than answers. At least once they revealed much, when she
sat on the veranda of the Barclay home a fine spring evening with all
the company there. Aunt Molly was there; and Uncle Bob Hendricks was
there, the special guest of Grandma Barclay. Uncle Adrian was away on
a trip somewhere; but Uncle Colonel and Grandma Culpepper and all the
others were there listening to father's new German music-box, and no
one should blame a little girl, sitting shyly on the stone steps,
trying to make something out of the absurd world around her, if she
piped out when the talk stopped:--

"Mother, why does Aunt Molly cut off her lilac buds before they
bloom?"

And when her mother assured her that Aunt Molly did nothing of the
kind, and when Uncle Bob Hendricks looked up and saw Aunt Molly go
pale under her powder, and when Aunt Molly said, "Why, Jane--the
child must have dreamed that," no one in this wide world must blame a
little girl for opening her eyes as wide as she could, and lifting her
little voice as strongly as she could, and saying: "Why, Aunt Molly,
you know I saw you last night--when I stayed with you. You know I
did, 'cause I looked out of the window and spokened to you. You know I
did--don't you remember?" And no one must blame the mother for
shaking her finger at Jeanette, and no one must blame Jeanette for
sitting there shaking a protesting head, and screwing up her little
face, trying to make the puzzle out.

And when, later in the evening, Daddy Barclay went over to the mill
with his work, and Uncle Bob left in the twilight, and Aunt Molly and
mother were alone in mother's room, how should a little girl know what
the crying was all about, and how should a little girl understand when
a small woman, looking in a mirror, and dabbing her face with a powder
rag, said to mother, who knows everything in the world, and all about
the angels that brought you here: "Oh, Jane, Jane, you don't
know--you don't understand. There are things that I couldn't make you
understand--and I mustn't even think of them."

Surely it is a curious world for little girls--a passing curious
world, when there are things in it that even mothers cannot
understand.

So Jeanette turned her face to the wall and went to sleep, leaving
Aunt Molly powdering her nose and asking mother, "Does it look all
right now--" and adding, "Oh, I'm such a fool." In so illogical a
world, the reader must not be allowed to think that Molly Brownwell
lamented the folly of mourning for a handsome young gentleman in blue
serge with white spats on his shoes and a Byronic collar and a fluffy
necktie of the period. Far be it from her to lament that sentiment as
folly; however, when she looked at her eyes in the mirror and saw her
nose, she felt that tears were expensive and reproached herself for
them. But so long as these souls of ours, whatever they may be, are
caged in our bodies, our poor bodies will have to bear witness to
their prisoners. If the soul smiles the body shines, and if the soul
frets the body withers. And Molly Brownwell saw in the looking-glass
that night more surely than ever before that her face was beginning to
slump. Her cheeks were no longer firm, and at her eyes were the stains
of tears that would not wipe off, but crinkled the skin at the temples
and deepened the shadows into wide salmon-coloured lines that fell
away from each side of the nose so that no trick could hide them.
Moreover, the bright eyes that used to flash into Bob Hendricks'
steady blue eyes had grown tired, and women who did not know, wondered
why such a pretty girl had broken so.

The Culpeppers had remained with the Barclays for dinner, and the hour
was late for the Ridge--after nine o'clock, and as the departing
guests went down the long curved walk of Barclay pride to the Barclay
gate, they saw a late April moon rising over the trees by the mill.
They clanged the tall iron gate behind them, and stood a moment
watching the moon. For the colonel never grew too old to notice it. He
put his arms about his wife and his daughter tenderly, and said before
they started up the street, "It never grows old--does it?" And he
pressed his wife to him gently and repeated, "Does it, my dear--it's
the same old moon; the one we used to have in Virginia before the war,
isn't it?"

His wife smiled at him placidly and said, "Now, pa--"

Whereupon the colonel squeezed his daughter lustily, and exclaimed,
"Well, Molly still loves me, anyway. Don't you, Molly?" And the
younger woman patted his cheek, and then they started for home.

"Papa, how much money has John?" asked the daughter, as they walked
along.

A man always likes to be regarded as an authority in financial
matters, and the colonel stroked his goatee wisely before replying:
"U-h-m-m, let me see--I don't exactly know. Bob and I were talking
about it the other day--after I bought John's share in College
Heights--last year, to be exact. Of course he's got the mill and it's
all paid for--say a hundred thousand dollars--and that old wheat
land he got back in the seventies--he's cleaned all of that up. I
should say that and the mill were easily worth half a million, and
they're both clear. That's all in sight." The colonel ruminated a
moment and then continued: "About the rest--it's a guess. Some say a
million, some say ten. All I know in point of fact, my dear, to get
right down to bed-rock, is that Lycurgus says they are turning out two
or three car-loads of the strips a year. I wouldn't believe Lycurgus
on a stack of Bibles as high as his head, but little Thayer Ward, who
works down there in the shipping department, told the general the same
thing, and Bob says he knows John gets ten dollars apiece for them
now, so that's a million dollars a year income he's got. He handles
grain and flour way up in Minnesota, and back as far as Ohio, and west
to California. But what he actually owns,--that is, whether he rents
the mills or, to be exact, steals them,--I haven't any idea--not the
slightest notion in the world, in point of fact--not the slightest
notion."

As they passed through Main Street it was deserted, save in the
billiard halls, and as no one seemed inclined to talk, the colonel
took up the subject of Barclay: "Say we call it five million--five
million in round numbers; that's a good deal of money for a man to
have and haggle a month over seventy-five dollars the way he did with
me when he sold me his share of College Heights. But," added the
colonel, "I suppose if I had that much I'd value it more." The women
were thinking of other things, and the colonel addressed the night:
"Man gets an appetite for money just as he does for liquor--just like
the love for whiskey, I may say." He shook his sides as he meditated
aloud: "But as for me--I guess I've got so I can take it or let it
alone. Eh, ma?"

"I didn't catch what you were saying, pa," answered his wife. "I was
just thinking whether we had potatoes enough to make hash for
breakfast; have we, Molly?"

As the women were discussing the breakfast, two men came out of a
cross street, and the colonel, who was slightly in advance of his
women, hailed the men with, "Hello there, Bob--you and Jake out here
carrying on your illicit friendship in the dark?"

The men and the Culpeppers stopped for a moment at the corner. Molly
Brownwell's heart throbbed as they met, and she thought of the rising
moon, and in an instant her brain was afire with a hope that shamed
her. Three could not walk abreast on the narrow sidewalk up the hill,
and when she heard Hendricks say after the group had parleyed a
moment, "Well, Jake, good night; I'll go on home with the colonel,"
she managed the pairing off so that the young man fell to her, and the
colonel and Mrs. Culpepper walked before the younger people, and they
all talked together. But at Lincoln Avenue, the younger people
disconnected themselves from the talk of the elders, and finally
lagged a few feet behind. When they reached the gate the colonel
called back, "Better come in and visit a minute, Bob," and Molly
added, "Yes, Bob, it's early yet."

But what she said with her voice did not decide the matter for him. It
was her eyes. And what he said with his voice is immaterial--it was
what his eyes replied that the woman caught. What he said was, "Well,
just for a minute, Colonel," and the party walked up the steps of the
veranda, and Bob and Molly and the colonel sat down.

Mrs. Culpepper stood for a moment and then said, "Well, Bob, you must
excuse me--I forgot to set my sponge, and there isn't a bit of bread
in the house for Sunday." Whereupon she left them, and when the
colonel had talked himself out he left them, and when the two were
alone there came an awkward silence. In the years they had been apart
a thousand things had stirred in their hearts to say at this time, yet
all their voices spoke was, "Well, Molly?" and "Well, Bob?" The moon
was in their faces as it shone through the elm at the gate. The man
turned his chair so that he could look at her, and after satisfying
his eyes he broke the silence with, "Seven years."

And she returned, "Seven years the thirteenth of April."

The man played a tune with his fingers and a foot and said nothing
more. The woman finally spoke. "Did you know it was the thirteenth?"

"Yes," he replied, "father died the ninth. I have often counted it
up." He added shortly after: "It's a long time--seven years! My! but
it has been a long time!"

"I have wondered if you have thought so," a pause, "too!"

Their hearts were beating too fast for thoughts to come coherently.
The fever of madness was upon them, and numbed their wills so that
they could not reach beneath the surface of their consciousnesses to
find words for their emotions. Then also there was in each a
deadening, flaming sense of guilt. Shame is a dumb passion, and these
two, who in the fastnesses of a thousand nights had told themselves
that what they sought was good and holy, now found in each other's
actual presence a gripping at the tongue's root that held them dumb.

"Yes, I--" the man mumbled, "yes, I--I fancied you understood that
well enough."

"But you have been busy?" she asked; "very busy, Bob, and oh, I've
been so proud of all that you've done." It was the woman's tongue that
first found a sincere word.

The man replied, "Well--I--I am glad you have."

It seemed to the woman a long time since her father had gone. Her
conscience was making minutes out of seconds. She said, "Don't you
think it's getting late?" but did not rise.

The man looked at his watch and answered, "Only 10.34." He started to
rise, but she checked him breathlessly.

"Oh, Bob, Bob, sit down. This isn't enough for these long years. I had
so many things to say to you." She hesitated and cried, "Why are we so
stupid now--now when every second counts?"

He bent slightly toward her and said in a low voice, "So that's why
your lilacs have never bloomed again."

She looked at her chair arm and asked, "Did you know they hadn't
bloomed?"

"Oh, Molly, of course I knew," he answered, and then went on: "Every
thirteenth of April I have slipped through the fence and come over
here, rain or shine, at night, to see if they were blooming. But I
didn't know why they never bloomed!"

The woman rose and walked a step toward the door, and turned her head
away. When she spoke it was after a sob, "Bob, I couldn't bear it--I
just couldn't bear it, Bob!"

He groaned and put his hands to his forehead and rested his elbow on
the chair arm. "Oh, Molly, Molly, Molly," he sighed, "poor, poor
little Molly." After a pause he said: "I won't ever bother you again.
It doesn't do any good." A silence followed in which the woman turned
her face to him, tear-stained and wretched, with the seams of her
heart all torn open and showing through it. "It only hurts," the man
continued, and then he groaned aloud, "Oh, God, how it hurts!"

She sank back into her chair and buried her face in the arm farthest
from him and her body shook, but she did not speak. He stared at her
dry-eyed for a minute, that tolled by so slowly that he rose at the
end of it, fearful that his stay was indecorously long.

"I think I should go now," he said, as he passed her.

"Oh, no!" she cried. "Not yet, not just yet." She caught his arm and
he stopped, as she stood beside him, trembling, haggard, staring at
him out of dead, mad eyes. There was no colour in her blotched face,
and in the moonlight the red rims of her eyes looked leaden, and her
voice was unsteady. At times it broke in sobbing croaks, and she spoke
with loose jaws, as one in great terror. "I want you to know--" she
paused at the end of each little hiccoughed phrase--"that I have not
forgotten--" she caught her breath--"that I think of you every
day--" she wiped her eyes with a limp handkerchief--"every day and
every night, and pray for you, though I don't believe--" she
whimpered as she shuddered--"that God cares much about me."

He tried to stop her, and would have gone, but she put a hand upon his
shoulder and pleaded: "Just another minute. Oh, Bob," she cried, and
her voice broke again, "don't forget me. Don't forget me. When I was
so sick last year--you remember," she pleaded, "I raved in delirium a
week." She stopped as if afraid to go on, then began to shake as with
a palsy. "I raved of everything under God's sun, and through it all,
Bob--not one word of you. Oh, I knew that wouldn't do." She swayed
upon his arm. "I kept a little corner of my soul safe to guard you."
She sank back into her chair and chattered, "Oh, I guarded you."

She was crying like a child. He stood over her and touched her
dishevelled hair with the tips of his fingers and said: "I oughtn't to
stay, Molly."

And she motioned him away with her face hidden and sobbed, "No--I
know it."

He paused a moment on the step before her and then said, "Good-by,
Molly--I'm going now." And she heard him walking down the yard on the
grass, so that his footsteps would not arouse the house. It seemed to
them both that it was midnight, but time had moved slowly, and when
the spent, broken woman crept into the house, and groped her way to
her room, she did not make a light, but slipped into bed without
looking at her scarred, shameful face.


CHAPTER XVIII


In the sunshine of that era of world-wide prosperity in the eighties,
John Barclay made much hay. He spent little time in Sycamore Ridge,
and his private car might be found in Minnesota to-day and at the end
of the week in California. As president of the Corn Belt Road and as
controlling director in the North Lake Line, he got rates on other
railroads for his grain products that no competitor could duplicate.
And when a competitor began to grow beyond the small fry class,
Barclay either bought him out or built a mill beside the offender and
crushed him out. Experts taught him the value of the chaff from the
grain. He had a dozen mills to which he shipped the refuse from his
flour and heaven only knows what else, and turned the stuff into
various pancake flours and breakfast foods. He spent hundreds of
thousands of dollars in advertising--in a day when large
appropriations for advertising were unusual. And the words "Barclay's
Best" glared at the traveller from crags in the Rocky Mountains and
from the piers of all the great harbour bridges. He used Niagara to
glorify the name of Barclay, and "Use Barclay's Best" had to be washed
off the statue of the Goddess of Liberty in New York Harbour. The
greenish brown eyes of the little man were forever looking into space,
and when he caught a dream, instead of letting it go, he called a
stenographer and made it come true. In those days he was beginning to
realize that an idea plus a million dollars will become a fact if a
man but says the word, whereas the same idea minus a million remains a
dream. The great power of money was slowly becoming part of the man's
consciousness. During the years that were to come, he came to think
that there was nothing impossible. Any wish he had might be gratified.
Such a consciousness drives men mad.

But in those prosperous days, while the millions were piling up,
Barclay kept his head. All the world was buying then, but wherever he
could Barclay sold. He bought only where he had to, and paid cash for
what he bought. He did not owe a dollar for anything. He had no
equities; his titles were all good. And as he neared his forties he
believed that he could sell what he had at forced sale for many
millions. He was supposed to be much richer than he was, but the one
thing that he knew about it was that scores of other men had more than
he. So he kept staring into space and pressing the button for his
stenographer, and at night wherever his work found him, whether in
Boston or in Chicago or in San Francisco, he hunted up the place where
he could hear the best music, and sat listening with his eyes closed.
He always kept his note-book in his hand, when Jane was not with him,
and when an idea came to him inspired by the music, he jotted it down,
and the next day, if it stood the test of a night's sleep, he turned
the idea into an event.

In planning his work he was ruthless. He learned that by bribing men
in the operating department of any railroad he could find out what his
competitors were doing. And in the main offices of the National
Provisions Company two rooms full of clerks were devoted to
considering the duplicate way-bills of every car of flour or grain or
grain product not shipped by the Barclay companies. Thus he was able
to delay the cars of his competitors, and get his own cars through on
time. Thus he was able to bribe buyers in wholesale establishments to
push his products. And with Lige Bemis manipulating the railroad and
judiciary committees in the legislatures of ten states, no laws were
enacted which might hamper Barclay's activities.

"Do you know, Lucy," said General Ward to his wife one night when they
were discussing Barclay and his ways and works, "sometimes I think
that what that boy saw at Wilson's Creek,--the horrible bloodshed,
the deadly spectacle of human suffering at the hospital wagon, some
way blinded his soul's eye to right and wrong. It was all a man could
stand; the picture must have seared the boy's heart like a fire."

Mrs. Ward, who was mending little clothes in the light of the
dining-room lamp, put down her work a moment and said: "I have always
thought the colonel had some such idea. For once when he was speaking
of the way John stole that wheat land, he said, 'Well, poor John, he
got a wound at Wilson's Creek that never will heal,' and when I asked
if he meant his foot, the colonel smiled like a woman and said gently,
'No, Miss Lucy, not there--not there at all; in his heart, my dear,
in his heart!'"

And the general's eyes met the eyes of a mother wandering toward a boy
of nine sleeping, tired out, on a couch near by; he was a little boy
with dark hair, and red tanned cheeks, and his mouth--such a soft
innocent mouth--curved prettily, like the lips of children in old
pictures, and as he slept he smiled, and the general, meeting the
mother's eyes coming back from the little face, wiped his glasses and
nodded his head in understanding; in a moment they both rose and stood
hand in hand over their child, and the mother said in a trembling
voice, "And his mother prayed for him, too--she has told me so--so
many times."

But the people of Sycamore Ridge and of the Mississippi Valley did not
indulge in any fine speculations upon the meaning of life when they
thought of John Barclay. He had become considerable of a figure in the
world, and the Middle West was proud of him. For those were the days
of tin cornices, false fronts, vain pretences, and borrowed plumes
bought with borrowed money. Other people's capital was easy to get,
and every one was rich. Debt was regarded as an evidence of
prosperity, and the town ran mad with the rest of the country. It is
not strange then that Mrs. Watts McHurdie, she who for four years
during the war dispensed "beefsteak--ham and eggs--breakfast
bacon--tea--coffee--iced tea--or--milk" at the Thayer House, and
for ten years thereafter sold dry-goods and kept books at Dorman's
store, should have become tainted with the infection of the times. But
it is strange that she could have inoculated so sane a little man as
Watts. Still, there were Delilah and Samson, and of course Samson was
a much larger man than Watts, and Nellie McHurdie was considerably
larger than Delilah; and you never can tell about those things,
anyway. Also it must not be forgotten that Nellie McHurdie since her
marriage had become Grand Preceptress in one lodge, Worthy Matron in
another, Senior Vice Commander in a third, and Worshipful Benefactress
in a fourth, to say nothing of positions as corresponding secretary,
delegate to the state convention, Keeper of the Records and Seals,
Scribe,--and perhaps Pharisee,--in half a dozen others, all in the
interests of her husband's political future; and with such obvious
devotion before him, it is small wonder after all that he succumbed.

But he would not run for office. He had trouble every spring
persuading her, but he always did persuade her, that this wasn't his
year, that conditions were wrong, and that next year probably would be
better. But he allowed her to call their home "The Bivouac," and have
the name cut in stone letters on the horse-block; and he sat by meekly
for many long years at lodges, at church entertainments, at high
school commencement exercises, at public gatherings of every sort, and
heard her sing a medley of American patriotic songs which wound up
with the song that made him famous. It was five drinks in Jake Dolan
that stopped the medley, when the drinks aforesaid inspired him to
rise grandly from his chair at the front of the hall at an
installation of officers of Henry Schnitzler Post of the Grand Army,
and stalk majestically out of the room, while the singing was in
progress, saying as he turned back at the door, before thumping
heavily down the stairs, "Well, I'm getting pretty damn tired of
that!" Mrs. McHurdie insisted that Watts should whip Dolan, and it is
possible that at home that night Watts did smite his breast and shake
his head fiercely, for in the morning the neighbours saw Mrs. McHurdie
walk to the gate with him, talking earnestly and holding his arm as if
to restrain him; moreover, when Watts had turned the corner of Lincoln
Avenue and had disappeared into Main Street, she hurried over to the
Culpeppers' to have the colonel warn Dolan that Watts was a dangerous
man. But when Dolan, sober, walked into the harness shop that
afternoon to apologize, the little harness maker came down the aisle
of saddles in his shop blinking over his spectacles and with his hand
to his mouth to strangle a smile, and before Dolan could speak, Watts
said, "So am I--Jake Dolan--so am I; but if you ever do that again,
I'll have to kill you."

It happened in the middle eighties--maybe a year before the college
was opened--maybe a year after, though Gabriel Carnine, talking of it
some twenty years later, insists that it happened two years after the
opening of the college. But no one ever has mentioned the matter to
Watts, so the exact date may not be recorded, though it is an
important date in the uses of this narrative, as will be seen later.
All agree--the colonel, the general, Dolan, Fernald, and perhaps two
dozen old soldiers who were at the railroad station waiting for the
train to take them to the National Encampment of the Grand Army of the
Republic,--that it was a fine morning in September. Of course John
Barclay contributed the band. He afterwards confessed to that,
explaining that Nellie had told him that Watts never had received the
attention he should receive either in the town or the state or the
nation, and so long as Watts was a National Delegate for the first
time in his life, and so long as she had twice been voted for as
National President of the Ladies' Aid, and might get it this time, the
band would be, as she put it, "so nice to take along"; and as John
never forgot the fact that Nellie asked him to sing at her wedding, he
hired the band. Thus are we bound to our past. But the band was not
what caused the comrades to gasp, though its going was a surprise. And
when they heard it turn into Main Street far up by Lincoln Avenue,
playing the good old tune that the town loved for Watts' sake and for
the sake of the time and the place and the heroic deeds it
celebrated,--when they heard the band, the colonel asked the general,
"Where's Watts?" and they suspected that the band might be bringing
him to the depot.

Heaven knows the town had bought uniforms and new horns for the band
often enough for it to do something public-spirited once in a while
without being paid for it. So the band did not come to the town as a
shock in and of itself. Neither for that matter did the hack--the new
glistening silver-mounted hack, with the bright spick-and-span hearse
harness on the horses; in those bustling days a quarter was nothing,
and you can ride all over the Ridge for a quarter; so when the
comrades at the depot, in their blue soldiers' clothes their campaign
hats, and their delegates' badges, saw the band followed by the hack,
they were of course interested, but that was all. And when some of the
far-sighted ones observed that the top of the hack was spread back
royally, they commented upon the display of pomp, but the comment was
not extraordinary. But when from the street as the band stopped, there
came cheers from the people, the boys at the station felt that
something unusual was about to come to them. So they watched the band
march down the long sheet-iron-covered station walk, and the hack move
along beside the band boys; and the poet's comrades-in-arms saw him
sitting beside the poet's wife,--the two in solemn state. And then
the old boys beheld Watts McHurdie,--little Watts McHurdie, with his
grizzled beard combed, with his gold-rimmed Sunday glasses far down on
his nose so that he could see over them, and--wonder of wonders, they
saw a high shiny new silk hat wobbling over his modest head.

He stumbled out of the open hack with his hand on the great stiff
awkward thing, obviously afraid it would fall off, and she that was
Nellie Logan, late of the Thayer House and still later of Dorman's
store, and later still most worshipful, most potent, most gorgeous and
most radiant archangel of seven secret and mysterious covenants,
conclaves, and inner temples, stood beaming at the pitiful sight,
clearly proud of her shameless achievement. Watts, putting his hand to
his mouth to cover his smile, grabbed the shiny thing again as he
nodded cautiously at the crowd. Then he followed her meekly to the
women's waiting room, where the wives and sisters of the comrades were
assembled--and they, less punctilious than the men, burst forth with
a scream of joy, and the agony was over.

And thus Watts McHurdie went to his greatest earthly glory. The
delegation from the Ridge, with the band, had John Barclay's private
car; that was another surprise which Mrs. McHurdie arranged, and when
they got to Washington, where the National Encampment was, opinions
differ as to when Watts McHurdie had his high tide of happiness. The
colonel says that it was in the great convention, where the Sycamore
Ridge band sat in front of the stage, and where Watts stood in front
of the band and led the great throng,--beginning with his cracked
little heady tenor, and in an instant losing it in the awful diapason
of ten thousand voices singing his old song with him; and where, when
it was over, General Grant came down the platform, making his way
rather clumsily among the chairs, and at last in front of the whole
world grasped Watts McHurdie's hands, and the two little men,
embarrassed by the formality of it all, stood for a few seconds
looking at each other with tears glistening in their speaking eyes.

But Jake Dolan, who knows something of human nature, does not hold to
the colonel's view about the moment of McHurdie's greatest joy. "We
were filing down the Avenue again, thousands and ten thousands of us,
as we filed past the White House nearly twenty years before. And the
Sycamore Ridge band was cramming its lungs into the old tune, when up
on the reviewing stand, beside all the big bugs and with the President
there himself, stood little Watts, plug hat in hand, bowing to the
boys. 'Twas a lovely sight, and he had been there for two mortal hours
before we boys got down--there was the Kansas boys and the Iowa boys
and some from Missouri, carrying the old flag we fought under at
Wilson's Creek. Watts saw us down the street and heard the old band
play; a dozen other bands had played that tune that day; but Billy
Dorman's tuba had its own kind of a rag in it, and Watts knew it. I
seen him a-waving his hat at the boys, almost as soon as they saw him,
and as the band came nearer and nearer I saw the little man's face
begin to crack, and as he looked down the line and saw them Kansas and
Iowa soldiers, I seen him give one whoop, and throw that plug hat
hellwards over the crowd and jump down from that band stand like a
wild man and make for the gang. He was blubbering like a calf when he
caught step with me, and he yelled so as to reach my ears above the
roar of the crowds and the blatting of the bands--yelled with his
voice ripped to shreds that fluttered out ragged from the torn bosom
of him, 'Jake--Jake--how I would like to get drunk--just this
once!' And we went on down the avenue together--him bareheaded,
hay-footing and straw-footing it the same as in the old days."

Jake always paused at this point and shook his head sorrowfully, and
then continued dolefully: "But 'twas no use; he was caught and took
away; some says it was to see the pictures in the White House, and
some says it was to a reception given by the Relief Corps to the
officers elect of the Ladies' Aid, where he was pawed over by a lot of
old girls who says, 'Yes, I'm so glad--what name please--oh,
--McHurdie, surely not _the_ McHurdie; O dear me--Sister McIntire,
come right here, this is _the_ McHurdie--you know I sang your song
when I was a little girl'--which was a lie, unless Watts wrote it for
the Mexican War, and he didn't. And then some one else comes waddling
up and says, 'O dear me, Mr. McHurdie--you don't know how glad I am
to see the author of "Home, Sweet Home,"' and Watts blinks his eyes
and pleads not guilty; and she says, 'O dear, excuse the mistake;
well, I'm sure you wrote something?' And Watts, being sick of love, as
Solomon says in his justly celebrated and popular song, Watts looks
through his Sunday glasses and doesn't see a blame thing, and smiles
and says calmly, 'No, madam, you mistake--I am a simple harness
maker.' And she sidles off looking puzzled, to make room for the one
from Massachusetts, who stares at him through her glasses and says,
'So you're Watts McHurdie--who wrote the--' 'The same, madam,' says
Watts, courting favour. 'Well,' says the high-browed one, 'well--you
are not at all what I imagined.' And 'Neither are you, madam,' returns
Watts, as sweet as a dill pickle; and she goes away to think it over
and wonder if he meant it that way. No--that's where Nellie made her
mistake. It wouldn't have hurt him--just once. But what's done's
done, and can't be undone, as the man said when he fished his wife out
of the lard vat."

Now this all seems a long way from John Barclay--the hero of this
romance. Yet the departure of Watts McHurdie for his scene of glory
was on the same day that a most important thing happened in the lives
of Bob Hendricks and Molly Brownwell. That day Bob Hendricks walked
one end of the station platform alone. The east-bound train was half
an hour late, and while the veterans were teasing Watts and the women
railing at Mrs. McHurdie, Hendricks discovered that it was one hundred
and seventy-eight steps from one end of the walk to the other, and
that to go entirely around the building made the distance fifty-four
steps more. It was almost train time before Adrian Brownwell arrived.
When the dapper little chap came with his bright crimson carnation,
and his flashing red necktie, and his inveterate gloves and cane,
Hendricks came only close enough to him to smell the perfume on the
man's clothes, and to nod to him. But when Hendricks found that the
man was going with the Culpeppers as far as Cleveland, as he told the
entire depot platform, "to report the trip," Hendricks sat on a
baggage truck beside the depot, and considered many things. As he was
sitting there Dolan came up, out of breath, and fearful he should be
late.

"How long will you be gone, Jake?" asked Hendricks.

"The matter of a week or ten days, maybe," answered Dolan.

"Well, Jake," said Hendricks, looking at Dolan with serious eyes, yet
rather abstractedly, "I am thinking of taking a long trip--to be gone
a long time--I don't know exactly how long. I may not go at all--I
haven't said anything to the boys in the store or the bank or out at
the shop about it; it isn't altogether settled--as yet." He paused
while a switch engine clanged by and the crowd surged out of the
depot, and ebbed back again into their seats. "Did you deliver my note
this morning?"

"Yes," replied Dolan, "just as you said. That's what made me a little
late."

"To the lady herself?"

"To the lady herself," repeated Dolan.

"All right," acquiesced Hendricks. "Now, Jake, if I give it out that
I'm going away on a trip, there'll be a lot of pulling and hauling and
fussing around in the bank and in the store and at the shop
and--every place, and then I may not go. So I've gone over every
concern carefully during the past week, and have set down what ought
to be done in case I'm gone. I didn't tell my sister even--she's so
nervous. And, Jake, I won't tell any one. But if, when you get back
from Washington, I'm not here, I'm going to leave this key with you.
Tell the boys at the bank that it will open my tin box, and in the tin
box they'll find some instructions about things." He smiled, and Dolan
assented. Hendricks uncoiled his legs from the truck, and began to get
down. "I won't mix up with the old folks, I guess, Jake. They have
their own affairs, and I'm tired. I worked all last night," he added.
He held out his hand to Dolan and said, "Well, good-by, Jake--have a
good time."

The elder man had walked away a few steps when Hendricks called him
back, and fumbling in his pockets, said: "Well, Jake, I certainly am a
fool; here--" he pulled an envelope marked "Dolan" from his inside
pocket--"Jake, I was in the bank this morning, and I found a picture
for you. Take it and have a good time. It's a long time till pension
day--so long."

The Irishman peeped at the bill and grinned as he said, "Them holy
pictures from the bank, my boy, have powerful healing qualities." And
he marched off with joy in his carriage.

Hendricks then resumed his tramp; up and down the long platform he
went, stepping on cracks one way, and avoiding cracks the next,
thinking it all out. He tried to remember if he had been unfair to any
one; if he had left any ragged edges; if he had taken a penny more
than his honest due. The letter to the county treasurer, returning the
money his father had taken, was on top of the pile of papers in his
tin box at the bank. He had finally concluded, that when everything
else was known, that would not add much to his disgrace. And then it
would be paid, and that page with the forged entry would not always be
in his mind. There were deeds, each witnessed by a different notary,
so that the town would not gossip before he went, transferring all of
his real estate to his sister, and the stock he had sold to the bank
was transferred, and the records all in the box; then he went over the
prices again at which he had disposed of his holdings to the bank, and
he was sure he had made good bargains in every case for the bank. So
it was all fair, he argued for the thousandth time--he was all square
with the world. He had left a deposit subject to his check of twenty
thousand dollars--that ought to do until they could get on their feet
somewhere; and it was all his, he said to himself--all his, and no
one's business.

And when he thought of the other part, the voice of Adrian Brownwell
saying, "Well, come on, old lady, we must be going," rose in his
consciousness. It was not so much Brownwell's words, as his air of
patronage and possession; it was cheerful enough, quite gay in fact,
but Hendricks asked himself a hundred times why the man didn't whistle
for her, and clamp a steel collar about her neck. He wondered
cynically if at the bottom of Brownwell's heart, he would not rather
have the check for twelve thousand dollars which Hendricks had left
for Colonel Culpepper, to pay off the Brownwell note, than to have his
wife. For seven years the colonel had been cheerfully neglecting it,
and now Hendricks knew that Adrian was troubling him about the old
debt.

As he rounded the depot for the tenth time he got back to their last
meeting. There stood General Ward with his arm about the girlish waist
of Mrs. Ward, the mother of seven. There was John Barclay with Jane
beside him, and they were holding hands like lovers. The Ward children
were running like rabbits over the broad lawn under the elms, and
there, talking to the wide, wide world, was Adrian Brownwell,
propounding the philosophy of the _Banner_, and quoting from last
week's editorials. And there sat Bob and Molly by the flower bed that
bordered the porch.

"I am going to the city to hear Gilmore," he said. That was simple
enough, and her sigh had no meaning either. It was just a weary little
sigh, such as women sometimes bring forth when they decide to say
something else. So she had said: "I'll be all alone next week. I think
I'll visit Jane--if she's in town."

Then something throbbed in his brain and made him say:--

"So you'd like to hear Gilmore, too?"

She coloured and was silent, and the pulse of madness that was beating
in her made her answer:--

"Oh--I can't--you know the folks are going to Washington to the
encampment, and Adrian is going as far as Cleveland with the
delegation to write it up."

An impulse loosened his tongue, and he asked:--

"Why not? Come on. If you don't know any one up there, go to the Fifth
Avenue; it's all right, and I'll get tickets, and we'll go every night
and both matinees. Come on!" he urged.

She was aflame and could not think. "Oh--don't, Bob, don't--not now.
Please don't," she begged, in as low a tone as she dared to use.

Adrian was thundering on about the tariff, and the general was
wrangling with him. The Barclays were talking to themselves, and the
children were clattering about underfoot, and in the trees overhead.
Bob's eyes and Molly's met, and the man shuddered at what he saw of
pathos and yearning, and he said: "Well, why not? It's no worse to go
than to want to go. What's wrong about it--Molly, do you think--"

He did not finish the sentence, for Adrian had ceased talking, and
Molly, seeing his jealous eyes upon her, rose and moved away. But
before they left that night she found occasion to say, "I've been
thinking about it, Bob, and maybe I will."

In the year that had passed since Hendricks had left her sobbing in
the chair on the porch of the Culpepper home, a current between them
had been reëstablished, and was fed by the chance passing in a store,
a smile at a reception, a good morning on the street, and the current
was pulsing through their veins night and day. But that fine September
morning, as she stood on the veranda of her home with a dust-cap on
her head, cleaning up the litter her parents had made in packing, she
was not ready for what rushed into her soul from the letter Dolan left
her, as he hurried away to overtake the band that was turning from
Lincoln Avenue into Main Street. She sat in a chair to read it, and
for a moment after she had read it, she held it open in her lap and
gazed at the sunlight mottling the blue grass before her, through the
elm trees. Her lips were parted and her eyes wide, and she breathed
slowly. The tune the band was playing--McHurdie's song--sank into
her memory there that day so that it always brought back the mottled
sunshine, the flowers blooming along the walk, and the song of a robin
from a lilac bush near by. She folded the letter carefully, and put it
inside her dress, and then moving mechanically, took it out and read
it again:--

    "MY DARLING, MY DARLING: There is no use struggling any more. You
    must come. I will meet you in the city at the morning train, the one
    that leaves the Ridge here at 2.35 A.M. We can go to the parks
    to-morrow and be alone and talk it all out, before the concert--and
    then--oh, Molly, core of my soul, heart of my heart, why should we
    ever come back!                                           BOB."

All that she could feel as she sat there motionless was a crashing
"no." The thing seemed to drive her mad by its insistence--a horrible
racking thing that all but shook her, and she chattered at it: "Why
not? Why not? Why not?" But the "no" kept roaring through her mind,
and as she heard the servant rattling the breakfast dishes in the
house, the woman shivered out of sight and ran to her room. She fell
on her knees to pray, but all she could pray was, "O God, O God, O
God, help me!" and to that prayer, as she said it, the something in
her heart kept gibbering, "Why not? Why not? Why not?" From an old box
hidden in a closet opening out of her mother's room she took Bob
Hendricks' picture,--the faded picture of a boy of twenty,--and
holding it close to her breast, stared open-lipped into the heart of
an elm tree-top. The whistle of the train brought her back to her real
world. She rose and looked at herself in the mirror, at the unromantic
face with its lines showing faintly around her eyes, grown quiet
during the dozen years that had settled her fluffy hair into sedate
waves. She smiled at the changes of the years and shook her head, and
got a grip on her normal consciousness, and after putting away the
picture and closing the box, she went downstairs to finish her work.

On the stairs she felt sure of herself, and set about to plan for the
next day, and then the tumult began, between the "no" and her soul. In
a few minutes as she worked the "no" conquered, and she said, "Bob's
crazy." She repeated it many times, and found as she repeated it that
it was mechanical and that her soul was aching again. So the morning
wore away; she gossiped with the servant a moment; a neighbour came in
on an errand; and she dressed to go down town. As she went out of the
gate, she wondered where she would be that hour the next day, and then
the struggle began again. Moreover, she bought some new
gloves--travelling gloves to match her gray dress.

In the afternoon she and Jane Barclay sat on the wide porch of the
Barclay home. "Gilmore's going to be in the city all this week," said
Jane, biting a thread in her sewing.

"Is he?" replied Molly. "I should so like to hear him. It's so poky up
at the house."

"Why don't you?" inquired Jane. "Get on the train and go on up."

"Do you suppose it would be all right?" replied Molly.

"Why, of course, girl! Aren't you a married woman of lawful age? I
would if I wanted to."

There was a pause, and Molly replied thoughtfully, "I have half a
notion to--really!"

But as she walked home, she decided not to do it. People from the
Ridge might be there, and they wouldn't understand, and her
finger-tips chilled at the memory of Adrian Brownwell's jealous eyes.
So as she ate supper, she went over the dresses she had that were
available. And at bedtime she gave the whole plan up and went upstairs
humming "Marguerite" as happily as the thrush that sang in the lilacs
that morning. As she undressed the note fell to the floor. When she
picked it up, the flash of passion came tearing through her heart, and
the "no" crashed in her ears again, and all the day's struggle was for
nothing. So she went to bed, resolved not to go. But she stared
through the window into the night, and of a sudden a resolve came to
her to go, and have one fair day with Hendricks--to talk it all out
forever, and then to come home, and she rose from her bed and tiptoed
through the house packing a valise. She left a note in the kitchen for
the servant, saying that she would be back for dinner the next
evening, and when she struck a match in the front hall to see what
time it was, she found that it was only one o'clock. For an hour she
sat in the chill September air on the veranda, thinking it all
over--what she would say; how they would meet and part; and over and
over again she told herself that she was doing the sensible thing. As
the clock struck two she picked up her valise--it was heavier than
she thought, and it occurred to her that she had put in many
unnecessary things, and that she had time to lighten it. But she
stopped a moment only, and then walked to the gate and down a side
street to the station. It was 2.20 when she arrived, and the train was
marked on the blackboard by the ticket window on time. She kept
telling herself that it was best to have it out; that she would come
right back; but she remembered her heavy valise, and again the warning
"no" roared through her soul. She walked up and down the long
platform, and felt the presence of Bob Hendricks strong and
compelling; she knew he had been there that very day, and wondered
where he sat. Then she thought perhaps she would do better not to go.
She looked into the men's waiting room, and it was empty save for one
man; his back was turned to her, but she recognized Lige Bemis. A
tremble of guilt racked and weakened her. And with a thrill as of pain
she heard the faint whistle of a train far up the valley. The man
moved about the room inside. Apparently he also heard the far-off
whistle. She shrank around the corner of the depot. But he caught
sight of her dress, and slowly sauntered up and down the platform
until he passed near enough to her to identify her in the faint
flicker of the gas. He spoke, and she returned his greeting. The train
whistled again--much nearer it seemed to her, but still far away, and
her soul and the "no" were grappling in a final contest. Suddenly it
came over her that she had not bought her ticket. Again the train
whistled, and far up the tracks she could see a speck of light. She
hurried into the waiting room to buy the ticket. The noise of the
train was beginning to sound in her ears, She was frightened and
nervous, and she fumbled with her purse and valise. Nearer and nearer
came the train, and the "no" fairly screamed in her ears, and her face
was pallid, with the black wrinkles standing out upon it in the
gaslight. The train was in the railroad yards, and the glare of the
headlight was in the waiting room. Bemis came in and saw her fumbling
with her ticket, her pocket book, and her valise.

"You'll have to hurry, Mrs. Brownwell, this is the limited--it only
stops a minute. Let me help you."

He picked up the valise and followed her from the room. The rush of
the incoming train shattered her nerves. They pulsed in fear of some
dreadful thing, and in that moment she wondered whether or not she
would ever see it all again--the depot, the familiar street, the
great mill looming across the river, and the Barclay home half a mile
above them. In a second she realized all that her going meant, and the
"no" screamed at her, and the "why not" answered feebly. But she had
gone too far, she said to herself. The engine was passing her, and
Bemis was behind her with the heavy valise. She wondered what he would
say when Bob met her at the train in the city. All this flashed across
her mind in a second, and then she became conscious that the rumbling
thing in front of her was not the limited but a cattle train, and the
sickening odour from it made her faint. In the minute while it was
rushing by at full speed she became rigid, and then, taking her valise
from the man behind her, turned and walked as fast as she could up the
hill, and when she turned the corner she tried to run. Her feet took
her to the Barclay home. She stood trembling in terror on the great
wide porch and rang the bell. The servant admitted the white-faced,
shaking woman, and she ran to Jane Barclay's room.

"Oh, Jane," chattered Molly, "Jane, for God's love, Jane, hold
me--hold me tight; don't let me go. Don't!" She sank to the floor and
put her face in Jane's lap and stuttered: "I--I--have g-g-got to
t-t-tell you, Jane. I've g-g-ot to t-t-t-ell you, J-J-Jane." And then
she fell to sobbing. "Hold me, don't let me go out there. When it
whistles ag-g-gain h-h-hold me t-t-tight."

Jane Barclay's strong kind hands stroked the dishevelled hair of the
trembling woman. And in time she looked up and said quietly, "You
know--you know, Jane, Bob and I--Bob and I were going to run away!"
Molly looked at Jane a fearful second with beseeching eyes, and then
dropped her head and fell to sobbing again, and lay with her face on
the other woman's knees.

When she was quiet Jane said: "I wouldn't talk about it any more,
dear--not now." She stroked the hair and patted the face of the woman
before her. "Shall we go to bed now, dear? Come right in with me." And
soon Molly rose, and her spent soul rested in peace. But they did not go
to bed. The dawn found the two women talking it out together--clear from
the beginning.

And when the day came Molly Brownwell went to Jane Barclay's desk and
wrote. And when Bob Hendricks came home that night, his sister handed
him a letter. It ran:--

    "MY DEAR BOB: I have thought it all out, dear; it wouldn't do at
    all. I went to the train, and something, I don't know what, caught
    me and dragged me over to Jane's. She was good--oh, so good. She
    knows; but it was better that she should than--the other way.

    "It will never do, Bob. We can't go back. The terrible something
    that I did stands irrevocably between us. The love that might have
    made both our lives radiant is broken, Bob--forever broken. And all
    the king's horses and all the king's men cannot ever put it together
    again. I know it now, and oh Bob, Bob, it makes me sadder than the
    pain of unsatisfied love in my heart.

    "It just can't be; nothing ever can make it as it was, and unless it
    could be that way--the boy and girl way, it would be something
    dreadful. We have missed the best in the world, Bob; we cannot enjoy
    the next best together. But apart, each doing his work in life as
    God wills it, we may find the next best, which is more than most
    people know.

    "I have found during this hour that I can pray again, Bob, and I am
    asking God always to let me hope for a heaven, into which I can
    bring a few little memories--of the time before you left me. Won't
    you bring yours there, too, dear? Until then--good-by.

                                                              "MOLLY."

The springs that move God's universe are hidden,--those that move the
world of material things and those that move the world of spiritual
things, and make events creep out of the past into the future so
noiselessly that they seem born in the present. It is all a mystery,
the half-stated equation of life that we call the scheme of things.
Only this is sure, that however remote, however separated by time and
space, the tragedy of life has its root in the weakness of men, and of
all the heart-breaking phantasms that move across the panorama of the
day, somewhere deep-rooted in our own souls' weakness is the
ineradicable cause. Even God's mercy cannot separate the punishment
that follows sin, and perhaps it is the greatest mercy of His mercy
that it cannot do so. For when we leave this world, our books are
clear. If our souls grow--we pay the price in suffering; if they
shrivel, we go into the next world, poorer for our pilgrimage.

So do not pity Molly Brownwell nor Robert Hendricks when you learn
that as she left the station at Sycamore Ridge that night, Lige Bemis
went to a gas lamp and read the note from Robert Hendricks that in her
confusion she had dropped upon the floor. Only pity the miserable
creature whose soul was so dead in him that he could put that note
away to bide his time. In this wide universe, wherein we are growing
slowly up to Godhood, only the poor leprous soul, whitened with malice
and hate, deserves the angels' tears. The rest of us,--weak, failing,
frail, to whom life deals its sorrows and its tears, its punishments
and its anguish,--we leave this world nearer to God than when we came
here, and the journey, though long and hard, has been worth the while.


CHAPTER XIX


Back in the days when John Barclay had become powerful enough to
increase the price of his door strips to the railroad companies from
five dollars to seven and a half, he had transferred the business of
the factory that made the strips from Hendricks' Exchange National to
the new Merchants' State Bank which Gabriel Carnine was establishing.
For Carnine and Barclay were more of a mind than were Barclay and
Hendricks; Carnine was bent on getting rich, and he had come to regard
Barclay as the most remarkable man in the world. Hendricks, on the
other hand, knew Barclay to the core, and since the quarrel of the
seventies, while they had maintained business relations, they were
merely getting along together. There were times when Barclay felt
uncomfortable, knowing that Hendricks knew much about his business,
but the more Carnine knew, the more praise Barclay had of him; and so,
even though Jane kept her own account with Hendricks, and though John
himself kept a personal account with Hendricks, the Economy Door Strip
Company and the Golden Belt Wheat Company did business with Carnine,
and Barclay became a director of the Merchants' State Bank, and
greatly increased its prestige thereby. And Bob Hendricks sighed a
sigh of relief, for he knew that he would never become John Barclay's
fence and be called upon to dispose of stolen goods. So Hendricks went
his way with his eyes on a level and his jaw squared with the world.
And when he knew that Jane knew the secret of his soul, about the only
comfort he had in those black days was the exultation in his heart
that John--whatever he might know--could not turn it into cash at
the Exchange National Bank.

As he walked alone under the stars that first night after Molly
Brownwell's note came to him, he saw his life as it was, with things
squarely in their relations. Of course this light did not stay with
him always; at times in his loneliness the old cloud of wild yearning
would come over him, and he would rattle the bars of his madhouse
until he could fight his way out to the clean air of Heaven under the
stars. And at such times he would elude Dolan, and walk far away from
the town in fields and meadows and woods struggling back to
sanity--sometimes through a long night. But as the years passed, this
truth came to be a part of his consciousness--that in some measure
the thing we call custom, or law, or civilization, or society, with
all its faults, is the best that man, endowed as he is to-day, can
establish, and that the highest service one can pay to man or to God
is found in conforming to the social compact, at whatever cost of
physical pain, or mental anguish, if the conformation does not require
a moral breach. That was the faith he lived by, that by service to his
fellows and by sacrifice to whatever was worthy in the social compact,
he would find a growth of soul that would pay him, either here or
hereafter. So he lent money, and sold light, and traded in
merchandise, and did a man's work in politics--playing each game
according to the rules.

But whatever came to him, whatever of honour or of influence, or of
public respect, in his own heart there was the cloud--he knew that he
was a forger, and that once he had offered to throw everything he had
aside and take in return--But he was not candid enough even in his
own heart to finish the indictment. It made him flush with shame, and
perhaps that was why on his face there was often a curious
self-deprecating smile--not of modesty, not of charity, but the smile
of the man who is looking at a passing show and knows that it is not
real. As he went into his forties, and the flux of his life hardened,
he became a man of reserves--a kind, quiet, strong man, charitable to
a fault for the weaknesses of others, but a man who rarely reflected
his impulses, a listener in conversation, a dreamer amid the tumult of
business, whose success lay in his industry and caution, and who drew
men to him not by what he promised, but by the faith we chattering
daws have in the man who looks on and smiles while we prattle.

His lank bones began to take on flesh, and his face rounded at the
corners, and the eagerness of youth passed from him. He always looked
more of a man than John Barclay. For Barclay was a man of enthusiasms,
who occasionally liked to mouth a hard jaw-breaking "damn," and who
followed his instincts with womanly faith in them--so that he became
known as a man of impulse. But Hendricks' power was in repression, and
in Sycamore Ridge they used to say that the only reason why Bob
Hendricks grew a mustache was to chew it when people expected him to
talk. It wasn't much of a mustache--a little blond fuzz about as
heavy as his yellow eyebrows over his big inquiring blue eyes, and he
once told Dolan that he kept it for a danger signal. When he found
himself pulling at it, he knew he was nervous and should get out into
the open. They tell a story in the Ridge to the effect that Hendricks
started to run to a fire, and caught himself pulling at his mustache,
and turned around and went out to the power-house instead.

It was the only anecdote ever told of Hendricks after he was
forty--for he was not a man about whom anecdotes would hang well,
though the town is full of them about John Barclay. So Hendricks lived
a strong reticent man, who succeeded in business though he was honest,
and who won in politics by choosing his enemies from the kind of noisy
men who make many mistakes, and let every one know it. The time came
when he did not avoid Molly Brownwell; she felt that he was not afraid
to see her in any circumstances, and that made her happy. Sometimes
she went to him in behalf of one of her father's charges,--some poor
devil who could not pay his note at the bank and keep the children in
school, or some clerk or workman at the power-house who had been
discharged. At such times they talked the matter in hand over frankly,
and it ended by the man giving way to the woman, or showing her simply
that she was wrong.

Only once in nearly a score of years did a personal word pass between
them. She had come to him for his signature to a petition for a pardon
for a man whose family suffered while he was in the penitentiary.
Hendricks signed the paper and handed it back to her, and his blue
eyes were fixed impersonally upon her, and he smiled his curious,
self-deprecatory smile and sighed, "As we forgive our debtors." Then
he reached for a paper in his desk and seemed oblivious to her
presence. No one else was near them, and the woman hesitated a moment
before turning to go and repeated, "Yes, Bob--as we forgive our
debtors." She tried to show him the radiance in her soul, but he did
not look up and she went away. When she had gone, he pushed aside his
work and sat for a moment looking into the street; he began biting his
mustache, and rose, and went out of the bank and found some other
work.

That night as Hendricks and Dolan walked over the town together, Dolan
said: "Did you ever know, Robert"--that was as near familiarity as
the elder man came with Hendricks--"that Mart Culpepper owed his
son-in-law a lot of money?"

"Well," returned Hendricks, "he borrowed a lot fifteen years ago or
such a matter; why?"

"Well," answered Dolan, "I served papers on Mart to-day in a suit
for--I dunno, a lot of money--as I remember it about fifteen
thousand dollars. That seems like a good deal."

Hendricks grunted, and they walked on in silence. Hendricks knew from
Brownwell's overdraft that things were not going well with him, and he
believed that matters must have reached a painful crisis in the
Culpepper family if Brownwell had brought suit against the colonel.

The next morning Colonel Martin Culpepper came into the bank. He had
grown into a large gray man--with gray hair, gray mustaches of
undiminished size, and chin whiskers grayed and broadened with the
years. His fine black eyes were just beginning to lose their lustre,
and the spring was going out of his stride. As he came into the bank,
Hendricks noticed that the colonel seemed to shuffle just a little. He
put out his fat hand, and said:--

"Robert, will you come into the back room with me a moment? It isn't
business--I just want to talk with you." He smiled apologetically and
added, "Just troubles, Robert--just an old man wants to talk to some
one, in point of fact."

Hendricks followed the colonel into the directors' room, and without
ceremony the colonel sank heavily into a fat leather chair, facing the
window, and Hendricks sat down facing the colonel. The colonel looked
at the floor and fumbled his triangular watch-charm a moment, and
cleared his throat, as he spoke, "I don't know just how to begin--to
get at it--to proceed, as I may say, Robert." Hendricks did not
reply, and the colonel went on, "I just wanted to talk to some one,
that's all--to talk to you--just to you, sir, to be exact."

Hendricks looked kindly at the colonel, whose averted eyes made the
younger man feel uncomfortable. Then he said gently, "Well, Colonel,
don't be backward about saying what you want to to me." It was a long
speech for Hendricks, and he felt it, and then qualified it with,
"But, of course, I don't want to urge you."

The colonel's face showed a flush of courage to Hendricks, but the
courage passed, and there was a silence, and then a little twitch
under his eyes told Hendricks that the colonel was contemplating a
flank attack as he spoke, "Robert, may I ask you in confidence if
Adrian Brownwell is hard up?"

Hendricks believed the truth would bring matters to a head, and he
answered, "Well, I shouldn't wonder, Colonel."

"Very hard up?" pressed the colonel.

Hendricks remembered Brownwell's overdraft and half a dozen past due
notes to cover other overdrafts and answered, "Well, Colonel, not
desperate, but you know the _Index_ has been getting the best of the
_Banner_ for two or three years."

There was a pause, and then the colonel blurted out, "Well, Bob, he's
sued me."

"I knew that, Colonel," returned Hendricks, anxious to press the
matter to its core. "Jake told me yesterday."

"I was going to pay him; he's spoken about it several times--dunned me,
sir, in point of fact, off and on for several years. But he knew I was
good for it. And now the little coward runs off up to Chicago to attend
the convention and sues me while he's gone. That's what I hate."
Hendricks could see that the object of the colonel's visit was still on
his mind, and so he left the way open for the colonel to talk. "You know
how Mrs. Culpepper feels and how Molly feels--disgraced, sir,
humiliated, shamed, to be exact, sir, in front of the whole town. What
would you do, Robert? What can a man do in a time like this--I ask you,
what can he do?"

"Well, I'd pay him, Colonel, if I were you," ventured the younger man.

The colonel straightened up and glared at Hendricks and exclaimed:
"Bob Hendricks, do you think, sir, that Martin Culpepper would rest
for a minute, while he had a dollar to his name, or a rag on his back,
under the imputation of not paying a debt like that? It is paid,
sir,--settled in full this morning, sir. But what am I going to do
about him, sir--the contemptible scamp who publicly sued his own
wife's father? That's what I came to you for, Robert. What am I going
to do?"

"It'll be forgotten in a week, Colonel--I wouldn't worry about it,"
answered Hendricks. "We all have those little unpleasantnesses."

The colonel was silent for a time, and then he said: "Bob--" turning
his eyes to meet Hendricks' for the first time during their
meeting--"that scoundrel said to me yesterday morning before leaving,
'If I hadn't the misfortune of being your son-in-law, you wouldn't
have the honour of owing me this money.' Then he sneered at me--you
know the supercilious way he has, the damn miserable hound-pup way he
has of grinning at you,--and says, 'I regarded it as a loan, even
though you seemed to regard it as a bargain.' And he whirled and left
me." The colonel's voice broke as he added: "In God's name, Bob, tell
me--did I sell Molly? You know--you can tell me."

The colonel was on his feet, standing before Hendricks, with, his
hands stretched toward the younger man. Hendricks did not reply at
once, and the colonel broke forth: "Bob Hendricks, why did you and my
little girl quarrel? Did she break it or did you? Did I sell her, Bob,
did I sell my little girl?" He slipped back into the chair and for a
moment hid his face, and shook with a great sob, then pulled himself
together, and said, "I know I'm a foolish old man, Bob, only I feel a
good deal depends on knowing the truth--a good deal of my attitude
toward him."

Hendricks looked at the colonel for an abstracted moment, and then
said: "Colonel, Adrian Brownwell is hard up--very hard up, and you
don't know how he is suffering with chagrin at being beaten by the
_Index_. He is quick-tempered--just as you are, Colonel." He paused a
moment and took the colonel by the hand,--a fat, pink hand, without
much iron in it,--and brought him to his feet. "And about that other
matter," he added, as he put his arm about the colonel, "you didn't
sell her. I know that; I give you my word on that. It was fifteen
years ago--maybe longer--since Molly and I were--since we went
together as boy and girl. That's a long time ago, Colonel, a long time
ago, and I've managed to forget just why we--why we didn't make a go
of it." He smiled kindly at the colonel as he spoke--a smile that the
colonel had not seen in Hendricks' face in many years. Then the mask
fell on his face, and the colonel saw it fall--the mask of the man
over the face of the boy. A puzzled, bewildered look crept into the
gray, fat face, and Hendricks could see that the doubt was still in
the colonel's heart. The younger man pressed the colonel's hand, and
the two moved toward the door. Suddenly tears flushed into the dimmed
eyes of the colonel, and he cried, through a smile, "Bob Hendricks, I
believe in my soul you're a liar--a damn liar, sir, but, boy, you're
a thoroughbred--God bless you, you're a thoroughbred." And he turned
and shuffled from the room and out of the bank.

When Colonel Martin Culpepper left Robert Hendricks at the door of the
directors' room of the Exchange National Bank, the colonel was
persuaded in his heart that his daughter had married Adrian Brownwell
to please her parents, and the colonel realized that day that her
parents were pleased with Brownwell as a suitor for their daughter,
because in time of need he had come to their rescue with money, and
incidentally because he was of their own blood and caste--a Southern
gentleman of family. The colonel went to the offices of the Culpepper
Mortgage and Loan Company and went over his bank-book again. The check
that he drew would take all but three hundred and forty-five dollars
out of the accounts of his company, and not a dollar of it was his.
The Culpepper Mortgage Company was lending other people's money. It
had been lending money on farm mortgages for ten years. Pay-day on
many mortgages was coming due, and of the fifteen thousand dollars he
checked out to pay Adrian Brownwell's debt, thirteen thousand dollars
was money that belonged to the Eastern creditors of the company--men
and women who had sent their money to the company for it to lend; and
the money checked out represented money paid back by the farmers for
the release of their mortgages. Some of the money was interest paid by
farmers on their mortgages, some of it was partial payments--but none
of it was Colonel Culpepper's money.

"Molly," said the colonel, as his daughter came into the office, "I've
given a check for that--that money, you know, to Adrian--paid it in
full, my dear. But--" the colonel fumbled with his pencil a moment
and added, "I'm a trifle shy--a few thousand in point of fact, and I
just thought I'd ask--would you borrow it of Bob, if you were me?"

He looked at her closely, and she coloured and shook her head
vehemently as she replied: "Oh, no, father--no, can't you get it
somewhere else? Not from Bob--for that! I mean--oh--I'd much rather
not."

The colonel looked at his daughter a moment and drew a deep breath,
and sighed, and smiled across his sigh, and took her hand and put it
around his neck and kissed it, and when she was close to him he put
his arm about her, and their eyes met for a fleeting instant, and they
did not speak. But in a moment from across his desk the daughter
spoke, "Why don't you go to John or Carnine, father?"

"Well, Gabe--you know Gabe. I'm borrowed clear to the limit there,
now. And John--you know John, Molly--and the muss, the disagreeable
muss,--the row, in point of fact, we had over that last seventy-five
dollars settling up the College Heights business--you remember? Well,
I just can't go to John. But," he added cheerfully, "I can get it
elsewhere, my dear--I have other resources, other resources, my
dear." And the colonel smiled so gayly that he deceived even his
daughter, and she went home as happy as a woman with eyelids as red as
hers were that day might reasonably expect to be.

As for the colonel, he sat figuring for an hour upon a sheet of white
paper. His figures indicated that by putting all of his property
except his home into the market, and reserving all of his commissions
on loans that would fall due during the three years coming, he could
pay back the money he had taken, little by little, and be square with
the company's creditors in three years--or four at the most. So he
let the check stand, and did not try to borrow money of the banks to
make it good, but trusted to to-morrow's receipts to pay yesterday's
debts of the company. Knowing that several mortgages of more than
three thousand each would fall due in a few weeks, and that the men
carrying them, expected to pay them, the colonel wrote dilatory
letters to the Eastern creditors whose money he had taken, explaining
that there was some delay in the payment of the notes, and that the
matter would be straightened out in a few weeks. When the money came
in from the mortgages falling due the next month, he paid those
already due, and delayed the payment of Peter until Paul paid up. It
was a miserable business, and Colonel Culpepper knew that he was a
thief. The knowledge branded him as one, and bent his eyes to the
ground, and wrenched his proud neck so that his head hung loosely upon
it. Always when he spoke in public, or went among his poor on errands
of mercy, at his elbow stood the accusing spectre, and choked his
voice, and unnerved his hand. And trouble came upon the Culpeppers,
and the colonel's clothes, which, had always been immaculate, grew
shabby. As that year and the next passed and mortgages began falling
due, not only in the colonel's company but all over the county, all
over the state, all over the Missouri Valley, men found they could not
pay. The cycle of business depression moved across the world, as those
things come and go through the centuries. Moreover, General Ward was
riding on the crest of a wave of unrest which expressed in terms of
politics what the people felt in their homes. Debts were falling due;
crops brought small returns; capital was frightened; men in the mills
lost their work; men on the farms burned their corn; and Colonel
Martin Culpepper sank deeper and deeper into the mire.

Those years of the panic of the early nineties pressed all the youth
out of his step, dimmed the lustre of his eyes, and slowly broke his
heart. His keenest anguish was not for his own suffering, but because
his poor, the people at the Mission, came trooping to him for help,
and he had to turn so many away. The whole town knew that he was in
trouble, though no one knew or even suspected just what it was. For
the people had their own troubles in those days, and the town and the
county and the state and the whole world grew shabby.

One day in the summer of '93, Colonel Culpepper was sitting in his
office reading a letter from Vermont demanding a long-deferred
interest payment on a mortgage. There were three hundred dollars due,
and the colonel had but half that amount, and was going to send what
he had. Jake Dolan came into the office and saw the colonel sitting
with the letter crumpled in his hands, and with worry in the dull old
eyes.

"Come in, Jake, come in," cried the colonel, a little huskily. "What's
the trouble, comrade--what's wrong?"

But let Dolan tell it to Hendricks three days later, as the two are
sitting at night on the stone bridge across the Sycamore built by John
Barclay to commemorate the battle of Sycamore Ridge. "'Well, Mart,'
says I, 'I'm in vicarious trouble,' says I. 'It's along of my orphan
asylum,' says I. 'What orphan asylum?' says he. 'Well, it's this way,
Mart,' says I. 'You know they found Trixie Lee guilty this afternoon
in the justice court, don't you?' Mart sighs and says, 'Poor Trixie, I
supposed they would sooner or later, poor girl--poor girl. An' old
Cap Lee of the Red Legs was her father; did you know that, Jake?' he
asks. 'Yes, Mart,' says I, 'and Lady Lee before her. She comes by it
honestly.' Mart sat drumming with his fingers on the table, looking
back into the years. 'Poor Jim,' he says, 'Jim was a brave soldier--a
brave, big-hearted, generous soldier--he nursed me all that first
night at Wilson's Creek when I was wounded. Poor Jim.' 'Yes,' says I,
'and Trixie has named her boy for him--Jim Lord Lee Young; that was
her husband's name--Young,' says I. 'And it's along of the boy that
I'm here for. The nicest bright-eyed little chap you ever saw; and he
seems to know that something is wrong, and just clings to his mother
and cries--seven years old, or maybe eight--and begs me not to put
his mother in jail. And,' says I to Mart, 'Mart, I just can't do it.
The sheriff he's run, and so has the deputy; they can't stand the boy
crying, and damn it to hell, Mart, I can't, either; so I just left 'em
in the office and locked the door and come around to see you. I'd 'a'
gone to see Bob, only he's out of town this week,' I says. 'I can
throw up the job, Mart--though I'd have to go on the county; but
Mart, they ain't a soul for the boy to go to; and it ain't right to
put him in jail with the scum that's in there.'"

"Tough--wasn't it?" said Hendricks. "What did you do? Why didn't you
go to Carnine or Barclay?"

"That's just what I'm a-comin' to,--the Priest or the Levite?" said
Jake. "Well, Mart said, 'Where're the men they caught--won't they
help?' and I says, 'They paid their tine and skipped.' 'Fine?' asks
Mart, 'fine? I thought you said it was jail sentence.' 'Well,' says I,
'it amounts to the same thing; she can't pay her fine, and that damn
reform judge, wanting to make a record as a Spartan, has committed her
to jail till it is paid!' 'So they go free, and she goes to jail,
because she is poor,' says Mart.' That's what your reform means,' says
I, 'or I let her and the boy loose and lose my job. And oh, Mart,'
says I, 'the screams of that little boy at the disgrace of it and the
terror of the jail--man--I can't stand it!' 'How much is it?' sighs
Mart. 'An even hundred fine and seventeen dollars and fifty cents
costs,' says I. Mart's eyes was leaking, and he gets up and goes to
the vault, and comes back with the cash and says, blubbering like a
calf: 'Here, Jake Dolan, you old scoundrel, take this. I'll pass a
paper and get it to-morrow--now get out of here.' And he handed me
the money all cried over where he'd been slow counting it out, and
said when he'd got hold of his wobbly jaw: 'Don't you tell her where
you got it--I don't want her around here. I'll see her to-morrow when
I'm down that way and talk to her for old Cap Lee--' And then he
laughs as he stands in the door and says: 'Well, Jim,' and he points
up, 'your bread cast upon the waters was a long time a-coming--but
here she is;' and he says, 'Do you suppose the old villain knows?' And
I turned and hunted up the justice and went around to the office, and
told Trixie to 'go sin no more,' and she laughs and says, 'Well,
hardly ever!' and I kissed the kid, and he fought my whiskers, and we
all live happy ever after."

But the colonel, after Dolan left the office, went into the darkening
room, and spread out the harsh letter from the Vermont banker
demanding money long past due, and read and reread it and took up his
burden, and got into the weary treadmill of his life. It rained the
next day, and he did not go out with his subscription paper; he had
learned that people subscribe better on bright days; and as Hendricks
and Barclay were both out of town, he wrote a dilatory letter to the
Vermont people--the fifth he had written about that particular
transaction--and waited another rainy day and still another before
starting out with his paper. But the event was past; the cry of the
child was not in the people's ears; they knew that the colonel had put
up the money; so it was not until Hendricks came back and heard the
story from Dolan that the colonel was repaid. Then because he actually
had the money--at least half of it due on that particular debt, which
was one of scores of its kind--the colonel delayed another day and
another, and while he was musing the fire burned. And events started
in Vermont which greatly changed the course of this story.

"I wonder," he has written in that portion of the McHurdie Biography
devoted to "The Press of the Years," "why, as we go farther and
farther into life, invariably it grows dingier and dingier. The 'large
white plumes' that dance before the eyes of youth soil, and are
bedraggled. And out of the inexplicable tangle of the mesh of life
come dark threads from God knows where and colour the woof of it gray
and dreary. Ah for the days of the large white plumes--for the days
when life's woof was bright!"


CHAPTER XX


If the reader of this tale should feel drawn to visit Sycamore Ridge,
he will find a number of interesting things there, and the trip may be
made by the transcontinental traveller with the loss of but half a
dozen hours from his journey. The Golden Belt Railroad, fifteen years
ago, used to print a guide-book called "California and Back," in which
were set down the places of interest to the traveller. In that book
Sycamore Ridge was described thus:--

    "Sycamore Ridge, pop. 22,345, census 1890; large water-power, main
    industry milling; also manufacturing; five wholesale houses. Seat
    Ward University, 1300 students; also Garrison County High School,
    also Business College. Thirty-five churches, two newspapers, the
    _Daily Banner_ and the _Index_; fifty miles of paved streets;
    largest stone arch bridge in the West, marking site of Battle of
    Sycamore Ridge, a border ruffian skirmish; home of Watts McHurdie,
    famous as writer of war-songs, best known of which is--" etc., etc.

But excepting Watts, who may be gone before you get there,--for he is
an old man now, and is alone and probably does not always have the
best of care,--the things above annotated will not interest the
traveller. At the Thayer House they will tell you that three things in
the town give it distinction: the Barclay home, a rambling gray brick
structure which the natives call Barclay Castle, with a great sycamore
tree held together by iron bands on the terraced lawn before the
house--that is number one; the second thing they will advise the
traveller to see is Mary Barclay Park, ten acres of transplanted elm
trees, most tastefully laid out, between Main Street and the Barclay
home; and the third thing that will be pointed out to the traveller is
the Schnitzler fountain, in the cemetery gateway, done by St. Gaudens;
it represents a soldier pouring water from his canteen into his hand,
as he bathes the brow of a dying comrade.

These things, of course,--the house, the park, and the
fountain,--represent John Barclay and his money. The town is proud of
them, but the reader is advised not to expect too much of them. One of
the two things really worth seeing at the Ridge is the view over the
wheat fields of the Sycamore Valley from the veranda of the Culpepper
home on the hill. There one may see the great fields lying in three
townships whereon John Barclay founded his fortune. The second thing
worth seeing may be found in the hallway of the public library
building, just at the turn of the marble stairway, where the morning
light strikes it. Take the night train out of Chicago and get to the
Ridge in the morning, to get the light on that picture.

It is a portrait of John Barclay, done when he was forty years old and
painted by a Russian during the summer when the Barclays were called
home from Europe before their journey was half completed, to
straighten out an obstreperous congressman, one Tom Wharton by name,
who was threatening to put wheat and flour on the free list in a
tariff bill, unless--but that is immaterial, except that Wharton was
on Barclay's mind more or less while the painter was at work, and the
portrait reflects what Barclay thought of a number of things. It shows
a small gray-clad man, with a pearl pin in a black tie, sitting rather
on the edge of his chair, leaning forward, so that the head is thrown
into the light. The eyes are well opened, and the jaw comes out, a
hard mean jaw; but the work of the artist, the real work that reveals
the soul of the sitter, is shown in three features, if we except the
pugnacious shoulders. In the face are two of these features: the
mouth, a hard, coarse, furtive mouth,--the mouth of the liar who is
not polished,--the peasant liar who has been caught and has brazened
it out; the mouth and the forehead, full almost to bulging, so clean
and white and naked that it seems shameful to expose it, a poet's
forehead, noble and full of dreams, broad over the eyes, and as
delicately modelled at the temples as a woman's where the curly brown
hair is brushed away from it. But the wonderful feature about the
portrait is the right hand. The artist obviously asked Barclay to
assume a natural attitude, and then seeing him lean forward with his
hand stretched out in some gesture of impatience, persuaded him to
take that pose. It is the sort of vital human thing that would please
Barclay--no sham about it; but he did not realize what the Russian
was putting into that hand--a long, hard, hairy, hollow, grasping,
relentless hand, full in the foreground and squarely in the light--a
horrible thing with artistic fingers, and a thin, greedy palm
indicated by the deep hump in the back. It reaches out from the
picture, with the light on the flesh tints, with the animal hair thick
upon it, and with the curved, slender, tapering fingers cramped like a
claw; and when one follows up the arm to the crouching body, the
furtive mouth, the bold, shrewd eyes, and then sees that forehead full
of visions, one sees in it more than John Barclay of Sycamore Ridge,
more than America, more than Europe. It is the menace of
civilization--the danger to the race from the domination of sheer
intellect without moral restraint.

General Ward, who was on the committee that received the picture
fifteen years after it was painted, stood looking at it the morning it
was hung there on the turn of the stairs. As the light fell
mercilessly upon it, the general, white-haired, white-necktied,
clean-shaven, and lean-faced, gazed at the portrait for a long time,
and then said to his son Neal who stood beside him, "And Samson wist
not that the Lord had departed from him."

It will pay one to stop a day in Sycamore Ridge to see that
picture--though he does not know John Barclay, and only understands
the era that made him, and gave him that refined, savage, cunning,
grasping hand.

Barclay stopped a week in Washington on his return from Europe the
year that picture was painted, made a draft for fifty thousand dollars
on the National Provisions Company to cover "legal expenses," and came
straight home to Sycamore Ridge. He was tired of cities, he told
Colonel Culpepper, who met Barclay at the post-office the morning he
returned, with his arms full of newspapers. "I want to hear the old
mill, Colonel," said Barclay, "to smell the grease down in the guts of
her, and to get my hair full of flour again." When he had gorged
himself for two days, he wired Bemis to come to the Ridge, and Barclay
and Bemis sat on the dam one evening until late bedtime, considering
many things. As they talked, Barclay found that a plan for the
reorganization of the Provisions Company was growing in his mind, and
he talked it out as it grew.

"Lige," he said, as he leaned with his elbows on a rock behind him,
"the trouble with the company as it now stands is that it's too
palpable. There's too much to levy on--too much in sight; too much
physical property. How would it do to sell all these mills and
elevators, and use the company as a kind of a cream skimmer--a profit
shop--to market the products of the mills?" He paused a moment, and
Bemis, who knew he was not expected to reply, flipped pebbles into the
stream. Barclay changed his position slightly and began to pick stones
out of the crevices, and throw the stones into the water. "That's the
thing to do--go ahead and sell every dollar's worth of assets the
company's got--I'll take the mill here. I couldn't get along without
that. Then we'll buy the products of the mills at cost of the millers,
and let them get their profits back as individual holders of our
stock. Our company will handle the Door Strip--buy it and sell
it--and if any long-nosed reformer gets to snooping around the mills,
he'll find they are making only a living profit; and as for us--any
state grain commissioner or board of commissioners who wanted to
examine us could do so, and what'd he find? Simply that we're buying
our products at cost of the millers and selling at the market
price--sometimes at a loss, sometimes at a profit; and what if we do
handle all the grain and grain products in the United States? They
can't show that we are hurting anything. I tell you there's getting to
be too much snooping now in the state and federal governments. Have
you got any fellow in your office who can fix up a charter that will
let us buy and sell grain, and also sell the Barclay Economy Strip?"

Bemis nodded.

"Then, damn 'em, let 'em go on with their commissioners and boards and
legislative committees; they can't catch us. There's no law against
the railroads that ship our stuff buying the Economy Door Strip, is
there? You bet there isn't. And we're entitled to a good round
inventor's profit, ain't we? You bet we are. You go ahead and get up
that reorganization, and I'll put it through. Say, Lige--" Barclay
chuckled as a recollection flashed across his mind--"you know I've
made some of our Northwest senators promise to make you a federal
judge. That's one of the things I did last week; I thought maybe
sometime we'd need a federal judge as one of the--what do you call
it--the hereditaments thereunto appertaining of the company." Bemis
opened his eyes in astonishment, and Barclay grunted in disgust as he
went on: "Of course we can't get you appointed from this
state--that's clear--but they think we can work it through in the
City--as soon as there is a vacancy--or make a new district. How
would you like that? Judge Bemis--say, that sounds all right, doesn't
it?"

Barclay rose and stretched his legs and arms. "Well, I must be
going--Mrs. Barclay and my mother want to hear the new organ over in
the Congregational Church. It's a daisy--Colonel Culpepper, amongst
hands, skirmished up three thousand. They let me pick it out, and I
had to put up another thousand myself to get the kind I wanted. Are
you well taken care of at the hotel?" When Bemis explained that he had
the bridal chamber, the two men clambered up the bank of the stream,
crossed the bridge, and at his gate Barclay said: "Now, I'll sleep on
this to-night,--this reorganization,--and then I'll write you a
letter to-morrow, covering all that I've said, and you can fix up a
tentative charter and fire it down--and say, Lige, figure out what a
modest profit on all the grain and grain produce business of the
country would be--say about two and a half per cent, and make the
capitalization of the reorganization fit that. We'll get the real
profits out of the Door Strip, and can fix that up in the books. We'll
show the reformers a trick or two." It was a warm night, and when the
organ recital was over, John and Jane Barclay, after the custom of the
town, sat on a terrace in front of the house talking of the day's
events. Music always made John babble.

"Jane," he asked suddenly, "Jane--when does a man begin to grow old?
Here I am past forty. I used to think when a man was forty he was
middle-aged; every five years I have advanced my idea of what an old
man was; when I was fifteen, I thought a man was getting along when he
was thirty. When I was twenty-five, I regarded forty as the beginning
of the end; when I was thirty, I put the limit of activity at
forty-five; five years ago I moved it up to fifty; and to-day I have
jumped it to sixty. It seems to me, Jane, that I'm as much of a boy as
ever; all this talk about my being a man puzzles me. What's this
Provisions Company but a game? And I'm going to play another game; I'm
going to get grain and grain produce organized, and then I'm going to
tackle meat. In ten years I'll have the packing-houses where I have
the mills; but it's just play--and it's a lot of fun."

He was silent a moment. Jane did not disturb his reveries. She
understood, without exactly putting her feeling into language, that
she was being talked at, not talked to.

"Say, Jane," he exclaimed, "wasn't that 'Marche Triomphante to-night
great?" He hummed a bar from the motif, "That's it--my--" he cried,
hitting his chair arm with his fist, "but that's a big thing--almost
good enough for Wagner to have done; big and insistent and strong. I'm
getting to like music with go to it--with bang and brass. Wagner does
it; honest, Jane, when I hear his trombones coming into a theme, I get
ideas enough to give the whole force in the office nervous prostration
for a month. To-night when that thing was swelling up like a great
tidal wave of music rolling in, I worked out a big idea; I'm going to
sell all the mills and factories back to the millers for our stock,
and when I own every dollar of our stock, I'm going to double the
price of it to them and sell it back to them; and if they haggle about
it, I'll build a new mill across the track from every man-jack who
tries to give me any funny business--I'll show 'em. That
reorganization ought to clean up millions for us in the next year.
What a lot of fun it all is! I used to think old Jay Gould was some
pumpkins; but if we get this reorganization through, I'll go down
there and buy the Gould outfit and sell 'em for old iron."

The current of his thoughts struck under language, as a prairie stream
sometimes hides from its surface bed. After a time Jane said: "Grandma
Barclay thought the 'Marche Funebre' was the best thing the man did. I
heard the Wards speaking of it in the vestibule; and Molly, who held
my hand through it, nearly squeezed it off--poor girl; but she looks
real well these days." Jane paused a moment and added: "Did you notice
the colonel? How worn and haggard he looks--he seems broken so. They
say he is in trouble. Couldn't we help him?"

Her husband did not reply at once. Finally he recalled his wandering
wits and answered: "Oh, I don't know, Jane. He'll pull through, I
guess." Then he reverted to the music, which was still in his head.
"He played the Largo well--didn't he? That was made for the organ.
But some way I like the big things. The Largo is like running a little
twenty-horse-power steam mill, and selling to the home grocers. But
'The Ride of the Valkyries,' with those screaming discords of brass,
and those magnificent crashes of harmony--Jane, I've got an
idea--Wagner's work is the National Provisions Company set to music,
and I'm the first trombone." He laughed and reached for his wife's
hand and kissed it; then he rose and stood before her, admiring her in
the starlight, as he exclaimed: "And you are those clarinets, sweet
and clear and delicious, that make a man want to cry for sheer joy.
Come on, my dear--isn't it very late?" And the little man limped
across the grass up the steps and into the house. The two stopped a
moment while he listened to the roar of the water and the rumble of
the mill, that glowed in the night like a phosphorescent spectre. He
squeezed her hand and cried out in exultation, "It's great, isn't
it--the finest mill on this planet, my dear--do you realize that?"
And then they turned into the house.

The next morning he kept two stenographers busy; he was spinning the
web of his reorganization, bringing about a condition under which men
were compelled to exchange their stock in the National Provisions
Company for their former property. He was a crafty little man, and his
ways were sometimes devious, even though to outward view his
advertised and proclaimed methods were those of a pirate. So when he
had dictated a day's work to two girls, he went nosing through the
mill, loafing in the engine rooms, looking at the water wheel, or
running about rafters in the fifth floor like a great gray rat. As he
went he hummed little tunes under his breath or whistled between his
teeth, with his lips apart. After luncheon he unlocked a row-boat, and
took a cane pole and rowed himself a mile up the mill-pond, and
brought home three good-sized bass. Thus did he spend his idle moments
around the Ridge. That night he thumped his piano and longed for a
pipe organ. The things he tried to play were noisy, and his mother,
sitting in the gloaming near him, sighed and said: "John, play some of
the old pieces--the quieter ones; play 'The Long and Weary Day' and
some of the old songs. Have you forgotten the 'Bohemian Girl' and
those Schubert songs?"

His fingers felt their way back to his boyhood, and when he ceased
playing, he stood by his mother a moment, and patted her cheeks as he
hummed in German the first two lines of the "Lorelei," and then said,
"We have come a long way since then--eh, mother?" She held his hand
to her cheek and then to her lips, but she did not reply. He repeated
it, "A long, long way from the little home of one room here!" After a
pause he added, "Would you like to go back?"

A tear fell on the hand against her cheek. He felt her jaw quiver, and
then she said, "Oh, yes, John--yes, I believe I would."

He knew she did not care for his wealth, and there were many things
about his achievements that he felt she might misunderstand; her
attitude often puzzled him. So he sat a moment on her chair arm, and
said, "Well, mother, I have done my best." It was a question more than
a protest.

"Yes, dear," she replied, "I know you have--you have done your
best--your very best. But I think it is in your blood."

"What?" he asked.

"Oh, all this," she answered; "all this money-getting. I am foolish,
John, but some way, I want my little boy back--the one who used to
sit with me so long ago, and play on the guitar and sing 'Sleeping, I
Dream, Love.' I don't like your new music, John; it's so like clanging
cars, and crashing hammers, and the groans of men at toil."

"But this is a new world, mother--a new world that is different,"
protested the son, impatiently.

And the mother answered sadly as she looked up at him: "I know,
dear--it is a new world; but the same old God moves it; and the same
faith in God and love of man move men that always have moved them, and
always will move them; there are as many things to live and die for
now, as when your father gave up his life, John--just as many." They
rocked together in silence--the boy of forty and the mother of sixty.
Finally she said, "Johnnie, play me 'Ever of Thee I'm fondly
Thinking,' won't you, before you go?"

He sat with his foot on the soft pedal and played the old love song,
and as he played his mother wandered over hills he had never seen,
through fields he had never known, and heard a voice in the song he
might never hear, even in his dreams. When he finished, she stood
beside him and cried with all the passion her years could summon: "Oh,
John--John--it will come out some way--some day. It's in your soul,
and God in His own way will bring it out." He did not understand her
then, and it was many years before he prayed her prayer.

The next day he went to the City and plunged into his work, and the
Ridge and its people and the prayers of his mother became to him only
as a dream that comes in the night and fades in the day. Even the
shabby figure of Colonel Martin Culpepper, with his market basket on
his arm, waving a good-by as the Barclay private car pulled out of the
Sycamore Ridge depot, disappeared from his mind, though that pathetic
image haunted him for nearly a hundred miles as he rode, and he could
not shake it off until he immersed himself in the roar of the great
City. He could not know that he had any remote relation with the worry
in the old man's eyes. Nor did Martin Culpepper try to shift his load
to John. He knew where the blame was, and he tried to take it like a
man. But in reckoning the colonel's account, may not something be
charged off to the account of John Barclay, who to save himself and
accomplish the Larger Good--which meant the establishment of his own
fortunes--sent Adrian Brownwell in those days in the seventies with
the money to the colonel, not so much to help the colonel as to save
John Barclay? The Larger Good is a slow, vicious, accumulative poison,
and heaven only knows when it will come out and kill.

It was a week after the pipe-organ recital at the church, when Mary
Barclay, doing her day's marketing, ran into Colonel Culpepper
standing rather forlornly in front of McHurdie's shop. He bowed to her
with elaborate graciousness, and she stopped to speak with him. In a
moment he was saying, "So you have not heard, are unaware, entirely
ignorant, in point of fact, of my misfortunes?" She assented, and the
colonel went on: "Well, madam, the end has come; I have played out my
hand; I have strutted my hour upon the stage, and now I go off. Old
Mart Culpepper, my dear, is no longer the leading citizen, nor our
distinguished capitalist, not even the hustling real estate agent of
former days--just plain old Mart Culpepper, I may say. He who was, is
now a has-been,--just an old man without a business." He saw that she
did not appreciate what had happened, and he smiled gently and said:
"Closed up, my dear madam. A receiver was appointed a few minutes ago
for the Culpepper Mortgage Company, and I gave him the key.
Failure--failure--" he repeated the word bitterly--"failure is
written over the door of this life."

Mary Barclay grasped his big fat hand and pressed it, and shook her
head. Something in her throat choked her, and she could not speak at
first. The two stood a moment in silence before the woman said
emphatically, "No--no! Martin Culpepper, God is keeping your books!"

The shabby old man stood uncovered, a smile quivering about his eyes.
"Maybe so, Mary Barclay, maybe so," he said. The smile fell into his
countenance as he added, "That is why I have gone so long without a
settlement; with my account so badly overdrawn, too." Then he turned
to go and walked as lightly down the street as a man could walk,
broken before his time with the weight of a humiliation upon him and a
fear greater than his shame burning in his fluttering old heart.

And now if you are reading this story to be in the company of the rich
Mr. Barclay, to feel the madness of his millions, to enjoy the vain
delirium of his power, skip the rest of this chapter. For it tells of a
shabby time in the lives of all of the threadbare people who move in
this tale. Even John Barclay sees the seams and basting threads of his
life here, and as for the others,--the colonel and Jake and the general
and Watts, and even Molly,--what do these people mean to you, these
common people, in their old clothes, with their old hearts and their
rusty sins and their homely sorrows? Milord and his lady will not
scamper across these pages; no rooms with rich appointments will gladden
your eyes, and perhaps in the whole book you will not find a man in
evening dress nor a woman in a dinner gown. And now the only thing there
is to offer is Jake Dolan, aged fifty-seven, with scanty, grizzled hair,
sitting in his shirt-sleeves in the basement of the court-house, with
the canvas cot he sleeps on for a chair, mending his blue army coat.
Beside him on the bed are his trousers, thin, almost worn through,
patched as to the knees and as to other important places, but clean and
without a loose thread hanging from them. Surely an old Irishman mending
an old army coat under a dusty electric light bulb in the basement of a
court-house, wherein he is janitor by grace of the united demand of
Henry Schnitzler Post of the G.A.R. No. 432, is not a particularly
inspiring picture. But he has bitten the last thread with his teeth, and
is putting away the sewing outfit. And now Mr. Dolan, from the drawer of
a little table beside the cot,--a table with Bob Hendricks' picture,
framed in plush, sitting on the top,--now Mr. Dolan takes from the
drawer a tablet of writing paper printed by the county. It is his
particular pride, that writing paper. For upon it at the top is the
picture of the new one-hundred-thousand-dollar court-house, and beside
the court-house picture are these words: "Office of Jacob Dolan,
Custodian of Public Buildings and Grounds of Garrison County." Mr. Dolan
will be writing a letter, and so long as it begins with "Dear Sir," and
nothing more endearing, surely we may look over his shoulder while he
writes,--even though it is bad form. And as Mr. Dolan will be writing to
"Robert Hendricks, care of Cook's Hotel, Cairo, Egypt,"--which he spells
with an "i," but let that pass, and let some of his literary style and
construction pass with it,--and as he will be writing to Mr. Hendricks,
perhaps Miss Nancy may do well to go sit in the corridor and put her
fingers in her ears while we read. For Mr. Dolan is an emotional man,
and he is breathing hard, and by the way he grabs his pen and jabs it
into the ink one can see that he is angry.

    "DEAR SIR (begins Mr. Dolan): I take my pen in hand to answer yours
    of this date from New York and would have written you anyhow, as
    there is much on my mind and I would cable you, but I can't, being
    for the moment short of funds. I write to say, Robert, that we have
    Mart Culpepper in jail--right across the hall. He came in at nine
    o'clock to-night, and the damn Pop judge put his bail at $15,999 to
    cover his alleged shortage, and the stinker won't accept us old boys
    on the bond--Phil and Watts and Os and the Company 'C' boys I could
    get before the judge went to bed, and Gabe Carnine, the gut, would
    not sign--would not sign old Mart's bond, sir, and I hope to be in
    hell with a fishpole some day poking him down every time his slimy
    fingers get on the rim of the kettle. But we'll have him out in the
    morning, if every man in Garrison County has to go on the bond. They
    say Mart received money to pay four or five mortgages due to a
    Vermont Bank, and they sent a detective here about a month ago and
    worked up the case, and closed his business to-day and waited until
    to-night to arrest him. I've just come from Mart. It's hell. Hoping
    this will find you enjoying the same I beg my dear sir to sign
    myself

    "Your ob't s'r'v't J. DOLAN."

When Jacob Dolan finished his letter, he addressed the envelope and
hurried away to mail it. And so long as we are here in the
court-house, and the custodian is gone, would you like to step in and
see Martin Culpepper across the hall? It is still in the basement now,
and if you are quiet, so quiet that the slipping patter of a rat's
foot on the floor comes to you, a sound as of a faint whining will
come to you also. There--now it comes again. No, it is not a dog; it
is a man--a man in his agony. Shall we open the great iron door, and
go into the cell room? Why, not even you, Miss Nancy--not even you,
who love tears so? You would not see much--only a man, with his coat
and vest off, an old man with a rather shaggy, ill-kept chin whisker
and not the cleanest shirt in the world--though it is plaited, and
once was a considerable garment. And the man wearing it, who lies
prostrate upon his face, once was a considerable man. But he is old
now, old and broken, and if he should look up, as you stepped in the
corridor before him, you would see a great face ripped and scarred by
fear and guilt, and eyes that look so piteously at you--eyes of a man
who cannot understand why the blow has fallen, surprised eyes with a
horror in them; and if he should speak, you will find a voice rough
and mushy with asthma. The heart that has throbbed so many nights in
fear and the breath that has been held for so many footsteps, at last
have turned their straining into disease. No--let's not go in. He
bade his daughter go, and would not see his wife, and they have sent
to the City for his son,--so let us not bother him, for to-morrow he
will be out on bail. But did you hear that fine, trembling, animal
whine--that cry that wrenched itself out of set teeth like a living
thing? Come on--let us go and find Jake, and if he is taking a drink,
don't blame him too much, Miss Nancy--how would you like to sleep in
that room across the corridor?

At nine o'clock the next morning two hundred men had signed the bond
the judge required, and Martin Culpepper shambled home with averted
eyes. They tried to carry him on their shoulders, thinking it would
cheer him up; and from the river wards of the town scores came to give
him their hands. But he shook himself away from them, like a great
whipped dog, and walked slowly up the hill, and turned into Lincoln
Avenue alone.

John Barclay heard the news of the colonel's trouble as he stepped
from his private car in the Sycamore Ridge yards that morning, and
Jane went to the Culpepper home without stopping at her own. That
afternoon, Molly Brownwell knocked at Barclay's office door in the
mill, and went in without waiting for him to open it. She was pale and
haggard, and she sat down before he could speak to her.

"John," she said in a dead voice that smote his heart, "I have come
for my reward now. I never thought I'd ask it, John, but last night I
thought it all out, and I don't believe it's begging."

"No," he replied quietly, "it's not. I am sure--"

But she did not let him finish. She broke in with: "Oh, I don't want
any of your money; I want my own money--money that you got when you
sold me into bondage, John Barclay--do you remember when?" She cried
the last words in a tremulous little voice, and then caught herself,
and went on before he could put into words the daze in his face. "Let
me tell you; do you remember the day you called me up into your office
and asked me to hold Adrian in town to save the wheat company? Yes,
you do--you know you do! And you remember that you played on my love
for Bob, and my duty to father. Well, I saved you, didn't I?"

"Yes, you did, Molly," Barclay replied.

She stared a moment at the framed pictures of mill designs on the
wall, and at the wheat samples on the long table near her, and did not
speak; nor did he. She finally broke the silence: "Well, I saved you,
but what about father--" her voice broke into a sob--"and Bob--Jane
has told you what Bob and I have been--and what about me--what have
you taken from me in these twenty years? Oh, John, John, what a
fearful wreck we have made of life--you with your blind selfishness,
and I with my weakness! Did you know, John, that the money that father
borrowed that day, twenty years ago, of Adrian, to lend to you, is the
very money that sent him to jail last night? I guess he--he took what
wasn't his to pay it back." Her face twitched, and she was losing
control of her voice. Barclay stepped to the door and latched it. She
watched him and shook her head sadly. "You needn't be afraid,
John--I'm not going to make a scene."

"It's all right, Molly," said Barclay. "I want to help you--you know
that. I'm sorry, Molly--infinitely sorry."

She looked at him for a moment in silence, and then said: "Yes, John,
I'll give you credit for that; I think you're as sorry as a selfish
man like you can be. But are you sorry enough to go to jail a pauper,
like father, or wander over the earth alone, like Bob, or come and beg
for money, like me?" Then she caught herself quickly and cried: "Only
it's not begging, John--it's my own; it's the price you got when you
sold me into bondage; it's the price of my soul, and I need it now.
Those people only want their money--that is all."

"Yes," he replied, "I suppose that is all they want." He drummed on
his desk a moment and then asked, "Does your father know how much it
is?"

"Yes," she answered, "I found in his desk at the house last night a
paper on which he had been figuring--poor father--all the night
before. All the night before--" she repeated, and then sobbed, "Poor
father--all the night before. He knew it was coming. He knew the
detective was here. He told me to-day that the sum he had there was
correct. It is sixteen thousand five hundred and forty-three dollars.
But he doesn't know I'm here, John. I told him I had some money of my
own--some I'd had for years--and I have--oh, I have, John
Barclay--I have." She looked up at him with the pallid face stained
with fresh tears and asked, "I have--I have--haven't I, John,
haven't I?"

He put his elbows on the desk and sank his head in his hands and
sighed, "Yes, Molly--yes, you have."

They sat in silence until the roar of the waters and the murmur of the
wheels about them came into the room. Then the woman rose to go.
"Well, John," she said, "I suppose one shouldn't thank a person for
giving her her own--but I do, John. Oh, it's like blood money to
me--but father--I can't let father suffer."

She walked to the door, he stepped to unlatch it, and she passed out
without saying good-by. When she was gone, he slipped the latch, and
sat down with his hands gripping the table before him. As he sat
there, he looked across the years and saw some of the havoc he had
made. There was no shirking anything that he saw. A footfall passing
the door made him start as if he feared to be caught in some guilty
act. Yet he knew the door was locked. He choked a little groan behind
his teeth, and then reached for the top of his desk, pulled down the
rolling cover, and limped quickly out of the room--as though he were
leaving a corpse. What he saw was the ghost of the Larger Good,
mocking him through the veil of the past, and asking him such
questions as only a man's soul may hear and not resent.

He walked over the mill for a time, and then calling his stenographers
from their room, dictated them blind and himself dumb with details of
a deal he was putting through to get control of the cracker companies
of the country. When he finished, the sunset was glaring across the
water through the window in front of him, and he had laid his ghost.
But Molly Brownwell had her check, and her father was saved.

That evening the colonel sat with Watts McHurdie, on the broad veranda
of the Culpepper home, and as the moon came out, General Ward wandered
up the walk and Jake Dolan came singing down the street about "the
relic of old dacincy--the hat me father wore." Perhaps he had one
drink in him, and perhaps two, or maybe three, but he clicked the gate
behind him, and seeing the three men on the veranda, he called out:--

"Hi, you pig-stealing Kansas soldiers, haven't ye heard the war is
over?" And then he carolled: "Oh, can't get 'em up, Oh, can't get 'em
up, Oh, can't get 'em up in the mornin'--Get up, you"--but the rest
of the song, being devoted to the technical affairs of war, and ending
with a general exhortation to the soldier to "get into your breeches,"
would give offence to persons of sensitive natures, and so may as well
be omitted from this story.

There was an awkward pause when Dolan came on the veranda. The general
had just tried to break the ice, but Dolan was going at too high a
speed to be checked.

"Do you know," he asked, "what I always remember when I hear that
call? You do not. I'll tell you. 'Twas the morning of the battle of
Wilson's Creek, and Mart and me was sleeping under a tree, when the
bugler of the Johnnies off somewhere on the hill he begins to crow
that, and it wakes Mart up, and he rolls over on me and he says:
'Jake,' he says, or maybe 'twas me says, 'Mart,' says I--anyway, one
of us says, 'Shut up your gib, you flannel-mouthed mick,' he says,
'and let me pull my dream through to the place where I find the
money,' he says. And I says, 'D'ye know what I'm goin' to do when I
get home?' says I. 'No,' says he, still keen for that money; 'no,'
says he, 'unless it is you're going to be hanged by way of diversion,'
he says. 'I'm going to hire a bugler,' says I. 'What fer--in the name
of all the saints?' says he. 'Well,' says I, 'I'm going to ask him to
blow his damn horn under my window every morning at five o'clock,' I
says, 'and then I'm going to get up and poke my head out of the window
and say: "Mister, you can get me up in the army, but on this occasion
would you be obliging enough to go to hell"!' And Mart, seeing that
the money was gone from his dream, he turns over and wallops me with
the blanket till I was merely a palpitating mass. That was a great
battle, though, boys--a great battle."

And then they shouldered arms and showed how fields were won. Boom!
went Sigel's guns out of the past, and crash! came the Texas cavalry,
and the whoop of the Louisiana Pelicans rang in their ears. They
marched south after Hindman, and then came back with Grant to
Vicksburg, where they fought and bled and died. The general left them
and went east, where he "deployed on our right" and executed flank
movements, and watched Pickett's column come fling itself to death at
Gettysburg. And Watts McHurdie rode with the artillery through the
rear of the rebel lines at Pittsburg Landing, and when the rebel
officer saw the little man's bravery, and watched him making for the
Union lines bringing three guns, he waved his hat and told his
soldiers not to shoot at that boy. The colonel took a stick and marked
out on the floor our position at Antietam, and showed where the
reserves were supposed to be and how the enemy masked his guns behind
that hill, and we planted our artillery on the opposite ridge; and he
marched with the infantry and lay in ambush while the enemy came
marching in force through the wood. In time Watts McHurdie was talking
to Lincoln in the streets of Richmond, and telling for the hundredth
time what Lincoln said of the song and how he had sung it. But who
cares now what Lincoln said? It was something kind, you may be sure,
with a tear and a laugh in it, and the veterans laughed, while their
eyes grew moist as they always did when Watts told it. Then they fell
to carnage again--a fierce fight against time, against the moment
when they must leave their old companion alone. Up hills they charged
and down dales, and the moon rose high, and cast its shadow to the
eastward before they parted. First Dolan edged away, and then the
general went, waving his hand military fashion; and the colonel
returned the salute. When the gate had clanged, Watts rose to go. He
did not speak, nor did the colonel. Arm in arm, they walked down the
steps together, and halfway down the garden path the colonel rested
his hand on the little man's shoulder as they walked in silence. At
the gate they saw each other's tears, and the little man's voice
failed him when the colonel said, "Well, good-by, comrade--good
night." So Watts turned and ran, while the colonel, for the first time
in his manhood, loosed the cords of his sorrow and stood alone in the
moonlight with upturned face, swaying like an old tree in a storm.


CHAPTER XXI


And now those who have avoided the gray unpainted shame of these
unimportant people of the Ridge may here take up again for a moment
the trailing clouds of glory that shimmer over John Barclay's office
in the big City. For here there is the sounding brass and tinkling
cymbal of great worldly power. Here sits John Barclay, a little
gray-haired, gray-clad, lynx-eyed man, in a big light room at the
corner of a tower high over the City in the Corn Exchange Building,
the brain from which a million nerves radiate that run all over the
world and move thousands of men. Forty years before, when John was
playing in the dust of the road leading up from the Sycamore, no king
in all the world knew so much of the day's doings as John knows now,
sitting there at the polished mahogany table with the green blotting
paper upon it, under the green vase adorned with the red rose. A
blight may threaten the wheat in Argentine, and John Barclay knows
every cloud that sails the sky above that wheat, and when the cloud
bursts into rain he sighs, for it means something to him, though
heaven only knows what, and we and heaven do not care. But a dry day
in India or a wet day in Russia or a cloudy day in the Dakotas are all
taken into account in the little man's plans. And if princes quarrel
and kings grow weary of peace, and money bags refuse them war, John
Barclay knows it and puts the episode into figures on the clean white
pad of paper before him.

It is a privilege to be in this office; one passes three doors to get
here, and even at the third door our statesmen often cool their toes.
Mr. Barclay is about to admit one now. And when Senator Myton comes
in, deferentially of course, to tell Mr. Barclay the details of the
long fight in executive session which ended in the confirmation by the
senate of Lige Bemis as a federal judge, the little gray man waves the
senator to a chair, and runs his pencil up a column of figures,
presses a button, writes a word on a sheet of paper, and when the
messenger appears, hands the paper to him and says, "For Judge Bemis."

"I have just dismissed a Persian satrap," expands Barclay, "who won't
let his people use our binders; that country eventually will be a
great field for our Mediterranean branch."

Myton is properly impressed. For a man who can make a senator out of
Red River clay and a federal judge out of Lige Bemis is a superhuman
creature, and Myton does not doubt Barclay's power over satraps.

When the business of the moment between the two men is done, Barclay,
rampant with power, says: "Myton" (it is always "Myton," never
"Senator," with Barclay; he finds it just as well to let his inferiors
know their relation to the universe), "Myton, I ran across a queer
thing last week when I took over that little jerkwater New England
coast line. The Yankees are a methodical lot of old maids. I find they
had been made agents of a lot of the big fellows--insurance people,
packing-houses, and transcontinental railroads--two of my lines were
paying them, though I'd forgotten about it until I looked it up--and
the good old sewing society had card-indexed the politics of the
United States--the whole blessed country, by state and congressional
districts. I took over the chap who runs it, and I've got the whole
kit in the offices here now. It's great. If a man bobs up for
something in Florida or Nebraska, we just run him down on the card
index, and there he stands--everything he ever did, every interview
he ever gave, every lawsuit he ever had, every stand he ever took in
politics--right there in the index, in an envelope ready for use, and
all the mean things ever written about him. I simply can't make a
mistake now in getting the wrong kind of fellows in. Commend me to a
Yankee or a Jap for pains. I can tell you in five minutes just what
influences are behind every governor, congressman, senator, judge,
most of the legislators in every state, the federal courts clear up to
the Supreme Court. There was a man appointed on that court less than a
dozen years ago who swapped railroad receiverships like a tin peddler
with his senator for his job, when he was on the circuit bench. And he
was considerable of a judge in the bean country for a time. Just to
verify my index, I asked Bemis about this judge. 'Lige,' I said, 'was
Judge So-and-So a pretty honest judge?' 'Oh, hell,' says Lige, and
that was all I could get out of him. So I guess they had him indexed
right." And Barclay rattles on; he has become vociferous and
loquacious, and seems to like to hear the roar of his voice in his
head. The habit has been growing on him.

But do not laugh at the blindness of John Barclay, sitting there in
his power, admiring himself, boasting in the strength of his
card-index to Senator Myton. For the tide of his power was running in,
and soon it would be high tide with John Barclay--high tide of his
power, high tide of his fame, high tide of his pride. So let us watch
the complacent smile crack his features as he sits listening to
Senator Myton: "Mr. Barclay, do you know, I sometimes think that
Providence manifests itself in minds like yours, even as in the days
of old it was manifest in the hearts of the prophets. In those days it
was piety that fitted the heart for higher things; to-day it is
business. You and a score of men like you in America are intrusted
with the destiny of this republic, as surely as the fate of the
children of Israel was in the hands of Moses and Aaron!"

Barclay closed his eyes a moment, in contemplation of the figure, and
then broke out in a roaring laugh, "Hanno is a god! Hanno is a
god!--get out of here, Henry Myton,--get out of here, I say--this
is my busy day," and he laughed the young senator out of the room. But
he sat alone in his office grinning, as over and over in his mind his
own words rang, "Hanno is a god!" And the foolish parrot of his other
self cackled the phrase in his soul for days and days!

It is our high privilege thus to stand close by and watch the wheels
of the world go around. In those days of the late nineties Barclay
travelled up and down the earth so much in his private car that Jane
used to tell Molly Brownwell that living with John was like being a
travelling man's wife. But Jane did not seem to appreciate her
privilege. She managed to stay at home as much as possible, and
sometimes he took the Masons along for company. Mrs. Mason gloried in
it, and lived at the great hotels and shopped at the highest-priced
antique stores to her heart's delight. Lycurgus' joy was in being
interviewed, and the Barclay secretaries got so that they could edit
the Mason interviews and keep out the poison, and let the old man
swell and swell until the people at home thought he must surely burst
with importance at the next town.

One day in the nineties Barclay appropriated a half-million dollars to
advertise "Barclay's Best" and a cracker that he was pushing. When the
man who placed the business in the newspaper had gone, Barclay sat
looking out of the window and said to his advertising manager: "I've
got an idea. Why should I pay a million dollars to irresponsible
newspapers? I won't do it."

"But we must advertise, Mr. Barclay--you've proved it pays."

"Yes," he returned, "you bet it pays, and I might just as well get
something out of it besides advertising. Take this; make five copies
of it; I'll give you the addresses later." Barclay squared himself to
a stenographer to dictate:--

    "Dear Sir: I spend a million dollars a year advertising grain
    products; you and the packers doubtless spend that much advertising
    your products and by-products; the railroads spend as much more, and
    the Oil people probably half as much more. Add the steel products
    and the lumber products, and we have ten million dollars going into
    the press of this country. In a crisis we cannot tell how these
    newspapers will treat us. I think we should organize so that we will
    know exactly where we stand. Therefore it is necessary absolutely to
    control the trade advertising of this country. A company to take
    over the five leading advertising agencies could be formed, for half
    as much as we spend every year, and we could control nine-tenths of
    the American trade advertising. We could then put an end to any
    indiscriminate mobbing of corporations by editors. I will be pleased
    to hear from you further upon this subject."

A day or two later, when the idea had grown and ramified itself in his
mind, he talked it all out to Jane and exclaimed, "How will old Phil
Ward's God manage to work it out, as he says, against that
proposition? Brains," continued Barclay, "brains--that's what counts
in this world. You can't expect the men who dominate this
country--who make its wealth, and are responsible for its prosperity,
to be at the mercy of a lot of long-nosed reformers who don't know how
to cash their own checks."

How little this rich man knew of the world about him! How
circumscribed was his vision! With all his goings up and down the
earth, with all of his great transactions, with all of his apparent
power, how little and sordid was his outlook on life. For he thought
he was somebody in this universe, some one of importance, and in his
scheme of things he figured out a kind of partnership between himself
and Providence--a partnership to run the world in the interests of
John Barclay, and of course, wherever possible, with reasonable
dividends to Providence.

But a miracle was coming into the world. In the under-consciousnesses
of men, sown God only knows how and when and where, sown in the
weakness of a thousand blind prophets, the seeds of righteous wrath at
greed like John Barclay's were growing during all the years of his
triumph. Men scarcely knew it themselves. Growth is so simple and
natural a process that its work is done before its presence is known.
And so this arrogant man, this miserable, little, limping, brass-eyed,
leather-skinned man, looked out at the world around him, and did not
see the change that was quickening the hearts of his neighbours.

And yet change was in everything about him. A thousand years are as
but a watch in the night, and tick, tock, tick, tock, went the great
clock, and the dresses of little Jeanette Barclay slipped down, down,
down to her shoe-tops, and as the skirts slipped down she went up. And
before her father knew it her shoe-tops sank out of sight, and she was
a miss at the last of her teens. But he still gave her his finger when
they walked out together, though she was head and shoulders above him.

One day when she led him to the _Banner_ office to buy some fancy
programmes for a party she was giving, he saw her watching young Neal
Ward,--youngest son of the general,--who was sitting at a reporter's
desk in the office, and the father's quick eyes saw that she regarded
the youth as a young man. For she talked so obviously for the Ward
boy's benefit that her father, when they went out of the
printing-office, took a furtive look at his daughter and sighed and
knew what her mother had known for a year.

"Jeanette," he said that night at dinner, "where's my shot-gun?" When
she told him, he said: "After dinner you get it, load it with salt,
and put it in the corner by the front door." Then he added to the
assembled family: "For boys--dirty-faced, good-for-nothing,
long-legged boys! I'm going to have a law passed making an open season
for boys in this place from January first until Christmas."

Jeanette dimpled and blushed, the family smiled, and her mother said:
"Well, John, there'll be a flock of them at Jeanette's party next week
for you to practise on. All the boys and girls in town are coming."

And after dessert was served the father sat chuckling and grinning and
grunting, "Boys--boys," and at intervals, "Measly little milk-eyed
kids," and again "Boys--boys," while the family nibbled at its
cheese.

Those years when the nineteenth century was nearing its close and when
the tide of his fortunes was running in, bringing him power and making
him mad with it, were years of change in Sycamore Ridge--in the old
as well as in the young. In those years the lilacs bloomed on in the
Culpepper yard; and John Barclay did not know it, though forty years
before Ellen Culpepper had guarded the first blossoms from those
bushes for him. Miss Lucy, his first ideal, went to rest in those
years while the booming tide was running in, and he scarcely knew it.
Mrs. Culpepper was laid beside Ellen out on the Hill; and he hardly
realized it, though no one in all the town had watched him growing
into worldly success with so kindly an eye as she. But the tide was
roaring in, and John Barclay's whole consciousness was turned toward
it; the real things of life about him, he did not see and could not
feel. And so as the century is old the booming tide is full, and John
Barclay in his power--a bubble in the Divine consciousness, a mere
vision in the real world--stands stark mad before his phantasm,
dreaming that it is all real, and chattering to his soul, "Hanno is a
god."

And now we must leave John Barclay for the moment, to explain why Neal
Dow Ward, son of General Philemon Ward, made his first formal call at
the Barclays'. It cannot be gainsaid that young Mr. Ward, aged
twenty-one, a senior at Ward University, felt a tingle in his blood
that day when he met Miss Jeanette Barclay, aged eighteen, and home
for the spring vacation from the state university; and seeing her for
the first time with her eyes and her hair and her pretty, strong, wide
forehead poking through the cocoon of gawky girlhood, created a
distinct impression on young Mr. Ward.

But in all good faith it should be stated that he did not make his
first formal call at the Barclays' of his own accord; for his sister,
Elizabeth Cady Stanton Ward, took him. She came home from the
Culpeppers' just before supper, laughing until she was red in the
face. And what she heard at the Culpeppers', let her tell in her own
way to the man of her heart. For Lizzie was her father's child; the
four other Ward girls, Mary Livermore, Frances Willard, Belva
Lockwood, and Helen Gougar, had climbed to the College Heights and had
gone to Ward University, and from that seat of learning had gone forth
in the world to teach school. Elizabeth Cady Stanton Ward had remained
in the home, after her mother's death filling her mother's vacant
place as well as a daughter may.

"Well, father," said the daughter, as she was putting the evening meal
on the table, addressing the general, who sat reading by the window in
the dining room, "you should have been at the Culpeppers' when the
colonel came home and told us his troubles. It seems that Nellie
McHurdie is going to make Watts run for sheriff--for sheriff, father.
Imagine Watts heading a posse, or locking any one up! And Watts has
passed the word to the colonel, and he has passed it to Molly and me,
and I am to see Mrs. Barclay, and she is to see Mrs. Carnine to-morrow
morning, and they are all to set to work on Nellie and get her to see
that it won't do. Poor Watts--the colonel says he is terribly wrought
up at the prospect."

The general folded his paper and smiled as he said: "Well, I don't
know; Watts was a brave soldier. He would make a good enough sheriff;
but I suppose he doesn't really care for it."

"Why, no, of course not, father--why should he?" asked the daughter.
"Anyhow, I want you to make Neal go down to Barclays' with me to-night
to talk it over with Jane. Neal," she called to the young man who was
sitting on the porch with his book on his knee, "Neal, I want you to
go to Barclays' with me to-night. Come in now, supper's ready."

And so it happened that Neal Dow Ward made his first call on Jeanette
Barclay with his sister, and they all sat on the porch together that
fine spring evening, with the perfume of the lilacs in the air; and it
happened naturally enough that the curious human law of attraction
which unites youth should draw the chairs of the two young people
together as they talked of the things that interest youth--the
parties and the ball-games and the fraternities and sororities, and
the freshman picnic and the senior grind; while the chairs of the two
others drew together as they talked of the things which interest women
in middle life--the affairs of the town, the troubles of Watts
McHurdie, the bereavement of the Culpeppers, the scarcity of good help
in the kitchen, the popularity of Max Nordau's "Social Evolution," and
the fun in "David Harum." Nor is it strange that after the girl had
shown the boy her Pi Phi pin, and he had shown her his Phi Delta
shield, they should fall to talking of the new songs, and that they
should slip into the big living room of the Barclay home, lighted by
the electric lamps in the hall, and that she should sit down to the
piano to show him how the new song went. And if the moonlight fell
across the piano, and upon her face as she sang the little Irish
folk-song, all in minors, with her high, trembling, half-formed notes
in the upper register, and if she flushed and looked up abashed and
had to be teased to go on,--not teased a great deal, but a
little,--will you blame the young man if he forgot for a moment that
her father was worth such a lot of money, and thought only that she
was a beautiful girl, and said so with his eyes and face and hands in
the pretty little pause that followed when she ceased singing? And if
to hide her confusion when her heart knew what he thought, she put one
foot on the loud pedal of the piano and began singing "O Margery, O
Margery," and he sang with her, and if they thrilled just a little as
their voices blended in the rollicking song--what of it? What of it?
Was it not natural that lilacs should grow in April? Was it not
natural that Watts McHurdie should dread the white light that beats
upon the throne of the sheriff's office? Was it not natural that he
should turn to women for protection against one of their sex, and that
the women plotting for him should have a boy around and having a boy
around where there is a girl around, and spring around and lilacs
around and a moon and music and joy around,--what is more natural in
all this world than that in the fire struck by the simple joy of youth
there should be the flutter of unseen wings around, and when the two
had finished singing, with something passing between their hearts not
in the words, what is more natural than that the girl, half frightened
at the thrill in her soul, should say timidly:--

"I think they will miss us out there--don't you?" as she rose from
the piano.

And if you were a boy again, only twenty-one, to whom millions of
money meant nothing, would you not catch the blue eyes of the girl as
she looked up at you, in the twilight of the big room, and answer,
"All right, Jeanette"? Certainly if you had known a girl all your
life, you would call her by her first name, if her father were worth a
billion, and would you not continue, emboldened some way by not being
frowned upon for calling her Jeanette, though she would have been
astonished if you had said Miss Barclay--astonished and maybe a
little fearful of your sincerity--would you not continue, after a
little pause, repeating your words, "All right, Jeanette--I suppose
so--but I don't care--do you?" as you followed her through the door
back to the moon-lit porch?

And as you walked home, listening to your elder sister, would you not
have time and inclination to wonder from what remote part of this
beautiful universe, from what star or what fairy realm, that creature
came, whose hair you pulled yesterday, whose legs seem to have been
covered with long skirts in the twinkling of an eye, and whose
unrelated features by some magic had sloughed off, leaving a beautiful
face? Would you not think these things, good kind sir, when you were
twenty-one--even though to-day they seem highly improbable thoughts
for any one to have who was not stark mad? But if we were not all
stark mad sometimes, how would the world go round? If we were not all
mad sometimes, who would make our dreams come true? How would visions
in thin air congeal into facts, how would the aspirations of the race
make history? And if we were all sane all the time, how would the
angels ever get babies into the world at all, at all?


CHAPTER XXII


"Speaking of lunatics," said Mr. Dolan to Mr. Hendricks one June
night, a few weeks after the women had persuaded Mrs. McHurdie not to
drag the poet into politics,--"speaking of lunatics, you may remember
that I was born in Boston, and 'twas my duty as a lad to drive the
Cambridge car, and many a time I have heard Mr. Holmes the poet and
Mr. Emerson the philosopher discussing how the world was made; whether
it was objective or subjective,--which I take it to mean whether the
world is in the universe or only in your eye. One fine winter night we
were waiting on a switch for the Boston car, when Mr. Holmes said to
Mr. Emerson: 'What,' says he, 'would you think if Jake Dolan driving
this car should come in and say, "Excuse me, gentlemen, but the moon I
see this moment is not some millions of miles away, but entirely in my
own noddle?"' 'I'd think,' says the great philosopher, never blinking,
'that Mr. Dolan was drunk,' says he. And there the discussion ended,
but it has been going on in my head ever since. Here I am a man
climbing up my sixties, and when have I seen the moon? Once walking by
this very creek here trying to get me courage up to put me arm around
her that is now Mary Carnine; once with me head poked up close to the
heads of Watts McHurdie, Gabe Carnine, and Philemon Ward, serenading
the girls under the Thayer House window the night before we left for
the army. And again to-night, sitting here on the dam, listening to
the music coming down the mill-pond. Did you notice them, Robert--the
young people--Phil Ward's boy, and John Barclay's girl, and Mary
Carnine's oldest, and Oscar Fernald's youngest, with their guitars and
mandolins, piling into the boats and rowing up stream? And now they're
singing the songs we sang--to their mothers, God bless 'em--the
other day before these children were born or thought of, and now I sit
here an old man looking at the moon."

"But is it the moon?" he went on after a long silence, puffing at his
pipe. "If the moon is off there, three or thirty or three hundred
million miles away in the sky, where has it been these forty years?
I've not seen it. And yet here she pops out of my memory into my eye,
and if I say the moon has always been in my eye, and is still in my
eye, Mr. Ralph Waldo Emerson says I'm drunk. But does that settle the
question of who's got the moon--me or the cosmos--as the poets call
it?" After that the two men smoked in silence, and as Hendricks threw
away the butt of his cigar, Dolan said, "'Tis a queer, queer world,
Robert--a queer, queer world."

Now do not smile at Mr. Dolan, gentle reader, for Adam must have
thought the same thing, and philosophy has been able to say nothing
more to the point.

It is indeed a queer, queer world, and our blindness is the queerest
thing in it. Here a few weeks, later sit John and Jane Barclay on the
terrace before their house one June night, listening to singing on the
water. Suddenly they realize that there is youth in the world--yet
there has been singing on the mill-pond ever since it was built. It
has been the habitat of lovers for a quarter of a century, this
mill-pond, yet Jane and John Barclay have not known it, and not until
their own child's voice came up to them, singing "Juanita," did they
realize that the song had not begun anew after its twenty years'
silence in their own hearts, but always had been on the summer breeze.
And this is strange, too, considering how rich and powerful John
Barclay is and how by the scratch of his pen, he might set men working
by the thousands for some righteous cause. Yet so it is; for with all
the consciousness of great power, with all the feeling of unrestraint
that such power gives a man, driving him to think he is a kind of god,
John Barclay was only a two-legged man, with a limp in one foot, and a
little mad place in his brain, wherein he kept the sense of his
relation to the rest of this universe. And as he sat, blind to the
moon, dreaming of a time when he would control Presidents and dominate
courts if they crossed his path, out on the mill-pond under an elm
tree that spread like a canopy upon the water, a boy, letting the oars
hang loosely, was playing the mandolin to a girl--a pretty girl
withal, blue as to eyes, fair as to hair, strong as to mouth and chin,
and glorious as to forehead--who leaned back in the boat, played with
the overhanging branches, and listened and looked at the moon, and let
God's miracle work unhindered in her heart. And all up and down those
two miles of mill-pond were other boats and other boys and other
maidens, and as they chatted and sang and sat in the moonlight, there
grew in their hearts, as quietly as the growing of the wheat in the
fields, that strange marvel of life, that keeps the tide of humanity
ceaselessly flowing onward. And it is all so simply done before our
eyes, and in our ears, that we forget it is so baffling a mystery.

Now let us project our astral bodies into the living room of the
Barclay home, while Mr. and Mrs. John Barclay are away in Boston, and
only John Barclay's mother and his daughter are in Sycamore Ridge; and
let us watch a young man of twenty-one and a young woman of eighteen
dispose of a dish of fudge together. Fudge, it may be explained to the
unsophisticated, is a preparation of chocolate, sugar, and cream,
cooked, cooled, and cut into squares. As our fathers and mothers
pulled taffy, as our grandfathers and grandmothers conjured with maple
sugar, and as their parents worked the mysterious spell with some
witchery of cookery to this generation unknown, so is fudge in these
piping times the worker of a strange witchery. Observe: Through a
large room, perhaps forty feet one way and twenty-five feet the other
way, flits a young woman in the summer twilight. She goes about
humming, putting a vase in place here, straightening a picture there,
kicking down a flapping rug, or rearranging a chair; then she sits
down and turns on an electric light and pretends to read. But she does
not read; the light shows her something else in the room that needs
attention, and she turns to that. Then she sits down again, and again
goes humming about the room. Suddenly the young woman rises and
hurries out of the room, and a footstep is heard on the porch,
outside. A bell tinkles, and a maid appears, and--

"Yes," she says. "I'll see if Miss Jeanette is at home!"

And then a rustle of skirts is heard on the stairway and Miss Jeanette
enters with: "Why, Neal, you are an early bird this evening--were you
afraid the worm would escape? Well, it won't; it's right here on the
piano."

The young man's eyes,--good, clear, well-set, dark eyes that match
his brown hair; eyes that speak from the heart,--note how they dwell
upon every detail of the opposing figure, caressing with their shy
surreptitious glances the girl's hair, her broad forehead, her lips;
observe how they flit back betimes to those ripe red lips, like bees
that hover over a flower trembling in the wind; how the eyes of the
young man play about the strong chin, and the bewitching curves of the
neck and shoulders, and rise again to the hair, and again steal over
the face, to the strong shoulders, and again hurry back to the face
lest some feature fade. This is not staring--it is done so quickly,
so furtively, so deftly withal as the minutes fly by, while the lips
and the teeth chatter on, that the stolen honey of these glances is
stored away in the heart's memory, all unknown to him who has gathered
it.

An hour has passed now, while we have watched the restless eyes at
their work, and what has passed with the hour? Nothing, ladies and
gentlemen--nothing; gibber, chatter, giggles, and squeals--that is
all. Grandma Barclay above stairs has her opinion of it, and wonders
how girls can be so addle-pated. In her day--but who ever lived long
enough or travelled far enough or inquired widely enough to find one
single girl who was as wise, or as sedate, or as industrious, or as
meek, or as gentle, or as kind as girls were in her grandmother's day?
No wonder indeed that grandmothers are all married--for one could
hardly imagine the young men of that day overlooking such paragons of
virtue and propriety as lived in their grandmothers' days. Fancy an
old maid grandmother with all those qualities of mind and heart that
girls had in their grandmothers' days!

So the elder Mrs. Barclay in her room at the top of the stairs hears
what "he said," "he said he said," and what "she said she said," and
what "we girls did," and what "you boys ought to do," and what "would
be perfectly lovely," and what "would be a lot of fun!" and so
grandmother, good soul, grows drowsy, closes her door, and goes to
bed. She does not know that they are about to sit down together on a
sofa--not a long, straight, cold, formal affair, but a small, rather
snuggly sofa, with the dish between them. No, girls never did that in
their grandmothers' days, so of course who would imagine they would do
so now? Who, indeed? But there they are, and there is the dish between
them, and two hands reaching into the same dish, must of course
collide. Collision is inevitable, and by carefully noting the
repetitions of the collisions, one may logically infer that the
collisions are upon the whole rather pleasurable than otherwise; and
when it comes to the last piece of fudge in the dish,--the very last
piece,--the astral observer will see that there is just the
slightest, the very slightest, quickest, most fleeting little tussle
of hands for it, and much laughter; and then the young woman rises
quickly--also note the slight pink flush in her cheeks, and she goes
to her chair and folds her pretty hands in her lap, and asks:--

"Well, do you like my fudge, Neal Ward? Is it as good as Belva
Lockwood's? She puts nuts in hers--I've eaten it; do you like it with
nuts in it?"

"Not so well as this," says the boy.

The girl slips into the dining room, for a glass of water. See the eyes
of the youth following her. It is dusky in the dining room, and the
youth longs for dusky places, but has not developed courage enough to
follow her. But he has courage enough to steady his eyes as she comes
back with the water, so that he can look into her blue eyes while you
would count as much as one--two--three--slowly--four--slowly--five. A
long, long time, so long indeed that she wishes he would look just a
second longer.

So at the end of the evening here stand Neal, and Jeanette, even as
Adam and Eve stood in the garden, talking of nothing in particular as
they slowly move toward the door. "Yes, I suppose so," she says, as
Eve said and as Eve's daughters have said through all the centuries,
looking intently at the floor. And then Neal, suddenly finding the
language of his line back to Adam, looks up to say, "Oh, yes, I
forgot--but have you read 'Monsieur Beaucaire'?" Now Adam said, "Have
you heard the new song that the morning stars are singing together?"
and Priam asked Helen if she would like to hear that new thing of
Solomon's just out, and so as the ages have rolled by, young gentlemen
standing beside their adored but not declared ones have mixed
literature with love, and have tied wisdom up in a package of candy or
wild honey, and have taken it to the trysting place since the
beginning of time. It is thus the poets thrive. And when she was asked
about the new song of the morning stars, Eve, though she knew it as
she knew her litany, answered no; and so did Eve's daughter, standing
in the dimly lighted hallway of the Barclay home in Sycamore Ridge;
and so then and there being, these two made their next meeting sure.

In those last years of the last century John Barclay became a powerful
man in this world--one of the few hundred men who divided the
material kingdoms of this earth among them. He was a rich man who was
turning his money into great political power. Senates listened to him,
many courts were his in fee simple, because he had bought and paid for
the men who named the judges; Presidents were glad to know what he
thought, and when he came to the White House, reporters speculated
about the talk that went on behind the doors of the President's room,
and the stock market fluttered. If he desired a law, he paid for it
and got it--not in a coarse illegal way, to be sure, but through the
regular conventional channels of politics, and if he desired to step
on a law, he stepped on it, and a court came running up behind him,
and legalized his transaction. He sneered at reformers, and mocked
God, did John Barclay in those days. He grew arrogant and boastful,
and strutted in his power like a man in liquor with the vain knowledge
that he could increase the population of a state or a group of states,
or he could shrivel the prosperity of a section of the country by his
whim. For by changing a freight rate he could make wheat grow, where
grass had nourished. By changing the rate again, he could beckon back
the wilderness. And yet, how small was his power; here beside him,
cherished as the apple of his eye, was his daughter, a slip of a girl,
with blue eyes and fair hair, whose heart was growing toward the
light, as the hearts of young things grow, and he, with all of his
power, could only watch the mystery, and wonder at it. He was not
displeased at what he saw. But it was one of the few things in his
consciousness over which he could find no way to assume control. He
stood in the presence of something that came from outside of his realm
and ignored him as the sun and the rain and the simple processes of
nature ignored him.

"Jane," he said one night, when he was in the Ridge for the first time
in many weeks,--a night near the end of the summer when Jeanette and
Neal Ward were vaguely feeling their way together, "Jane, mother says
that while we've been away Neal Ward has been here pretty often. You
don't suppose that--"

"Well, I've rather wondered about it myself a little," responded Jane.
"Neal is such a fine handsome young fellow."

"But, Jane," exclaimed Barclay, impatiently, as he rose to walk the
rug, "Jennie is only a child. Why, she's only--"

"Nineteen, John--she's a big girl now."

"I know, dear," he protested, "but that's absurdly young. Why--"

"Yes," she answered, "I was nearly twenty when I was engaged to you,
and Jennie's not engaged yet, nor probably even thinking seriously of
it."

"Don't you think," cried Barclay, as he limped down the diagonal of
the rug, "that you should do something? Isn't it a little unusual?
Why--"

"Well, John," smiled the wife, "I might do what mother did: turn the
young man over to father!" Barclay laughed, and she went on patiently:
"It's not at all unusual, John, even if they do--that is, if they
are--you know; but they aren't, and Jennie is too much in love with
her work at school to quit that. But after all it's the American way;
it was the way we did, dear, and the way our mothers and fathers did,
and unless you wish to change it--to Europeanize it, and pick--"

"Ah, nonsense, Jane--of course I don't want that! Only I thought some
way, if it's serious she ought to--Oh, don't you know she ought
to--"

Mrs. Barclay broke her smile with, "Of course she ought to, dear, and
so ought I and so ought mother when she married father and so ought my
grandmother when she married grandpa--but did we? Dear, don't you see
the child doesn't realize it? If it is anything, it is growing in her
heart, and I wouldn't smudge it for the world, by speaking to her
now--unless you don't like Neal; unless you think he's too--unless
you want a different boy. I mean some one of consequence?"

"Oh, no, it isn't that, Jane--it isn't that. Neal's all right; he's
clean and he is honest--I asked Bob Hendricks about him to-day, when
we passed the boy chasing news for the _Banner_, and Bob gives him a
fine name." Barclay threw himself into a chair and sighed. "I suppose
it's just that I feel Jeanette's kind of leaving us out of it--that
is all."

Jane went to him and patted his head gently, as she spoke: "That is
nature, dear--the fawn hiding in the woods; we must trust to Jennie's
good sense, and the good blood in Neal. My, but his sisters are proud
of him! Last week Lizzie was telling me Neal's wages had been
increased to ten dollars a week--and I don't suppose their father in
all of his life ever had that much of a steady income. The things the
family is planning to do with that ten dollars a week brought tears of
joy to my eyes. Neal's going to have his mother-in-law on his side,
anyway--just as you had yours. I know now how mother felt."

But John Barclay did not know how mother felt, and he did not care. He
knew how father felt--how Lycurgus Mason felt, and how the father of
Mrs. Lycurgus Mason felt; he felt hurt and slighted, and he could not
repress a feeling of bitterness toward the youth. All the world loves
a daughter-in-law, but a father's love for a son-in-law is an acquired
taste; some men never get it. And John Barclay was called away the
next morning to throttle a mill in the San Joaquin Valley, and from
there he went to North Dakota to stop the building of a competitive
railroad that tapped his territory; so September came, and with it
Jeanette Barclay went back to school. The mother wondered what the
girl would do with her last night at home. She was clearly nervous and
unsettled all the afternoon before, and made an errand into town and
came back with a perturbed face. But after dinner the mother heard
Jeanette at the telephone, and this is the one-sided dialogue the
mother caught: "Yes--this is Miss Barclay." "Oh, yes, I didn't
recognize your voice at first." "What meeting?" "Yes--yes." "And they
are not going to have it?" "Oh, I see." "You were--oh, I don't know.
Of course I should have felt--well, I--oh, it would have been all
right with me. Of course." Then the voice cheered up and she said:
"Why, of course--come right out. I understand." A pause and then,
"Yes, I know a man has to go where he is called." "Oh, she'll
understand--you know father is always on the wing." "No--why, no, of
course not--mother wouldn't think that of you. I'll tell her how it
was." "All right, good-by--yes, right away." And Jeanette Barclay
skipped away from the telephone and ran to her mother to say, "Mother,
that was Neal Ward--he wants to come out, and he was afraid you'd
think it rude for him to ask that way, but you know he had a meeting
to report and thought he couldn't come, and now they've postponed the
meeting, and I told him to come right out--wasn't that all right?"

And so out came Neal Ward, a likely-looking young man of twenty-one or
maybe twenty-two--a good six feet in height, with a straight leg, a
square shoulder, and firm jaw, set like his father's, and clean brown
eyes that did not blink. And as Jeanette Barclay, with her mother's
height, and her father's quick keen features, and her Grandmother
Barclay's eyes and dominant figure, stood beside him in the doorway,
Mrs. Jane Barclay thought a good way ahead, and Jeanette would have
blushed her face to a cinder if the mother had spoken her thoughts.
The three, mother and daughter and handsome young man, sat for a while
together in the living room, and then Jane, who knew the heart of
youth, and did not fear it, said, "You children should go out on the
porch--it's a beautiful night; I'm going upstairs."

And now let us once more in our astral bodies watch them there in the
light of the veiled moon--for it is the last time that even we should
see them alone. She is sitting on a balustrade, and he is standing
beside her, and their hands are close together on the stones. "Yes,"
he is saying, "I shall be busy at the train to-morrow trying to catch
the governor for an interview on the railroad question, and may not
see you."

"I wish you would throw the governor into the deep blue sea," she
says, and he responds:--

"I wish I could." There is a silence, and then he risks it--and the
thing he has been trying to say comes out, "I wonder if you will do
something for me, Jeanette?"

"Oh, I don't know--don't ask me anything hard--not very hard, Neal!"

The last word was all he cared for, and by what sleight of hand he
slipped his fraternity pin from his vest into her hand, neither ever
knew.

"Will you?" he asks. "For me?"

She pins it at her throat, and smiles. Then she says, "Is this long
enough--do you want it back now?"

He shakes his head, and finally she asks, "When?" and then it comes
out:--

"Never."

And her face reddens, and she does not speak. Their hands, on the
wall, have met--they just touch, that is all, but they do not hasten
apart. A long, long time they are silent--an eternity of a minute;
and then she says, "We shall see in the morning."

And then another eternal minute rolls by, and the youth slips the rose
from her hair--quickly, and without disarranging a strand.

"Oh," she cries, "Neal!" and then adds, "Let me get you a pretty
one--that is faded."

But no, he will have that one, and she stands beside him and pins it
on his coat--stands close beside him, and where her elbows and her
arms touch him he is thrilled with delight. In the shadow of the great
porch they stand a moment, and her hand goes out to his.

"Well, Jeanette," he says, and still her hand does not shrink away,
"well, Jeanette--it will be lonesome when you go."

"Will it?" she asks.

"Yes--but I--I have been so happy to-night."

He presses her hand a little closer, and as she says, "I'm so glad,"
he says, "Good-by," and moves down the broad stone steps. She stands
watching him, and at the bottom he stops and again says:--

"Well--good-by--Jeanette--I must go--I suppose." And she does not
move, so again he says, "Good-by."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Youth," said Colonel Martin Culpepper to the assembled company in the
ballroom of the Barclay home as the clock struck twelve and brought in
the twentieth century; "Youth," he repeated, as he tugged at the
bottom of Buchanan Culpepper's white silk vest, to be sure that it met
his own black trousers, and waved his free hand grandly aloft;
"Youth," he reiterated, as he looked over the gay young company at the
foot of the hall, while the fiddlers paused with their bows in the
air, and the din of the New Year's clang was rising in the town;
"Youth,--of all the things in God's good green earth,--Youth is the
most beautiful." Then he signalled with some dignity to the leader of
the orchestra, and the music began.

It was a memorable New Year's party that Jeanette Barclay gave at the
dawn of this century. The Barclay private car had brought a dozen girls
down from the state university for the Christmas holidays, and then had
made a recruiting trip as far east as Cleveland and had brought back a
score more of girls in their teens and early twenties--for an invitation
from the Barclays, if not of much social consequence, had a power behind
it that every father recognized. And what with threescore girls from the
Ridge, and young men from half a dozen neighbouring states,--and young
men are merely background in any social picture,--the ballroom was as
pretty as a garden. It was her own idea,--with perhaps a shade of
suggestion from her father,--that the old century should be danced out
and the new one danced in with the pioneers of Garrison County set in
quadrilles in the centre of the floor, while the young people whirled
around them in the two-step then in vogue. So the Barclays asked a score
or so of the old people in for dinner New Year's Eve; and they kept
below stairs until midnight. Then they filed into the ballroom, with its
fair fresh faces, its shrill treble note of merriment,--these old men
and women, gray and faded, looking back on the old century while the
others looked into the new one. There came Mr. and Mrs. Watts McHurdie
in the lead, Watts in his best brown suit, and Mrs. Watts in lavender to
sustain her gray hair; General Ward, in his straight black frock coat
and white tie, followed with Mrs. Dorman, relict of the late William
Dorman, merchant, on his arm; behind him came the Brownwells, in evening
clothes, and Robert Hendricks and his sister,--all gray-haired, but
straight of figure and firm of foot; Colonel Culpepper followed with
Mrs. Mary Barclay; the Lycurgus Masons were next in the file, and in
their evening clothes they looked withered and old, and Lycurgus was not
sure upon his feet; Jacob Dolan in his faded blue uniform marched in
like a drum-major with the eldest Miss Ward; and the Carnines followed,
and the Fernalds followed them; and then came Judge and Mrs. Bemis--he a
gaunt, sinister, parchment-skinned man, with white hair and a gray
mustache, and she a crumbling ruin in shiny satin bedecked in diamonds.
Down the length of the long room they walked, and executed an
old-fashioned grand march, such as Watts could lead, while the orchestra
played the tune that brought cheers from the company, and the little old
man looked at the floor, while Mrs. McHurdie beamed and bowed and
smiled. And then they took their partners to step off the
quadrille--when behold, it transpired that in all the city orchestra,
that had cost the Barclays a thousand dollars according to town
tradition, not one man could be found who could call off a quadrille.
Then up spake John Barclay, and stood him on a chair, and there, when
the colonel had signalled for the music to start, the voice of John
Barclay rang out above the din, as it had not sounded before in nearly
thirty years. Old memories came rushing back to him of the nights when
he used to ride five and ten and twenty miles and play the cabinet organ
to a fiddle's lead, and call off until daybreak for two dollars. And
such a quadrille as he gave them--four figures of it before he sent them
to their seats. There were "cheat or swing," the "crow's nest," "skip to
my Loo,"--and they all broke out singing, while the young people clapped
their hands, and finally by a series of promptings he quickly called the
men into one line and the women into another, and then the music
suddenly changed to the Virginia reel. And so the dance closed for the
old people, and they vanished from the room, looking back at the youth
and the happiness and warmth of the place with wistful but not eager
eyes; and as Jacob Dolan, in his faded blues and grizzled hair and
beard, disappeared into the dusk of the hallway, Jeanette Barclay,
looking at her new ring, patted it and said to Neal Ward: "Well, dear,
the nineteenth century is gone! Now let us dance and be happy in this
one."

And so she danced the new year and the new century and the new life
in, as happy as a girl of twenty can be. For was she not a Junior at
the state university, if you please? Was she not the heir of all the
ages, and a scandalous lot of millions besides, and what is infinitely
more important to a girl's happiness, was she not engaged, good and
tight, and proud of it, to a youth making twelve dollars every week
whether it rained or not? What more could an honest girl ask? And it
was all settled, and so happily settled too, that when she had
graduated with her class at the university, and had spent a year in
Europe--but that was a long way ahead, and Neal had to go to the City
with father and learn the business first. But business and graduation
and Europe were mere details--the important thing had happened. So
when it was all over that night, and the girls had giggled themselves
to bed, and the house was dark, Jeanette Barclay and her mother walked
up the stairs to her room together. There they sat down, and Jeanette
began--

"Neal said he told you about the ring?"

"Yes," answered her mother.

"But he did not show it to you--because he wanted me to be the first
to see it."

"Neal's a dear," replied her mother. "So that was why? I thought
perhaps he was bashful."

"No, mother," answered the girl, "no--we're both so proud of it." She
kept her hand over the ring finger, as she spoke, "You know those
'Short and Simple Annals' he's been doing for the _Star_--well, he
got his first check the day before Christmas, and he gave half of it
to his father, and took the other twenty-five dollars and bought this
ring. I think it is so pretty, and we are both real proud of it." And
then she took her hand from the ring, and held her finger out for her
mother's eyes, and her mother kissed it. They were silent a moment;
then the girl rose and stood with her hand on the doorknob and cried:
"I think it is the prettiest ring in all the world, and I never want
any other." Then she thought of mother, and flushed and ran away.

And we should not follow her. Rather let us climb Main Street and turn
into Lincoln Avenue and enter the room where Martin Culpepper sits
writing the Biography of Watts McHurdie. He is at work on his famous
chapter, "Hymen's Altar," and we may look over his great shoulder and
see what he has written: "The soul caged in its prison house of the
flesh looks forth," he writes, "and sees other chained souls, and
hails them in passing like distant ships. But soul only meets soul in
some great passion of giving, whether it be man to his fellow-man, to
his God, or in the love of men and women; it matters not how the
ecstasy comes, its root is in sacrifice, in giving, in forgetting self
and merging through abnegation into the source of life in this
universe for one sublime moment. For we may not come out of our prison
houses save to inhale the air of heaven once or twice, and then go
scourged back to our dungeons. Great souls are they who love the most,
who breathe the deepest of heaven's air, and give of themselves most
freely."


CHAPTER XXIII


The next morning, before the guests were downstairs, Barclay, reading
his morning papers before the fireplace, stopped his daughter, who was
going through the living room on some morning errand.

"Jeanette," said the father, as he drew her to his chair arm, "let me
see it."

She brought the setting around to the outside of her finger, and gave
him her hand. He looked at it a moment, patted her hand, put the ring
to his lips, and the two sat silent, choked with something of joy and
something of sorrow that shone through their brimming eyes. Thus Mary
Barclay found them. They looked up abashed, and she bent over them and
stroked her son's hair as she said:--

"John, John, isn't it fine that Jennie has escaped the curse of your
millions?"

Barclay's heart was melted. He could not answer, so he nodded an
assenting head. The mother stooped to kiss her son's forehead, as she
went on, "Not with all of your millions could you buy that simple
little ring for Jennie, John." And the father pressed his lips to the
ring, and his daughter snuggled tightly into his heart and the three
mingled their joy together.

Two hours later Barclay and General Ward met on the bridge by the
mill. It was one of those warm midwinter days, when nature seems to be
listening for the coming of spring. A red bird was calling in the
woods near by, and the soft south wind had spring in it as it blew
across the veil of waters that hid the dam. John Barclay's head was
full of music, and he was lounging across the bridge from the mill on
his way home to try his new pipe organ. He had spent four hours the
day before at his organ bench, trying to teach his lame foot to keep
up with his strong foot. So when General Ward overhauled him, Barclay
was annoyed. He was not the man to have his purposes crossed, even
when they were whims.

"I was just coming over to the mill to see you," said the general, as
he halted in Barclay's path.

"All right, General--all right; what can I do for you?"

The general was as blunt a man as John Barclay. If Barclay desired no
beating around the bush, the general would go the heart of matters. So
he said, "I want to talk about Neal with you."

Barclay knew that certain things must be said, and the two men sat in
a stone seat in the bridge wall, with the sun upon them, to talk it
out then and there. "Well, General, we like Neal--we like him
thoroughly. And we are glad, Jane and I, and my mother too--she likes
him; and I want to do something for him. That's about all there is to
say."

"Yes, but what, John Barclay--what?" exclaimed the general. "That's
what I want to know. What are you going to do for him? Make him a
devil worshipper?"

"Well now, General, here--don't be too fast," Barclay smiled and
drawled. He put his hands on the warm rocks at his sides and flapped
them like wing-tips as he went on: "Jeanette and Neal have their own
lives to live. They're sensible--unusually sensible. We didn't steal
Neal, any more than you stole Jeanette, General, and--"

"Oh, I understand that, John; that isn't the point," broke in the
general. "But now that you've got him, what are you going to do with
him? Can't you see, John, he's my boy, and that I have a right to
know?"

"Now, General, will you let me do a little of this talking?" asked
Barclay, impatiently. "As I was saying, Jeanette and Neal are
sensible, and money isn't going to make fools of them. When the time
comes and I'm gone, they'll take the divine responsibility--"

"The divine tommyrot!" cried the general; "the divine fiddlesticks!
Why should they? What have they done that they should have that thrust
upon them like a curse; in God's name, John Barclay, why should my
Neal have to have that blot upon his soul? Can't they be free and
independent?"

Barclay did not answer; he looked glumly at the floor, and kicked the
cement with his heel. "What would you have them do with the money when
they get it," he growled, "burn it?"

"Why not?" snapped the general.

"Oh--I just thought I'd ask," responded Barclay.

The two men sat in silence. Barclay regarded conversation with the
general in that mood as arguing with a lunatic. Presently he rose, and
stood before Ward and spoke rather harshly: "What I am going to do is
this--? and nothing more. Neal tells me he understands shorthand: I
know the boy is industrious, and I know that he is bright and quick
and honest. That's all he needs. I am going to take him into our
company as a stockholder--with one share--a thousand-dollar share,
to be explicit; I'm going to give that to him, and that's all; then
he's to be my private secretary for three years at five thousand a
year, so long as you must know, and then at the end of that time, if
he and Jennie are so minded, they're going to marry; and if he has any
business sense--of course you know what will happen. She is all we
have, General--some one's got to take hold of things."

As Barclay spoke General Ward grew white--his face was aquiver as his
trembling voice cried out: "Oh, God, John Barclay, and would you take
my boy--my clean-hearted, fine-souled boy, whom I have taught to fear
God, and callous his soul with your damned money-making? How would you
like me to take your girl and blacken her heart and teach her the
wiles of the outcasts? And yet you're going to teach Neal to lie and
steal and cheat and make his moral guide the penal code instead of his
father's faith. Shame on you, John Barclay--shame on you, and may God
damn you for this thing, John Barclay!" The old man trembled, but the
sob that shook his frame had no tears in it. He looked Barclay in the
eyes without a tremor for an angry moment, and then broke: "I am an
old man, John; I can't interfere with Neal and Jeanette; it's their
life, not mine, and some way God will work it out; but," he added,
"I've still got my own heart to break over it--that's mine--that's
mine."

He rose and faced the younger man a moment, and then walked quickly
away. Barclay limped after him, and went home. There he sat on his
bench and made the great organ scream and howl and bellow with rage
for two hours.

When Neal Ward went to the City to live, he had a revelation of John
Barclay as a man of moods. The Barclay Neal Ward saw was an electric
motor rather than an engine. The power he had to perceive and to act
seemed transmitted to him from the outside. At times he dictated
letters of momentous importance to the young man, which Neal was sure
were improvised. Barclay relied on his instincts and rarely changed a
decision. He wore himself out every day, yet he returned to his work
the next day without a sign of fag. The young man found that Barclay
had one curious vanity--he liked to seem composed. Hence the big
smooth mahogany table before him, with the single paper tablet on it,
and the rose--the one rose in the green vase in the centre of the
table. Visitors always found him thus accoutred. But to see him
limping about from room to room, giving orders in the great offices,
dictating notes for the heads of the various departments, to see him
in the room where the mail was received, worrying it like a pup, was
to see another man revealed. He liked to have people from Sycamore
Ridge call upon him, and the man who kept door in the outer office--a
fine gray-haired person, who had the manners of a brigadier--knew so
many people in Sycamore Ridge that Neal used to call him the City
Directory. One day Molly Brownwell called. She was the only person who
ever quelled the brigadier; but when a woman has been a social leader
in a country town all of her life, she has a social poise that may not
be impressed by a mere brigadier. Mrs. Brownwell realized that her
call was unusual, but she refused to acknowledge it to him. Barclay
seemed glad to see her, and as he was in one of his mellow moods he
talked of old times, and drew from a desk near the wall, which he
rarely opened, an envelope containing a tintype picture of Ellen.
Culpepper. He showed it to her sister, and they both sat silent for a
time, and then the woman spoke.

"Well, John," she said, "that was a long time ago."

"Forty years, Molly--forty years."

When they came back to the world she said: "John, I am up here looking
for a publisher. Father has written a Biography of Watts, and
collected all of his poems and things in it, and we thought it might
sell--Watts is so well known. But the publishers won't take it. I
want your advice about it."

Barclay listened to her story, and then wheeled in his chair and
exclaimed, "Can Adrian publish that book?"

"Yes," she answered tentatively; "that is, he could if it didn't take
such an awful lot of money."

After discussing details with her, Barclay called Neal Ward and
said:--

"Get up a letter to Adrian Brownwell asking him to print for me three
thousand copies of the colonel's book, at one dollar and fifty cents a
copy, and give seventy-five per cent of the profits to Colonel
Culpepper. We'll put that book in every public library in this
country. How's that?" And he looked at the tintype and said, "Bless
her dear little heart."

"Neal," asked Barclay, as Mrs. Brownwell left the room, "how old are
you? I keep forgetting." When the young man answered twenty-five,
Barclay, who was putting away the tintype picture, said, "And Jeanette
will be twenty-three at her next birthday." He closed the desk and
looked at the youth bending over his typewriter and sighed. "Been
going together off and on five or six years--I should say."

Neal nodded. Barclay put his hand on his chin and contemplated the
young man a moment. "Ever have any other love affair, son?"

The youngster coloured and looked up quickly with a puzzled look and
did not reply.

Barclay cut in with, "Well, son, I'm glad to find you don't lie
easily." He laughed silently. "Jennie has--lots of them. When she was
six she used to cry for little Watts Fernald, and they quarrelled like
cats and dogs, and when she was ten there was an Irish boy--Finnegan
I think his name was--who milked the cow, whom she adored, and when
she was fourteen or so, it was some boy in the high school who gave
her candy until her mother had to shoo him off, and I don't know how
many others." He paused for a few seconds and then went on, "But she's
forgotten them--that's the way of women." His eyes danced merrily as
he continued, while he scratched his head: "But with us men--it's
different. We never forget." He chuckled a moment, and then his face
changed as he said, "Neal, I wish you'd go into the mail room and see
if the noon mail has anything in it from that damn scoundrel who's
trying to start a cracker factory in St. Louis--I hate to bother to
smash him right now when we're so busy."

But it so happened that the damn scoundrel thought better of his
intention and took fifty thousand for his first thought, and Neal
Ward, being one of the component parts of an engaged couple, went
ahead being sensible about it. All engaged couples, of course, resolve
to be sensible about it. And for two years and a half--during
nineteen one and two and part of nineteen three--Jeanette Barclay and
Neal Ward had tried earnestly and succeeded admirably (they believed)
in being exceedingly sensible about everything. Jeanette had gone
through school and was spending the year in Europe with her mother,
and she would be home in May; and in June--in June of 1904--why, the
almanac stopped there; the world had no further interest, and no one
on earth could imagine anything after that. For then they proposed not
to be sensible any longer.

In the early years of this century--about 1902, probably--John
Barclay paid an accounting company twenty-five thousand dollars--more
money than General Ward and Watts McHurdie and Martin Culpepper and
Jacob Dolan had saved in all their long, industrious, frugal, and
useful lives--to go over his business, install a system of audits and
accounts, and tell him just how much money he was worth. After a score
of men had been working for six months, the accounting company made
its report. It was put in terms of dollars and cents, which are
fleeting and illusive terms, and mean much in one country and little
in another, signify great wealth at one time and mere affluence in
another period. So the sum need not be set down here. But certain
interesting details of the report may be set down to illuminate this
narrative. For instance, it indicates that John Barclay was a man of
some consequence, when one knows that he employed more men in that
year than many a sovereign state of this Union employed in its state
and county and city governments. It signifies something to learn that
he controlled more land growing wheat than any of half a dozen
European kings reign over. It means something to realize that in those
years of his high tide John Barclay, by a few lines dictated to Neal
Ward, could have put bread out of the reach of millions of his
fellow-creatures. And these are evidences of material power--these
men he hired, these lands he dominated, and this vast store of food
that he kept. So it is fair to assume that if this is a material
world, John Barclay's fortune was founded upon a rock. He and his
National Provisions Company were real. They were able to make laws;
they were able to create administrators of the law; and they were able
to influence those who interpreted the law. Barclay and his power were
substantial, palpable, and translatable into terms of money, of power,
of vital force.

And then one day, after long years of growth in the
under-consciousnesses of men, an idea came into full bloom in the
world. It had no especial champions. The people began to think this
idea. That was all. Now life reduced to its lowest terms consists of
you and him and me. Put us on a desert island together--you and him
and me--and he can do nothing without you and me--except he kill us,
and then he is alone; even then we haunt him, so our influence still
binds him. You can do nothing without him and me, and I can do nothing
without you and him. Not that you and he will hold me; not that you
will stop me; but what you think and say will bind me to your wishes
tighter than any chains you might forge. What you and he think is more
powerful than all the material forces of this universe. For what you
and he think is public opinion. It is not substantial; it is not
palpable. It may not readily be translated into terms of money, or
power, or vital force. But it crushes all these things before it. When
this public opinion rises sure and firm and strong, no material force
on this earth can stop it. For a time it may be dammed and checked.
For a day or a week or a year or a decade it may be turned from its
channel; yet money cannot hold it; arms cannot hold it; cunning cannot
baffle it. For it is God moving among men. Thus He manifests Himself
in this earth. Through the centuries, amid the storm and stress of
time, often muffled, often strangled, often incoherent, often raucous
and inarticulate with anguish, but always in the end triumphant, the
voice of the people is indeed the voice of God!

Nearly a dozen years had passed since the Russian painted the picture
of John Barclay, which hangs in the public library of Sycamore Ridge,
and in that time the heart of the American people had changed. Barclay
was beginning to feel upon him, night and day, the crushing weight of
popular scorn. He called the idea envy, but it was not envy. It was
the idea working in the world, and the weight of the scorn was
beginning to crumple his soul; for this idea that the people were
thinking was finding its way into newspapers, magazines, and books.
They were beginning to question the divine right of wealth to rule,
because it was wealth--an idea that Barclay could not comprehend even
vaguely. The term honest wealth, which was creeping into respectable
periodicals, was exceedingly annoying to him. For the very presence of
the term seemed to indicate that there was such a thing as dishonest
wealth,--an obvious absurdity; and when he addressed the students of
the Southwestern University at their commencement exercises in 1902,
his address attracted considerable attention because it deplored the
modern tendency in high places toward socialism and warned the
students that a nation of iconoclasts would perish from the earth. But
the people went on questioning the divine right of wealth to rule. In
the early part of 1903 Barclay was astounded at the action of a score
of his senators and nearly a hundred of his congressmen, who voted for
a national law prohibiting the giving of railroad rebates. He was
assured by all of them that it was done to satisfy temporary
agitation, but the fact that they voted for the law at all, as he
explained to Senator Myton, at some length and with some asperity, was
a breach of faith with "interests in American politics which may not
safely be ignored." "And what's more," he added angrily, "this is a
personal insult to me. That law hits my Door Strip."

And then out of the clear sky like a thunderbolt, not from an enemy,
not from any clique or crowd he had fought, but from the government
itself, during the last days of Congress came a law creating a
Department of Commerce and Labour at Washington, a law giving federal
inspectors the right to go through books of private concerns. Barclay
was overwhelmed with amazement. He raged, but to no avail; and his
wrath was heated by the rumours printed in all the newspapers that
Barclay and the National Provisions Company were to be the first
victims of the new law. Mrs. Barclay and Jeanette were going to Europe
in the spring of 1903, and Barclay on the whole was glad of it. He
wished the decks cleared for his fight; he felt that he must not have
Jane at his elbow holding his hand from malice in the engagement that
was coming, and when he left them on the boat, he spent a week
scurrying through the East looking for some unknown enemy in high
financial circles who might be back of the government's determination
to move against the N.P.C. He felt sure he could uncover the source of
his trouble--and then, either fight his enemy or make terms. It did
not occur to Barclay that he could not find a material, palpable,
personal object upon which to charge or with which to capitulate. But
he found nothing, and crossed the Alleghanies puzzled.

When he got home, he learned that a government inspector, one H. S.
Smith, was beginning the investigation of the Provisions Company's
books in St. Paul, Omaha, Chicago, and Denver. Barclay learned that
Smith had secured some bills of lading that might not easily be
explained. Incidentally, Barclay learned that an attempt had been
made, through proper channels, to buy Smith, and he was nonplussed to
learn that Smith was not purchasable. Then to end the whole matter,
Barclay wrote to Senator Myton, directing him to have Smith removed
immediately. But Myton's reply, which was forwarded to Barclay at
Sycamore Ridge, indicated that "the orders under which Smith is
working come from a higher source than the department."

Barclay's scorn of Inspector Smith--a man whom he could buy and sell
a dozen times from one day's income from his wealth--flamed into a
passion. He tore Myton's letter to bits, and refreshed his faith in
the god of Things As They Are by garroting a mill in Texas. While the
Texas miller was squirming, Barclay did not consider Inspector Smith
consciously, but in remote places in his mind always there lived the
scorned person whom Barclay knew was working against him.

From time to time in the early summer the newspapers contained
definite statements, authorized from Washington with increasing
positiveness, that the cordon around the N.P.C. was tightening. In
July Barclay's scorn of Inspector Smith grew into disquietude; for a
letter from Judge Bemis, of the federal court,--written up in the
Catskills,--warned him that scorn was not the only emotion with which
he should honour Smith. After reading Bemis' confidential and
ambiguous scrawl, Barclay drummed for a time with his hard fingers on
the mahogany before him, stared at the print sketches of machinery
above him, and paced the floor of his office with the roar of the mill
answering something in his angry heart. He could not know that the
tide was running out. He went to his telephone and asked for a city so
far away that when he had finished talking for ten minutes, he had
spent enough money to keep General Ward in comfort for a month. Neal
Ward, sitting in his room, heard Barclay say: "What kind of a damn
bunco game were you fellows putting up on me in 1900? You got my
money; that's all right; I didn't squeal at the assessment, did I?"
Young Ward in the pause closed his door. But the bull-like roar of
Barclay came through the wood between them in a moment, and he heard:
"Matter enough--here's this fellow Smith bullying my clerks out in
Omaha, and nosing around the St. Paul office; what right has he got?
Who is he, anyway--who got him his job? I wrote to Myton to get him
removed, or sent to some other work, and Myton said that the White
House was back of him. I wish you'd go over to Washington, and tell
them who I am and what we did for you in '96 and 1900; we can't stand
this. It's a damned outrage, and I look to you to stop it." In a
moment Ward heard Barclay exclaim: "You can't--why, that's a hell of
a note! What kind of a fellow is he, anyway? Tell him I gave half a
million to the party, and I've got some rights in this government that
a white man is bound to respect--or does he believe in taking your
money and letting you whistle?" A train rolling by the mill drowned
Barclay's voice, but at the end of the conversation Ward heard Barclay
say: "Well, what's a party good for if it doesn't protect the men who
contribute to its support? You simply must do it. I look to you for
it. You got my good money, and it's up to you to get results."

There was some growling, and then Barclay hung up the receiver. But he
was mad all day, and dictated a panic interview to Ward, which Ward
was to give to the Associated Press when they went to Chicago the next
day. In the interview, Barclay said that economic conditions were
being disturbed by half-baked politicians, and that values would
shrink and the worst panic in the history of the country would follow
unless the socialistic meddling with business was stopped.

The summer had deepened to its maturest splendour before Barclay
acknowledged to himself his dread of the City. For he began to feel a
definite discomfiture at the panorama of his pictures on the
news-stands in connection with the advertising of the Sunday
newspapers and magazines. The newspapers were blazoning to the whole
country that the Economy Door Strip was a blind for taking railroad
rebates, and everywhere he met the report of Inspector Smith that the
National Provisions Company's fifty-pound sack of Barclay's Best
contained but forty-eight pounds and ten ounces; also that Barclay had
been taking three ounces out of the pound cartons of breakfast food,
and that the cracker packages were growing smaller, while the prices
were not lowered. Even in Sycamore Ridge the reporters appeared with
exasperating regularity, and the papers were filled with diverting
articles telling of the Barclays' social simplicity and rehashing old
stories of John Barclay's boyhood. His attempt to stop the
investigation of the National Provisions Company became noised around
Washington, and the news of his failure was frankly given out from the
White House. This inspired a cartoon from McCutcheon in the _Chicago
Tribune_, representing the President weighing a flour sack on which
was printed "Barclay's Worst," with Barclay behind the President
trying to get his foot on the scales.

All of his life Barclay had been a fighter; he liked to hit and dodge
or get hit back. His struggles in business and in the business part of
politics had been with tangible foes, with material things; and his
weapons had been material things: coercion, bribery (more or less
sugar-coated), cheating, and often in these later years the roar of
his voice or the power of his name. But now, facing the formless,
impersonal thing called public opinion, hitherto unknown in his scheme
of things, he was filled with uncertainty and indecision.

One autumn day, after sending three stenographers home limp and weary
with directions for his battles, Barclay strayed into McHurdie's shop.
The general and Dolan were the only members of the parliament present
that afternoon, besides Watts. Barclay nodded at the general without
speaking, and Dolan said:--

"Cool, ain't it? Think it will freeze?"

Barclay took a chair, and when Dolan and Ward saw that he had come for
a visit, they left.

"Watts," asked Barclay, after the others had gone, and the little man
at the bench did not speak, "Watts, what's got into the people of this
country? What have I done that they should begin pounding me this
way?"

McHurdie turned a gentle smile on his visitor, knowing that Barclay
would do the talking. Barclay went on: "Here are five suits in county
courts in Texas against me; a suit in Kansas by the attorney-general,
five or ten in the Dakotas, three in Nebraska, one or two in each of
the Lake states, and the juries always finding against me. I haven't
changed my methods. I'm doing just what I've done for fifteen years.
I've had lots of lawsuits before, with stockholders and rival
companies and partners, and millers and all that--but this standing
in front of the mob and fighting them off--why? Why? What have I
done? These county attorneys and attorneys-general seem to delight in
it--now why? They didn't used to; it used to be that only cranks like
old Phil Ward even talked of such things, and people laughed at them;
and now prosecuting attorneys actually do these things, and people
reelect them. Why? What's got into the people? What am I doing that I
haven't been doing?"

"Maybe the people are growing honest, John," suggested the harness
maker amiably.

Barclay threw back his head and roared: "Naw--naw--it isn't that;
it's the damn newspapers. That's what it is! They're what's raising
the devil. But why? Why? What have I done? Why, they have even
bulldozed some of my own federal judges--my own men, Watts, my own
men; men whose senators came into my office with their hats in their
hands and asked permission to name these judges. Now why?" He was
silent awhile and then began chuckling: "But I fixed 'em the other
day. Did you see that article in all the papers briefed out of New
York about how that professor had said that the N.P.C. was an economic
necessity? I did that, Watts: and got it published in the magazines,
too--and our advertising agents made all the newspapers that get our
advertising print it--and they had to." Barclay laughed. After a
moody silence he continued: "And you know what I could do. I could
finance a scheme to buy out the meat trust and the lumber trust, and I
could control every line of advertising that goes into the damn
magazines--and I could buy the paper trust too, and that would fix
'em. The Phil Wards are not running this country yet. The men who make
the wealth and maintain the prosperity have got to run it in spite of
the long-nosed reformers and socialists. You know, Watts, that we men
who do things have a divine responsibility to keep the country off the
rocks. But she's drifting a lot just now, and they're all after me,
because I'm rich. That's all, Watts, just because I've worked hard and
earned a little money--that's why." And so he talked on, until he was
tired, and limped home and sat idly in front of his organ, unable to
touch the keys.

Then he turned toward the City to visit his temporal kingdom. There in
the great Corn Exchange Building his domain was unquestioned. There in
the room with the mahogany walls he could feel his power, and stanch
the flow of his courage. There he was a man. But alas for human
vanity! When he got to the City, he found the morning papers full of a
story of a baby that had died from overeating breakfast food made at
his mills and adulterated with earth from his Missouri clay banks, as
the coroner had attested after an autopsy; and a miserable county
prosecutor was looking for John Barclay. So he hid all the next day in
his offices, and that evening took Neal Ward on a special train in his
private car, on a roundabout way home to Sycamore Ridge.

It was a wretched homecoming for so great and successful a man as
Barclay. Yet he with all his riches, with all his material power, even
he longed for the safety of home, as any hunted thing longs for his
lair. On the way he paced the diagonals of the little office room in
his car, like a caged jackal. The man had lost his anchor; the things
which his life had been built on would not hold him. Money--men
envied the rich nowadays, he said, and the rich man had no rights in
the courts or out of them; friends--they had gone up in the market,
and he could not afford them; politics--he had found it a quicksand.
So he jabbered to Neal Ward, his secretary, and pulled down the
curtains of his car on the station side of every stop the train made
in its long day's journey.


CHAPTER XXIV


It was nearly midnight when the special train pulled into Sycamore
Ridge, and Neal Ward hurried home. He went to his room, and found
there a letter and a package, both addressed in Jeanette's
handwriting. The letter was only a note that read:--

    "MY DEAREST BOY: I could not wait to send it for your Christmas
    present. So I am sending it the very day it is finished. I hope it
    will bring me close to you--into your very heart and keep me there.
    I have kissed it--for I knew that you would.

    "Your loving JEANETTE."

He tore open the package and found a miniature of Jeanette done on
ivory--that seemed to bring her into the room, and illumine it with
her presence. The thing bloomed with life, and his heart bounded with
joy as his eyes drank the beauty of it. His father called from below
stairs, and the youth went down holding the note and the miniature in
his hands. Before the father could speak, the son held out the
picture, and Philemon Ward looked for a moment into the glowing
faces--that of the picture and that of the living soul before him,
and hesitated before speaking.

"I got your wire--" he began.

"But isn't it beautiful, father--wonderful!" broke in the son.

The father assented kindly and then continued: "So I thought I'd sit
up for you. I had to talk with you." The son's face looked an
interrogation, and the father answered, "Read that, Neal--" handing
his son a letter in a rich linen envelope bearing in the corner the
indication that it was written at the Army and Navy Club in
Washington. The lovely face in the miniature lay on the table between
them and smiled up impartially at father and son as the young man drew
out the letter and read:--

