In the afternoon two natives made their appearance on the opposite side
of the water, and I walked over to them, as I could not by any signs
induce them to come to us. They were not bad looking men, and had lost
their two front teeth of the upper jaw. To one I gave a tomahawk, and a
hook to the other, but when I rose to depart, they gave them both back to
me, and were astonished to find that I had intended them as presents.
Seeing, I suppose, that we intended them no injury, these men in the
morning went on with their ordinary occupations, and swimming into the
middle of the water began to dive for mussels. They looked like two seals
in the water with their black heads, and seemed to be very expert: at all
events they were not long in procuring a breakfast.

Notwithstanding the misgivings I had as to the creek, the paths of the
natives became wider and wider as we advanced. They were now as broad as
a footpath in England, by a road side, and were well trodden; numerous
huts of boughs also lined the creek, so that it was evident we were
advancing into a well peopled country, and this circumstance raised my
hopes that it would improve. As, however, our horses had no longer a
gallop in them, we found it necessary to keep a sharp look out; although
the natives with whom we had communicated, did not appear anxious to
leave the place as they generally are to tell the news of our being on
the creek to others above us.

On the 31st we started at 7 a.m., and at a mile and a half found ourselves
at the termination of the stony ranges to our left. They fell back to the
north, and a larger plain succeeded them. At two miles we crossed a small
tributary, and passed over a stony plain, from which we entered an open
box-tree forest extending far away to our left. At five miles and a half
we found ourselves again on the banks of the creek, where it had an upper
and a lower channel, that is to say, it had a lower channel for the
stream, and an upper one independently of it. In the lower bed there was
a little water, and we therefore stopped for a short time, the day being
exceedingly hot. While here we saw a native at some water a little lower
down, mending a net, but did not call to him. On resuming our journey we
kept in the upper channel, and had not ridden very far when we saw a
native about 150 yards ahead of us, pulling boughs. On getting nearer we
called out to him, but to no purpose. At the distance of about 70 yards,
we called out again, but still he did not hear, perhaps because of the
rustling of the boughs he was breaking down. At length he bundled them
up, and throwing them over his shoulder, turned from us to cross to the
lower part of the creek, when suddenly he came bolt up against us. I
cannot describe his horror and amazement,--down went his branches,--out
went his hands,--and trembling from head to foot, he began to shout as
loud as he could bawl. On this we pulled up, and I desired Mr. Stuart to
dismount and sit down. This for a time increased the poor fellow's alarm,
for he doubtless mistook man and horse for one animal, and he stretched
himself out in absolute astonishment when he saw them separate. When Mr.
Stuart sat down, however, he stood more erect, and he gradually got
somewhat composed. His shouting had brought another black, who had stood
afar off, watching the state of affairs, but who now approached. From
these men I tried to gather some information, and my hopes were greatly
raised from what passed between us, insomuch that one of the men could
not help expressing his hope that we were now near the long sought for
inland sea.

On my seeking to know, by signs, to what point the creek would lead us,
the old man stretched out his hand considerably to the southward of east,
and spreading out his fingers, suddenly dropped his hand, as if he
desired us to understand that it commenced, as he shewed, by numerous
little channels uniting into one not very far off. On asking if the
natives used canoes, he threw himself into the attitude of a native
propelling one, which is a peculiar stoop, in which he must have been
practised. After going through the motions, he pointed due north, and
turning the palm of his hand forward, made it sweep the horizon round to
east, and then again put himself into the attitude of a native propelling
a canoe. There certainly was no mistaking these motions. On my asking if
the creek went into a large water, he intimated not, by again spreading
out his hand as before and dropping it, neither did he seem to know
anything of any hills. The direction he pointed to us, where there were
large waters, was that over which the cold E.S.E. wind I have noticed,
must have passed. This poor fellow was exceedingly communicative, but he
did not cease to tremble all the while we were with him. After leaving
him, the creek led us up to the northward of east, and we cut off every
angle by following the broad and well beaten paths crossing from one to
the other. At three miles I turned to ascend a conical sand hill, from
whence the country appeared as follows: to the north were immense plains,
with here and there a gum-tree on them; they were bounded in the distance
by hills that I took to be the outer line of the range we purposed
visiting; to the eastward the ground was undulating and woody; and
southward, the prospect was bounded by low stony elevations, or a low
range. The course of the creek was now north-east, in the direction of
two distant sand hills. We now ran along it for seven miles, under an
open box-tree forest, varying in breadth from a quarter of a mile to two
miles; the creek frequently changed from a broad channel to a smaller
one, but still having splendid sheets of water in it. At length, as we
pushed up, it became sandy, and the lofty gum-trees that had ornamented
it, gradually disappeared. Nevertheless we encamped on a beautiful spot.

The 1st of November broke bright and clear over us. Started at seven, the
poor horses scarcely able to draw one leg after the other, the Roan
having worn his hoof down the quick was exposed and raw, and he walked
with difficulty. At a mile and a half we ascended an eminence, and to the
eastward, saw a magnificent sheet of water to which we moved, and at five
miles reached a low stony range, bounding the creek to the north; having
ridden along a broad native path the whole of that distance, close to the
edge of the above mentioned water. There were large rocks in the middle
of it, and pelicans, one swan, several sea-gulls, and a number of
cormorants on its bosom, together with many ducks, but none would let us
within reach. We next ran on a bearing of 75 degrees, or nearly east,
along a large path, crossing numerous small branches of the creek, with
deep and sandy beds, and occasionally over small stony plains. At noon we
were at some distance from the creek, but then went towards it. The
gum-trees were no longer visible, but melaleucas, from fifteen to twenty
feet high, lined its banks like a copse of young birch. We now observed a
long but somewhat narrow sheet of water, to which we rode; our suspicions
as to its quality being roused by its colour, and the appearance of the
melaleuca. It proved, as we feared, to be slightly brackish, but not
undrinkable. Near the edge of the water, or rather about four or five
feet from it, there was a belt of fine weeds, between which and the shore
there were myriads of small fish of all sizes swimming, similar to those
we had captured to the westward, in the fourth or O'Halloran's Creek.
Here then was not only the clue as to how fish got into that isolated
pond, but a proof of the westerly fall of the interior, since there was
now no doubt whatever, but that the whole of the country Mr. Browne and I
had traversed, even to the great sand hills on this side the Stony
Desert, was laid under water, and by the overflow of this great creek
filled the several creeks, and inundated the several plains that we had
crossed. By so unexpected a fact, was this material point discovered. The
Roan, at this time, could hardly walk, and not knowing when or at what
distance we might again find water, or what kind of water it would be, I
stopped on reaching the upper end of this pool, but even there it had a
nasty taste, nor were any fish to be seen; a kind of weed covered the bed
of the creek, and it looked like an inlet of the sea.

I was exceedingly surprised that we had not seen more natives, and
momentarily expected to come on some large tribe, but did not, and what
was very singular, all the paths were to the right, and none on the
southern bank of the creek.

The weather continued intensely hot, and the flies swarmed in hundreds of
thousands. The sky was without a cloud, either by day or night, and I
could not but be apprehensive as to the consequences if rain should not
fall; it was impossible that the largest pools could stand the rapid
evaporation that was going on, but I did not deem it right to unburden my
mind, even to Mr. Stuart, at this particular juncture.

On the morning of the 2nd of November the horses strayed for the first
time, and delayed us for more than two hours, and we were after all
indebted to three natives for their recovery, who had seen them and
pointed out the direction in which they were. It really was a distressing
spectacle to see them brought up, but their troubles and sufferings were
not yet over. The Roan was hardly able to move along, and in pity I left
him behind to wander at large along the sunny banks of the finest
water-course we had discovered.

Starting at 10 a.m. we crossed the creek, and traversed a large sandy
plain, intersected by numerous native paths, that had now become as wide
as an ordinary gravel walk. From this plain we observed a thin white line
along the eastern horizon. The plain itself was also of white sand, and
had many stones upon it, similar in substance and shape to those on the
Stony Desert, but there was, not withstanding, some grass upon it. A
little above where we had slept, we struck a turn or angle of the creek
where there was a beautiful sheet of water, but of a deep indigo blue
colour. This was as salt as brine, insomuch that no animal could possibly
have lived in it, and we observed water trickling into it from many
springs on both sides. At four miles when we again struck the creek,
after having crossed the plain, the water was perfectly fresh and sweet
in a large pool close to which we passed. Here again there were several
sea-gulls sitting on the rocks in the water, and a good many cormorants
in the trees, yet I do not think there were any fish in this basin; I
have no other reason for so thinking, however, than that we never saw
any, either swimming in the water or rising to its surface in the
coolness of evening on the sheets of fresh water. There might, however,
have been fish of large size in the deep pools of this creek, although I
would observe that I had two reasons for believing otherwise. The first
was, that, the meshes of the nets used by the natives, of which we
examined several hanging in the trees, were very small, and that among
the fish bones at the natives' fires, we never saw any of a larger size
than those we had ourselves captured, and it was evident that at this
particular time, it was not the fishing season. I was led to think, that
the water in which we noticed so many swimming about, was sacred, and
that it is only when the creek overflows, that the fish are generally
distributed along its whole line, that the natives take them. Certainly,
to judge from the smooth and delicate appearance of the weeds round that
sheet of water the fish were not disturbed.

We had been riding for some time on the proper right {LEFT in published
text} bank of the creek, but I at length crossed to the right and altered
my course to E.S.E., but shortly afterwards ran due east across earthy
plains covered with grass in tufts and very soft, but observing that I had
got outside of the native tracks, and that there was no indication of the
creek in front, I turned to the S.E. and at five miles struck a small
sandy channel which I searched in vain for water; I therefore left it,
crossing many similar channels still on a S.E. course; but observing
that they all had level sandy beds, I gave up the hope of finding
water in them and turned to the south, as the horses were not in a
condition to suffer from want. At about two miles I ascended a sand
hill, but could not see any thing of the creek; it was now getting
late and two of the horses were hardly able to get along. Had we
halted then, there was not a tree or a bush to which we could have
tethered our animals, anxious too to get them to water I turned to
the west, and at a mile got on a native path, that ultimately led me
to the creek, and we pulled up at a small pond, where there was better
feed than we had any right to expect.

We had hardly arranged our bivouac, when we heard a most melancholy
howling over an earthen bank directly opposite to us, and saw seven black
heads slowly advancing towards us. I therefore sent Mr. Stuart to meet
the party and bring them up. The group consisted of a very old blind man,
led by a younger one, and five women. They all wept most bitterly, and
the women uttered low melancholy sounds, but we made them sit down and
managed to allay their fears. It is impossible to say how old the man
was, but his hair was white as snow, and he had one foot in the grave.

These poor creatures must have observed us coming, and being helpless,
had I suppose thought it better to come forward, for they had their huts
immediately on the other side of the bank over which they ventured. We
gave the old man a great coat, as the most useful present, and he seemed
delighted with it. I saw that it was hopeless to expect any information
from this timid party, so I made no objection to their leaving us after
staying for about half an hour. Our latitude here, by an altitude of
Jupiter, was 27 degrees 47 minutes S.; our longitude by account 141
degrees 51 minutes E.

The plains we had crossed during the day were very extensive, stretching
from the north-west, to the south-east, like an open sea. They were
thinly scattered over with box-trees, and comprised hundreds of thousands
of acres of flooded grassy land. It is worthy of remark that none of
these plains existed to the south of the creek, in which quarter the
country was very barren, neither were there any native paths. We were at
this time in too low a position to see any of the mountain ranges of
which I have spoken. As the old native with the boughs had told us, the
creek led us to the southward of east, and consequently away from them,
and I feared that his further information would prove correct, and that
we should soon arrive at its commencement.

The morning of the 3rd of November was as cloudy as the night of the 2nd
had been, during which it blew violently from the N.W., and a few
heat-drops fell, but without effect on the temperature. One of the horses
got bogged in attempting to drink, and Mack's illness made it nine before
we mounted and resumed our journey up the creek, on a N.N.E. course, but
it gradually came round to north. At six miles we crossed the small and
sandy bed of a creek coming from the stony plains to the south, and
beneath a tree, near two huts, observed a large oval stone. It was
embedded in the ground, and was evidently used by the natives for
pounding seeds. We now proceeded along a broad native path towards some
gum-trees, having stony undulating hills upon our right. Underneath the
trees there was a fine deep pool in the channel of the creek, which had
again assumed something of its original shape; but as we were in an
immense hollow or bowl, and the view was very limited, I branched off to
the hills, then not more than half a mile distant. From their summit the
country to the south and south-west appeared darkly covered with brush;
to the west, there were numerous stony undulations; northward and to the
east were immense grassy plains, with many creeks, all making for a
common centre upon them. In the near ground to the south-east, the
surface of the country was of fine white sand, partly covered with
salsolaceous plants, with small fragments of stone, and patches of more
grassy land. There was no fixed point on which to take a bearing, nor
could we see anything of the higher ranges, now to the north-west of us.

In returning to the creek, we observed a body of natives to our left.
They were walking in double file, and approaching us slowly. I therefore
pulled up, and sent Mr. Stuart forward on foot, following myself with his
horse. As he neared them the natives sat down, and he walked up and sat
down in front of them. The party consisted of two chiefs and fourteen
young men and boys. The former sat in front and the latter were ranged in
two rows behind. The two chiefs wept as usual, and in truth shed tears,
keeping their eyes on the ground; but Mr. Stuart, after the interview,
informed me that the party behind were laughing at them and sticking
their tongues in their cheeks. One of the chiefs was an exceedingly tall
man, since he could not have measured less than six feet three inches,
and was about 24 years of age. He was painted with red ochre, and his
body shone as if he had been polished with Warren's best blacking. His
companion was older and of shorter stature. We soon got on good terms
with them, and I made a present of a knife to each. They told us, as
intelligibly as it was possible for them to do, that we were going away
from water; that there was no more water to the eastward, and, excepting
in the creek, none anywhere but to the N.E. I had observed, indeed, that
the native paths had altogether ceased on the side of the creek on which
we then were (the south or left bank), and the chief pointed that fact
out to me, explaining that we should have to cross the creek at the head
of the water, under the trees, and get on a path that would lead us to
the N.E. On this I rose up and mounting my horse, riding quietly towards
it, descended into the bed of the creek, in which the natives had their
huts, but their women and children were not there. The two chiefs and the
other natives had followed, but, the former only crossed the creek and
accompanied us. We almost immediately struck on the native path which, as
my tall friend had informed me, led direct to the N.E.

I was not at first aware, what object our new friends had in following or
rather accompanying us; but, at about a mile and a half, we came to a
native hut at which there was an old man and his two lubras. The tall
young man introduced him to us as his father, in consequence of which I
dismounted, and shook hands with the old gentleman, and, as I had no
hatchet or knife to give him, I parted my blanket and gave him half of
it. We then pro ceeded on our journey, attended as before, and at a mile,
came on two huts, at which there were from twelve to fifteen natives.
Here again we were introduced by our long-legged friend, who kept pace
with our animals with ease, and after a short parley once more moved on,
but were again obliged to stop with another tribe, rather more numerous
than the last, who were encamped on a dirty little puddle of water that
was hardly drinkable; however, they very kindly asked us to stay and
sleep, an honour I begged to decline. Thus, in the space of less than
five miles, we were introduced to four different tribes, whose collective
numbers amounted to seventy-one. The huts of these natives were
constructed of boughs, and were of the usual form, excepting those of the
last tribe, which were open behind, forming elliptic arches of boughs,
and the effect was very pretty.

These good folks also asked us to stop, and I thought I saw an expression
of impatience on the countenance of my guide when I declined, and turned
my horse to move on. We had been riding on a sandy kind of bank, higher
than the flooded ground around us. The plains extended on either side to
the north and east, nor could we distinctly trace the creek beyond the
trees at the point we had crossed it, but there were a few gum-trees
separated by long intervals, that still slightly marked its course. When
we left the last tribe, we rode towards a sand hill about half a mile in
front, and had scarcely gone from the huts when our ambassadors, for in
such a light I suppose I must consider them, set off at a trot and
getting a-head of us disappeared over the sand hill. I was too well aware
of the customs of these people, not to anticipate that there was
something behind the scene, and I told Mr. Stuart that I felt satisfied
we had not yet seen the whole of the population of this creek; but I was
at a loss to conjecture why they should have squatted down at such muddy
puddles, when there were such magnificent sheets of water for them to
encamp upon, at no great distance; however, we reached the hill soon
after the natives had gone over it, and on gaining the summit were hailed
with a deafening shout by 3 or 400 natives, who were assembled in the
flat below. I do not know, that my desire to see the savage in his wild
state, was ever more gratified than on this occasion, for I had never
before come so suddenly upon so large a party. The scene was one of the
most animated description, and was rendered still more striking from the
circumstance of the native huts, at which there were a number of women
and children, occupying the whole crest of a long piece of rising ground
at the opposite side of the flat.

I checked my horse for a short time on the top of the sand hill, and
gazed on the assemblage of agitated figures below me, covering so small a
space that I could have enclosed the whole under a casting net, and then
quietly rode down into the flat, followed by Mr. Stuart and my men, to
one of whom I gave my horse when I dismounted, and then walked to the
natives, by whom Mr. Stuart and myself were immediately surrounded.

Had these people been of an unfriendly temper, we could not by any
possibility have escaped them, for our horses could not have broken into
a canter to save our lives or their own. We were therefore wholly in
their power, although happily for us perhaps, they were not aware of it;
but, so far from exhibiting any unkind feeling, they treated us with
genuine hospitality, and we might certainly have commanded whatever they
had. Several of them brought us large troughs of water, and when we had
taken a little, held them up for our horses to drink; an instance of
nerve that is very remarkable, for I am quite sure that no white man,
(having never seen or heard of a horse before, and with the natural
apprehension the first sight of such an animal would create,) would
deliberately have walked up to what must have appeared to them most
formidable brutes, and placing the troughs they carried against their
breast, have allowed the horses to drink, with their noses almost
touching them. They likewise offered us some roasted ducks, and some
cake. When we walked over to their camp, they pointed to a large new hut,
and told us we could sleep there, but I had noticed a little hillock on
which there were four box-trees, about fifty yards from the native
encampment, on which, foreseeing that we could go no farther, I had
already determined to remain, and on my intimating this to the natives
they appeared highly delighted; we accordingly went to the trees, and
unsaddling our animals turned them out to feed. When the natives saw us
quietly seated they came over, and brought a quantity of sticks for us to
make a fire, wood being extremely scarce.

The men of this tribe were, without exception, the finest of any I had
seen on the Australian Continent. Their bodies were not disfigured by any
scars, neither were their countenances by the loss of any teeth, nor were
they circumcised. They were a well-made race, with a sufficiency of
muscular development, and stood as erect as it was possible to do,
without the unseemly protrusion of stomach, so common among the
generality of natives. Of sixty-nine who I counted round me at one time,
I do not think there was one under my own height, 5 feet 10 3/4 inches,
but there were several upwards of 6 feet. The children were also very
fine, and I thought healthier and better grown than most I had seen, but
I observed here, as elsewhere amongst smaller tribes, that the female
children were more numerous than the males, why such should be the case,
it is difficult to say. Whilst, however, I am thus praising the personal
appearance of the men, I am sorry to say I observed but little
improvement in the fairer sex. They were the same half-starved unhappy
looking creatures whose condition I have so often pitied elsewhere.

These were a merry people and seemed highly delighted at our visit, and
if one or two of them were a little forward, I laid it to the account of
curiosity and a feeling of confidence in their own numbers. But a little
thing checked them, nor did they venture to touch our persons, much less
to put their hands into our pockets, as the natives appear to have done,
in the case of another explorer. It is a liberty I never allowed any
native to take, not only because I did not like it, but because I am sure
it must have the effect of lowering the white man in the estimation of
the savage, and diminishing those feelings of awe and inferiority, which
are the European's best security against ill treatment. The natives told
us, that there was no water to the eastward, and that if we went there we
should all die. They explained that the creek commenced on the plains, by
spreading out their fingers as the old man had done, to shew that many
small channels made a large one, pointing to the creek, and they said the
water was all gone to the place we had come from; meaning, to the lower
part of it. On asking them by signs, if the creek continued beyond the
plains, they shook their heads, and again put their extended hand on the
ground, pointing to the plain. They could give us no account of the
ranges to which I proposed going, any more than others we had asked. On
inquiring, if there was any water to the north-west a long discussion
took place, and it was ultimately decided that there was not. I could
understand, that several of them mentioned the names of places where they
supposed there might be water, but it was evidently the general opinion
that there was none. Neither did they appear to know of any large waters,
on which the natives had canoes, in confirmation of the old man's
actions. On this interesting and important point they were wholly
ignorant.

The smallness of the water-hole, on which these people depended, was
quite a matter of surprise to me, and I hardly liked to let the horses
drink at it, in consequence. At sunset all the natives left us (as is
their wont at that hour), and went to their own encampment; nor did one
approach us afterwards, but they sat up to a late hour at their own camp,
the women being employed beating the seed for cakes, between two stones,
and the noise they made was exactly like the working of a loom factory.
The whole encampment, with the long line of fires, looked exceedingly
pretty, and the dusky figures of the natives standing by them, or moving
from one hut to the other, had the effect of a fine scene in a play. At
11 all was still, and you would not have known that you were in such
close contiguity to so large an assemblage of people.

When I laid down, I revolved in my own mind what course I should pursue
in the morning. If the account of the natives was correct, it was clear
that my further progress eastward, was at an end. My horses, indeed, were
now reduced to such a state, that I foresaw my labours were drawing to a
close. Mack, too, was so ill, that he could hardly sit his animal, and
although I did not anticipate any thing serious in his case, anything
tending to embarrass was now felt by us. Mr. Stuart and Morgan held up
well, but I felt myself getting daily weaker and weaker. I found that I
could not rise into my saddle with the same facility, and that I lost
wind in going up a bank of only a few feet in height. I determined,
however, on mature consideration, to examine the plain, and to satisfy
myself before I should turn back, as to the fact of the creek commencing
upon it. Accordingly, in the morning, we saddled and loaded our horses,
but none of the natives came to us until we had mounted; when they
approached to take leave, and to persuade us not to go in the direction
we proposed, but to no purpose. The pool from which they drew their
supply of water, was in the centre of a broad shallow grassy channel,
that passed the point of the sand hill we had ascended, and ran up to the
northward and westward; we were, therefore, obliged to cross this
channel, and soon afterwards got on the plains. They were evidently
subject to flood, and were exceedingly soft and blistered; the grass upon
them grew in tufts, not close, so that in the distance, the plains
appeared better grassed than they really were. At length, we got on a
polygonum flat of great size, in the soil of which our horses absolutely
sunk up to the shoulder at every step. I never rode over such a piece of
ground in my life, but we managed to flounder through it, until at length
we got on the somewhat firmer but still heavy plain. It was very clear,
however, that our horses would not go a day's journey over such ground.
It looked exactly as I have described it--an immense concavity, with
numerous small channels running down from every part, and making for the
creek as a centre of union; nor, could we anywhere see a termination to
it. Had the plain been of less extent, I might have doubted the
information of the natives; but, looking at the boundless hollow around
me, I did not feel any surprise that such a creek even as the one up
which we had journeyed, should rise in it, and could easily picture to
myself the rush of water there must be to the centre of the plain, when
the ground has been saturated with moisture.

The day being far advanced, whilst we were yet pushing on, without any
apparent termination to the heavy ground over which we were riding, I
turned westward at 2 p.m., finding that the attainment of the object I
had in view, in attempting to cross the plain, was a physical
impossibility. We reached the water, at which the blind native visited
us, a little after sunset, and were as glad as our poor animals could
have been, when night closed in upon us, and our labours.

On the 5th, we passed the old man's camp, in going down the creek,
instead of crossing the plains as before, and halted at the junction of a
creek we had passed, that came from the north, and along the banks of
which I proposed turning towards the ranges. On the morning of the 6th we
kept the general course of this tributary, which ran through an
undulating country of rocks and sand. Its channel was exceedingly
capacious, and its banks were high and perpendicular, but everything
about it, was sand or gravel. Its bed was perfectly level, and its
appearance at once destroyed the hope of finding water in it.

The ground over which we rode, was, as I have stated, a mixture of gravel
and rocks, and our horses yielded under us at almost every step as they
trod on the sharp pointed fragments. At eight miles we reached the outer
line of hills, as they had appeared to us in the distance, and entered a
pass between two of them, of about a quarter of a mile in width. At this
confined point there were the remains and ravages of terrific floods. The
waters had reached from one side of the pass to the other, and the dead
trunks of trees and heaps of rubbish, were piled up against every bush.

There was not a blade of vegetation to be seen either on the low ground
or on the ranges, which were from 3 to 400 feet in height, and were
nothing more than vast accumulations of sand and rocks. At a mile, we
arrived at the termination of the pass, and found ourselves at the
entrance of a barren, sandy valley, with ranges in front of us, similar
to those we had already passed. I thought it advisable, therefore, to
ascend a hill to my left, somewhat higher than any near it, to ascertain,
if possible, the character of the northern interior. The task of
clambering to the top of it however, was, in my then reduced state,
greater than I expected, and I had to wait a few minutes before I could
look about me after gaining the summit. I could see nothing, after all,
to cheer me in the view that presented itself. To the northward was the
valley in which the creek rises, bounded all round by barren, stony
hills, like that on which I stood; and the summits of other similar hills
shewed themselves above the nearer line. To the east the apparently
interminable plains on which we had been, still met the horizon, nor was
anything to be seen beyond them. Westward the outer line of hills
continued backed by others, in the outlines of which we recognised the
peaks and forms of the apparently lofty chain we first saw when we
discovered the creek. Thus, then, it appeared, that I had been entirely
deceived in the character of these hills, and that it had been the effect
of refraction in those burning regions, which had given to these moderate
hills their mountain-like appearance.

Satisfied that my horses had not the strength to cross such a country,
and that in it I had not the slightest chance of procuring the necessary
sustenance for them, I turned back to Cooper's Creek, and then deemed it
prudent to travel quietly on towards the place at which we first struck
it, and had subsequently left our surplus stores.

In riding amongst some rocky ground, we shot a new and beautiful little
pigeon, with a long crest. The habits of this bird were very singular,
for it never perched on the trees, but on the highest and most exposed
rocks, in what must have been an intense heat; its flight was short like
that of a quail, and it ran in the same manner through the grass when
feeding in the evening. We reached our destination on the evening of the
8th, and were astonished to see how much the waters had shrunk from their
previous level. Such an instance of the rapid diminution of so large a
pool, made me doubt whether I should find any water in Strzelecki's Creek
to enable me to regain the Depot.

As we descended from the flats to cross over to our old berth, we found
it occupied by a party of natives, who were disposed to be rather
troublesome, especially one old fellow, whose conduct annoyed me
exceedingly. However, I very soon got rid of them; and after strolling
for a short time within sight of us, they all went up the creek; but I
could not help thinking, from the impertinent pertinacity of these
fellows, that they had discovered my magazine, and taken all the things,
more especially as they had been digging where our fire had been, so
that, if I had buried the stores there as intended, they would have been
taken.

As soon as the natives were out of sight, Mr. Stuart and I went to the
rhagodia bush for our things. As we approached, the branches appeared
just as we had left them; but on getting near, we saw a bag lying
outside, and I therefore concluded that the natives had carried off
everything. Still, when we came up to the bush, nothing but the bag
appeared to have been touched, all the other things were just as we left
them, and, on examining the bag, nothing was missing. Concluding,
therefore, that the natives had really discovered my store, but had been
too honest to rob us, I returned to the creek in better humour with them;
but, a sudden thought occurring to Mr. Stuart, that as there was an oil
lamp in the bag, a native dog might have smelt and dragged it out of its
place, we returned to the bush, to see if there were any impressions of
naked feet round about it, but with the exception of our own, there were
no tracks save those of a native dog. I was consequently obliged to give
Mr. Stuart credit for his surmise, and felt somewhat mortified that the
favourable impression I had received as to the honesty of the natives had
thus been destroyed. They had gone up the creek on seeing that I was
displeased, and we saw nothing more of them during the afternoon; but on
the following morning they came to see us, and as they behaved well, I
gave them a powder canister, a little box, and some other trifles; for
after all there was only one old fellow who had been unruly, and he now
shewed as much impatience with his companions as he had done with us, and
I therefore set his manner down to the score of petulance.

At 10 a.m. on the 9th we prepared to move over to the branch creek, as I
really required rest and quiet, and knew very well that as long as I
remained where I was, we should be troubled by our sable friends, who,
being sixteen in number, would require being well looked after. Before we
finally left the neighbourhood, however, where our hopes had so often
been raised and depressed, I gave the name of Cooper's Creek to the fine
watercourse we had so anxiously traced, as a proof of my great respect
for Mr. Cooper, the Judge of South Australia. I am not conversant in the
language of praise, but thus much will I venture to say, that whether in
his public or private capacity, Mr. Cooper was equally entitled to this
record of my feelings towards him. I would gladly have laid this creek
down as a river, but as it had no current I did not feel myself justified
in so doing. Had it been nearer the located districts of South Australia,
its discovery would have been a matter of some importance. As it is we
know not what changes or speculations may lead the white man to its
banks. Purposes of utility were amongst the first objects I had in view
in my pursuit of geographical discovery; nor do I think that any country,
however barren, can be explored without the attainment of some good end.
Circumstances may yet arise to give a value to my recent labours, and my
name may be remembered by after generations in Australia, as the first
who tried to penetrate to its centre. If I failed in that great object, I
have one consolation in the retrospect of my past services. My path
amongst savage tribes has been a bloodless one, not but that I have often
been placed in situations of risk and danger, when I might have been
justified in shedding blood, but I trust I have ever made allowances for
human timidity, and respected the customs and prejudices of the rudest
people. I hope, indeed, that in this my last expedition, I have not done
discredit to the good opinion Sir C. Napier, an officer I knew not, was
pleased to entertain of me. Most assuredly in my intercourse with the
savage, I have endeavoured to elevate the character of the white man.
Justice and humanity have been my guides, but while I have the
consolation to know that no European will follow my track into the Desert
without experiencing kindness from its tenants, I have to regret that the
progress of civilized man into an uncivilized region, is almost
invariably attended with misfortune to its original inhabitants.

I struck Cooper's Creek in lat. 27 degrees 44 minutes, and in long. 140
degrees 22 minutes, and traced it upwards to lat. 27 degrees 56 minutes,
and long. 142 degrees 0 minutes. There can be no doubt but that it would
support a number of cattle upon its banks, but its agricultural
capabilities appear to me doubtful, for the region in which it lies is
subject evidently to variations of temperature and seasons that must, I
should say, be inimical to cereal productions; nevertheless I should
suppose its soil would yield sufficient to support any population that
might settle on it.


CHAPTER III.


CONTINUED DROUGHT--TERRIFIC EFFECT OF HOT WIND--THERMOMETER
BURSTS--DEATH OF POOR BAWLEY--FIND THE STOCKADE DESERTED--LEAVE FORT GREY
FOR THE DEPOT--DIFFERENCE OF SEASONS--MIGRATION OF BIRDS--HOT
WINDS--EMBARRASSING POSITION--MR. BROWNE STARTS FOR FLOOD'S CREEK--THREE
BULLOCKS SHOT--COMMENCEMENT OF THE RETREAT--ARRIVAL AT FLOOD'S
CREEK--STATE OF VEGETATION--EFFECTS OF SCURVY--ARRIVE AT ROCKY
GLEN--COMPARISON OF NATIVE TRIBES--HALT AT CARNAPAGA--ARRIVAL AT
CAWNDILLA--REMOVAL TO THE DARLING--LEAVE THE DARLING--STATE OF THE
RIVER--OPPRESSIVE HEAT--VISITED BY NADBUCK--ARRIVAL AT MOORUNDI.


By half past eleven of the 9th November we had again got quietly settled,
and I then found leisure to make such arrangements as might suggest
themselves for our further retreat. To insure the safety of the animals
as much as possible, I determined to leave all my spare provisions and
weightier stores behind, and during the afternoon we were engaged making
the loads as compact and as light as we could.

It was not, however, the fear of the water in Strzelecki's Creck having
dried up, that was at this moment the only cause of anxiety to me, for I
thought it more than probable that Mr. Browne had been obliged to retreat
from Fort Grey, in which case I should still have a journey before me to
the old Depot of 170 miles or more, under privations, to the horses at
least, of no ordinary character; and I had great doubts as to the
practicability of our final retreat upon the Darling. The drought had now
continued so long, and the heat been so severe, that I apprehended we
might be obliged to remain another summer in these fearful solitudes. The
weather was terrifically hot, and appeared to have set in unusually
early.

Under such circumstances, and with so many causes to render my mind
anxious, the reader will believe I did not sleep much. The men were as
restless as myself, so that we commenced our journey before the sun had
risen on the morning of the 10th of November, to give the horses time to
take their journey leisurely. Slowly we retraced our steps, nor did I
stop for a moment until we had got to within five miles of our
destination, at which distance we saw a single native running after us,
and taking it into my head that he might be a messenger from Mr. Browne,
I pulled up to wait for him, but curiosity alone had induced him to come
forward. When he got to within a hundred yards, he stopped and approached
no nearer. This little delay made it after sunset before we reached the
upper pool (not the one Mr. Browne and I had discovered), and were
relieved from present anxiety by finding a thick puddle still remaining
in it, so that I halted for the night. Slommy, Bawley, and the colt had
hard work to keep up with the other horses, and it really grieved me to
see them so reduced. My own horse was even now beginning to give way, but
I had carried a great load upon him.

As we approached the water, three ducks flew up and went off down the
creek southwards, so I was cheered all night by the hope that water still
remained at the lower pool, and that we should be in time to benefit by
it. On the 11th, therefore, early we pushed on, as I intended to stop and
breakfast at that place before I started for the Depot. We had scarcely
got there, however, when the wind, which had been blowing all the morning
hot from the N.E., increased to a heavy gale, and I shall never forget
its withering effect. I sought shelter behind a large gum-tree, but the
blasts of heat were so terrific, that I wondered the very grass did not
take fire. This really was nothing ideal: every thing, both animate and
inanimate, gave way before it; the horses stood with their backs to the
wind, and their noses to the ground, without the muscular strength to
raise their heads; the birds were mute, and the leaves of the trees,
under which we were sitting, fell like a snow shower around us. At noon I
took a thermometer, graduated to 127 degrees, out of my box, and observed
that the mercury was up to 125 degrees. Thinking that it had been unduly
influenced, I put it in the fork of a tree close to me, sheltered alike
from the wind and the sun. In this position I went to examine it about an
hour afterwards, when I found that the mercury had risen to the top of
the instrument, and that its further expansion had burst the bulb, a
circumstance that I believe no traveller has ever before had to record. I
cannot find language to convey to the reader's mind an idea of the
intense and oppressive nature of the heat that prevailed. We had reached
our destination however before the worst of the hot wind set in; but all
the water that now remained in the once broad and capacious pool to which
I have had such frequent occasion to call the attention of the reader,
was a shining patch of mud nearly in the centre. We were obliged to dig a
trench for the water to filter into during the night, and by this means
obtained a scanty supply for our horses and ourselves.

About sunset the wind shifted to the west, a cloud passed over us, and we
had heavy thunder; but a few drops of rain only fell. They partially
cooled the temperature, and the night was less oppressive than the day
had been. We had now a journey of 86 miles before us: to its results I
looked with great anxiety and doubt. I took every precaution to fortify
the horses, and again reduced the loads, keeping barely a supply of flour
for a day or two. Before dawn we were up, and drained the last drop of
water, if so it could be called, out of the little trench we had made,
and reserving a gallon for the first horse that should fall, divided the
residue among them. Just as the morning was breaking, we left the creek,
and travelled for 36 miles. I then halted until the moon should rise, and
was glad to see that the horses stood it well. At seven we resumed the
journey, and got on tolerably well until midnight, when poor Bawley, my
favourite horse, fell; but we got him up again, and abandoning his
saddle, proceeded onwards. At a mile, however, he again fell, when I
stopped, and the water revived him. I now hoped he would struggle on, but
in about an hour he again fell. I was exceedingly fond of this poor
animal, and intended to have purchased him at the sale of the remnants of
the expedition, as a present to my wife. We sat down and lit a fire by
him, but he seemed fairly worn out. I then determined to ride on to the
Depot, and if Mr. Browne should still be there, to send a dray with water
to the relief of the men. I told them, therefore, to come slowly on, and
with Mr. Stuart pushed for the camp. We reached the plain just as the sun
was descending, without having dismounted from our horses for more than
fifteen hours, and as we rode down the embankment into it, looked around
for the cattle, but none were to be seen. We looked towards the little
sandy mound on which the tents had stood, but no white object there met
our eye; we rode slowly up to the stockade, and found it silent and
deserted. I was quite sure that Mr. Browne had had urgent reasons for
retiring. I had indeed anticipated the measure: I hardly hoped to find
him at the Fort, and had given him instructions on the subject of his
removal, yet a sickening feeling came over me when I saw that he was
really gone; not on my own account, for, with the bitter feelings of
disappointment with which I was returning home, I could calmly have laid
my head on that desert, never to raise it again. The feeling was natural,
and had no mixture whatever of reproach towards my excellent companion.

We dismounted and led our horses down to water before I went to the tree
under which I had directed Mr. Browne to deposit a letter for me. A good
deal of water still remained in the channel, but nevertheless a large pit
had been dug in it as I had desired. I did not drink, nor did Mr. Stuart,
the surface of the water was quite green, and the water itself was of a
red colour, but I believe we were both thinking of any thing but
ourselves at that moment. As soon as we had unsaddled the horses, we went
to the tree and dug up the bottle into which, as agreed upon, Mr. Browne
had put a letter; informing me that he had been most reluctantly obliged
to retreat; the water at the Depot having turned putrid, and seriously
disagreed with the men; he said that he should fall back on the old Depot
along the same line on which we had advanced, and expressed his fears
that the water in Strzelecki's Creek would have dried, on the permanence
of which he knew our safety depended. Under present circumstances the
fate of poor Bawley, if not of more of our horses, was sealed. Mr. Stuart
and I sat down by the stockade, and as night closed in lit a fire to
guide Morgan and Mack on their approach to the plain. They came up about
2 p.m. having left Bawley on a little stony plain, and the Colt on the
sand ridges nearer to us, and in the confusion and darkness had left all
the provisions behind; it therefore became necessary to send for some, as
we had not had anything for many hours. The horses Morgan and Mack had
ridden were too knocked up for further work, but I sent the latter on my
own horse with a leather bottle that had been left behind by the party,
full of water for poor Bawley, if he should still find him alive. Mack
returned late in the afternoon, having passed the Colt on his way to the
Depot, towards which he dragged himself with difficulty, but Bawley was
beyond recovery; he gave the poor animal the water, however, for he was a
humane man, and then left him to die.

We had remained during the day under a scorching heat, but could hardly
venture to drink the water of the creek without first purifying it by
boiling, and as we had no vessel until Mack should come up we had to wait
patiently for his arrival at 7 p.m. About 9 we had a damper baked, and
broke our fast for the first time for more than two days.

While sitting under a tree in the forenoon Mr. Stuart had observed a crow
pitch in the little garden we had made, but which never benefited us,
since the sun burnt up every plant the moment it appeared above the
ground. This bird scratched for a short time in one of the soft beds, and
then flew away with something in his bill. On going to the spot Mr.
Stuart scraped up a piece of bacon and some suet, which the dogs of
course had buried. These choice morsels were washed and cooked, and Mr.
Stuart brought me a small piece of bacon, certainly not larger than a
dollar, which he assured me had been cut out of the centre and was
perfectly clean. I had not tasted the bacon since February, nor did I now
feel any desire to do so, but I ate it because I thought I really wanted
it in the weak state in which I was.

Perhaps a physician would laugh at me for ascribing the pains I felt the
next morning to so trifling a cause, but I was attacked with pains at the
bottom of my heels and in my back. Although lying down I felt as if I was
standing balanced on stones; these pains increased during the day,
insomuch that I anticipated some more violent attack, and determined on
getting to the old Depot as soon as possible; but as the horses had not
had sufficient rest, I put off my journey to 5 p.m. on the following day,
when I left Fort Grey with Mr. Stuart, directing Mack and Morgan to
follow at the same hour on the following day, and promising that I would
send a dray with water to meet them. I rode all that night until 3 p.m.
of the 17th, when we reached the tents, which Mr. Browne had pitched
about two miles below the spot we had formerly occupied. If I except two
or three occasions on which I was obliged to dismount to rest my back for
a few minutes we rode without stopping, and might truly be said to have
been twenty hours on horseback.

Sincere I believe was the joy of Mr. Browne, and indeed of all hands, at
seeing us return, for they had taken it for granted that our retreat
would have been cut off. I too was gratified to find that Mr. Brown was
better, and to learn that everything had gone on well. Davenport had
recently been taken ill, but the other men had recovered on their removal
from the cause of their malady.

When I dismounted I had nearly fallen forward. Thinking that one of the
kangaroo dogs in his greeting had pushed me between the legs, I turned
round to give him a slap, but no dog was there, and I soon found out that
what I had felt was nothing more than strong muscular action brought on
by hard riding.

As I had promised I sent Jones with a dray load of water to meet Morgan
and Mack, who came up on the 19th with the rest of the horses.

Mr. Browne informed me that the natives had frequently visited the camp
during my absence. He had given them to understand that we were going
over the hills again, on which they told him that if he did not make
haste all the water would be gone. It now behoved us therefore to effect
our retreat upon the Darling with all expedition. Our situation was very
critical, for the effects of the drought were more visible now than
before the July rain,--no more indeed had since fallen, and the water in
the Depot creek was so much reduced that we had good reason to fear that
none remained anywhere else. On the 18th I sent Flood to a small creek,
between us and the Pine forest, but he returned on the following day with
information that it had long been dry. Thus then were my fears verified,
and our retreat to the Darling apparently cut off. About this time too
the very elements, against which we had so long been contending, seemed
to unite their energies to render our stay in that dreadful region still
more intolerable. The heat was greater than that of the previous summer;
the thermometer ranging between 110 degrees and 123 degrees every day;
the wind blowing heavily from N.E. to E.S.E. filled the air with
impalpable red dust, giving the sun the most foreboding and lurid
appearance as we looked upon him. The ground was so heated that our
matches falling on it, ignited; and, having occasion to make a night
signal, I found the whole of our rockets had been rendered useless, as on
being lit they exploded at once without rising from the ground.

I had occasion--in the first volume of this work--to remark that I
should at a future period have to make some observations on the state of
the vegetation at this particular place; there being about a month or six
weeks difference between the periods of the year when we first arrived
at, and subsequently returned to it. When we first arrived on the 27th of
January, 1845, the cereal grasses had ripened their seed, and the larger
shrubs were fast maturing their fruit; the trees were full of birds, and
the plains were covered with pigeons--having nests under every bush. At
the close of November of the same year--that is to say six weeks
earlier--not an herb had sprung from the ground, not a bud had swelled,
and, where the season before the feathered tribes had swarmed in hundreds
on the creek, scarcely a bird was now to be seen. Our cattle wandered
about in search for food, and the silence of the grave reigned around us
day and night.

Was it instinct that warned the feathered races to shun a region in which
the ordinary course of nature had been arrested, and over which the wrath
of the Omnipotent appeared to hang? Or was it that a more genial season
in the country to which they migrate, rendered their desertion of it at
the usual period unnecessary? Most sincerely do I hope that the latter
was the case, and that a successful destiny will await the bold and
ardent traveller [Note 10. Dr. Leichhardt had started to cross the
Continent some time before.] who is now crossing those regions.

On the 20th I sent Flood down the creek to ascertain if water remained in
it or the farther holes mentioned by the natives, thinking that in such a
case we might work our way to the eastward; but on the 23rd he returned
without having seen a drop of water from the moment he left us. The deep
and narrow channel I had so frequently visited, and which I had hoped
might still contain water, had long been dry, and thus was our retreat
cut off in that quarter also. There was apparently no hope for us--its
last spark had been extinguished by this last disappointment; but the
idea of a detention in that horrid desert was worse than death itself.

On the morning of the 22nd the sky was cloudy and the sun obscure, and
there was every appearance of rain. The wind was somewhat to the south of
west, the clouds came up from the north, and at ten a few drops fell; but
before noon the sky was clear, and a strong and hot wind was blowing from
the west: the dust was flying in clouds around us, and the flies were
insupportable.

At this time Mr. Stuart was taken ill with pains similar to my own, and
Davenport had an attack of dysentery.

On the 23rd it blew a fierce gale and a hot wind from west by north,
which rendered us still more uncomfortable: nothing indeed could be done
without risk in such a temperature, and such a climate. The fearful
position in which we were placed, caused me great uneasiness; the men
began to sicken, and I felt assured that if we remained much longer, the
most serious consequences might be apprehended.

On the 24th, Mr. Browne went with Flood to examine a stony creek about 16
miles to the south, and on our way homewards. We had little hope that he
would find any water in it, but if he did, a plan had suggested itself,
by which we trusted to effect our escape. It being impossible to stand
the outer heat, the men were obliged to take whatever things wanted
repair, to our underground room, and I was happy to learn from Mr.
Stuart, who I sent up to superintend them, that the natives had not in
the least disturbed Mr. Poole's grave.

On the 25th Mr. Browne returned, and returned unsuccessful: he could find
no water any where, and told me it was fearful to ride down the creeks
and to witness their present state.

We were now aware that there could be no water nearer to us than 118
miles, i. e. at Flood's Creek, and even there it was doubtful if water
any longer remained. To have moved the party on the chance of finding it
would have been madness: the weather was so foreboding, the heat so
excessive, and the horses so weak, that I did not dare to trust them on
such a journey, or to risk the life of any man in such an undertaking. I
was myself laid up, a helpless being, for I had gradually sunk under the
attack of scurvy which had so long hung upon me. The day after I arrived
in camp I was unable to walk: in a day or two more, my muscles became
rigid, my limbs contracted, and I was unable to stir; gradually also my
skin blackened, the least movement put me to torture, and I was reduced
to a state of perfect prostration. Thus stricken down, when my example
and energies were so much required for the welfare and safety of others,
I found the value of Mr. Browne's services and counsel. He had already
volunteered to go to Flood's Creek to ascertain if water was still to be
procured in it, but I had not felt justified in availing myself of his
offer. My mind, however, dwelling on the critical posture of our affairs,
and knowing and feeling as I did the value of time, and that the burning
sun would lick up any shallow pool that might be left exposed, and that
three or four days might determine our captivity or our release, I sent
for Mr. Browne, to consult with him as to the best course to be adopted
in the trying situation in which we were placed, and a plan at length
occurred by which I hoped he might venture on the journey to Flood's
Creek without risk. This plan was to shoot one of the bullocks, and to
fill his hide with water. We determined on sending this in a dray, a day
in advance, to enable the bullock driver to get as far as possible on the
road, we then arranged that Mr. Browne should take the light cart, with
36 gallons of water, and one horse only; that on reaching the dray, he
should give his horse as much water as he would drink from the skin,
leaving that in the cart untouched until he should arrive at the
termination of his second day's journey, when I proposed he should give
his horse half the water, and leaving the rest until the period of his
return, ride the remainder of the distance he had to go. I saw little
risk in this plan, and we accordingly acted upon it immediately: the hide
was prepared, and answered well, since it easily contained 150 gallons of
water. Jones proceeded on the morning of the 27th, and on the 28th Mr.
Browne left me on this anxious and to us important journey, accompanied
by Flood. We calculated on his return on the eighth day, and the reader
will judge how anxiously those days passed. On the day Mr. Browne left
me, Jones returned, after having deposited the skin at the distance of 32
miles.

On the eighth day from his departure, every eye but my own was turned to
the point at which they had seen him disappear. About 3 p.m., one of the
men came to inform me that Mr. Browne was crossing the creek, the camp
being on its left bank, and in a few minutes afterwards he entered my
tent. "Well, Browne," said I, "what news? Is it to be good or bad?"
"There is still water in the creek," said he, "but that is all I can say.
What there is is as black as ink, and we must make haste, for in a week
it will be gone." Here then the door was still open,--a way to escape
still practicable, and thankful we both felt to that Power which had
directed our steps back again ere it was finally closed upon us; but even
now we had no time to lose: to have taken the cattle without any prospect
of relief until they should arrive at Flood's Creek, would have been to
sacrifice almost the whole of them, and to reduce the expedition to a
condition such as I did not desire. The necessary steps to be taken, in
the event of Mr. Browne's bringing back good tidings, had engaged my
attention during his absence, and with his assistance, that on which I
had determined was immediately put into execution. I directed three more
bullocks to be shot, and their skins prepared; and calculated that by
abandoning the boat and our heavier stores, we might carry a supply of
water on the drays, sufficient for the use of the remaining animals on
the way. Three bullocks were accordingly killed, and the skins stripped
over them from the neck downwards, so that the opening might be as small
as possible.

The boat was launched upon the creek, which I had vainly hoped would have
ploughed the waters of a central sea. We abandoned our bacon and heavier
stores, the drays were put into order, their wheels wedged up, their
axles greased, and on the 6th of December, at 5 p.m., we commenced our
retreat, having a distance of 270 miles to travel to the Darling, and
under circumstances which made it extremely uncertain how we should
terminate the journey, since we did not expect to find any water between
Flood's Creek and the Rocky Glen, or between the Rocky Glen and the
Darling itself. The three or four days preceding our departure had been
quite overpowering, neither did there seem to be a likelihood of any
abatement of the heat when we left the Depot. At 5 a.m. of the morning of
the 7th, having travelled all night, I halted to rest the men and
animals. We had then the mortification to find one of the skins was
defective, and let out the water at an hundred different pores. I
directed the water that remained in the skin to be given to the stock
rather than that it should be lost; but both horses and bullocks refused
it. During the first part of the night it was very oppressive; but about
an hour after midnight the wind shifted to the south, and it became
cooler. We resumed our journey at 7, and did not again halt until half
past 12 p.m. of the 8th, having then gained the Muddy Lagoon, at which
the reader will recollect we stopped for a short time after breaking
through the Pine forest about the same period the year before; but as
there was nothing for the animals to eat, I took them across the creek
and put them upon an acre or two of green feed along its banks. I
observed that the further we advanced southwards, the more forward did
vegetation appear; Mr. Browne made the same remark to me on his return
from Flood's Creek, where he found the grasses ripe, whereas at the Depot
Creek the ground was still perfectly bare.

About 3 a.m. we had a good deal of thunder and lightning, and at 7 the
wind shifted a point or two to the eastward of south. Notwithstanding the
quarter from which the wind blew, heavy clouds came up from the west, and
about 11 we had a misty rain with heavy thunder and lightning. The rain
was too slight to leave any puddles, but it moistened the dry grass,
which the animals greedily devoured.

On leaving the creek we kept for about eight miles on our old track, but
at that distance turned due south for two hills, the position of which
Mr. Browne had ascertained on his recent journey, and by taking this
judicious course avoided the Pine ridges altogether. We were, however,
obliged to halt, as the moon set, in the midst of an open brush, but
started again at day-break on the morning of the 9th.

Before we left the creek, near the Muddy Lagoon, all the horses and more
than one half of the bullocks had drank plentifully of the water in the
hides, in consequence of which they got on tolerably well. On resuming
our journey we soon cleared the remainder of the scrub, and got into a
more open sandy country, but the travelling on it was good; and at 20
minutes to two we halted within a mile of the hills towards which we had
been moving, then about 26 miles from Flood's Creek. Being in great pain
I left Mr. Browne at half-past three p.m., and reached our destination at
midnight. Two hours afterwards Mr. Browne came up with the rest of the
party. So we completed our first stage without the loss of a single
animal; but had it not been for the slight rain that fell on the morning
of the 8th, and the subsequent change of temperature, none of our
bullocks could have survived the journey thus far.

As it had occupied three nights and two days, it became necessary to give
both men and animals a day of rest. I could not however be so indulgent
to Mr. Browne or to Flood. The next place at which we hoped to find
water, was at the Rocky Gully at the foot of the ranges, distant 49
miles, if water failed us there, neither had Mr. Browne or Flood any
reasonable expectation that we should procure any until we gained the
Darling itself, then distant 150 miles. Mr. Browne was himself suffering
severely from attacks of scurvy, but he continued with unwearied zeal to
supply my place. On the 11th, at one p.m., he left me for the hills, but
before he started we arranged that he should return and meet me half way
whether he succeeded in finding water or not, and in order to ensure this
I proposed leaving the Creek on the 13th.

As Mr. Browne had informed me, we found the vegetation much more forward
at this place than we had hitherto seen it, still many of the grasses
were invisible, not having yet sprung up, but there was a solitary stool
of wheat that had been accidentally dropped by us and had taken root,
which had 13 fine heads upon it quite ripe. These Mr. Browne gathered,
and, agreeably to my wishes, scattered the seed about in places where he
thought it would be most likely to grow. There was also a single stool of
oats but it was not so fine as the wheat.

On the 12th, at 2 p.m., Flood suddenly returned, bringing information
that Mr. Browne had unexpectedly found water in the lower part of a
little rocky creek in our way, distant 18 miles, and that he was gone on
to the Rocky Gully. On receiving this intelligence I ordered the bullocks
to be yoked up, and we started for the creek at which we had left the
cart on our outward journey, at 7 p.m. It was blowing heavily at the time
from the S.W. and large clouds passed over us, but the sky cleared as the
wind fell at midnight. We reached our destination at 3 a.m. of the 13th.
Here I remained until half-past six when we again started and gained the
Horse-cart Creek at half-past twelve. Here, as at Flood's Creek, we found
a large plant of mustard and some barley in ear and ripe, where few of
the native grasses had more than made their appearance out of the ground.

Stopping to rest the animals for half an hour, I went myself to the
little branch creek, on which the reader will recollect our cattle
depended when we were last in this neighbourhood, and where I had
arranged to meet Mr. Browne, who arrived there about half an hour before
me. He had again been successful in finding a large supply of water in
the Rocky Gully, and thought that rain must have fallen on the hills.

At 4 the teams again started, but I was too unwell to accompany them
immediately. I had in truth lost the use of my limbs, and from the time
of our leaving the Depot had been lifted in and out of the cart; constant
jolting therefore had greatly fatigued me, and I found it necessary to
stop here for a short time after the departure of the drays. At half-past
six however, we followed and overtook the party about five miles from the
gully, where we halted at 3 A M. of the 14th.

Mr. Browne had found a large party of natives at the water, who had been
very kind to him, and many of them still remained when we came up. He had
observed some of them eating a small acid berry, and had procured a
quantity for me in the hope that they would do me good, and while we
remained at this place he good-naturedly went into the hills and gathered
me a large tureen full, and to the benefit I derived from these berries I
attribute my more speedy recovery from the malady under which I was
suffering. We were now 116 miles from the Darling, and although there was
no longer any doubt of our eventually reaching it, the condition in which
we should do so, depended on our finding water in the Coonbaralba pass,
from which we were distant 49 miles. In the evening I sent Flood on ahead
to look for water, with orders to return if he succeeded in his search.
In consequence of the kindness of the natives to Mr. Browne I made them
some presents and gave them a sheep, which they appeared to relish
greatly. They were good-looking blacks and in good condition, speaking
the language of the Darling natives.

It was late on the 15th before we ascended the ranges; but, as I had only
a limited distance to go it was not of much consequence, more especially
as I purposed halting at the little spring, in the upper part of the
Rocky Gully, at which Morgan and I stopped on a former occasion, when Mr.
Browne and Flood were looking for a place by which we could descend from
the hills to the plains of the desert interior. Mr. Browne took the short
cut up the gully with the sheep; but when I reached the glen he had not
arrived, and as he did not make his appearance for some time I became
anxious, and sent after him, but he had only been delayed by the
difficulty of the road, along which he described the scenery as very bold
and picturesque.

We had not up to this time experienced the same degree of heat that
prevailed at the Depot. The temperature since the thunder on the 8th had
been comparatively mild, and on ascending the hills we felt a sensible
difference. I attributed it, however, to our elevated position, for we
had on our way up the country experienced the nature of the climate of
the Darling. We could not decidedly ascertain the fact from the natives,
but as they were at this place in considerable numbers, both Mr. Browne
and myself concluded that the river had not been flooded this year;
neither had the season been the same as that of the former year, for it
will be remembered that at the period the party crossed the ranges, a
great deal of rain had fallen, in so much that the wheels of the drays
sunk deep into the ground; but now they hardly left an impression, as
they moved over it; and although more rain might have fallen on the hills
than in the depressed region beyond them, it was clear that none had
fallen for a considerable length of time in this neighbourhood.

Mr. Browne saw five or six rock Wallabies as he was coming up the glen,
and said they were beautiful little animals. He remarked that they
bounded up the bold cliffs near him with astonishing strength and
activity; in some places there were basaltic columns, resting on granite,
200 and 300 feet high.

Flood returned at 4 a.m. having found water, though not of the best
description, in the pass. His horse had, however, drank plentifully of
it, so that I determined on pushing from that point to Cawndilla, hoping
by good management to secure the cattle reaching it in safety.

Considering the distance we had to go we started late, but the bullocks
had strayed down the creek, and it took some time to drive them over such
rugged ground.

I preceded the party in the cart, leaving Mr. Browne in charge of the
drays, and crossing the ranges descended into the pass two hours after
sunset. We passed a brackish pool of water, and stopped at a small well,
at which there were two native women. The party came up about two hours
after midnight, the men and animals being greatly fatigued, so that it
was absolutely necessary to remain stationary for a day. Our retreat had
been a most harassing one, but it admitted of no hesitation. Though we
had thus far, under the blessing of Providence, brought every thing in
safety, and had now only one more effort to make, Cawndilla was still
distant 69 miles, between which and our position there was not a drop of
water.

One of the women we found here, came and slept at our fire, and managed
to roll herself up in Mr. Browne's blanket, who, waking from cold, found
that his fair companion had uncovered him, and appropriated the blanket
to her own use. The natives suffer exceedingly from cold, and are
perfectly paralysed by it, for they are not provided with any covering,
neither are their huts of a solidity or construction such as to protect
them from its effects. About noon a large tribe joined us from the S.W.
and we had a fine opportunity to form a judgment of them, when contrasted
with the natives of the Desert from which we had come. Robust, active,
and full of life, these hill natives were every way superior to the
miserable half-starved beings we had left behind, if I except the natives
of Cooper's Creek. During the day they kept falling in upon us, and in
the afternoon mustered more than one hundred strong, in men, women, and
children. As they were very quiet and unobtrusive I gave them a couple of
sheep, with which they were highly delighted, and in return, they
overwhelmed our camp at night with their women.

I mentioned in a former part of this work, that Mr. Browne and I had
succeeded in capturing a Dipus, when journeying to the N.W. We had
subsequently taken another, and had kept them both for some time, but one
died, and the other springing out of its box was killed by the dogs. From
the habits of this animal I did not expect to succeed in taking it home,
but I had every hope that some Jerboas, of which we had five, would
outlive the journey, for they thrived well on the food we gave them. I
was, however, quite provoked at this place to find that two of them had
died from the carelessness of the men throwing the tarpauline over the
box, and so smothering them. The survivors were all but dead when looked
at, and I feared we should lose them also.

As the morning of the 19th dawned, and distant objects became visible,
the plains of the Darling gradually spread out before us. We commenced
our journey to Cawndilla at half-past 7, and travelled down the creek
until 2 p.m., when we halted for two hours during the heat of the day at
Carnapaga. At 4 we resumed our journey, and again stopped for an hour on
the little sand hill at the lower part of the creek, to enable the men to
take some refreshment. At quarter-past 8 we turned from the creek and
travelled all night by the light of a lamp, and at daylight were 18 miles
from Cawndilla. We had kept upon our former tracks, on which the cattle
had moved rapidly along, but they now began to flag. Mr. Browne was in
front of the party with Mr. Stuart, but he suddenly returned, and coming
up to my cart gave me a letter he had found nailed up to a tree by Mr.
Piesse. This letter was to inform me of his arrival on the banks of the
Williorara on the 6th of the month, of his having been twice on the road
in the hope of seeing us, and sent natives to procure intelligence of us,
who returned in so exhausted a state, that he had given up all
expectation of our being able to cross the hills. He stated that we
should find a barrel of water a little further on, together with a letter
from head quarters, but had retained all other letters until he should
see me; nevertheless, he had the gratification to tell me that he had
seen Mrs. Sturt the day before he left Adelaide, and that she was well.
About a mile further on, we found the barrel of water, and relieved our
suffering horses, and thus benefited by the prudent exertions of Mr.
Piesse. Nothing, indeed, appeared to have escaped the anxious solicitude
of that zealous officer to relieve our wants.

I reached Cawndilla at 9 a.m. and stopped on the banks of the Williorara
at the dregs of a water-hole, about six inches deep, it being all that
remained in the creek, but I was too much fatigued to push on to the
Darling, a further distance of seven miles, where Mr. Piesse then was.
The drays came up a little after noon; the cattle almost frantic from the
want of water. It was with difficulty the men unyoked them, and the
moment they were loose they plunged headlong into the creek and drank
greedily of the putrid water that remained.

Amongst the letters I now received was one from the Colonial Secretary,
informing me, that supplies had been forwarded to the point I had
specified, according to the request contained in my letter of July; that
my further suggestions had been acted upon, and that the Governor had
availed himself of Mr. Piesse's services again, to send him in charge of
the party: thus satisfied that he was on the Darling, I sent Mr. Browne
and Mr. Stuart in advance, to apprise him of our approach.

On their arrival at his camp Mr. Piesse lost no time in repairing to me,
and I shall not readily forget the unaffected joy he evinced at seeing me
again. He had maintained a friendly intercourse with the natives, and had
acquitted himself in a manner, as creditable to himself, as it had been
beneficial to me.

Mr. Piesse was the bearer of numerous letters from my family and friends,
and I was in some measure repaid for the past, by the good intelligence
they conveyed: that my wife and children were well, and the colony was in
the most flourishing condition,--since, during my absence, that
stupendous mine had been discovered, which has yielded such profit to the
owners--and the pastoral pursuits of the colonists were in an equally
flourishing condition. Mr. Browne, too, received equally glad tidings
from his brother, who informed him of his intention to meet the party on
its way homewards.

On the 21st I moved over to the Darling; and found a number of natives at
the camp, and amongst them the old Boocolo of Williorara, who was highly
delighted at our return.

Mr. Piesse had constructed a large and comfortable hut of boughs--which
was much cooler than canvass. In this we made ourselves comfortable, and
I hoped that the numerous and more generous supplies of eatables and
drinkables than those to which we had been accustomed would conduce to
our early restoration to health. I could not but fancy that the berries
Mr. Browne had procured for me, and of which I had taken many, were
beginning to work beneficially--although I was still unable to move. As
I proposed remaining stationary until after Christmas Day, I deemed it
advisable to despatch messengers with letters for the Governor, advising
him of my safety, and to relieve the anxiety of my family and friends.
Mr. Browne accordingly made an agreement with two natives, to take the
letter-bag to the Anabranch of the Darling, and send it on to Lake
Victoria by other natives, who were to be rewarded for their trouble. For
this service our messengers were to receive two blankets and two
tomahawks, and the bag being closed they started off with it. I had
proposed to Mr. Browne to be himself the bearer of it, but he would not
leave me, even now. In order, therefore, to encourage the messengers, I
gave them in advance the tomahawks they were to have received on their
return. Our tent was generally full of natives; some of them very fine
young men, especially the two sons of the Boocolo. Topar made his
appearance two or three days after our arrival, but Toonda was absent on
the Murray: the former, however, having been detected in attempting a
theft, I had him turned out of the tent and banished the camp. The old
Boocolo came daily to see us, and as invariably laid down on the lower
part of my mattrass.

On the 23rd I sent Mr. Stuart to verify his former bearings on Scrope's
Range, and Mr. Browne kindly superintended the chaining of the distance
between a tree I had marked on the banks of the Darling and Sir Thomas
Mitchell's last camp. This tree was about a quarter of a mile below the
junction of the Williorara, and had cut on it, (G. A. E., Dec. 24, 1843,)
the distance between the two points was three miles and 20 chains.

The 25th being Christmas Day, I issued a double allowance to the men, and
ordered that preparations should be made for pushing down the river on
the following morning. About 2 p.m. we were surprised at the return of
our two messengers, who insisted that they had taken the letter-bag to
the point agreed upon, although it was an evident impossibility that they
could have done so. I therefore evinced my displeasure and refused to
give them the blankets--for which, nevertheless, they greatly importuned
me. Mr. Browne, however, explained to the Boocolo why I refused, and
charged the natives with having secreted it somewhere or other. On this
there was a long consultation with the natives, which terminated in the
Boocolo's two sons separating from the others, and talking together for a
long time in a corner of my hut; they then came forward and said, that my
decision was perfectly just, for that the men had not been to the place
agreed upon, but had left the bag of letters with a tribe on the Darling,
and therefore, that they had been fully rewarded by the present of the
tomahawks. This decided opinion settled the dispute at once, and the
parties quietly acquiesced.

I had, as stated, been obliged to turn Topar out of my tent, and expel
him the camp for theft, but at the same time Mr. Browne explained to the
natives why I did so, and told them that I should in like manner expel
any other who so transgressed, and they appeared fully to concur in the
justice of my conduct. There is no doubt indeed but that they punish each
other for similar offences, although perhaps the moral turpitude of the
action is not understood by them.

The Darling at this time had ceased to flow, and formed a chain of ponds.
The Williorara was quite dry from one end to the other, as were the
lagoons and creeks in the neighbourhood. The natives having cleared the
river of the fish that had been brought down by the floods, now subsisted
for the most part on herbs and roots of various kinds, and on the
caterpillar of the gum-tree moth, which they procured out of the ground
with their switches, having a hook at the end. I do not think they could
procure animal food in the then state of the country, there being no
ducks or kangaroos in the neighbourhood, in any great quantity at all
events.

I thus early began to feel the benefit of a change of diet in the
diminished rigidity of my limbs, and therefore entertained great hopes
that I should yet be able to ride into Adelaide. The men too generally
began to recover from their fatigues, but both Mr. Browne and Mr. Stuart
continued to complain of shooting pains in their limbs. The party and the
animals however being sufficiently recruited to enable us to resume our
progress homewards, we broke up our camp at the junction of the
Williorara on the 26th of the month as I had proposed, under more
favourable circumstances than we could have expected, the weather being
beautifully fine and the temperature pleasant. When I was carried out of
my tent to the cart, I was surprised to see the verdure of that very
ground against the barrenness of which I had had to declaim the preceding
year; I mean the flats of the Williorara, now covered with grass, and
looking the very reverse of what they had done before; so hazardous is it
to give an opinion of such a country from a partial glimpse of it. The
incipient vegetation must have been brought forth by flood or heavy
rains.

We passed two tribes of natives, with whom we staid for a short time as
the old Boocolo was with us. Amongst these natives we did not notice the
same disproportion in the sexes as in the interior, but not only amongst
these tribes but with those of Williorara and Cawndilla, we observed that
many had lost an eye by inflammation from the attacks of flies. I was
really surprised that any of them could see, for most assuredly it is
impossible to conceive anything more tormenting than those brutes are in
every part of the interior.

On the 27th we passed two of our old encampments, and halted after a
journey of 16 miles in the close vicinity of a tribe of natives, about
fifty in number, the majority of whom were boys as mischievous as
monkeys, and as great thieves too, but we reduced them to some kind of
order by a little patience. The Darling had less water than in the
previous year before the flood, but its flats were covered with grass, of
which hundreds of tons might have been cut, so that our cattle speedily
began to improve in condition.

About this time the weather was exceedingly oppressive, and heavy
thunder-clouds hung about, but no rain fell.

Our journey on the 28th was comparatively short. We passed the location
of another tribe during the day, and recovered our letter-bag, which had
been left by our messengers with a native belonging to it. Here the old
Boocolo left us and returned to Williorara.

The last days of 1845 and the few first of 1846 were exceedingly
oppressive, and the heat was almost as great as in the interior itself.

On the 5th of January we crossed over from the Darling to its ancient
channel, and on the 6th Mr. Browne left for Adelaide. On the 8th I
reached Lake Victoria, where I learnt that our old friend Nadbuck had
been speared by a native, whose jealousy he had excited, but that his
wound was not mortal. He was somewhere on the Rufus, which I did not
approach, but made a signal fire in the hope that he would have seen it,
and, had they not been spoiled, I should have thrown up a rocket at
night. However Nadbuck heard of our return, and made a successful effort
to get to us, and tears chased each other down the old man's cheeks when
he saw us again. Assuredly these poor people of the desert have the most
kindly feelings; for not only was his reception of us such as I have
described, but the natives one and all exhibited the utmost joy at our
safety, and cheered us on every part of the river.

It blew very heavily on the night of the 10th, but moderated towards the
morning, and the day turned out cooler than usual. The lagoons of the
Murray were full of fish and wild fowl, and my distribution of all the
hooks and lines I had brought back enabled my sable friends to capture an
abundance of the former without going into the water, and they very soon
appreciated the value of such instruments.

On the 13th I left Mr. Piesse in charge of the party, and pushed on to
Moorundi, and arrived at the settlement, into which I was escorted by the
natives raising loud shouts, on the 15th. Here my kind friends made me as
comfortable as they could. Mr. Eyre had gone to England on leave of
absence, and Mr. Nation was filling his appointment as Resident.

On the 17th I mounted my horse for the first time since I had been taken
ill in November, and had scarcely left Moorundi when I met my good
friends Mr. Charles Campbell and Mr. A. Hardy in a carriage to convey me
to Adelaide. I reached my home at midnight on the 19th of January, and,
on crossing its threshold, raised my wife from the floor on which she had
fallen, and heard the carriage of my considerate friends roll rapidly
away.


CHAPTER IV.


REMARKS ON THE SEASON--DRY STATE OF THE ATMOSPHERE--THERMOMETRICAL
OBSERVATIONS--WINDS IN THE INTERIOR--DIRECTION OF THE RANGES--GEOLOGICAL
OBSERVATIONS--NON-EXISTENCE OF ANY CENTRAL CHAIN--PROBABLE COURSE OF THE
STONY DESERT--WHETHER CONNECTED WITH LAKE TORRENS--OPINIONS OF CAPTAIN
FLINDERS--NO INFORMATION DERIVED FROM THE NATIVES--THE NATIVES--THEIR
PERSONAL APPEARANCE--DISPROPORTION BETWEEN THE SEXES--THE WOMEN--CUSTOMS
OF THE NATIVES--THEIR HABITATIONS--FOOD--LANGUAGE--CONCLUSION.


Having thus brought my narrative to a conclusion I shall trespass but
little more on the patience of the reader. It appears to me that a few
observations are necessary to clear some parts, and to make up for
omissions in the body of my work. I have written it indeed under
considerable disadvantage; for although I have in a great measure
recovered from the loss of sight consequent on my former services, I
cannot glance my eye so rapidly as I once did over such a voluminous
document as this journal; and I feel that I owe it to the public, as well
as to myself, to make this apology for its imperfections.

There were two great difficulties against which, during the progress of
the expedition, I had to contend. The one was, the want of water; the
other, the nature of the country. That it was altogether impracticable
for wheeled carriages of any kind, may readily be conceived from my
description; and in the state in which I found it, horses were evidently
unequal to the task. I cannot help thinking that camels might have done
better; not only for their indurance, but because they carry more than a
horse. I should, undoubtedly, have been led to try those animals if I
could have procured them; but that was impossible. Certain however it is,
that I went into the interior to meet with trials that scarcely camels
could have borne up against; for I think there can be no doubt, from the
facts I have detailed, that the season, during which this expedition was
undertaken, was one of unusual dryness; but although the arid state of
the country contributed so much to prevent its movements, I question
whether, under opposite circumstances, it would have been possible to
have pushed so far as the party succeeded in doing. Certainly, if the
ground had been kept in a state of constant saturation, travelling would
have been out of the question; for the rain of July abundantly proved how
impracticable any attempt to penetrate it under such circumstances would
have been.

It is difficult to say what kind of seasons prevail in Central Australia.
That low region does not, as far as I can judge, appear to be influenced
by tropical rains, but rather to be subject to sudden falls. That the
continent of Australia was at one time more humid than it now is, appears
to be an admitted fact; the marks of floods, and the violence of torrents
(none of which have been witnessed), are mentioned by every explorer as
traceable over every part of the continent; but no instance of any
general inundation is on record: on the contrary the seasons appear to be
getting drier and drier every year, and the slowness with which any body
exposed to the air decomposes, would argue the extreme absence of
moisture in the atmosphere. It will be remembered that one of my bullocks
died in the Pine Forest when I was passing through it in December, 1844.
In July, 1845, when Mr. Piesse was on his route home from the Depot in
charge of the home returning party, he passed by the spot where this
animal had fallen; and, in elucidation of what I have stated, I will here
give the extract of a letter I subsequently received from him from India.
Speaking of the humidity of the climate of Bengal, he says: "It appears
to me that heat alone is rather a preservative from decomposition; of
which I recollect an instance, in the bullock that died in the march
through the Pine scrub on the 1st of January, 1845. When I passed by the
spot in the following July, the carcase was dried up like a mummy, and
was in such a perfect state of preservation as to be easily recognised."

No stronger proof, I apprehend, could have been adduced of the dryness of
the atmosphere in that part of the interior, or more corroborative of the
intensity of heat there during the interval referred to; but the singular
and unusual effects it had on ourselves, and on every thing around was
equally corroborative of the fact. The atmosphere on some occasions was
so rarified, that we felt a difficulty in breathing, and a buzzing
sensation on the crown of the head, as if a hot iron had been there.

There were only two occasions on which the thermometer was noticed to
exceed the range of 130 degrees in the shade, the solar intensity at the
same time being nearly 160 degrees. The extremes between this last and
our winter's cold, when the thermometer descended to 24 degrees was 133
degrees. I observe that Sir Thomas Mitchell gives the temperature at the
Bogan, in his tent at 117 degrees and when exposed to the wind at 129
degrees; but I presume that local causes, such as radiation from stones
and sand, operated more powerfully with us than in his case. Whilst we
were at the Depot about May, the water of the creek became slightly
putrid, and cleared itself like Thames water; and during the hotter
months of our stay there, it evaporated at the rate of nearly an inch a
day, as shewn by a rod Mr. Browne placed in it to note the changes, but
the amount varied according to the quiescent or boisterous state of the
atmosphere. It will readily be believed that in so heated a region the
air was seldom still; to the currents sweeping over it we had to
attribute the loathsome and muddy state of the water on which we
generally subsisted after we left that place, for the pools from which we
took it were so shallow as to be stirred up to the consistency of
white-wash by the play and action of the wind on their surfaces. During
our stay at the Depot the barometer never rose above 30.260, or fell
below 29.540.

From December, 1844, to the end of April of the following year, the
prevailing winds were from E.N.E. to E.S.E., after that month they were
variable, but westerly winds predominated. The south wind was always
cold, and its approach was invariably indicated by the rise of the
barometer.

The rain of July commenced in the north-east quarter and gradually went
round to the north-west; but more clouds rose from the former point than
from any other. The sky generally speaking was without a speck, and the
dazzling brightness of the moon was one of the most distressing things we
had to endure when out in the bush. It was impossible indeed to shut out
its light which ever way one turned, and its irritating effects were
remarkable.

It will be observable to those who cast their eyes over the chart of
South Australia that the range of mountains between St. Vincent's Gulf
and the Murray river runs up northwards into the interior. In like manner
the ranges crossed by the Expedition also ran in the same direction. The
Black Rock Hill, so named by Captain Frome, is in lat. 32 degrees 45
minutes and in the 139th meridian, and is the easternmost of the chain to
which it belongs. Mount Gipps on the Coonbaralba range is in lat. 31
degrees 52 minutes and in long. 141 degrees 41 minutes, but from that
point the ranges trend somewhat to the westward of south, and
consequently, may run nearer to that (of which the Black Rock Hill forms
so prominent a feature) than we may suppose, but there is a distance of
nearly 150 miles of country still remaining to be explored, before this
point can be decided. Nevertheless, it is more than probable the two
chains are in some measure connected, especially as they greatly resemble
each other in their classification. They are for the most part composed
of primary igneous rocks, amongst which there is a general distribution
of iron, and perhaps of other metals. The iron ore, however, that was
discovered during the progress of the Expedition, of which Piesse's Knob
is a remarkable specimen, was of the purest kind.

It was, as has been found in South Australia, a surface deposit,
protruding or cropping out of the ground in immense clean blocks. This
ore was highly magnetic; the veins of the metal run north and south, the
direction of the ranges, as did a similar crop on the plains at the S.E.
base of the ranges. Generally speaking there was nothing bold or
picturesque in the scenery of the Barrier Range, but the Rocky Glen and
some few others of a similar description were exceptions. As the Barrier
Range ran parallel to the coast ranges, so there were other ranges to the
eastward of the Barrier Range, running parallel to it, and they were
separated by broad plains, partly open and partly covered with brush. The
general elevation of the ranges was about 1200 feet above the level of
the sea, but some of the hills exceeded 1600. Mount Lyell was 2000; Mount
Gipps 1500; Lewis's Hill 1000: but the general elevation of the range
might be rather under than over what I have stated. It appears to me that
the whole of the geological formation of this portion of the continent is
the same, and that all the lines of ranges terminate in the same kind of
way to the north, that is to say, in detached flat-topped hills of
compact or indurated quartz shewing white and abrupt faces. So terminated
the Coonbaralba Range, and so Mr. Eyre tells us did the Mount Serle
Range, and so terminated the range we saw to the westward of Lake
Torrens.

That they exhibit evidences of a past violent commotion of waters, I
think any one who will follow my steps and view them, will be ready to
admit.

That the range of hills I have called "Stanley's Barrier Range," and that
all the mountain chains to the eastward and westward of it, were once so
many islands I have not the slightest doubt, and that during the primeval
period, a sea covered the deserts over which I wandered; but it is
impossible for a writer, whatever powers of description he may have, to
transfer to the minds of his readers the same vivid impressions his own
may have received, on a view of any external object.

From the remarks into which I have thus been led, as well as those which
have escaped me in the course of this narrative, it will be seen that the
impressions I had received as to the past and present state of the
continent were rather strengthened than diminished, on my further
knowledge of its internal structure.

It is true, that I did not find an inland sea as I certainly expected to
have done, but the country as a desert was what I had anticipated,
although I could not have supposed it would have proved of such boundless
extent.

Viewing the objects for which the Expedition was equipped, and its
results, there can, I think, be no doubt, as to the non-existence of any
mountain ranges in the interior of Australia, but, on the contrary, that
its central regions are nearly if not quite on a sea level, and that the
north coast is separated from the south as effectually as if seas rolled
between them. I have stated my opinion that that portion of the desert
which I tried to cross continues with undiminished breadth to the Great
Australian Bight, and I agree with Captain Flinders, in supposing that if
an inland sea exists any where, it exists underneath and behind that
bank, (speaking from seaward). It would, I think, be unreasonable to
suppose that such an immense tract of sandy desert, once undoubtedly a
sea-bed, should immediately contract; considering, indeed, the sterile
character of the country to the north of Gawler's Range, to the westward
of Port Lincoln, and along the whole of the south coast of Australia,
nearly to King George's Sound, I must confess I have no hope of any
inland fertile country. I am aware it is the opinion of some of my
friends that the Stony Desert may communicate with Lake Torrens. Such may
have been and still may be the case--I will not argue the contrary, or
answer for the changes in so extraordinary a region. I only state my own
ideas from what I observed, strengthened by my view of the position I
occupied, when at my farthest north; we will therefore refer to that
position, and to the position of Lake Torrens, and see how far it is
probable, that a large channel, such as I have described the Stony
Dessert to be, should turn so abruptly, as it must do to connect itself
with that basin; the evident fall of the interior, as far as that fact
could be ascertained, being plainly from east to west.

The western shore of Lake Torrens, as laid down by Mr. Eyre, is in 137
degrees 40 minutes or thereabouts. Its eastern shore in 141 degrees of
longitude. Its southern extremity being in lat. 28 1/2 degrees. My
position was in 138 degrees of long. and 24 degrees 40 minutes of
latitude. I was therefore within 20 miles as far to the westward of the
westernmost part of Lake Torrens, and was also 250 geographical miles due
north of it. To gain Lake Torrens, the Stony Desert must turn at a right
angle from its known course, and in such case hills must exist to the
westward of where I was, for hills alone could so change the direction of
a current, but the whole aspect of the interior would argue against such
a conclusion. I never lost sight of the probability of Lake Torrens being
connected with some central feature, until my hopes were destroyed by the
nature of the country I traversed, nor do I think it probable that in so
level a region as that in which I left it, there is any likelihood of the
Stony Desert changing its direction so much as to form any connection
with the sandy basin to which I have alluded. Nevertheless it may do so.
We naturally cling to the ideas we ourselves have adopted, and it is
difficult to transfer them to the mind of another. In reference however
to what I had previously stated, I would give the following quotation
from Flinders. His impressions from what he observed while sailing along
the coast, in a great measure correspond with mine when travelling
inland, the only point we differ upon is as to the probable origin of the
great sea-wall, which appeared to him to be of calcareous formation, and
he therefore concluded that it had been a coral reef raised by some
convulsion of nature. Had Capt. Flinders been able to examine the rock
formation of the Great Australian Bight, he would have found that it was
for the most part an oolitic limestone, with many shells imbedded in it,
similar in substance and in formation to the fossil bed of the Murray,
but differing from it in colour.

"The length of these cliffs from their second commencement is 33 leagues,
and that of the level bank from New Cape Paisley, where it was first seen
from the sea, no less than 145 leagues. The height of this extraordinary
bank is nearly the same throughout, being nowhere less by estimation than
400 feet, not anywhere more than 600. In the first 20 leagues the rugged
tops of some inland mountains were visible over it, but during the
remainder of its long course, the bank was the limit of our view.

"This equality of elevation for so great an extent, and the evidently
calcareous nature of the bank, at least in the upper 200 feet, would
bespeak it to have been the exterior line of some vast coral reef, which
is always more elevated than the interior parts, and commonly level with
high water mark. From the gradual subsiding of the sea, or perhaps from
some convulsion of nature, this bank may have attained its present height
above the surface, and however extraordinary such a change may appear,
yet when it is recollected that branches of coral still exist, upon Bald
Head, at the elevation of 400 feet or more, this supposition assumes a
degree of probability, and it would farther seem that the subsiding of
the waters has not been at a period very remote, since these frail
branches have yet neither been all beaten down nor mouldered away by the
wind and weather.

"If this supposition be well founded, it may with the fact of no other
hill or object having been perceived above the bank in the greater part
of its course, assist in forming some conjecture as to what may be within
it, which cannot as I judge in such case, be other than flat sandy plains
or water. The bank may even be a narrow barrier between an interior and
the exterior sea, and much do I regret the not having formed an idea of
this probability at the time, for notwithstanding the great difficulty
and risk, I should certainly have attempted a landing upon some part of
the coast, to ascertain a fact of so much importance."

Had there been any inland ranges they would have been seen by that
searching officer from the ocean, but it is clear that none exists; for
Mr. Eyre in his intercourse with the natives, during his journey from
South Australia to King George's Sound, elicited nothing from them that
led him to suppose that there were any hills in the interior, or indeed
that an inland sea was to be found there; even the existence of one may
reasonably be doubted, and it may be that the country behind the Great
Australian Bight is, as Captain Flinders has conjectured, a low sandy
country, formed by a channel of 400 or 500 miles in breadth, separating
the south coast of the continent from the west and north ones. Although I
did not gain the direct centre of the continent there can be very little
doubt as to the character of the country round it. The spirit of
enterprise alone will now ever lead any man to gain it, but the gradual
development of the character of the yet unexplored interior will alone
put an end to doubts and theories on the subject. The desert of Australia
is not more extensive than the deserts in other parts of the world. Its
character constitutes its peculiarity, and that may lead to some
satisfactory conclusion as to how it was formed, and by what agent the
sandy ridges which traverse it were thrown up. I would repeat that I am
diffident of my own judgment, and that I should be indebted to any one
better acquainted with the nature of these things than I am to point out
wherein I am in error.

It remains for me, before I close this part of my work, to make a few
observations on the natives with whom we communicated beyond the river
tribes. Mr. Eyre has given so full and so accurate an account of the
natives of the Murray and Darling that it is needless for me to repeat
his observations. I would only remark that I attribute our friendly
intercourse with them to the great influence he had gained over them by
his judicious conduct as Resident Protector at the Murray. I fully concur
with him in the good that resulted from the establishment of a post on
that river, for the express pur pose of putting a stop to the mutual
aggression of the overlanders and natives upon each other. I have
received too many kindnesses at the hands of the natives not to be
interested in their social welfare, and most fully approved the wise
policy of Captain Grey, in sending Mr. Eyre to a place where his
exertions were so eminently successful.

In another place I may be led to make some remarks on the condition of
the natives of South Australia, but at present I have only to observe
upon that of the natives of the distant interior with whom no white man
had ever before come in contact.

If I except the tribe upon Cooper's Creek, on which they are numerous,
the natives are but thinly scattered over the interior, as far as our
range extended. The few families wandering over those gloomy regions may
scarcely exceed one hundred souls. They are a feeble and diminutive race
when compared to the river tribes, but they have evidently sprung from
the same parent stock, and local circumstances may satisfactorily and
clearly account for physical differences of appearance. Like the tribes
of the Darling and the Murray, and indeed like the aborigines of the
whole continent, they have the quick and deep set eye, the rapidly
retiring forehead, and the great enlargement of the frontal sinus, the
flat nose and the thick lip. It is quite true that many have not the
depression of the head so great, but in such cases I think an unusual
proportion of the brain lies behind the ear. In addition, however, to the
above physiognomical resemblances, they have the same disproportion
between the upper region of the body and the lower extremities, the same
prominent chest, and the same want of muscular development, and in common
with all the natives I have seen, their beards are strong and stand out
from the chin, and their hair the finest ornament they possess, only that
they destroy its natural beauty by filth and neglect, is both straight
and curly. Their skins are nearly of the same hue; nor did we see any
great difference, excepting in one woman, whose skin was of a jet black.
Two young women, however, were noticed who had beautiful glossy ringlets,
of which they appeared to be exceedingly proud, and kept clean, as if
they knew their value. Both Mr. Browne and myself observed a great
disparity of numbers in the male and female children, there being an
excess of the latter of nearly two to one, and in some instances of a
still greater disproportion.

This fact was also obvious both to Mr. Stuart and myself in the tribe on
Cooper's Creek, in which the number of female children greatly exceeded
that of the male, though there were more adult men than women. The
personal appearance of the men of this tribe, as I have already stated,
was exceedingly prepossessing--they were well made and tall, and
notwithstanding that my long-legged friend was an ugly fellow, were
generally good looking. Their children in like manner were in good
condition and appeared to be larger than I had remarked elsewhere, but
with the women no improvement was to be seen. Thin, half-starved and
emaciated they were still made to bear the burden of the work, and while
the men were lounging about their fires, and were laughing and talking,
the women were ceaselessly hammering and pounding to prepare that meat,
of which, from their appearance, so small a proportion fell to their
share. As regards the treatment of their women, however, I think I have
observed that they are subjected to harsher treatment when they are
members of a large tribe than when fewer are congregated together. Both
parents are very fond of and indulgent to their children, and there is no
surer way of gaining the assistance of the father, or of making a
favourable impression on a tribe than by noticing the children.

I think that generally speaking the native women seldom have more than
four children, or if they have, few above that number arrive at the age
of puberty. There are, however, several reasons why the women are not
more prolific; the principal of which is that they suckle their young for
such a length of time, and so severe a task is it with them to rear their
offspring that the child is frequently destroyed at its birth; and
however revolting to us such a custom may be, it is now too notorious a
fact to be disputed.

The voices of the natives, generally speaking, are soft, especially those
of the women. They are also a merry people and sit up laughing and
talking all night long. It is this habit, and the stars so constantly
passing before their eyes, which enables them to know when they are
likely to have rain or cold weather, as they will point to any star and
tell you that when it shall get up higher then the weather will be cold
or hot.

These primitive people have peculiar customs and ceremonies in their
intercourse with strangers, and on first meeting preserve a most painful
silence; whether this arises from diffidence or some other feeling it is
difficult to say, but it is exceedingly awkward; but, however awkward or
embarrassing it may be, there can be no doubt as to the policy and
necessity of respecting it. The natives certainly do not allow strangers
to pass through their territory without permission first obtained, and
their passions and fears are both excited when suddenly intruded upon. To
my early observation of this fact, and to my forbearing any forced
interview, but giving them time to recover from the surprise into which
my presence had thrown them, I attribute my success in avoiding any
hostile collision. I am sure, indeed, whatever instances of violence and
murder may be recorded of them, they are naturally a mild and inoffensive
people.

It is a remarkable fact that we seldom or ever saw weapons in the hands
of any of the natives of the interior, such as we did see were similar to
those ordinarily used by natives of other parts of the continent. Their
implements were simple and rude, and consisted chiefly of troughs for
holding water or seeds, rush bags, skins, stones, etc. The native
habitations, at all events those of the natives of the interior, with the
exception of the Cooper's Creek tribe, had huts of a much more solid
construction than those of the natives of the Murray or the Darling,
although some of their huts were substantially built also. Those of the
interior natives however were made of strong boughs with a thick coating
of clay over leaves and grass. They were entirely impervious to wind and
rain, and were really comfortable, being evidently erections of a
permanent kind to which the inhabitants frequently returned. Where there
were villages these huts were built in rows, the front of one hut being
at the back of the other, and it appeared to be a singular but universal
custom to erect a smaller hut at no great distance from the large ones,
but we were unable to detect for what purpose they were made, unless it
was to deposit their seeds; as they were too small even for children to
inhabit. At the little hut to the north of the ranges, from which the
reader will recollect we twice frightened away a poor native, we found a
very large spear, apparently for a canoe, which I brought to the camp.
This spear could not possibly have been used as a weapon, for it was too
heavy, but on shewing it subsequently to some natives, they did not
intimate that it was a canoe spear.

It may be thought that having been in the interior for so many months I
ought to have become acquainted with many of the customs and habits of
the people inhabiting it, but it will have been seen that they seldom
came near us.

The custom of circumcision generally prevailed, excepting with the
Cooper's Creek tribe, but you would meet with a tribe with which that
custom did not prevail, between two with which it did.

As regards their food, it varies with the season. That which they
appeared to me to use in the greatest abundance were seeds of various
kinds, as of grasses of several sorts, of the mesembryanthemum, of the
acacia and of the box-tree; of roots and herbs, of caterpillars and
moths, of lizards and snakes, but of these there are very few. Besides
these they sometimes take the emu and kangaroo, but they are never so
plentiful as to constitute a principal article of food. They take ducks
when the rains favour their frequenting the creeks and lagoons, exactly
as the natives of other parts of Australia do, with nets stuck up to long
poles, and must procure a sufficiency of birds during the summer season.
They also wander among the sand ridges immediately after a fall of rain,
to hunt the jerboa and talperoo, (see Nat. Hist.,) of which they procure
vast supplies; but all these sports are temporary, particularly the
latter, as the moment the puddles dry up the natives are forced to
retreat and fall back on previous means of subsistence.

With regard to their language, it differed in different localities,
though all had words common to each respectively. My friend Mr. Eyre
states, that they have not any generic name for anything, as tree, fish,
bird; but in this, as far as the fish goes, I think he is mistaken, for
the old man who visited our camp before the rains, and who so much raised
our hopes, certainly gave them a generic name; for placing his fingers on
such fish as he recognised, he distinctly mentioned their specific name,
but when he put his fingers on such as he did not recognise, he said
"Guia, Guia, Guia," successively after each, evidently intending to
include them under the one name. With respect to their religious
impressions, if I may so call them, I believe they have none. The only
impression they have is of an evil spirit, but however melancholy the
fact, it is no less true that the aborigines of Australia have no idea of
a superintending Providence.

In conclusion: I have spoken of Mr. Browne and Mr. Piesse throughout my
narrative, in terms such as I feel they deserved. I should be sorry to
close its pages without also recording the valuable and cheerful
assistance I received from Mr. Stuart, whose zeal and spirit were equally
conspicuous, and whose labour at the charts did him great credit. To
Flood I was indebted for having my horses in a state fit for service,
than whom as a person in charge of stock, I could not have had a better;
and I cannot but speak well of all the men in their respective
capacities, as having always displayed a willingness to bear with me,
when ever I called on them to do so, the fatigues and exposure incidental
to such a service as that on which I was employed.

Before closing my narrative I would make a few observations on the
conduct of such an Expedition as the one the details of which I have just
been giving.

It appears to me then that discipline is the first and principal point to
be considered on such occasions; unless indeed the leader be implicitly
obeyed it is impossible that matters should go on regularly. For this
reason it is objectionable to associate any irresponsible person in such
an undertaking. When I engaged the men who were to accompany me, I made
them sign an agreement, giving me power to diminish or increase the
rations, and binding themselves not only to the performance of any
particular duty, but to do everything in their power to promote the
success of the service in which they were engaged, under the penalty of
forfeiture of wages, in whole or part as I should determine. I deemed it
absolutely necessary to arm myself with powers with which I could
restrain my men even in the Desert, before I left the haunts of civilized
man, although I never put these powers in force,--and this appears to me
to be a necessary precaution on all such occasions. Equally necessary is
the establishment of a guard at night, for it is impossible to calculate
on the presence of natives--they may be close at hand, when none have
been seen or heard during the day. Had Dr. Leichhardt adopted this
precaution his camp would not have been surprised, nor would he have lost
a valuable companion. Equally necessary is it to keep the stock, whether
horses or bullocks, constantly within view. In all situations where I
thought it probable they might wander I had them watched all night long.
Unless due precaution however is used to ensure their being at hand when
wanted, they are sure to wander and give ceaseless trouble.

As regards the consumption of provisions, I had both a weekly and a
monthly statement of issues. In addition to this they were weighed
monthly and their loss ascertained, and their consumption regulated
accordingly, and I must say that I never found that the men were disposed
to object to any reasonable reduction I made. I found the sheep I took
with me were admirable stock, but I was always aware that an unforeseen
accident might deprive me of them, and indeed they called for more
watchful care even than the other stock. The men at the Depot were never
without their full allowance of mutton. It was only the parties out on
distant and separate services who were reduced to an allowance scarcely
sufficient to do their work upon.

The attention of a Leader is no less called to all these minutiae than
his eye and judgment to the nature of the country in which he may happen
to be. I would observe that in searching for water along the dry channel
of a creek, he should watch for the slightest appearance of a creek
junction, for water is more frequently found in these lateral branches,
however small they may at first appear to be, than in the main creek
itself, and I would certainly recommend a close examination of them. The
explorer will ever find the gum-tree in the neighbour hood of water, and
if he should ever traverse such a country as that into which I went, and
should discover creeks as I did losing themselves on plains, he should
never despair of recovering their channels again. They invariably
terminate in grassy plains, and until he sees such before him he may rest
assured that their course continues. Should the traveller be in a country
in which water is scarce it will be better for him to stop at any he may
find, although early in the day, than to go on in the chance of being
without all night, and so entailing fatigue on his men.

I trust that what I have said of the natives renders it unnecessary for
me to add anything as to the caution and forbearance required in
communicating with them. Kindness gains much on them, and their friendly
disposition eases the mind of a load of anxiety--for however confident
the Leader may be, it is impossible to divest the minds of the men of
apprehension when in the presence of hostile natives. He who shall have
perused these pages will have learnt that under whatever difficulties he
may be placed, that although his last hope is almost extinguished, he
should never despair. I have recorded instances enough of the watchful
superintendence of that Providence over me and my party, without whose
guidance we should have perished, nor can I more appropriately close
these humble sheets, than by such an acknowledgment, and expressing my
fervent thanks to Almighty God for the mercies vouchsafed to me during
the trying and doubtful service on which I was employed.


AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEA COAST AND INTERIOR OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
WITH OBSERVATIONS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH ITS INTERESTS.


CHAPTER I.


DUTIES OF AN EXPLORER--GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA--DESCRIPTION OF ITS COAST LINE--SEA MOUTH OF THE
MURRAY--ENTERED BY MR. PULLEN--RISK OF THE ATTEMPT--BEACHING--ROSETTA
HARBOUR--VICTOR HARBOUR--NEPEAN BAY--KANGAROO ISLAND--KINGSCOTE--CAPT.
LEE'S INSTRUCTIONS FOR PORT ADELAIDE--PORT ADELAIDE--REMOVAL TO THE NORTH
ARM--HARBOUR MASTER'S REPORT--YORKE'S PENINSULA--PORT LINCOLN--CAPT.
LEE'S INSTRUCTIONS--BOSTON ISLAND--BOSTON BAY--COFFIN'S BAY--MR. CAMERON
SENT ALONG THE COAST--HIS REPORT--POSITION OF PORT ADELAIDE.


No mariner ever shook the reefs from his sails, on the abatement of the
storm, under the fury of which his vessel had been labouring, with more
grateful feelings than those with which I turn from the dreary and
monotonous wastes I have been describing, to the contemplation of fairer
and more varied scenes. My weary task has been performed, and however
uninteresting my narrative may have proved to the general reader, I would
yet hope, that those who shall hereafter enter the field of Australian
discovery, will profit from my experience, and be spared many of the
inconveniences and sufferings to which I was unavoidably exposed. They
may rest assured, that it is only by steady perseverance and unceasing
attention, by due precaution and a mild discipline, that they will
succeed in such an undertaking as that in which I was engaged. That
unless they are fortunate enough to secure such an assistant as I had in
Mr. Browne, their single eye must be over every thing, to study the
features of the country through which they are passing, to keep their
horses and cattle always within view, to prevent disputes in their camp,
and to husband their provisions with the utmost care, to ascertain from
time to time the quantity they may have on hand, and to regulate their
consumption accordingly. Few difficulties present themselves to the
explorer in journeying down a river, for that way is smooth before him;
it is when he quits its banks, and traverses a country, on the parched
surface of which little or no water is to be found, that his trials
commence, and he finds himself obliged to undergo that personal toil,
which sooner or later will lay him prostrate. Strictly speaking, my work
should close here. I am not, however, unmindful of the suggestion I made
in my Preface, that a short notice of South Australia at the close of my
journal would not be out of place.

In the following pages, therefore, it is proposed to give some account of
that province, from whence, as the reader is aware, I took my departure,
before commencing my recent labours. Its circumstances and prospects
have, I know, of late, been frequently brought before the public, but, I
trust, nevertheless, that my observations will carry something of
novelty, if not of interest, and utility with them.

South Australia, then, the youngest of the colonies that have been
established round the shores of the Australian Continent, is situate, as
its name would imply, upon its southern coast. It extends from the 132nd
to the 141st degree of longitude east from Greenwich, and runs up
northwards into the interior to the 26th parallel of latitude. The
district of Port Phillip bounds it on the east, for which reason, the
fixing of the eastern boundary line between those two fine provinces has
of late been a point of great interest and importance. Mr. Tyers, an able
and intelligent officer, was employed by the Government of New South
Wales, primarily to determine the longitude of the mouth of the Glenelg,
and from his triangulations and observations it would appear that the
141st meridian falls on the coast about a mile and a half to the eastward
of it. Subsequent observations, taken by Captain Stokes, in command of
Her Majesty's surveying ship, the Beagle, differ slightly from the result
of Mr. Tyers' observations, but they prove beyond doubt, the care and
accuracy with which the latter officer carried on his survey. The point,
has since, I believe, been finally recognised by the governments of
Sydney and Adelaide, and the boundary line been marked to the distance of
123 miles from the coast. The party employed in this useful undertaking,
however, was obliged to relinquish it for a time, in consequence of heavy
rains; but it is not probable that any dispute will hereafter arise on
the question. If the line could have been extended to the Murray river,
it would have been as well, but the desert country beyond it is valueless
to civilised man. Taking it for granted, then, that the S.E. angle of the
province of South Australia has been fixed, we shall in the first
instance proceed along its sea line, and notice any thing worthy of
observation, before we enter into a detail as to the character of the
country itself.

From the mouth of the Glenelg the coast of South Australia trends to the
westward as far as Cape Northumberland in long. 140 degrees 37 minutes
and in lat. 38 degrees; [Note 11. The reader will be good enough to bear
in mind that the Longitudes in this work are all east of Greenwich, and
that the Latitudes are south.] from Cape Northumberland it turns to the
N.N.W., keeping that general direction for more than 100 miles. Between
the last mentioned Cape and Cape Morard des Galles in lat. 36 1/2 degrees,
there are several bays, two only of which, Rivoli Bay, immediately to the
north of Cape Lannes, and Guichen Bay, a little to the south of Cape
Bernouilli, have more particularly drawn the attention of the local
Government, rendered necessary in consequence of the rapid settlement of
the back country. Recent surveys have enhanced the value of these two
bays, and townships have been laid out at each. That at Rivoli bay being
called Grey Town, that of Guichen bay Robe Town. At the latter, there is
a resident magistrate and a party of mounted police. Many allotments have
been sold in both towns, and although the bays offer but little
protection to large vessels, they are of great importance to the colonial
trade and to the settlers occupying the beautiful and fertile country in
the neighbourhood of Mounts Gambier and Shanck. From Cape Morard des
Galles, a low dreary and sandy beach extends for five leagues beyond the
sea mouth of the Murray, a distance of more than 100 miles. This beach,
which varies in breadth from one to three miles, conceals the waters of
the Coorong, and the depressed and barren country beyond it is completely
hid from view by the bright sand-hills on this long and narrow strip of
land.

The sea mouth of the Murray, famous for the tragical events that have
occurred near it, and which give a melancholy interest to the spot, is in
long. 138 degrees 56 minutes and in lat. 35 degrees 32 minutes. No one
could, I am sure, look on the foaming waters of that wild line of
sand-hills through which it has forced a channel, without deep feelings
of awe and emotion. Directly open to the Southern Ocean, the swell that
rolls into Encounter Bay, is of the heaviest description. The breakers
rise to the height of fifteen or eighteen feet before they burst in one
unbroken line as far as the eye can see, and as the southerly is the most
prevailing wind on that part of the Australian coast, it is only during
the summer season, and after several days of northerly wind that the sea
subsides, and the roar of breakers ceases for a time. The reader will
perhaps bear in mind that the channel of the Goolwa connects Lake
Victoria with Encounter Bay, the sea mouth of the Murray being the outlet
through which its waters are discharged into the ocean.

The channel of the Goolwa (now called Port Pullen, in compliment to an
officer of that name on the marine survey staff of the province, who
succeeded, after several disappointments, in taking a small cutter
through that narrow passage, and navigating her across the lake into the
Murray River, as high as the settlement of Moorundi) is to the westward
of the sea mouth as the Coorong is to the eastward. [Note 12. below]

[Note 12. The compliment thus paid to Mr. Pullen, who is now employed on
the expedition to the North Pole, in search of Sir John Franklin, by Col.
Gawler, the then Governor, was well merited, as a reward for the
perseverance and patience he had shewn on the occasion--for those only
who have been at the spot can form an idea of the disturbed and doubtful
character of the place, and the risk there must have been in the attempt
to enter such a passage for the first time.]

But although Mr. Pullen succeeded in getting into the Goolwa, it was only
under the most favourable circumstances, nor will the sea mouth of the
Murray ever, I fear, be available for navigable purposes. How far it may
be practicable to steamers, I would not hazard an opinion, nor is the
subject at the present moment one of much importance, for the country to
the eastward of the ranges is not yet sufficiently located to call for
such a speculation.

The sea mouth of the Murray is about the third of a mile in breadth, and
when the river is flooded a strong current runs out of it with such
rapidity, that the tide setting in at the same time causes a short and
bubbling sea. It took Captain Barker nine minutes and fifty-eight seconds
to swim across it on the fatal occasion on which he lost his life--but
he was obliged to go somewhat above the outlet, as the stream would
otherwise have carried him amidst the breakers. The western shore is very
low, but the eastern one is marked by a large sandhill, now called
Barker's Knoll, after that talented and amiable officer. From seaward,
nothing but a wild line of sand-hills meets the view, such as few
mariners would venture to approach, and through which fewer still could
hope to find a passage into the calmer waters of Lake Victoria, so
completely hidden is the entrance. It was only by patient watching
indeed, that Mr. Pullen seized the opportunity by which he entered the
Goolwa. He was not the first, however, who did so, as Captain Gill, the
master of a small cutter that was unfortunately wrecked on the strand at
some distance to the eastward of the outlet, was the first to come down
the Coorong in his boat, in which he ultimately reached Victor Harbour,
but he also had to remain three weeks under the sand-hills before he
could venture forth. Some years prior to this, however, Sir John
Jeffcott, the first judge of South Australia, and Captain Blenkensorf,
the head of the fishery, both found a watery grave in attempting to pass
from the Goolwa into Encounter Bay.

I speak more particularly on the point, however, because, in 1838, during
my first visit to the province, I went with a party of hardy seamen, with
the intention, if possible, of passing into the Goolwa from seaward. At
Encounter Bay, Captain Hart, who had the superintendence of the fishery
there, gave me his most experienced steersman, and a strong whale-boat.
In this I left Victor harbour for Freeman's Nob, a small rocky point in
the very bight of Encounter Bay, where I remained until three a.m. of the
next morning, when I started for the outlet under the most favourable
auspices. A northerly wind had been blowing off the land for several
days, and the sea was so tranquil that I had every hope of success. I had
five leagues to pull, and keeping about a mile from the shore, swept
rapidly along it. We were still about four miles from the inlet when the
sun rose over it, as if encouraging us onwards. On approaching it at low
water, I tried in vain to enter. The sea was breaking heavily right
across the entrance from one side to the other, and after several
ineffectual attempts to run in, I came to an anchor, close to the outer
line of breakers, hoping that the sea would subside at high water and
that we should then have less difficulty. We had not, however, been in
this position more than half an hour, when a heavy southerly swell set
in; from a deep blue the water became green, and the wind suddenly flew
round to the S.W. Before we could weigh and stand out from the shore,
several seas had broken outside of us, and in less than ten minutes the
whole coast, to the distance of more than a mile from the shore, was
white with foam, and it seemed clear that a gale was coming on. Under
these circumstances I determined on returning to the little harbour from
which we had started in the morning, but the wind being directly against
us, we made very little head. "We shall never get to the Nob," said Mr.
Witch, who had the steer oar, to me; "it blows too hard, Sir." "What are
we to do, then?" said I. "Why, Sir," he replied, "we must either beach or
run out to sea," "We will beach, then," I said; "it is better to try that
than to do any thing else." Mr Witch evinced some surprise at my
decision, but made no remark. "You had better select your place," I
observed, "and be careful to keep the boat's head well on to the seas."
"You need not fear me, Sir," said the hardy seaman; "I am accustomed to
such work. It looks worse than it really is." The sea, however, was now
breaking full a mile and a half from the shore, and in looking towards it
I observed a solitary horseman riding slowly along, as if watching our
movements. At length Mr. Witch said that he thought we were opposite to a
favourable spot, on which I directed him to put the boat's head towards
the shore, and to keep her end on as he went in. Round we flew, and in a
moment after we were running at railway speed on the top of a heavy wave.
"Steady, men," said Mr. Witch: "Steady all," and on we went; but looking
round him a moment after--"Back, all. Back, all," he cried. The men did
as they were ordered, and the boat's way was stopped. Her stern rose
almost perpendicularly over the prow, and the next moment fell into the
trough of the sea. The wave, transparent as bottle glass, rushed past us,
and topping, as it is called, burst at our very bow, in a broad sheet of
foam. "Give way, my lads," was the next order of the watchful steersman,
as he again cast his eyes behind him. "Give way, my lads. Give way, all."
"Steady, men," he called, as if doubtful of the result of the coming
wave. I thought I saw paleness on the face of the rowers, but they pulled
regularly and well, and a thundering sound soon told us we had escaped
the threatening sea that had come so rapidly up. I do not know if I am
doing justice to the occurrence. There was more of apparent than real
danger in it, and I myself was less nervous, because I had not long
before been accustomed to the heavy surf of Norfolk Island. It was,
however, a moment of great excitement. We had literally shot towards the
shore, and were now within fifty yards of it, when Mr. Witch said to me,
"Take care of yourself, Sir; we shall catch it at last."

I turned round, and saw a large roller close upon us, just on the point
of topping--I had scarcely time to stoop and give my back to it when it
came upon us, and I never had such a thump in my life. The boat was
filled in a moment and we were all thrown out--Mr. Witch, who had been
standing, was hurled to a great distance, but the men were up in a
moment, the water being about four feet deep, and with admirable
dexterity ran her on the beach. I do not remember ever having been in so
strong a breeze. The reader may form some idea of it when I assure him
that the wind rolled the boat over and over as if she had been as light
as a carpenter's chip, and the sand and pebbles came with such violence
in our faces, that we were obliged to retreat behind the sand hills until
it moderated.

It was my friend Mr. Strangways who had accompanied me from Adelaide,
whose figure we had seen on the beach, and he assured me that we seemed
to fly as we approached him.

The wind having apparently flown permanently round to the south, and it
being hopeless to expect that the sea would subside for many days, I
hauled the boat over the sand hills, and launching her in the Goolwa,
tried to row through the outlet to sea, but after remaining for eight
days, and having my boat four times swamped, I was forced to give up the
attempt as I had no time to spare. The distance between my outer and
inner points might have been a cable's length. In endeavouring to pass
out I shoaled to a quarter less one, having kept the lead constantly
going. I abandoned the task therefore under an impression that the outlet
was not navigable, yet Mr. Pullen succeeded in taking a small cutter into
the Goolwa with perfect safety. I cannot but conclude therefore that it
has a shifting bar, and that it will present difficulties to regular
navigation that will only be surmounted by a better knowledge of its
locality, and in all probability by artificial means.

From Freeman's Nob the coast line turns southwards to Rosetta Head, a
bold and prominent conical hill, from the summit of which the whalers
look for their game. Under the lea of Rosetta Head there is a small
harbour called Rosetta Harbour. It is separated by a rocky island called
Granite Island, and a reef that is visible at low water, and connects
Granite Island with the main land from Victor Harbour, so called after
H.M.'s ship Victor, when surveying in that quarter. Neither of these
harbours however are considered secure, although they are protected from
all but south-east winds.

It was in Rosetta Harbour, that during the early settlement of the Colony
the South Australian Company's ship South Australian, was driven on shore
and lost. The John Pirie, a strongly built schooner, also belonging to
the Company, had well nigh shared her fate. This little vessel was lying
astern of the Australian when she went ashore, with the reef close astern
of her. In this fearful position her anchors began to drag, and her
destruction appeared inevitable, when her commander, Captain Martin,
determined on attempting to take her over the reef, it being high water
at the time. He accordingly cut his cable, set his sails, and ran his
vessel on the rocks. Four times she struck and was heaved as often over
them, until at length she floated in the deeper water of Victor Harbour,
and found her safety under the lea of the very danger from which she
expected destruction. It was a bold resolve and deserved the success that
attended it. I always feel a pleasure in recording such events, not only
from feelings of admiration, but because they are examples for men to
follow when placed in equally hazardous circumstances, and shew that
firmness and presence of mind are equal to almost every emergency. The
anchorage in Victor Harbour is under the lea of Granite Island, but I
believe it is foul and rocky, and until both it and Rosetta Harbour shall
be better known, the seaman will enter them with caution. Encounter Bay
indeed, is not a place into which the stranger should venture, as he
would find it extremely difficult to beat out to sea with a contrary
wind. Still no doubt vessels may find refuge at these places from strong
west and south-west winds, but I have always understood that it is better
for a ship encountering a gale at the entrance of Backstairs Passage
rather to keep at sea, than seek shelter in any contiguous harbour.

There is room for two or three tolerably sized vessels in Victor Harbour,
which is in longitude 138 {188 in published text} degrees 38 minutes 0
seconds and in latitude 35 degrees 32 minutes, and in certain seasons of
the year it may be deemed secure, if it were not liable to other
objections, but I have heard it stated by an experienced seaman,
one whose intimate knowledge of this part of the coast of South
Australia is indisputable, that there is anchorage under the lea of
Freeman's Nob, and a small island off it, sufficient for two or
three vessels of 250 or 300 tons, altogether preferable to either
of those I have mentioned, as being more sheltered, and having better
holding ground--but we must not forget that it is deeper in the bay,
and there would consequently be a greater difficulty in beating out;
but the truth is that the importance and capabilities of these
harbours will only be developed as the wants of the colonists
render it necessary for them to have ports in this vicinity. When the
country to the eastward of the mountains shall be more thickly peopled,
and when the rich and fertile valleys of the Inman, the Hindmarsh and
Currency Creek, and the available country between the two last, be more
generally cultivated, and when the mines at the Reedy Creek and other
places are at full work, the want of a harbour at Encounter Bay will be
sufficiently apparent.

The principal whale fishery on the coast of South Australia is in
Encounter Bay, and has, I believe, of late years proved as advantageous a
speculation to those who have carried it on as could be expected; profits
are of course dependent on contingencies, as the nature of the season and
the number of whales that may visit the coast: but the fishery at
Encounter Bay has certainly been as successful as any other on the coast,
and would have been more so if the ground had not been intruded upon. As
a source of colonial industry, and as a proof of commercial enterprise, I
should regret to see this bold and hardy occupation abandoned. See
Appendix.

From Rosetta Head the line of coast again trends for a short distance to
the west, and forms, together with the opposite shore of Kangaroo Island,
the Backstairs Passage, or eastern entrance into St. Vincent's Gulf, of
which Cape Jervis is the N.W. point. It is here that the more important
navigation of the South Australian seas commences. The line of coast I
have already described is not sufficiently known to be approached by the
stranger without caution, nevertheless the several bays and harbours I
have mentioned may offer better shelter and greater convenience than I am
able to point out.

One of the first establishments, if not the very first, of the South
Australian Company was on Kangaroo Island, on the shores of Nepean Bay.
Here the town of Kingscote was laid out, and some very good houses built,
which are now falling to dilapidation and decay, since it has been
abandoned by the Company's servants for some years. Nevertheless
Kingscote is a very pretty sea-port town, and the harbour is undoubtedly
good. The bay is large enough to hold a number of ships, and is secure
from all winds, being almost completely land-locked. The water inside
moreover is smooth, since the bay is protected by a long spit of sand,
whereby the roughness of the outer sea does not affect it, and vessels
consequently lie there during heavy weather without any apparent motion.
It is to be regretted, that, with such advantages, Kingscote Harbour
should have any drawback, but when we have given credit for its
capabilities as a harbour, we have done all, and even as a harbour,
sailors are divided in opinion, whether or not American River, or a small
bay, five miles to the south-east of it, are not to be preferred. In
Nepean Bay there is a deficiency of water, which is not the case in
either of the last mentioned places. The soil is equally good in the
neighbourhood of all three, but Kingscote having been occupied, the
ground has been cleared of the dense brush that grew on it in a state of
nature, and some of the most productive gardens in the Province are to be
found there. It is astonishing what quantities of the finest onions are
sent from Kingscote, with other produce, to Adelaide. The island is,
however, so generally and so heavily covered with brushwood, that
although the soil is good in many places, it has been found impracticable
to clear. On the general character of Kangaroo Island, I would observe,
that, from the reports of those best acquainted with it, nine-tenths of
the surface is covered with dwarf gum-trees, or heavy low brush, that
there are no plains of any consequence, no harbours excepting those I
have already mentioned,--that water is generally scarce, and the best
land is most heavily wooded and perfectly impenetrable; but, if it is
thus useless and unavailable for pastoral and agricultural purposes,
Kingscote, being so short a distance from Adelaide, holds out every
inducement as a watering-place to those who, desiring change of air and
sea-bathing, would wish to leave the heated neighbourhood of the capital
during the summer months. It is a disadvantage to them that there are few
places on the shores of St. Vincent's Gulf, on which bathing places could
be established, but the change of air at Kingscote would be as great a
benefit as sea-bathing itself, for hot winds are not felt there, but a
cool and refreshing breeze is almost constantly blowing. As a
watering-place therefore, it may, one day or other, be of importance,
when the convenience of steam-boats shall render the passage from
Adelaide to Kangaroo Island, like a trip across the Channel. But it is to
be observed that whatever disadvantages the island may possess, its
natural position is of the highest importance, since it lies as a
breakwater at the bottom of St. Vincent's Gulf, and prevents the effects
of the heavy southerly seas from being felt in it. There is, perhaps, no
gulf, whether it is entered by the eastern or western passage, the
navigation of which is so easy as that of St. Vincent, and so clear of
dangers, that it can only be by the most fortuitous circumstances, or the
most culpable neglect, that any accident can befal a ship in its passage
up to Adelaide.

Anxious to make this portion of my work as useful as possible, and
feeling assured that the remarks I have hitherto made will only lead the
seaman to adopt those measures of precaution in approaching any of the
harbours and bays I have mentioned, our knowledge of which is still
limited, I shall here quote a passage from a small book of Sailing
Instructions for South Australia, published some years ago by Captain
Lee, an experienced mariner, for the guidance of commanders of vessels
bound to Port Adelaide. I shall only observe that, in running up the Gulf
it is extremely difficult to recognise the peak of Mount Lofty; but a
pile of stones has been erected upon it, which is easily visible through
a good telescope, and that the pilot station spoken of by Captain Lee as
being five miles from Glenelg has been abandoned, and the pilots now
board ships from the light vessel moored off the bar.

"Vessels from England bound to Port Adelaide, should, after leaving the
Cape of Good Hope, run to the eastward in 37 degrees or 38 degrees south
latitude, until they arrive in longitude 132 degrees east, when they may
haul to the northward, so as to get into latitude 36 degrees 25 minutes,
in longitude 135 degrees 30 minutes; then steer to the north-east, and
make Kangaroo Island, passing between which and a small island named
Althorpe's Island, they will enter Investigator's Straits. These Straits
form the western entrance to St Vincent's Gulf, and are so free from
danger, that it seems almost wonderful how any vessel can get on shore
without gross negligence. The only danger that can possibly affect a
vessel is the Troubridge Shoal, and this, by a little attention to the
lead, may be easily avoided, as on the south side of the shoal the water
deepens gradually from four to seventeen or eighteen fathoms. The shores
on the side of Kangaroo Island are bold and rocky, whilst on the north
side, on Yorke's Peninsula, they are low and sandy. In working up in the
night, stand no nearer to the north shore than nine fathoms, or to the
southward than twelve fathoms. You will have from sixteen to twenty
fathoms in the fair way--fine grey sand, mixed with small pieces of
shell. In working up St. Vincent's Gulf, you may stand to the eastward in
six fathoms, and towards the Troubridge Shoal in nine fathoms. The
prevailing winds are from the south-west to south-east, especially in the
summer months, when the sea breeze sets in about nine o'clock. The
strength of tide in the Gulf is very irregular, with a strong south-west
wind, the flood runs up at the rate of about two miles an hour, whilst
with a northerly wind it is scarcely perceptible. The anchorage in
Holdfast Bay is hardly safe in the winter months, as it is quite open to
north-west, west, and south-west winds, which, when blowing hard, raise a
short tumbling sea. The ground is a fine sand, almost covered with weeds,
so that when the anchor once starts, the weeds being raked up under the
crown, will in a great measure prevent its again holding. In the summer
months it may be considered a perfectly safe anchorage, if due caution is
exercised in giving the vessel cable in time. The best anchorage for a
large vessel is with the summit of Mount Lofty, bearing east in six
fathoms. A small vessel will lay better close in, just allowing her depth
of water sufficient to ride in.

"The pilot station for Port Adelaide is about five miles north of
Holdfast Bay. In running up keep in five fathoms, until abreast of the
flag-staff on the beach, when a pilot will come on board. It is always
high water in Port Adelaide morning and evening, and consequently low
water in the middle of the day. In the present state of the harbour, no
vessel drawing more than sixteen feet water ought to go into the port.
Several very serious accidents have befallen vessels in this port, for
which the harbour itself ought certainly to be held blameless."

"Vessels," he adds, "from Sydney, or from the eastward, bound to Port
Adelaide, having arrived at Cape Howe, should shape a course for Hogan's
Group in Bass' Straits, when off which, with a northerly wind, the best
passage through the Straits is between Redondo and Wilson's Promontory,
because should a gale of wind come on from the north-west, as it almost
invariably does commence in that quarter, they would have more drift to
the south-east than if they passed through near Kent's Group or Sir R.
Curtis's Island. It is also a great saving in distance. Having arrived
off King's Island, with a north wind, stand well out to the west or
south-west, so as to keep well to the southward of Cape Northumberland,
as the heavy gales from the north-west seldom last more than forty-eight
hours, when they veer to the south-west, and fine weather ensues. Being
abreast of Cape Northumberland, a south-west wind will be a favourable
wind to proceed to Adelaide. Steer directly for the east end of Kangaroo
Island, which you may pass at a distance of one mile; and if the wind is
from the south or south-east, you may then steer across Backstairs
Passage to Cape Jarvis; having arrived off which, proceed as directed
before: should the wind be strong from south-west or west-south-west,
keep Kangaroo Island close on board until abreast of Cape Jarvis, when
you will have the Gulf open. Should it be night time or thick weather,
and you have sighted Cape Willoughby at the entrance after passing that
Cape, steer north-west fifteen miles, and you may lay to or run up
north-east by east under snug sail until daylight. There are four rocks
at the entrance of this passage, called the Pages; with a beating wind,
you may pass on either side of them, but with a leading wind there is no
necessity to approach them at all, as it is best to pass close round Cape
Willoughby. Should the wind be so strong that a vessel could not carry
sufficient canvas to fetch through the passage, it would be better for a
stranger to stand out to the southward, rather than attempt to run into
Encounter Bay. The anchorage in Encounter Bay is close round Granite
Island, where a vessel may lay sheltered from all winds, save from
south-east. There are several good anchorages where a vessel may run to,
should she be caught in a gale of wind in Bass' Straits: one behind
Wilson's Promontory, the corner inlet of Flinders; another in Western
Port; two under King's Island, besides several on the Van Diemen's Land
side, as Circular Head, George Town, Preservation Island, &c., the whole
of which may be attained by a proper consideration of the chart; but it
is always better, provided a vessel has sufficient sea room, to keep at
sea than to run for an anchorage, as the sea will seldom hurt a good ship
properly managed, and she is always ready to take advantage of any change
that may take place.

"Should a gale of wind come on when a vessel is far to the westward of
King's Island, she may run for Portland Bay. In going in, you pass to the
eastward of the St. Lawrence Islands, and haul directly in for the land
west-north-west; keep along the south shore of the bay, at a distance of
one mile, until you see the flag-staff at Mr. Henty's; bring that to bear
west, and you will have six fathoms water about three-quarters of a mile
from shore."

From Cape Jarvis the coast line tends to the north along the eastern
shore of St. Vincent's Gulf. The scenery, as you turn the point, is
extremely diversified. Dark cliffs and small sandy bays, with grassy
slopes almost to the water's edge, succeed each other, backed by moderate
hills, sparingly covered with trees, and broken into numerous valleys.
Thus you pass Yankelilla, Rapid Bay, and Aldingis; but from Brighton the
shore becomes low and sandy, and is backed by sand hummocks, that conceal
the nearer country from the view, and enable you to see the tops of the
Mount Lofty Range at a distance of from eleven to twelve miles.

Port Adelaide, a bar harbour, is about nine miles from Glenelg, and
situate on the eastern bank of a large creek, penetrating the mangrove
swamp by which the shore of the Gulf is thereabouts fringed. This creek
is from ten to eleven miles in length. Its course for about two miles
after you cross the bar is nearly east and west, but at that distance it
turns to the south, and runs parallel to the coast; and there is an
advantage in the direction it thus takes, that would not be apparent to
the reader unless explained. It is, that, as the land breeze blows off
the shore in the evening, and the sea breeze sets in in the morning
vessels can leave the harbour, or run up to it as they are inward or
outward bound.

The landing-place of the early settlers was too high up the creek, and
was not only the cause of great inconvenience to the shipping, but of
severe loss in stores and baggage to the settlers; but at the close of
the year 1839, Mr. McLaren, the then manager of the South Australian
Company commenced and finished a road across the swamp to a section of
land belonging to his employers, that was situated much lower down the
creek, and on which the present Port now stands. The road, which is two
miles in length, cost the Company 12,000 pounds. It has, however, been
transferred to the local Government, in exchange for 12,000 acres of
land, that were considered equivalent to the sum it cost.

The removal of the Port to this place was undoubtedly a great public
benefit; and whatever perspective advantages might have influenced Mr.
McLaren on the occasion, he merited all due praise for having undertaken
such a work at a time when the Government itself was unable to do so.
Both the wharf and the warehouse belonging to the Company are very
creditable buildings, as is the Custom House and the line of sheds
erected by the Government; but the wharf attached to them is defective,
and liable to injury, from the chafing of the tide between the piers,
which are not placed so as to prevent its action. Mr. Phillips' iron
store is also one of a substantial description; but there was not, when I
left the province, another building of any material value at the Port.
Numerous wooden houses existed in the shape of inns, stables, etc.; but
the best of these were unfortunately burnt down by a fire a few days
before I embarked for Europe. Whether it is that a misgiving on the minds
of the public as to the permanency of the Port has been the cause of, and
prevented the erection of more substantial and better houses at Port
Adelaide, it is difficult to say; but any one might have foreseen, that
as the colony progressed, and its commerce increased, the Port would
necessarily have to be moved to some part of the creek where there was
deeper and broader water, for the convenience of the shipping. I felt
assured, indeed, that the removal of the Port would take place sooner
than was generally supposed. The following extract from the South
Australian Gazette of the 4th of December last, will prove that I judged
truly:--

"NEW ROAD TO THE NORTH ARM.--This road was commenced last Tuesday week;
and at the rate at which the work is progressing, will be completed
(except as regards the subsequent metalling and ballasting) within four
months from the present time. The line adopted is the one which was
proposed by Mr. Lindsay in 1840, as requiring less outlay in the original
construction than either of the other lines proposed. Taking Adelaide as
the starting point, the course will be either along the present Port Road
between Hindmarsh and Bowden as far as section No. 407, thence along the
cross track between that section and section No. 419 (preliminary), as
far as the southeast corner of Mr. Mildred's section, No. 421; then in a
straight line through the last named section and Mr. Gilles's, No. 2072,
after leaving which it passes through an opening in the sand-hills, and
then winds along the highest ground between the creeks, leaving the South
Australian Company's road about a mile on the left, till it joins the
main road or street running through section G. at the North Arm; or
through North Adelaide and along the road at the back of Bowden, parallel
with the main Port Road as far as Mr. Torrens' residence, to the
south-east corner of Mr. Mildred's section, thence through that section
as before. The soil of the so-termed swamp, or rather marsh, is of the
most favourable description for embanking and draining operations,
consisting at the part of the line where the work has been commenced, of
a good loam for the first spit, and then clay to the depth of eighteen
inches or two feet, resting upon a stratum composed for the most part of
shells of numberless shapes and sizes, which extends to the bottoms of
the drains (four feet), being the level of high water at spring tides,
and at about the same above the low-water level. The shelly stratum
continues below the bottoms of the drains to an uncertain depth. From the
commencement of the 'Swamp' to the Great Square or public reserve at the
junction of the North Arm with the main channel of the Creek, the
distance along the line of road is 4800 yards, or nearly two miles and
three-quarters. The breadth of the road between the ditches will be 114
feet, or between three and four times the breadth of the Company's road."

If there is anything more justly a subject of congratulation to the
Province than another, it is the commencement of the work thus notified.
The road is now, in all probability, finished, and that part of the creek
rendered available where these permanent improvements may be made,
without the fear of any future change; and when the shores of the North
Arm shall be lined by wharfs, and the more elevated portions of Torrens'
Island shall be covered with houses, few harbours will be able to boast
of more picturesque beauty. There was something dreary in sailing up the
creek with its dense and dark mangroves on either side, and no other
object visible beyond them save the distant mountains; but the approach
to the new Port will not fail to excite those pleasurable feelings in the
heart of the stranger which give a colouring to every other object.

The removal of the port to the proposed locality will bring it within
three miles of the bar, and will be of incalculable advantage to the
shipping, since there will no longer be any delay in their putting to
sea. The following letter, addressed by Captain Lipson, the
Harbour-master, to the Colonial Secretary, in reference to the
improvements that have been effected at the bar, will best explain its
present state, and the description of vessels it will admit into the
Port.


"Port, 6th July, 1847.

"SIR,--In answer to your letter of this day's date, requesting that I
would report to you, for the information of the Legislative Council, what
beneficial effects have been produced by the use of the mud barge in
deepening the bar at the entrance of Port Adelaide, since the
commencement of its operation, in the year 1845, up to the present date,
also what additional depth of water, if any, has been obtained by the
work alluded to.

"I have the honour to state, that at the commencement of the colony, her
Majesty's storeship 'Buffalo' was brought out by the then governor,
Captain Hindmarsh, to be detained here nine months for the protection and
convenience of the colonists. It was, therefore, much wished to have her
inside the bar; but after attending and carefully watching successive
spring-tides, it was given up as impracticable, she drawing fifteen feet.
The Governor then appointed a board to examine the bar, consisting of the
masters of the 'Buffalo,' 'John Renwick,' and another, who, in their
report, stated as their opinion, that no vessel above 300 tons ought to
be brought into the harbour; however, last week two vessels exceeding 600
tons have been brought up to the wharf. But the most beneficial effect is
now felt from a ship being able to cross the outer bar so much sooner on
the tide than before, thereby having sufficient time to take her round
the bar, and, if moderate, to beat up and anchor at the North Arm the
same tide. Ships may now be brought in on the springs in winter, drawing
seventeen or eighteen feet, as the time of high water is in the day, and
the wind generally fair to beat in, but not so in going out, from the
difficulty of reaching the bar at the time required, and the tide leaving
so quickly after the ebb is made great care is required; and I find it
unsafe to allow any vessel to load deeper than 15 or 16.6 inches at most.
With a tug, there would be less difficulty and danger in loading to 18
feet than there now is to 15.

"There is now three feet more water on the bar than there was previous to
its being deepened, and if the work be continued next summer, to enlarge
a cut which has been made, there will be five feet.

"I have the honour to be, Sir, your obedient servant,

"THOMAS LIPSON, Harbour Master.
"The Honourable Colonial Secretary."

It is not clear to me, however, that the admission of larger class
shipping into the Port will be of any great advantage. I am led to
believe that ships of smaller tonnage than those drawing 16 to 17 feet,
have been found to be most convenient for the ordinary purposes of
commerce. However, it is evident, that if Captain Lipson continues the
same praiseworthy exertions he has hitherto used, he will deepen the bar
for vessels of any tonnage. Under existing circumstances, it may be as
well to state that any ship arriving off the bar when there is not
sufficient water on it for them to enter the port, will find good
anchorage all round the lightship, particularly a little to the westward
of it. The whole Gulf, indeed, from this point, may be considered as a
safe and extensive roadstead. As regards Port Adelaide itself, I cannot
imagine a securer or a more convenient harbour. Without having any broad
expanse of water, it is of sufficient width for vessels to lie there in
perfect safety, whether as regards the wind or the anchorage.

The head of St. Vincent's Gulf is in latitude 34 1/2 degrees. Between
that point and Port Adelaide, the shore is either lined by mangroves, or
is low and sandy. There are, nevertheless, several inlets similar to, but
much smaller than Port Adelaide, and other commodious anchorages for
small craft along it. The principal of these is the inlet connected with
the Gawler, of which I shall hereafter speak. York Peninsula forms the
western shore of St. Vincent's Gulf, and separates it from that of
Spencer. It is a long, low tongue of land--Cape Spencer, its southern
extremity, being in 35 degrees 17 minutes, and in long. 136 degrees 52
minutes. Though embracing a considerable area, the character of the
Peninsula is unfavourable to the growth of nutritive herbage; the surface
soil is a species of calcareous limestone, the rock formation of a
tertiary description, although, at the lower extremity, granite and trap
rock are known to exist. The surface of the country is undulating,
covered in many places by scrub, and the trees being very short-lived,
the whole is matted with dead timber, and difficult of access. A
deficiency of water renders York Peninsula still more unfavourable for
location; nevertheless, several sections of land have been purchased on
that part which is immediately opposite to Port Adelaide, and it is said
that indications of copper have been found there, a fact I should be
inclined to doubt. In 1840, a company applied for a special survey on the
shores of the Peninsula to the southward of Point Pearce, and gave the
name of Victoria Harbour to the locality; but the survey was subsequently
abandoned in consequence of the unfavourable character of the interior,
from the great deficiency of water.

If we except the results of a survey made by the late Lieut.-Governor,
Colonel Robe, of the upper part of Spencer's Gulf, during which, as is
the case in the same part of the neighbouring gulf, his Excellency found
convenient bays and inlets, but little is known of the eastern shore of
that splendid gulf, beyond this point. Double the size of St. Vincent's
Gulf, it runs up to the 32 1/2 parallel, and was at one time or other
very probably connected with Lake Torrens. The higher part is backed by a
range of mountains, the more prominent of which were named by Captain
Flinders--Mount Remarkable, Mount Browne, and Mount Arden. On the first
of these there were so many indications of copper, that a special survey
of 20,000 acres was taken by a company for the purpose of working any
lodes that might be found. The country round about Mount Remarkable is
stated to be exceedingly picturesque and good; so that independently of
any value it may possess as a mineral survey, it possesses both
agricultural and pastoral advantages. After passing the Mount Remarkable
Range, however, the country falls off in character. A dreary region
extends round the head of the Gulf, and, it is to be feared, to a much
greater distance. The description given by Mr. Eyre, and the reports of
those who have endeavoured to penetrate to the westward of Lake Torrens
both agree as to the sterile and inhospitable character of the remote
interior. Little improvement takes place in it on following down the
western shore of the Gulf. Several individuals, indeed, have perished in
endeavouring to take stock round the head of the Gulf to Port Lincoln,
either from the want of water, or from having wandered and lost
themselves amidst the low brush with which it is covered. The whole of
the country, indeed, lying to the westward of Spencer's Gulf is, as far
as I have been able to ascertain, of very inferior description. There
are, it is true, isolated patches of good land, and a limited run for
sheep, but the character of the country corresponds but little with the
noble feature for which Spencer's Gulf is so justly celebrated. In
reference to this magnificent basin, Captain Lee, from whom I have
already quoted, observes--

"The harbour of Port Lincoln, including Boston Bay, is situated near the
extremity of the Peninsula, which forms the west side of Spencer's Gulf
in the Province of South Australia, and from its great extent, and the
number of its safe anchorages, is capable of containing the largest
fleets, and as a depot, is not, perhaps, to be surpassed by any port in
the world. Vessels from England, bound to Port Lincoln, should run along
in about 35 degrees 20 minutes south latitude, until they arrive in 135
degrees 20 minutes east longitude, when they may haul up to the
north-east, and make Cape Catastrophe. After arriving near the Cape, they
may then shape a course to pass between it and Williams' Island. There
are strong tide ripplings here, which, to a stranger, would present the
appearance of reefs; but as the channel is perfectly clear, no danger
need be apprehended. Having passed through the channel, should night be
approaching, it would be advisable for a stranger to keep the main land
aboard, leaving another Island (Smith's Island), on the starboard hand,
and bring up in Memory Cove, a perfectly safe anchorage, in about five
fathoms, and wait for day-light. Proceeding then along shore to the
northward, he will arrive at Taylor's Island, which may be passed on
either side; after which he may run along shore at a distance of one
mile, until he arrives at Cape Donnington. This Cape may be known by its
having a small islet laying about half a mile from the point. Rounding
this islet, at half a cable's length, in about nine-fathoms' water, and
hauling to the westward, he will open the magnificent harbour of Port
Lincoln, stretching to the south-west as far as the eye can reach. Should
the wind be fresh from the south or south-west, it would be better if
bound to Boston Bay, to beat up between Boston Island and the promontory
of Cape Donnington. The shores are steep on both sides, so that a vessel
may stand close in on either tack. Should the wind be so strong as to
prevent a vessel beating in, she may run up under easy sail to a bay on
the north-east end of Boston Island, and bring up in seven fathoms
opposite a white sandy beach, three-quarters of a mile off shore. There
is also excellent anchorage at the entrance to Spalding Cove, bringing
the western point of the promontory of Cape Donnington to bear north by
east, and the northernmost of Bicker's Island west by north, you will lay
in seven fathoms, muddy bottom. Having arrived at Bicker's Island and
bound for Boston Bay, stand directly over to the westward, passing the
south end of Boston Island, until you open the bay, when you may choose a
berth according to circumstances, and in any depth from ten to four
fathoms.

"The positions of the various points and islands are so correctly laid
down on Flinders' chart, that the skilful navigator will at once know his
exact situation by cross-bearings.

"The anchorage in Port Lincoln itself is not so safe as in Boston Bay,
and more difficult of access, especially in the winter months, when the
winds are strong from the south-west, and in the summer months it is
quite open to the north-east. In working up, a vessel may stand close in
to the eastern shore, and to within half a mile of the western, but
should not attempt to pass between the two Bicker's Islands, as there is
a reef running from the northernmost island nearly across to the other.

"Vessels from Adelaide, bound to Boston Bay, after arriving at Althorpe's
Island, should shape a course so as to pass between the Gambier Islands
and Thistle's Islands. There is a small island bearing west five miles
from the south end of Wedge Island, the largest of the Gambier group,
which is not laid down in Flinders, which should be left on the starboard
hand. Bring the highest part of Thistle's Island to bear west, distant
about six miles, and in twenty-two fathoms water, and a north-west
half-west course will carry you through midway between the Horse-shoe
Reef and the rocks which lay off the north-west end of Thistle's Island,
and in the direct track for Cape Donnington. The passage between the
reefs is about three miles wide, and ought not to be attempted in the
night, as the tides set directly across the channel. There is very good
anchorage on the north-east side of Thistle's Island, well sheltered
three-fourths of the year. Bring the rocks before-mentioned to bear
north-north-west, and two remarkable sand hills south by west, and you
will lay in five fathoms, one mile off shore--north end Thistle's Island
west by south. Should the wind be so strong from southwest or
west-south-west, so that a vessel from the eastward cannot carry sail
sufficient to fetch up to Cape Donnington, or under Thistle's Island, it
would be advisable to bear up for Hardwick Bay; passing to the eastward
of Wedge Island, come no nearer to the shore of York's Peninsula than two
miles, until you arrive within five miles of Corny Point, when you may
haul in for that point, rounding it a distance of half a mile, you may
bring up in five fathoms, one mile from shore: Corny Point bearing west.
Vessels from Sydney, bound to Port Lincoln, may pass through Backstairs
Passage, and proceed according to the foregoing directions, or by keeping
well to the southward, pass outside Kangaroo Island, until they arrive in
longitude 136 degrees E., when they may shape a course either to pass
between Gambier's and Thistle's Islands, or else for Cape Catastrophe,
taking care to give the Neptune Islands a wide berth, and then proceed
according to either of the foregoing directions."

To this extract which refers exclusively to the navigation of Spencer's
Gulf, I may add, that Boston Island lies immediately opposite to the bay,
and that there are two channels of entrance round the island, through
which vessels of the largest size can pass with any wind or in any
weather, for the harbour is so sheltered by the headlands forming the
entrance, that the swell of the sea is broken before reaching it.

The high ground which almost surrounds Boston Bay, protects it in like
manner from the winds, more especially those coming from the west and
southwest, in which directions some of the hills attain the height of
several hundred feet.

The depth of water in the central parts of the Bay is about twelve
fathoms, varying from five to seven at the distance of less than a
quarter of a mile from the shore all round; whilst at Boston Point, where
the town of Boston has been laid out, there is a depth of two, three, and
four fathoms, at about a boat's length from the land. The bottom consists
in some places of mud, in others of shells and sand, so that the
anchorage is safe.

The tide sometimes rises seven feet, but that is considered a high tide,
the ordinary rise not being more than five; this depends, however, on the
outward state of the Gulf, and the quarter from which the wind may happen
to be blowing.

In the summer season, the land and sea breezes blow very regularly, for
three weeks or a month at a time. They are then succeeded by strong winds
from the south-west, that last for three or four days, and are sometimes
very violent. In winter these interruptions to the usual calm state of
the weather are more frequent, but the harbour is little influenced by
them; taking it altogether, indeed, as a harbour, it is unquestionably as
safe and commodious as any in the world, and it is deeply to be
regretted, that its position, of which I shall have to speak, and the
nature of the country behind it, should be any drawbacks to its becoming
one of the most important ports on the Australian Continent.

In the vicinity of Port Lincoln, the land is of very varied character. To
the west and south-west it is poor and scrubby, covered with a diminutive
growth of she oak (Casuarinae) or dwarf gumtrees (Eucalypti), or it is
wholly destitute of timber; but along the line of hills, stretching to
the north, at a short distance from the shores of the Gulf, there is an
improvement in the soil. The pasture is well adapted for sheep, and there
are isolated valleys in which the soil is very good and fit for
cultivation; but this kind of country only occupies a narrow strip of
about ten miles, and although tracts of available land have been found in
the interior, and it has been ascertained that water is not deficient, it
must still, I fear, be considered as a very inferior district. As regards
Port Lincoln itself, the inhabitants procure their water from a spring,
on the sea-shore, which is covered by every tide. This spring does not
appear to undergo any sensible diminution, even in the height of summer,
and is stated to be so copious, that it would yield a most abundant
supply.

It has been reported, that strong indications of the presence of copper
have been found in the neighbourhood of Port Lincoln, and this report may
be correct. The discovery of mines there, would at once raise the harbour
to importance, and make it the resort of shipping. Mines might be worked
at Port Lincoln with more advantage perhaps to the province, than where
they have been already in operation, for it admits of great doubt whether
the benefit from the distribution of wealth from mining speculations,
makes up for the interference of such speculations with other branches of
industry. Unless some local advantage, of the kind to which I have
alluded, should give this noble harbour an impulse however, it would
appear to have but little prospect of becoming a place of importance, for
although Spencer's Gulf penetrates so deep into the northern interior,
the country is altogether unprofitable, and although there is depth of
water sufficient for the largest ships to the very head of the Gulf, yet,
as far as our present knowledge extends, it is not probable that it will
be the outlet of any export produce. It is to be remembered, however,
that if there should be minerals in any abundance found on the Mount
Remarkable special survey--the ore must necessarily be shipped, from some
one of the little harbours examined by the Lieutenant-Governor during his
survey of that part of Spencer's Gulf--In such case, Port Lincoln will
be brought more immediately into notice.

From Port Lincoln, the shore of the Gulf still trends to the south, as
far as Cape Catastrophe, in lat. 35 degrees. It then turns with an
irregular outline to the N.N.W., and several bays succeed each other. The
first of these is Sleaford Bay, sometimes occupied as a whaling station,
but of no other importance. Coffin's Bay, almost immediately behind Port
Lincoln, is rather an inlet than a bay, and runs so far into the
interior, as to approach Boston Bay, to within 16 miles. Coffin's Bay is
exceedingly wide, and objectionable for many reasons, but as it is a
whaling station of some importance, and visited by numerous whalers, I
shall quote Captain Lee's remarks upon it, and give his directions for
going to it.


"This is a very large bay, perfectly secure from all winds, save from
north to east, but unfortunately a great portion of it is rendered
useless by the shallowness of the water. The best anchorage is with Point
Sir Isaac, bearing north-north-west, about one mile and a half from the
western shore in four or five fathoms. In working in with a southerly
wind, you may stand to the eastward until you bring the above point to
bear south-west by west, after which it would be better to make short
tacks along the western shore. You must be careful to keep the lead
going, as the water shoals from five and four fathoms to one and a half
at a single cast. This bay seems well adapted for a fishing station. The
inner part of the bay extends a long way back into the country, at least
thirty miles from Point Sir Isaac, and contains two or three secure
harbours and excellent anchorages, a new chart of which is in course of
publication.

"Vessels from Sydney bound to Coffin's Bay, should proceed as if bound to
Port Lincoln until arrived off the Neptune Islands, when they should
steer for Perforated Island, having passed which, steer for Point
Whidbey, giving it a berth of at least two miles. In running along shore
from Point Whidbey to Point Sir Isaac, come no nearer the shore than two
miles, until you get the latter point to bear east-south-east as the
rocks lay a long way from the shore. Having arrived at Point Sir Isaac
proceed as directed before.

"Althorp's Island is of moderate height, situated at the entrance of
Investigator's Straits; may be passed close to on the south side. Several
other islands and reefs lay between it and York's Peninsula, rendering
that passage highly dangerous.

"Wedge Island, one of the Gambier Group, may easily be known by its
wedge-like form, sloping from south-east to north-west. There are two
peaked rocks off the south-east end, one mile off shore, also a small
island, bearing west five miles from the south end, not laid down in
Flinders' charts.

"Thistle's Island, is low at each end but high in the middle, it lays in
a north-west and south-east direction. There are some rocks which lay off
the northern point about three miles, which being connected with the
island itself, forms a good anchorage behind, secure from all but north
and east winds, another good place for a fishing party. See Port Lincoln
directions.

"Neptune's Islands are low, three in number, and having numerous rocks
and reefs amongst them; ought not to be approached too closely, there
being generally a strong swell from the south-west, the sea breaks over
them with great violence.

"Liguanea Island is of moderate elevation, and may be passed on the south
side at a distance of two miles.

"Perforated Island, as its name imports, may be known by its having a
hole through it near the north end and close to the top of the island, it
may be passed close on any side. FOUR HUMMOCKS may easily be known from
their appearance answering to their name.

"Greenly Island, this is a peaked island, rather high, and may be seen
ten leagues off. There is another island laying south and by west, seven
miles, not laid down in Flinders', and two other reefs between them,
rendering the passage unsafe.

"Proceeding along shore to the northward you will fall in with Flinders'
Island. This is a large island, covered with wood, with plenty of fresh
water, possessing a secure anchorage on the northern side, and is
admirably adapted for a whaling station. In going on from the southward,
keep outside the top Gallant {GALL'S in published text} Island, and steer
directly for the north-east point, rounding which, you will open the
anchorage, and as there is no danger, but may be seen, you may choose
a berth according to circumstances.

"Waldegrave's Island, close to the main land, has good anchorage on the
northern side, secure from south-east and south-west winds.

"The shore, from Waldegrave's Island to Point Weyland is low and sandy.
There is a large body of water running in a direction parallel to the
coast, all the way from Point Weyland to the northward of Cape Radstock,
having an entrance at both points. It appears as if the action of the sea
from the south-west, had broken through the coast range and filled up the
valley immediately behind. Indeed the whole coast from Kangaroo Island to
as far to the north-west as has been visited by the author, bears evident
marks of the encroachments of the sea. In some places marked down as
small islands in Flinders', there are now only reefs, other places which
were formerly points of land, are transformed to islands."


In the year 1840, I was instructed by the then Governor of South
Australia, to send an officer of the survey in a small vessel, with a
supply of provisions for Mr. Eyre, who was at that time supposed to have
reached Fowler's Bay, during the first of his expeditions; I accordingly
selected Mr. John Cannan, in whose zeal and ability I had every
confidence. This officer left Port Adelaide the 9th September, 1840, with
instructions from me, in addition to the immediate object he had in view,
to survey such parts of the coast along which he was about to sail, as
had only been partially examined by Captain Flinders. Unfortunately it
was during the winter time, and the task I had assigned him would, I
knew, be attended with considerable risk in beating along that dangerous
and stormy coast. Mr. Cannan arrived at Streaky Bay on the 27th
September, but was disappointed in finding Mr. Eyre, or a letter he had
buried for him under Cape Bauer, he therefore proceeded to the
examination of the coast, as I had instructed him to do; and the
following extract from his report will not only enable the reader to
judge how he performed that service, but will give him the best
information as to the character of the several bays and inlets he
examined.


"I send you a chart of Streaky, Smoky, and Denial Bays, by which you will
be better able to judge of the capabilities of the harbours they contain,
than by any description I can give. I may mention however, that the
entrance to Smoky Bay, between the shoals of St. Peter's and Eyre's
Islands, is dangerous, for with any swell on the sea breaks right across.
In the inlet, on the west side of Denial Bay, there is a salt water creek
with two fathoms of water; and adjoining some high sand-hills, among
which we found fresh water by digging. Our vessel being the first, I
believe, that ever entered Smoky Bay, on finding an island at its
southern end, I named it after that enterprising traveller Mr. Eyre. I
also found an island and reef not laid down by Flinders, to the southern
of St. Francis Islands. There is also an island 10 miles west of the
rocky group of Whidbey's Isles, and about 12 miles from Greenly's Isles.
The captain of a French whaler also informed me, that a sunken rock lays
6 miles N.W., off Point Sir Isaac, on which the sea breaks in heavy
weather.

"The desert country surrounding these bays has been sufficiently
explored, and so correctly described by Mr. Eyre, as not to require to be
mentioned. The absence of any rise that can be called a hill, from Mount
Greenly to Mount Barren, the eternal limestone cliffs, the scarcity of
water and grass, surely prove this coast to be the most miserable in the
world, whilst the harbours are as good as could be wished for, and it
must be owing to the deficiency of charts, that whalers do not frequent
these bays, for there are generally two or three French or American
vessels in the neighbourhood during the season. I found no bones or
carcases of whales in Streaky, Denial, or Smoky Bays, but the shores of
Fowler's and Coffin's Bays, I found strewed with their remains. In the
latter place, Captain Rossiter, of the Mississippi shewed me his chart,
and told me there was no shelter for a vessel on this side of the Bight,
except at Fowler's Bay, and that was indifferent. The great extent of
smooth water at Denial and Streaky Bays, and a well of water on St.
Peter's, dug by a sealer who lived on it many months, afford more
advantages for fishing, and more especially to a shore party, than are to
be found any where else in the Province.

"From the general flatness of the country, it may be presumed that its
character does not alter for a great distance inland. I observed nothing
in the formation of the island, differing from the mainland, and I may
mention that the rocks of the isles of St. Francis presented the same
appearance as the Murray Cliffs."


It will appear from the above, that Mr. Cannan did not proceed farther to
the westward than Fowler's Bay, and that he did not therefore prolong his
survey to the western limits of the Colony, by a distance of about five
leagues, since the 132 degrees meridian falls on that coast a little to
the westward of Cape Adieu, and between 12 and 15 leagues from the bottom
of the Great Australian Bight.

Although some of the bays and harbours I have described in running along
its coast, are not so good as might be desired, yet it is evident that,
as a maritime country, South Australia is particularly favoured, not only
in having anchorage of the safest description, but also in possessing two
or three known harbours, capable of containing ships in any number or any
size, and as safe and capacious as any in the world. Looking indeed at
Port Adelaide, one cannot but admire its appropriate and convenient
position. Had such a harbour not existed there, the produce of that
fertile portion of the Province would hardly have been available to the
inhabitants in the shape of exports, so difficult would it have been to
have found another harbour of equal security, or of equal size, for the
commercial wants of the settlers. Added to this, it has the double
advantage of being close to the capital, being so easy of access, and in
so central a position, as to be able to communicate with the neighbouring
colonies with the greatest ease.

It will be remembered that I stated in the former part of my work, that
the remarkable wall forming the Great Australian Bight, was thrown up
simultaneously with the great fossil bed of the Murray.

As the principal object of the Expedition into Central Australia was to
ascertain the past and present structure of the Continent, I have been
led to allude to the subject again, in consequence of two or three
remarks in Mr. Cannan's letter, which has been quoted above, bearing
strongly upon it, and corroborative of the hypothesis I have entertained
as proving a striking uniformity in the rock formation of those two
localities. To those remarks I would beg to call the attention of my
readers. They will be found at the commencement and termination of the
last paragraph.


CHAPTER II.


PLAINS OF ADELAIDE--BRIDGES OVER THE TORRENS--SITE OF
ADELAIDE--GOVERNMENT HOUSE BUILDINGS AND
CHURCHES--SCHOOLS--POLICE--ROADS--THE GAWLER--BAROSSA RANGE--THE MURRAY
BELT--MOORUNDI--NATIVES ON THE MURRAY--DISTANT STOCK STATIONS--MOUNT
GAMBIER DISTRICT--ITS RICHNESS--ASCENT TO MOUNT LOFTY--MOUNT BARKER
DISTRICT--SCENE IN HINDMARSH VALLEY--PROPORTION OF SOIL IN THE
PROVINCE--PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL--PORT LINCOLN--CLIMATE OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA--RANGE OF THE THERMOMETER--SALUBRITY.


Having, in the preceding chapter, run along the coast of South Australia,
and noticed such parts as have been sufficiently examined to justify our
observations, it remains for me to give an account of its interior
features, of its climate, soil, mineral, and other sources of wealth, and
lastly of its fitness as a colony for the peculiar habits of an English
population.

The city of Adelaide, the capital of South Australia, stands on the
eastern shore of St. Vincent's Gulf, and is about six miles from the
coast. Any one landing either at the old or new port, and proceeding to
the capital for the first time, would perhaps be disappointed at the
description of country through which he would pass. It consists indeed of
extensive level plains, over the eastern extremity of which the Mount
Lofty Range is visible. They are bounded southwards by a line of trees,
marking the course of the river Torrens across them, but extend
northwards for many miles without any visible termination. Their monotony
however, is, at the present date, in some measure broken by belts of
wood, and the numerous cottages that have been built upon them, with
their adjoining corn-fields, have changed their aspect, and removed the
appearance of loneliness which they first exhibited. Still neither the
gloomy swamp over which the stranger has in the first instance to travel,
on landing at the Port--or the character of the plains themselves, are
calculated to raise his anticipations, as to the beauty or fertility of
the interior. The first town through which he will pass after leaving the
Port, is Albert Town, which has been laid out on the first available
ground near the swamp. When I left the colony in May last, several
tolerable buildings had been erected in Albert Town, but it was
nevertheless a wretched looking and straggling place, and will never
perhaps advance beyond its present state.

On his nearer approach to the capital the traveller will pass between the
villages of Boden and Hindmarsh, in both of which he will observe
numerous kilns of bricks. He will then enter on the Park Lands, by which
North and South Adelaide are separated from each other. On this land the
scene at once changes, and he will find himself riding through an open
forest, shading rich, alluvial, and grassy flats; and, strictly speaking,
will then be traversing the Valley of the Torrens. In May, 1847, there
were four bridges over that little river. The Company's bridge a little
above the city. The Frome bridge, a light wooden structure, built by the
sappers and miners, under the direction of Captain Frome, the
Surveyor-General, after whom it was called. The City bridge, constructed
of stone, but then incomplete, and a rude wooden bridge between Adelaide
and Hindmarsh, erected by an innkeeper, with a view of drawing the
traffic from the Port past his door. The City bridge, which was
undertaken by contract, promised to grace the approach to Adelaide, and
was intended to be the principal bridge to connect the north and south
portions of the city, as well as to form the chief line to the Port and
to the north. The occurrence of an unusual flood, however, in the latter
part of the year 1847 deprived the good citizens of Adelaide of these
necessary means of communication with the country on the right bank of
the Torrens, by the injury it did to them. The Company's bridge suffered
less than any other, but was so shaken as to be impassable for several
days. Aware, as I am, of the general character of the Australian streams,
and seeing no reason why the Torrens should differ from others, taking
into consideration, too, the reports of the natives as to the height to
which the river had been known to rise in former years, and the fact that
no rain had fallen since the establishment of the Colony to cause any
very great or sudden flood, it appeared to me, that the place selected
for the City bridge was too low. Ordinary floods so completely change the
channel of the river, and make such devastation in its bed, that it is
hardly to be recognised when the water subsides, so that unless the banks
are high, and the soil of which they may be composed stiff enough to
resist the impetuosity of the stream, I fear no bridge across the Torrens
will be permanently safe.

The position and ground chosen by the first Surveyor-General of South
Australia, as the site of its future capital is a remarkable instance of
the quick intelligence of that officer. For although he had but little
time to make his selection, a more intimate knowledge of the coast has
proved that no more eligible point could have been found. Fault has, I am
aware, been found with Colonel Light in this matter, but without just
grounds, I think, for in no other locality could the same quantity of
water have been found, or the same facility offered for the construction
of those reservoirs and other works so necessary to the health and
comfort of a large metropolis. A principal objection raised to the
situation of Adelaide is its distance from the Port, but that we must
remember is a disadvantage common to many other large and mercantile
cities. The Surveyor-General seems to have been fully aware of the
responsible duty that devolved upon him, and to have acted with great
judgment. Port Lincoln, indeed, is a splendid harbour, one with which
Port Adelaide, as far as size goes, cannot be compared, but having said
this nothing farther can be advanced in its favour, for it is not only
deficient in its supply of water, but the contiguous country is far from
rich, whereas Adelaide is backed by one of undoubted fertility.

Established where it is, the city of Adelaide stands on the summit of the
first elevated ground, between the coast and the mountain ranges.

It is separated, as the reader will have learnt, by the valley of the
Torrens, and occupies the northern and southern slopes and brows of the
hills on either side. The view to the westward from the more elevated
parts of the city commands the whole of the plains of Adelaide, and St.
Vincent's Gulf; to the eastward, it extends over the rich and dark wooded
valley of the river, the lighter wooded country at the base of the Mount
Lofty Range, and the peaks and elevations of that beautiful mountain
chain.

South Adelaide is on flat ground and twice the size of the northern part
of the town. It has also been more extensively built upon, and is the
established commercial division of the city. The Government House and all
the public buildings and offices are in South Adelaide, and the streets
in the vicinity of the North Terrace, have assumed a regularity and
uniformity greater than any street in North Adelaide. Hindley and Rundle
streets, indeed, would do no discredit to any secondary town in England.
Every shop and store that is now built is of a substantial and ornamental
character, and those general improvements are being made which are the
best proofs of increasing prosperity and opulence.

There is scarcely any article of European produce that cannot be obtained
in Adelaide, at a very little advance on home prices, nor is it
necessary, or indeed advisable that Emigrants should overload themselves
in going out to any of the Australian Colonies. Experience, the best
monitor, leads me to give this advice, which, however, I am bound to say,
I did not adopt when I went out to New South Wales; but the consequence
was, that I purchased a great many things with which I could have
dispensed, and that I should have found the money they cost much more
useful than they proved.

King William Street divides Hindley from Rundle Street, and is
immediately opposite to the gate of Government House, which is built on a
portion of the Park lands, and is like a country gentleman's house in
England. It stands in an enclosure of about eight or ten acres; the
grounds are neatly kept, and there is a shrubbery rapidly growing up
around the House.

The Public Offices are at the corner of King William Street and Victoria
Square, facing into the latter. The building is somewhat low, but a
creditable edifice, to appearance at all events, although not large
enough for the wants of the public service.

I am not aware that there is any other public building worthy of
particular notice, if I except the gaol, which is a substantial erection
occupying the north-west angle of the Park land, but is too low in its
situation to be seen to advantage at any distance. Like Government House,
it was built with a view to future addition, but fortunately for the
colony, Government House is the first which seems to call for completion.

The number of Episcopalian Churches in Adelaide is limited to two,
Trinity Church and St. John's. The former was originally built of wood,
and may be said to be coeval with the colony itself. It has of late
however been wholly built of stone, and under the active and praiseworthy
exertions of Mr. Farrell, the colonial chaplain, an excellent and
commodious school-room has been attached to it.

Trinity Church stands on the North Terrace, and is a prominent object as
you ascend from the Park lands. St. John's is situated on the East
Terrace at a greater distance, but it has a commanding view of the Mount
Lofty Range, and the intervening plains. Perhaps considering that the
city has not extended much in the direction of East Terrace, it may be a
little too far for public convenience, but this is a question that admits
of doubt. It is a neat and unostentatious brick building, at which the
Rev. Mr. Woodcock performs service, whose exertions amongst the natives
in the West Indies have stamped him both as a christian and a
philanthropist. The two churches are calculated to hold about 1000
sittings, and the average attendance is about 900.

It may appear to the reader that the number of churches in Adelaide,
where there is a population of between 8000 and 10,000 souls, is not
sufficient, as is the case. Ere this however, a third church, to be
called "Christ's Church," will have been erected in North Adelaide, where
such a place of worship was much required. 500 pounds had been subscribed
for the purpose in December last, and it was confidently anticipated that
the further contributions of the colonists would enable the committee to
commence and finish it. The arrival of the Bishop on the 24th of the
above month, of which accounts have been received had given great
satisfaction, and his Lordship was to begin his useful ministry on the
following day (Christmas Day), by preaching at Trinity Church.

However few the Episcopalian churches in the capital of South Australia,
we cannot accuse the Dissenters of a similar want of places of public
worship, of which there are 9, the whole number throughout the province
being 31; whilst the number of churches is 6. The Congregational chapels
are calculated to accomodate 4700 communicants, the average attendance
being about 2300, and are, generally speaking, good looking and
ornamental buildings, and do no discredit to those who superintended
their erection, and approved the places.

There is a Roman Catholic Bishop of South Australia, but he had, during
the latter period of my residence in the province, been absent in Europe.
The Catholic Church stands on the West Terrace, and is, perhaps, in one
of the most healthy situations that could have been chosen. There is an
excellent school attached to the church, which is equally open to all
denominations of Christians, and is, I have understood, more numerously
attended than any other in the capital. The total number of
Sunday-schools in the province, in 1841, was 26, at which 617 boys and
582 girls attended. The average number of Sunday and other schools in
1845 was 55, at which 780 males and 670 female children attended.

In the year 1846, when His Excellency Colonel Robe laid the estimates on
the table of the Legislative Council, its attention was drawn to the
state of education and religion in the province, and after a long
discussion on the subject, a grant of 2s. per head was voted to the
different sects in aid of religion and education. It was left to the
ministers of the Protestant Church, and to the proper officers of the
other persuasions to appropriate the sum received by each, according to
the last census, as they deemed best, for the promotion of one or the
other of the above purposes, with the sole condition that they should
render an account yearly to the Council of the manner in which the
several sums had been appropriated. Yet this provision, which without
interfering in the slightest degree with any religious sect, gave to the
heads of each the greater power of doing good, caused very great
dissatisfaction. All I can say is, that it was an instance of liberal and
enlightened views of government, of which the Council of South Australia
in having set the example ought to be proud.

The Legislative Council of New South Wales has since, I believe, followed
its example, and I sincerely trust the good that is anticipated, will
result from this proof on the part of both Governments to raise the moral
and social character of the people.

In addition to the schools already noticed, there is a school for the
natives on the Park lands. At this school there were in 1847, thirty-five
boys and twenty-nine girls. The establishment being entirely under the
superintendence of the Government, is kept in the very best order; the
apartments are neat and clean, the master is patient and indulgent, and
if we could hope for any improvement in the moral and social habits of
the aborigines, it would be under circumstances so promising, but as I
propose, in another place, to make some observations on the natives
generally, it may not be necessary for me to add to the above remarks at
the present moment.

Of other public buildings not under the immediate controul of the
Government, the Bank of South Australia is certainly the first. It stands
on the North Terrace and is a prominent and pleasing object from whatever
point of view it is seen. There are, however, several other very
creditable buildings in different parts of the city.

Had the city of Adelaide been laid out in the first instance on a smaller
plan, it would now have been a compact and well-built town, but
unfortunately it was planned on too large a scale, and it will
necessarily have a straggling appearance for many years to come.

North and South Adelaide are, as I have already stated, separated from
each other by the valley of the Torrens, than which nothing can be
prettier. Its grassy flats are shaded by beautiful and umbrageous trees,
and the scenery is such as one could not have expected in an unimproved
state. The valley of the Torrens is a portion of the Park lands which run
round the city to the breadth of half a mile. Nothing could have been
more judicious than the appropriation of this open space for the
amusement and convenience of the public, and for the establishment of
those museums and institutions which tend so much to direct the taste,
and promote the scientific improvement of a people.

Beyond the Park lands, the preliminary sections, of 134 acres each,
extend to a certain distance--many of which have been laid out into
smaller sections, and the city is surrounded by numerous villages, few of
which add to its appearance. This certainly may be said of Thebarton,
Hindmarsh, Boden, and several other villages, but those of Richmond, and
Kensington, embosomed in trees, and picturesque in scenery, bear a strong
resemblance to the quiet and secluded villages of England.

In Hindmarsh, Mr. Ridley, whose mechanical genius has been of such public
utility, and whose enterprise is so well known, has established his steam
flour-mill, which is the largest in the province. In addition to this,
the South Australian Company has a steam-mill at the upper bridge; there
are several of a smaller size in the city, and the total number of
flour-mills in the Colony, including wind and water mills is twenty-two.

This general description of the capital of South Australia will perhaps
suffice to shew its rapid growth during the eleven short years since the
first wooden dwelling was erected upon its site.

It may be necessary for me to state that its peace and order are
preserved by a body of police, whose vigilance and activity are as
creditable to them as their own good conduct and cleanliness of
appearance; and whilst the returns of the supreme court, and the general
unfrequency of crime, prove the moral character of the working classes
generally, the fewness of convictions for crimes of deeper shade amongst
that class of the population from whose habit of idleness and drinking we
should naturally look for a greater amount of crime, as undoubtedly
proves the vigilance of the police. From the return of convictions before
Mr. Cooper the Judge, it is clear that the majority of those who have
been brought before him are men who have already suffered for former
breach of the laws, and who, having escaped from the neighbouring
Colonies, have vainly endeavoured to break themselves of former evil
habits. The eyes of the police are however so steadily kept on such men,
that they have little chance of escaping detection if they commit
themselves, and they consequently level their aim at those who encourage
them in vice, and who, in reality, are little better than themselves in
morals, as knowing that, in many instances, they will not dare to bring
them to punishment.

There are five principal roads leading from Adelaide; three into the
interior, and two to the coast. Of the three first, one leads to the
north, through Gawler Town, one as the Great Eastern Road leads to Mount
Barker and the Murray, and the third running southwards, crosses the
range to Encounter Bay. Of the roads leading to the coast, the one goes
to the Port, the other to Glenelg. In endeavouring to give a description
of the country, and enabling the reader to judge of it, I would propose
to take him along each of these roads, and to point out the character and
changes of the country on either side, for the one is peculiar and the
others are diversified. My desire is to present such a view of the colony
to the minds of my readers, as shall enable them to estimate its
advantages and disadvantages. I would speak of both with equal
impartiality and decision. The grounds of attachment I entertain for this
colony rest not on any private stake I have in its pastoral or mineral
interests, and I hope the reader will believe that my feelings towards it
are such as would only lead me to speak as it really and truly should be
spoken of. There is no country, however fair, that has not some drawback
or other. There are no hopes, however promising, that may not be
blighted; no prospects, however encouraging, that may not wither.
Unfitness for the new field of enterprise on which a man may
enter--unpropitious seasons, the designs of others, or unforeseen
misfortunes; one or more of these may combine to bring about results very
opposite from those we had anticipated. I would not therefore take upon
myself the responsibility of giving advice, but enter upon a general
description of the province of South Australia as a tourist, whose
curiosity had led him to make inquiries into the capabilities of the
country through which he had travelled, and who could therefore speak to
other matters, besides the description of landscape or the smoothness of
a road.

If we take our departure from Adelaide by the great Northern Road, we
shall have to travel 25 miles over the plains, keeping the Mount Lofty
Range at greater and less distances on our right, the plains extending in
varying breadth to the westward, ere we can pull up at Calton's Hotel in
Gawler Town, where, nevertheless, we should find every necessary both for
ourselves and our horses.

That township, the first and most promising on the Northern Road, is, as
I have stated, 25 miles from Adelaide; and occupies the angle formed by
the junction of the Little Para and the Gawler Rivers; the one coming
from south-east, and the other from north-north-east; the traveller
approaching from the south therefore, would have to cross the first of
these little streams before he can enter the town.

Still, in its infancy, Gawler Town will eventually be a place of
considerable importance. Through it all the traffic of the north must
necessarily pass, and here, it appears to me, will be the great markets
for the sale or purchase of stock. From its junction with the Little
Para, the Gawler flows to the westward to the shores of St. Vincent's
Gulf. It has extensive and well wooded flats of deep alluvial soil along
its banks, flanked by the plains of Adelaide--the river line of trees
running across them, only with a broader belt of wood, just as the line
of trees near Adelaide indicates the course of that river. If I except
these features, and two or three open box-tree forests at no great
distance from Albert Town, the plains are almost destitute of timber, and
being very level, give an idea of extent they do not really possess,
being succeeded by pine forests and low scrub to the north from Gawler
Town.

The Gawler discharges itself into a deep channel or inlet, which, like
the creek at Port Adelaide, has mangrove swamps on either side; still the
inlet is capable of great improvement, and the anchorage at its mouth, so
high up the gulf is safe, and if it were only for the shipment of goods,
for tran-shipment at Port Adelaide, Port Gawler as it is called, would be
of no mean utility, but it is probable that ships might take in cargo at
once, in which case it would be to the interest of the northern settlers
to establish a port there. Captain Allen and Mr. Ellis, two of the most
independent settlers in the province, are the possessors of the land on
both sides the Gawler, and I feel confident it is a property that will
greatly increase in value. The alluvial flats along this little stream,
are richer and more extensive than those of the Torrens, and they seem to
me to be calculated for the production of many things that would be less
successfully cultivated in any other part of the province. Apart,
however, from any advantages Gawler Town may derive from the facilities
of water communication, it will necessarily be in direct communication
with Port Adelaide, as soon as a road is made between them. At present
the drays conveying the ore and other exports are obliged to keep the
great northern line to within a few miles of the city, before they turn
off almost at a right angle to the Port; but there can be no doubt as to
the formation of a direct line of communication with the Port from Gawler
Town, if not of the establishment of a railway, ere many years shall
elapse, for not only are the principal stock stations of the province,
but the more valuable mines to the north of this town.

Up to this point the traveller does not quit the plains of Adelaide, the
Mount Lofty Range being to the eastward of him and the plains, bounded by
the mangrove swamps extending towards St. Vincent's Gulf. Generally
speaking, for their extent the soil is not good, but there are patches of
alluvial soil, the deposits of creeks falling from the hills, that are
rich and fertile. Yet, notwithstanding the quality of the soil, a great
portion of the Adelaide plains have been purchased and are under
cultivation. There is a great deficiency of surface water upon them, but
it is procurable by digging wells; and Mr. Ellis I believe has rendered
those parts of them contiguous to the Gawler available as sheep stations,
by sinking wells for the convenience of his men and stock; neither can
there be a doubt but that many other apparently unavailable parts of the
province might be rendered available by the adoption of similar means, or
by the construction of tanks in favourable situations.

This is a point it is impossible to urge too much on the attention of the
Australian stock holder. There is generally speaking a deficiency of
water in those Colonies, and large tracts of country favourable to stock
are unoccupied in consequence, but the present liberal conditions on
which leases of Crown lands are granted will make it worth the sheep
farmer's while to make those improvements which shall so conduce to his
prosperity and comfort.

In proof of this, I would observe that I had several capacious tanks on
my property at Varroville, near Sydney, for which I was indebted to Mr.
Wells the former proprietor, and not only did they enable me to retain a
large quantity of stock on my farm, when during a season of unmitigated
drought my neighbours were obliged to drive their cattle to distant parts
of the Colony--but I allowed several poor families to draw their supplies
from, and to water some of their cattle at my reservoirs.

Beyond Gawler Town the country changes in character and appearance,
whether you continue the northern road across the river, or turn more to
the eastward, you leave the monotonous plain on which you have journeyed
behind, and speedily advance into an undulating hilly country, lightly
wooded withal, and containing many very rich, if not beautiful valleys.
The Barossa Range and the districts round it are exceedingly pretty.
Here, at Bethany, the Germans who have fled from the religious
persecution to which they were exposed in their own country have settled,
and given the names of several places in their Fatherland to the features
around them. The Keizerstuhl rises the highest point in the Barossa
Range, the outline of which is really beautiful, and the Rhine that
issues from its deep and secluded valleys flows northwards through their
lands.

In this neighbourhood Mr. Angas has a valuable property, as also the
South Australian Company. Angas Park is a place of great picturesque
beauty, and is capable of being made as ornamental as any nobleman's
estate in England. The direct road to the Murray River passes through
Angas Park, but a more northerly course leads the traveller past the
first of those valuable properties to which South Australia is mainly
indebted for her present prosperous state. I mean the copper mines of
Kapunda, the property of Captain Bagot, who, with Mr. Francis Dutton,
became the discoverer and purchaser of the ground on which the principal
lode has been ascertained to exist. There has been a large quantity of
mineral land sold round this valuable locality, but although indications
of copper are everywhere to be seen, no quantity sufficiently great to
justify working had I believe been found up to the time I left the
Colony. As however I shall have to give a more detailed account of the
mines of South Aust ralia, it may not be necessary for me to speak of
them at length in this place.

Captain Bagot is anxious to establish a township in the vicinity of
Kapunda, and he will no doubt succeed, the very concourse of people round
such a place being favourable to his views.

Beyond this point to the north the coast range of Mount Lofty, which thus
far preserves a northerly direction, throws off a chain to the westward
of that point, but the main range still continues to run up into the
interior on its original bearing, rather increasing than decreasing in
height. Upon it, the Razor Back Mount Brian, to the south of which is the
great Burra Burra mine, and the Black Rock Hill, rise to the height of
2922, 3012 and 2750 respectively. On the more western branch of the
chain, Mount Remarkable, Mount Brown, and Mount Arden, so named by
Captain Flinders, form the principal features. This chain has been traced
by Mr. Eyre to Mount Hopeless, in lat. 29 1/2, and has been found by him
to terminate in the basin of Lake Torrens. The main range on the contrary
has only been followed up to lat. 32 degrees 10 minutes, beyond which
point it cannot extend to any great distance, as if it did, I should
necessarily have seen something of it during my recent expedition. It is
a remarkable fact that the further the northern ranges have been followed
up, the more denuded of trees they have become. Immense tracts of land,
through portions of which the Wakefield flows, rich in soil and abundant
in pasture, have scarcely a tree upon them. The scenery round Mount
Remarkable on the contrary is bold and picturesque, and much diversified
by woodland.

Here again the indications of copper were so abundant, that 20,000 acres
were taken as a special survey a short time before I left the Colony. The
occupation of this land will necessarily extend the boundaries of
location, but up to the period when the survey was taken, Mr. White,
formerly a resident at Port Lincoln, was the most distant stockholder to
the north.

Proceeding eastward from Angas Park, the road to the Murray river leads
through a hilly country of an inferior description, portions only of it
being occupied as sheep stations. From the brow of the last of these
hills, the eye wanders over the dark and gloomy sea of scrub, known as
the Murray belt, through which the traveller has to pass before he gains
the bank of the river or the station at Moorundi. He descends direct upon
the level plain over which he has to go, and after passing some pretty
scenery on the banks of a creek close to which the road runs, and
crossing an open interval, he enters the belt, through which it will take
him four hours to penetrate. This singular feature is a broad line of
wood, composed in the lower part of Eucalyptus dumosa, a straggling tree,
growing to an inconsiderable height, rising at once from the ground with
many slender stems, and affording but an imperfect shade. About the
latitude of 34 degrees the character of the Murray belt changes--it
becomes denser and more diversified. Pine trees on sandy ridges, Acacia,
Hakea, Exocarpi, and many other shrubs form a thick wood, through which
it is difficult to keep a correct course. Occasionally a low brush
extends to the cliffs overlooking the valley of the Murray, but it may be
said, that there is an open space varying in breadth from half a-mile to
three miles between the Murray belt and the river. It is a flat table
land about 250 or 300 feet above the level of the sea, the substratum
being of the tertiary fossil formation. The surface is a mixture of red
sand and clay, mixed with calcareous limestone in small rounded nodules.
The very nature of this soil is heating, and the consequence is that it
has little herbage at any one time. There is however a succession of
vegetation, especially during the spring months, which, from the fact of
the cattle being particularly fond of it, must I should imagine be both
sweet and nutritious.

Any one who has ever been on the banks of the Murray will admit that it
is a noble river. The description I have already given supersedes the
necessity of my dwelling on it here. In another place I shall have to
speak of it, not in a commercial point of view, but as a line of
communication between two distant colonies, and the important part it has
acted in the advancement of the province of South Australia. As a
commercial river, I fear it will not be of practical utility. To prove
this, it may be necessary for me to observe that the Murray runs for more
than five degrees of latitude through a desert. That it is tortuous in
its course, and is in many places encumbered with timber, and its depth
entirely depends on the seasons. The difficulties, therefore, that
present themselves to the navigation of the central Murray are such as to
preclude the hope of its ever being made available for such a purpose,
even admitting that its banks were located at every available point.
Moorundi, the property of Mr. Eyre, the present Lieutenant-Governor of
New Zealand, is ninety miles from Adelaide, and twenty-six from the N.W.
bend of the Murray. It is part of a special survey of four thousand acres
taken by Mr. Eyre and Mr. Gilles on the banks of the river, and in
consequence of its appropriate position, was selected by Captain Grey,
the then Governor of South Australia, as a station for a Resident
Magistrate and Protector of the Aborigines, to fill both which
appointments he nominated Mr. Eyre. There can be no doubt, either as to
the foresight which dictated the establishment of this post on the banks
of the Murray, or the selection of Mr. Eyre as the Resident. At the time
this measure was decided on, the feelings of the natives on the river
were hostile to the settlers. The repeated collisions between them and
the Overlanders had kindled a deep spirit of revenge in their breasts,
and although they suffered severely in every contest, they would not
allow any party with stock to pass along the line of the river without
attempting to stop their progress; and there can be no doubt but that, in
this frame of mind, they would have attacked the station next the river
if they had been left to themselves, and with their stealthy habits and
daring, would have been no mean enemy on the boundaries of location. The
character and spirit of these people is entirely misunderstood and
undervalued by the learned in England, and the degraded position in the
scale of the human species into which they have been put, has, I feel
assured, been in consequence of the little intercourse that had taken
place between the first navigators and the aborigines of the Australian
Continent. I have seen them under every variety of circumstances--have
come suddenly upon them in a state of uncontrolled freedom--have passed
tribe after tribe under the protection of envoys--have visited them in
their huts--have mixed with them in their camps, and have seen them in
their intercourse with Europeans, and I am, in candour, obliged to
confess that the most unfavourable light in which I have seen them, has
been when mixed up with Europeans.

That the natives of the interior have made frequent attacks on the
stations of the settlers I have no doubt; very likely, in some instances,
they have done so without any direct provocation, but we must not forget
their position or the consequences of the extension of boundaries of
location to the aborigines themselves. The more ground our flocks and
herds occupy, the more circumscribed become the haunts of the savage. Not
only is this the inevitable consequence, but he sees the intruder running
down his game with dogs of unequalled strength and swiftness, and
deplores the destruction of his means of subsistence. The cattle tread
down the herbs which at one season of the year constituted his food. The
gun, with its sharp report, drives the wild fowl from the creeks, and the
unhappy aborigine is driven to despair. He has no country on which to
fall back. The next tribe will not permit him to occupy their territory.
In such a state what is he to do? Is it a matter of surprise that in the
confidence of numbers he should seek to drive those who have intruded on
him back again, and endeavour to recover possession of his lost domain?
It might be that the parties concerned were not conscious of the injury
they were inflicting, but even that fact would not lessen the fancied
right of the native to repossess himself of his lost territory. Yet on
the other hand we cannot condemn resistance on the part of the white man;
for it would be unjust to overlook the fearful position in which they are
placed, and the terrible appearance of a party of savages working
themselves up to the perpetration of indiscriminate slaughter. No doubt
many parties have gone to take up stations in the interior, with the
honest intention of keeping on good terms with the natives, and who in
accordance with such resolution have treated them with hospitality and
consideration; but, it unfortunately happens that a prolonged intercourse
with the Europeans weakens and at length destroys those feelings of awe
and uncertainty with which they were at first regarded. The natives find
that they are men like themselves, and that their intrusion is an injury,
and they perhaps become the aggressors in provoking hostilities. In such
a case resistance becomes a matter of personal defence, and however much
such collisions may be regretted, the parties concerned can hardly be
brought to account; but, it more frequently happens, that the men who are
sent to form out-stations beyond the boundaries of location, are men of
bold and unscrupulous dispositions, used to crime, accustomed to danger,
and reckless as to whether they quarrel, or keep on terms with the
natives who visit them. Thrown to such a distance in the wild, in some
measure out of the pale of the law, without any of the opposite sex to
restrain their passions, the encouragement these men give to their sable
friends, is only for the gratification of their passions. The seizure of
some of their women, and the refusal to give them up, provokes hostility
and rouses resentment, but those who scruple not at the commission of one
act of violence, most assuredly will not hesitate at another. Such cases
are gene rally marked by some circumstances that betray its character,
and naturally rouse the indignation of the Government. If the only
consequence was the punishment of the guilty, we should rejoice in such
retributive justice; but, unfortunately and too frequently, it happens,
that the station belongs to a stockholder, who, both from feelings of
interest and humanity, has treated the natives with every consideration,
and discountenanced any ill-treatment of them on the part of his
servants, but whose property is nevertheless sacrificed by their
misconduct.

I have been unintentionally led into this subject, in the course of my
remarks on the policy of Captain Grey, in establishing the post at
Moorundi. The consequences have been equally beneficial to the settlers
and aborigines. The eastern out-stations of the province have been
unmolested, and parties with stock have passed down the Murray in perfect
safety. If any act of violence or robbery has been committed by the
natives, the perpetrators have been delivered up by the natives
themselves, who have learnt that it is their interest to refrain from
such acts; and instead of the Murray being the scene of conflict and
slaughter, its whole line is now occupied by stock-stations, and
tranquillity everywhere prevails.

About seventy {FIFTEEN in published text} miles below Moorundi is
Wellington, where a ferry has been established across the Murray, that
township being on the direct road from Adelaide to Mount Gambier, and
Rivoli Bay. A little below Wellington, Lake Victoria receives the waters
of the Murray, which eventually mingle with those of the ocean,
through the sea mouth.

The country immediately to the eastward of the Murray affords, in some
places, a scanty supply of grass for sheep, but, generally speaking, it
is similar in its soil and rock formation, and consequently in its
productions to the scrubby country to the westward. The line of granite I
have mentioned, in the former part of my work, as traversing or crossing
the Murray below Wellington, continues through the scrub, large blocks
being frequent amongst the brushes on a somewhat lower level than the
tertiary fossil limestone in its neighbourhood. Round these blocks of
granite the soil is considerably better, and there is a coating of grass
upon it, as far as the ground consists of the decomposed rock.

About sixty miles to the E.S.E. of Wellington is the Tatiara country,
once celebrated for the ferocity and cannibalism of its inhabitants, but
now occupied by the settlers, who have of late crossed the Murray in
considerable numbers to form stations there. The distance from Wellington
to the district of Mount Gambier, said to be the fairest portion of South
Australia, whether as regards its climate or its soil, is more than 200
miles. The first portion of the road, to almost the above distance, is
through a perfect desert, in which, excepting during the rainy season,
water is scarcely to be found, so that the journey is not performed
without its privation. After passing Lake Albert the traveller has to
journey at no great distance from the Coorong over a low country, once
covered by the waters of the ocean, the noise of whose billows he hears
through the silence of the night. The first elevation he reaches is a
continuation of the great fossil bed, through which the volcanic hills,
where he will ultimately arrive, have been forced up. Mount Gambier, the
principal of these, is about 40 miles from the Glenelg, and 50 from
Rivoli Bay. The country from either of these points is low for many
miles, but well grassed, of the richest soil, and in many places
abundantly timbered. Mount Gambier is scarcely visible until you almost
reach its base--nor even then is its outward appearance different from
other hills. On reaching its summit, however, you find youself on the
brink of a crater, standing indeed on a precipice, with a small sheet of
water of about half-a-mile in circumference, two hundred feet below you;
the water of which is as blue as indigo, and seems to be very deep; no
bottom indeed has been found at 50 fathoms. The ground round the base of
Mount Gambier is very open, and you may ride your horse along it
unchecked for many miles. At the lower parts, and at some distance from
it, the ground is moist, and many caverns have been found in which water
of the very purest kind exists, no doubt deposited in the natural
reservoirs by percolation from the higher ground. The whole formation of
the district, these capacious caverns, and the numerous and extensive
tea-tree swamps along the coast, plainly demonstrate that they are
supplied by gradual filtration, or find their way through the
interstices, or cells of the lava to the lower levels.

It is generally admitted that the greater part of the land in the
neighbourhood of Mount Gambier is equal to the richest soil, whether of
Van Diemen's Land or of Port Phillip, the general character indeed of
this district, and the fact of its being so much farther to the south
than Adelaide, its perpetual verdure and moister climate would lead to
the supposition that it is capable of producing grain of the very finest
quality, and there can, I think, be but little doubt that it will rival
the sister colonies in its agricultural productions, and considering the
nature of the soil is similar to that round the volcanic peaks in the
Mediterranean, it will also produce wine of a superior description.
Settlers both from the province of South Australia and neighbouring
colonies have vied with each other in securing stations in this fertile,
but remote district, and it would appear from the number of allotments
that have been purchased in the townships which have been established on
the coast that settlers are fast flocking to it.

From what has been stated it would seem that the district of Mount
Gambier is adapted rather for agricultural than pastoral pursuits, and
that it is consequently favourable for occupation by a rural population.
Tea-tree swamps (melaleuca) are a feature, I believe, peculiar to South
Australia, and generally indicate the presence of springs, and always of
moisture. The soil is of the very richest quality, and there is, perhaps,
no ground in the world that is more suitable for gardens, and as these
swamps are both numerous and extensive in the lower country, behind
Rivoli and Guichen Bays, this portion of the province promises equally
fair for the growth of those European fruits which are less
advantageously cultivated in the more northern parts of the province.

Returning to Adelaide, and proceeding from thence to the eastward, along
the great eastern or Mount Barker line, we cross, in the first instance,
the remaining portion of the plains lying between the city and the hills,
to the base of which the distance is about three miles, the whole is laid
out in farms, and is extensively and carefully cultivated. As you
approach the hills, the country becomes lightly wooded and undulating,
affording numerous sites for villas, on which many have already been
erected, both by settlers and the more opulent tradesmen. Individuals
indeed, residing in England, can form but a faint idea of the comforts
and conveniences they enjoy, at such a distance from their native
country. Being at sufficient elevation to catch the sea breeze, which
passes over the plains of Adelaide, without being felt, they have almost
the advantage of living near the sea coast, and the cool winds that sweep
down the valleys behind them, and constitute the land breeze, ensure to
them cool and refreshing evenings, when those dwelling at a lower
elevation are oppressed by heat. On the first rise of the mountains is
the Glen Osmond Lead Mine, which will be noticed hereafter. The Mount
Barker district being more numerously settled than most other parts of
the province, and being one of its most important and fertile districts,
more labour has been expended on the road leading into it, than on any
other in the colony. From the level of the Glen Osmond Mine, it winds up
a romantic valley, with steep hills of rounded form, generally covered
with grass, and studded lightly with trees on either side, nor is it,
until you attain the summit of the Mount Lofty range, that any change
takes place in the character of the hills or the vegetation, you then
find yourself travelling through a dense forest of stringy barks, the
finest of which have been levelled to the ground, with the axe, for the
purpose of being sawn into planks for building, or split into rails for
fencing. From Crafer's Inn, situated under the peak of Mount Lofty, the
road to Mount Barker passes through a barren country for some miles, and
crosses several steep valleys, in the centre of which there are rippling
streams; the summit of the ranges still continues to be thickly wooded,
the ground underneath being covered with shrubs and flowers of numberless
kinds and varied beauty. In illustration of this, I may observe, that the
first time I crossed the Mount Lofty range, I amused myself pulling the
different kinds of flowers as I rode along, and on counting them when I
reached Adelaide for the purpose of arranging them in a book, found that
I had no less than ninety-three varieties. The majority of these,
however, consisted of papilionaceous plants, and several beautiful
varieties of Orchideae. On descending to a lower level, after crossing
the Onkaparinga, the scenery and the country at once change, you find
yourself upon rich alluvial flats, flanked by barren rocky hills, the air
during the spring being perfumed by the scent of the Tetratheca, a
beautiful hill flower, at that time in splendid blossom, and growing in
profusion on the tops of the hills, mingled with the Chyranthera, with
its light blue blossoms; both these plants it has always appeared, are
well adapted for the edges of borders, but there are not many plants in
Australia that would be fit for such a purpose.

It does not appear necessary, in a work like this, to trouble the reader
with an account of every village or of every valley in the districts
through which I lead him; my object is to give a general and faithful
description of the country only, reserving the power of drawing attention
to any thing I may deem worthy of notice. Taking the district of Mount
Barker therefore in its full range, I would observe, that it is one of
the finest agricultural districts in the province. It abounds in very
many beautiful alluvial valleys, which, when I first crossed, had grass
that rose above the horses middles as they walked through it, and looked
luxuriant beyond description. These valleys are limited both in length
and breadth, but are level and clear; their soil is a rich alluvial
deposit, and the plough can be driven from one end to the other without
meeting a single obstacle to check its progress. Independently of these
valleys, there are other portions of good grazing land in the Mount
Barker district, but there are, nevertheless, very many stony ranges that
are entirely useless even to stock. The Mount Barker district may be said
to extend from the village of Nairne to Strathalbyn, on the River Angas,
the latter place being 15 miles from the shores of Lake Victoria. Within
the range of this district, there are also the villages of Hahansdorf and
Macclesfield, the former being a German village, at no great distance
from Mount Barker. Immediately to the north of the village of Nairne is
Mount Torrens, the river of that name has several branches to the
north-east of it as high up as Mount Gould. The first of the Company's
special surveys, and perhaps some of the finest soil in the province is
in this locality. The surveys on the sources and tributaries of the
Torrens are splendid properties, and the Company may well consider them
as amongst the most valuable of its acquisitions; beyond the heads of the
Torrens the country is more hilly and less available. There are,
nevertheless, isolated spots sufficiently large for the most comfortable
homesteads. From this point, a west-south-west course will soon lead the
traveller into the plains of Adelaide, and at less than 10 miles after
entering upon them, he will again find himself in the metropolis. Again
departing from it for the southern parts of the province, he will keep
the Mount Lofty range upon his left, and will really find some difficulty
in passing the numberless fences which now enclose the plains. The land
indeed in this line of road is more fenced than in any other direction, a
reason for this may be that the road runs nearer the base of the hills,
and the land is consequently better than that on the lower ground. Many
very excellent farms are to be found on the banks of the Sturt and the
Onkaparinga, on the latter of which the village of Noorlunga has been
established, at the point where the road crosses it. The Sturt has a
tortuous course, somewhat to the northward of west, and falls into the
gulf at Glenelg, after spreading over the flats behind the sand-hills at
that place. The direction of the road is parallel to that of the ranges,
or nearly south-south-west as far as the village of Noorlunga, when it
turns more to the eastward of south, for Willunga, which is 28 miles
distant from Adelaide. The banks of the Onkaparinga, above the crossing
place, are extremely inaccessible, insomuch that stock can hardly be
driven down to water for many miles above that point. The hills however
are rounded in form, grassy, and clear of trees, consequently well
adapted for grazing purposes. It was at Noorlunga, which is not more than
two miles from the gulf, and can be approached in boats, as high as the
bridge there, that Captain Barker first landed on the South Australian
shore. The country between it and Willunga is generally good, portions of
it are sandy and scrubby, but Morphett's Vale is a rich and extensive
piece of land, and I can well remember before it was settled seeing
several large stacks of hay that had been cut, as it then lay in a state
of nature. Willunga is close under the foot of the hills, which here,
trending to the south-south-west, meet the coast line extremity of the
Southern Aldinga plains. Close to this point is a hill, called Mount
Terrible, almost of a conical shape, over the very summit of this, in the
early stages of the colony, the road led to Encounter Bay; and I shall
not forget the surprise I experienced, when going to that place, on
finding I could not by any possibility avoid this formidable obstacle. On
the other side of Mount Terrible the country is very scrubby for some
miles, until, all at once, you burst upon the narrow, but beautiful
valley of Mypunga. This beautiful valley, which had scarcely been trodden
by the European when I first encamped upon it, was then covered with
Orchideous plants of every colour, amidst a profusion of the richest
vegetation. A sweet rippling stream passed within five yards of my
tent-door, and found its way to the Gulf about a mile below me to the
west. It was on the occasion of my going to the sea mouth of the Murray,
that I first stopped at this spot. Amongst the boat's crew I had brought
with me from Adelaide a young lad, of not more than twenty-one, who had,
for some weeks before, been leading a very hard life. At Mypunga he was
seized with delirium tremens, and became so exceedingly outrageous, that
I was obliged to have his feet and hands tied. In the morning he was
still as frantic as ever, but the policeman, under whose charge I had
placed him, having imprudently loosened the cord from his ankles, he
suddenly started upon his feet, and gaining the scrub, through which we
had descended into the valley, with incredible swiftness, secreted
himself amongst it. Nor could we, by the utmost efforts during that and
the succeeding day, discover his hiding place. I was accompanied by a man
of the name of Foley, a bushranger of great notoriety, who had been
captured by the Adelaide police, and was sent with my party in the hope
that his knowledge of the coast would be of use to me, but neither could
he discover the unfortunate runaway, who, there is no doubt, subsequently
perished. Beyond Mypunga, to the south, are the valleys of Yankalilla and
Rapid Bay, but very little, if in any respect inferior to the first
mentioned place. The country between them is, however, extremely hilly,
and contains some beautifully romantic spots of ground. The rock
formation of this part of the ranges is very diversified; the upper part
of Rapid valley is a fine grey limestone; a little to the southward veins
both of copper and lead have been discovered, and I have good reason for
supposing that quicksilver will one day or other be found in this part of
the province. At Willunga there is a small stream, which issues from a
valley close behind the township, and appears in former times to have
laid many hundred acres of the flats below under water. Their soil is
composed of the very richest alluvial deposit, and has produced some of
the finest crops of wheat in the province. Aldinga plains lie to the
south-west of Willunga, and are sufficiently extensive to feed numerous
sheep, but unavailable in consequence of the deficiency of water upon
them, and are an instance of a large tract of land lying in an
unprofitable state, which might, with little trouble and expense, by
sinking wells in different parts, be rendered extremely valuable. On
ascending the hills above Willunga, in following up the southern line of
road to Encounter Bay, it leads for several miles through a stringy-bark
forest, and brings the traveller upon the great sandy basin, between
Willunga and Currency Creek. This gloomy and sterile feature bears a
strong contrast to the rich and fertile valleys I have described, and is
really a most remarkable formation in the geology of the province. At an
elevation of between 600 and 700 feet this basin is surrounded on all
sides by rugged stony hills, excepting to the south and south-east, in
which direc tion it falls into the valley of the Hindmarsh and Currency
Creek respectively. Mount Magnificent, Mount Compass, and Mount Jagged,
rise in isolated groups in different parts of the basin, the soil of
which is pure sand, its surface is undulating, and in many parts covered
with stunted banksias, through which it is difficult to force one's way
in riding along. The Finniss rises behind Mount Magnificent, and is
joined by a smaller branch from Mount Compass, as it flows from the
eastward. At about 25 miles from Willunga the traveller descends into the
valley of Currency Creek, and finds the change from the barren tract over
which he has been riding as sudden as when he entered upon it from the
rich flats of Willunga. The valley of Currency Creek is not, however, the
same as those I have already described in other parts of the colony; it
is prettily wooded and grassy, but continues narrow for some distance
after you have entered it; a small running stream, with a rocky bed,
occupying the centre of the valley, which ultimately escapes from the
hills by a kind of gorge, and discharges itself into an arm of the
Goolwa. The extent of good land in Currency Creek is not very great, and
is bounded both to the north and south by barren scrub. Due south, at the
distance from 15 to 18 miles, is Encounter Bay, the country intervening
between the two points to the shores of the Goolwa is very level, the
soil is light but rich, and there appeared to me to be many thousand
acres that were adapted for agricultural purposes, better adapted indeed
than the richer soils. Whether that view be correct or not, the valleys
of the Inman and Hindmarsh immediately behind Encounter Bay would fully
make up for the want of agricultural land in this part of the province.
Hindmarsh valley is not of any great extent, but the soil is good, and
its scenery in my humble opinion surpasses any other I remember in South
Australia. I shall never, indeed, forget the beautiful effect of sunset,
on a fine bold mountain at the head of it, called the Black Hill. The
glowing orb was fast descending behind it to the west, and the Black Hill
was cast into deep shade, whilst the sun's rays shooting down two valleys
on either side gave the grass the appearance of young wheat. The extent
of arable land in the valley of the Inman is very considerable, but in
point of scenery bears no comparison with the first. I do not know
whether I have made it sufficiently clear that there is a high range at
the back of the coast hereabouts. If not, I would observe that it runs
uninterruptedly from Mount Lofty to Cape Jarvis. Opposite to Encounter
Bay it occupies nearly the centre of the promontory, and consequently
forms a division of the eastern and western waters, there being a
considerable breadth of barren stringy-bark forest between the heads of
the opposite valleys, here as on the higher parts of the ranges near
Mount Lofty, from the ascent of the great eastern road to the valley of
the Onkerparinga.

It is a remarkable fact, but one that I believe I have already adverted
to, that the farther north, towards the valley of the Wakefield, the more
denuded of timber the country becomes, until at last not a tree of any
kind can be seen. These extensive and open downs are, nevertheless, well
grassed, and covered with a profusion of orchideous plants. Whether,
however, there is any salt present in the soil, to check the growth of
the trees, it is impossible to say. Undoubtedly many of the ponds in the
Wakefield, as well as other parts of the province are brackish, but the
same denuded state of the country exists not any where else. These
districts are far too valuable to be overlooked, and are therefore
extensively occupied by cattle and sheep. My most worthy friend, Mr.
Charles Campbell, and my companion Mr. John Browne, and his brother, both
occupy the most distant stations to the north. Mr. Campbell has one of
the finest cattle runs in the province, and my comrade, I believe, is
perfectly satisfied with his run. The condition of their cattle and sheep
would at all events lead to the conclusion, that neither suffer from the
nature of the water they drink or the pasture on which they feed.

As regards the general appearance of the wooded portion of the province,
I would remark, that excepting on the tops of the ranges where the
stringy-bark grows; in the pine forests, and where there are belts of
scrub on barren or sandy ground, its character is that of open forest
without the slightest undergrowth save grass. The trees are more or less
numerous according to the locality, as well as more or less umbrageous, a
character they generally have on river flats, but the habit of the
eucalyptus is, generally speaking, straggling in its branches. In many
places the trees are so sparingly, and I had almost said judiciously
distributed as to resemble the park lands attached to a gentleman's
residence in England, and it only wants the edifice to complete the
comparison.

The proportion of good to bad land in the province has generally been
considered as divisible into three parts; that is to say, land entirely
unavailable--land adapted for pastoral purposes only, and land of a
superior quality. On due consideration, I am afraid this is not a correct
estimate, but that unavailable country greatly preponderates over the
other two. If, in truth, keeping the distant interior entirely out of
view, and confining our observations to those portions of the colony into
which the settlers have pushed in search for runs, we look to the great
extent of unavailable country between the Murray and the Mount Gambier
district, along the line of the Murray belt, and the extensive tracts at
the head of the Gulfs, we shall find that South Australia, from the very
nature of its formation, has an undue proportion of waste land. Those
parts, however, which I have mentioned as being unavailable, were once
covered by the sea, and could hardly be expected to be other than we now
see them, and it may, therefore, be questioned how far they ought to be
put into the scale. In this view of the matter, and taking the hilly
country only into account, the proportion of unavailable and of pastoral
land may be nearly equal; but that of the better description will still,
I think, fall short of the other two. Taking South Australia in its
length and breadth, the quantity of available land is, beyond doubt, very
limited, but I regard it as exceedingly good, and believe that its
capabilities have by no means been ascertained. I feel satisfied, indeed,
that necessity will prove, not only, that the present pastoral districts
are capable of maintaining a much greater number of stock upon them than
they have hitherto borne, but that the province is also capable of
bearing a very great amount of population; that it is peculiarly fitted
for a rural peasantry, and that its agricultural products will be
sufficient to support masses of the population employed either in its
mining or manufactures. In this view of the subject it would appear that
Providence has adapted the land to meet its new destinies, and that
nothing we can say, either in praise or censure of its natural
capabilities, will have the effect of concealing either the one or the
other, as time shall glide on.

On the better soils the average crop of wheat is rather over than under
twenty-five bushels to the acre. In many localities, and more especially
when the ground is first cropped, it exceeds forty; and on some lands,
once my own, in the Reed Beds, at the termination of the Torrens' river,
five acres, which I sold to Mr. Sparshott, averaged fifty-two bushels to
the acre. The Reed Beds may be said to be on the plains of Adelaide, and
their very nature will account to the reader for the richness of their
soil; but the soil of the plains is not generally good, excepting in such
places where torrents descending from the hills have spread over
portions, and covered them with an alluvial deposit to a greater or less
depth. The average crop of wheat on the plains does not exceed twelve or
fifteen bushels to the acre, and depends on the time when the hot winds
may set in. Barley on the light sandy soil of the plains is much heavier
than wheat.

In the description I have thus endeavoured to give of South Australia, I
have omitted any mention of the district of Port Lincoln, chiefly because
sufficient was not known of it when I sailed for England to justify my
hazarding any remark. Recent advices from the colony state that a
practicable line of route from Adelaide has been discovered along the
western shore of Spencer's Gulf, and therefore, the disasters that
overtook early explorers in that quarter, are not likely again to occur.
It is farther said, that the number of sheep now depastured on the lands
behind Port Lincoln, amounts to 70,000--a proof of the utility, if not
the richness of the country--as far, however, as I am aware, the soil
must be considered of an inferior description--in other respects, the
Port has advantages that will always render it an agreeable, if not
altogether a desirable residence. It appears to be gradually improving,
but the amount of its population is still low, not more than sixty. It is
frequented by American and other whalers, but the duties collected add
little to the revenues of the province. Port Lincoln, however, could
hardly now be abandoned, since there are considerable interests at stake
there. It has been stated that copper has been found in the interior, and
I see no reason why it should not exist in the mountain formation of the
Gawler Range, in such case an impulse will be given to the whole
district, that would even change its prospects, and increase the
mercantile operations of the province.

It does not appear to be the disposition of the English settlers to try
experiments on the growth of intertropical productions. It must be
admitted, however, that there are not many places in South Australia
where they could be cultivated with advantage; for although both the
plains of Adelaide and the valley of the Murray are warm in summer, the
frosts, which are sufficient to blight potatoes, would necessarily
injure, if they did not destroy, perennials, whilst in the hills the cold
is adverse to any plants the growth of a tropical climate, if we except
those which, as annuals, come to maturity in the course of a summer; but
the true reason why the growth of extraneous productions is neglected in
South Australia, is the expense consequent on the state of the labour
market--for no doubt many pursuits might be followed there that would be
remunerative. It is exceedingly difficult, however, to lead the pursuits
of a community out of their ordinary course, and it is only where direct
advantages are to be gained, that the spirit of enterprise and
speculation breaks forth.

The climate of South Australia is admirably adapted for the growth of
fruit trees of the hardier tropical kinds, for although the tenderer
kinds grow there also, they do not arrive at perfection. The loquat, the
guava, the orange, and the banana, are of slow growth, but the vine, the
fig, the pomegranate, and others, flourish beyond description, as do
English fruit trees of every kind. It is to be observed, that the climate
of the plains of Adelaide and that of the hills are distinct. I have been
in considerable heat in the former at noon, and on the hills have been in
frost in the evening. The forest trees of Europe will grow in the ranges,
but on the plains they languish; in the ranges also the gooseberry and
the currant bear well, but in the gardens on the plains they are admitted
only to say you have such fruits; the pomegranate will not mature in the
open air, but melons of all kinds are weeds. Yet, such trees as are
congenial to the climate arrive at maturity with incredible rapidity, and
bear in the greatest abundance. The show of grapes in Mr. Stephenson's
garden in North Adelaide, and the show of apples and plums in Mr.
Anstey's garden on the hills are fine beyond description, and could not
be surpassed in any part of the world--it may readily be imagined,
therefore, that the intermediate fruit trees, such as the peach, the
nectarine, the pear, the cherry, the greengage, and others, are of the
most vigorous habits. All of them, indeed, are standards, and the wood
they make during one season, is the best proof that can be given of their
congeniality to the soil and climate of the province.

There are in South Australia two periods of the year which are equally
deceptive to the stranger. The one is when the country is burnt up and
suffering under the effects of summer heat--when the earth is almost
herbless, and the ground swarms with grasshoppers--when a dry heat
prevails in a calm still air. The other when vegetation is springing up
under the early rains and every thing is green. Arriving at Adelaide
during the first period, the stranger would hardly believe that the
country, at any other season of the year, would be so clothed with
herbage and look so fresh; arriving at the other, he would equally doubt
the possibility of the vegetable kingdom being laid so completely
prostrate, or that the country could assume so withered and parched an
appearance; but these changes are common to every country under a similar
latitude, and it would be unjust to set them down to its prejudice, or
advantage.

The following mean of heat at 2 p.m. throughout the year, will give the
reader a correct idea of the range of the thermometer. I have taken 2
p.m. as being the hottest period of the day, and, therefore, nearest the
truth.


January   85       106 1/2    70
February  79        94        71
March     77       103 1/2    68 1/2
April     67 1/2    85        55 1/2
May       62        76        53
June      58        67        49
July      55        60        49
August    59        68        52
September 61        72 1/2    55 1/2
October   68 1/2    94 1/2    55
November  74        94        59
December  83       100        68


The west and south-west winds are the most prevalent, blowing for 130 or
140 days in the year. During the summer months the land and sea breezes
prevail along the coast, but in the interior the wind generally commences
at E.N.E., and going round with the sun settles at west in the afternoon.

I need not point out to the reader, that the above table only shews the
mean of the thermometer during a certain hour of the day; the temperature
during the night must necessarily be much lower; the coolness of the
night, indeed, generally speaking, makes up for the mid-day heat. There
are some days of the year when hot winds prevails, which are certainly
very disagreeable, if not trying. Their occurrence, however, is not
frequent, and will be easily accounted for from natural causes. They
sometimes continue for three or more days, during which time clouds of
dust fill the air, and whirlwinds cross the plains, but the dryness of
the Australian atmosphere considerably influences the feelings on such
occasions, and certainly produces a different effect upon the system from
that which would be produced at a much lower temperature in a more humid
climate; for, no doubt, it is to the united effects of heat and moisture,
where they more or less exist, that the healthiness or unhealthiness of a
country may be ascribed. In such countries, generally speaking, either
teaming vapours, or malaria from dense woods or swamps naturally tries
the constitution, but to its extreme dryness, and the absence of all
vegetable decay, it appears to me that the general salubrity of
South-east Australia is to be attributed. So rarified, indeed, is the
atmosphere, that it causes an elasticity of spirits unknown in a heavier
temperature. So the hot winds, of which I have been speaking, are not
felt in the degree we should be led to suppose. Like the air the spirits
are buoyant and light, and it is for its disagreeableness at the time,
not any after effects that a hot wind is to be dreaded. It is hot, and
that is all you can say; you have a reluctance to move, and may not rest
so well as usual; but the spirits are in no way affected; nor indeed, in
the ordinary transactions of business does a hot wind make the slightest
difference. If there are three or four months of warm weather, there are
eight or nine months of the year, during which the weather is splendid.
Nothing can exceed the autumn, winter, and spring of that transparent
region, where the firmament is as bright as it would appear from the
summit of Mount Blanc. In the middle of winter you enjoy a fire, the
evenings are cold, and occasionally the nights are frosty. It is then
necessary to put on warmer clothing, and a good surtout, buttoned across
the breast, is neither an uncomfortable nor unimportant addition. Having
said thus much of the general salubrity of the climate of South
Australia, I would observe, in reference to what may be said against it,
that the changes of temperature are sudden and unexpected, the
thermometer rising or falling 50 degrees in an hour or two. Whether it is
owing to the properties I have ascribed, that the climate of this place
as also of Sydney should be fatal to consumptive habits, I do not know,
but in both places I have understood that such is the case, and in both I
have had reason to regret instances. It has been said that influenza
prevailed last year in Adelaide to a great extent, and that it carried
off a great many children and elderly persons. An epidemic, similar in
its symptoms, may have prevailed there, and been severe in its progress,
but it hardly seems probable that the epidemic of this country should
have been conveyed through constant change of air, the best cure for such
a disease, to so distant a part of the world. With all its salubrity,
indeed, I believe it may be said, that South Australia is subject to the
more unimportant maladies like other countries, but that there are no
indigenous disorders of a dangerous kind, and that it is a country which
may strictly be called one of the healthiest in the world, and will, in
all probability, continue so, as long as it shall be kept clear of
European diseases.

Having thus endeavoured to give a description of the general character
and climate of this limited but certainly beautiful portion of the
Australian continent, without encumbering my description with any remark
on the principal and particular sources of wealth it possesses, which not
being usual, could not, or rather would not, have been considered
applicable. I hope the object I have had in view will be sufficiently
clear to the reader. I have endeavoured to point out with an impartial
pen, the real capabilities of the province, and the nature of those
productions which are most congenial to her soil. Without undue praise on
the one hand, or unjust depreciation on the other, it has been my desire
to present a faithful picture of her to my readers, and I hope it will
appear from what I have said, as is really and truly the case, that both
in climate and other respects it is a country peculiarly adapted to the
pursuits and habits of my countrymen. That its climate so far approaches
that of England, as to be subject to light and partial frosts, which
render it unfit for the cultivation of tropical productions, but make it
essentially an agricultural country, capable of yielding as fine cereal
grain as any country in the world, of whatever kind it may be--that at
the same time the greater mildness of the climate makes it favourable to
the growth of a variety of fruits and vegetables, independently of
European fruit trees and culinary herbs, which put it in the power of the
settler to secure the enjoyment of greater luxuries and comforts, than he
could possibly expect to have done in his own country, except at a great
expense, and that as far as the two great desiderata go, on which I have
been dwelling, it is a country to which an Englishman may migrate with
the most cheerful anticipations.


CHAPTER III.


SEASONS--CAUSE WHY SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS FINE GRAIN--EXTENT OF
CULTIVATION--AMOUNT OF STOCK--THE BURRA-BURRA MINE--ITS
MAGNITUDE--ABUNDANCE OF MINERALS--ABSENCE OF COAL--SMELTING ORE--IMMENSE
PROFITS OF THE BURRA-BURRA--EFFECT OF THE MINES ON THE LABOUR
MARKET--RELUCTANCE OF THE LOWER ORDERS TO EMIGRATE--DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
CANADA AND AUSTRALIA--THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES--STATE OF SOCIETY--THE
MIDDLE CLASSES--THE SQUATTERS--THE GERMANS--THE NATIVES--AUTHOR'S
INTERVIEWS WITH THEM--INSTANCES OF JUST FEELING--THEIR BAD
QUALITIES--PERSONAL APPEARANCE--YOUNG SETTLERS ON THE MURRAY--CONCLUSION.


It was my object in the last chapter, to confine my observations strictly
to the agricultural and pastoral capabilities of the province of South
Australia, which I thought I could not better do than by describing the
nature of its climate and soil, for on these depend the producing powers
of every country. In speaking of the climate, however, I merely adverted
to its temperature, leaving its seasons out of question for the time,
intending to close my remarks on these heads, by a short review of the
state of the agricultural and pastoral interests of the colony at the
present date.

It will be borne in mind that the seasons of Australia are the reverse of
our own; that when in England the ground is covered with snow, there the
sun is hottest, and that when summer heats are ripening our fruits, in
Australia it is the coldest season of the year, December, January,
February, and March being the summer months; June, July, August, and
September the winter ones. An experience of ten years has shewn that the
seasons of South Australia are exceedingly regular, that the rains set in
within a few days of the same period each successive year, and that
during the winter the ground gets abundantly saturated. This regularity
of season may be attributed to the almost insular position of the
promontory of Cape Jarvis, and may be said to be almost local, in
elucidation of which, I may refer to what I have stated in the former
part of my work, of the state of the weather in the valley of the Murray
when the expedition was proceeding up its banks in the month of August,
1844. For some time before there had been heavy rains in the hills, and
it was with some difficulty the drays crossed them. During our stay at
Moorundi, the ranges were covered with heavy clouds, and the mountain
streams were so swollen as to stop one of my messengers; but the sky over
the valley of the Murray was as clear as crystal, morning mists it is
true curled up at early dawn from the bosom of its waters, but they were
soon dissipated, and a sharp frosty night was succeeded by a day of
surpassing beauty.

The regularity, however, both in its commencement and in the quantity of
moisture that falls during the rainy season in the colony, enables the
agriculturist to calculate with certainty upon it, and the only anxiety
of the farmer is to get his grain into the ground sufficiently early, if
possible, to escape the first hot winds. In a region, portions of which
are subject, it must be confessed, to long continued drought, this is no
inconsiderable advantage, although South Australia is not singular in
this respect, for the rainy seasons in the Port Phillip districts are, I
believe, equally regular and more abundant, whilst the climate of Van
Diemen's Land almost approaches to that of England; neither, indeed,
fairly speaking, is South Australia more favoured than those of her
immediate neighbours in the quality of her soil. Van Diemen's Land is the
granary of the southern seas, and there is unquestionably a very great
proportion of the very best soil in the Port Phillip district.
Nevertheless that of South Australia has yielded a finer and a heavier
grain than has ever been produced in those colonies, but the reason of
this is, that with a naturally rich soil to work upon, the agriculturists
of South Australia have spared no pains in cultivating their lands, but
there can be no doubt that with equal care and attention both the
Vandemonians and the settlers of Port Phillip would produce an equally
fine sample. The farmers of South Australia have enhanced the value of
their colony by their energy and skill in cultivating it, and can boast
of having sent the finest sample of wheat to England that has ever been
exhibited in her market.

South Australia, in its length and breadth, contains about 300,000 square
miles, or in round numbers more than 190,000,000 acres. The limits of
location, however, do not exceed 4000 miles, or 7,000,000 acres. In this
area, however, a great portion of desert country is included, or such, at
least, as at the present moment is considered so. Of the more available
land, 470,000 acres have been purchased, but the extent of country
occupied by sheep and cattle stations is not known.

It may be necessary here to observe, that the returns of the land under
cultivation last year were published after I left the colony; but the
comparison between the two previous years will shew the increase and
decrease of the different grains, sufficiently to establish the progress
of agricultural pursuits in the colony. In the year 1845, the number of
acres of wheat sown was 18,848. In 1846 it was 26,135. Of barley, there
were in the former year 4,342 acres, in the latter only 3,490. Of oats,
there were 1,485 in the first year, which, in 1846, increased to 1,963.
It would thus appear, that the increase of cultivated land in the course
of one year amounted to between 6000 and 7000 acres, and that more than
400 agriculturists were added to the list of landed proprietors. The
necessary consequence of such extensive farming operations is that the
produce far exceeds the wants of the settlers, and that there is a
considerable surplus for exportation; the price of the best flour being
from 12 pounds to 13 pounds per ton, whereas for a short period in 1839
it was 120 pounds!!!

Whilst the agriculturists have been so earnest in the development of the
productive powers of the colony, another class of its inhabitants were
paying equal attention to its pastoral interests. The establishment of
stock stations over its surface followed its occupation, and a mild
climate and nutritive herbage equally contributed to the increase of
cattle and sheep that had been introduced. In 1844 the number of sheep
assessed was 355,700, in the following year that number had increased to
480,669, or an addition of 120,000. At the present moment there cannot be
far short of a million of sheep in the province, with an increase of
200,000 annually, at a moderate computation. The number of other kinds of
stock in the possession of the settlers, at the close of last year, was
as follows:--of cattle, 70,000; 30,000 having been imported during the
two previous years from New South Wales. The number of horses was
estimated at 5000, and of other smaller stock, as pigs and goats, there
were supposed to be more than 20,000.

It is impossible to contemplate such a prosperous state of things in a
colony that has only just completed the eleventh year of its existence,
without feeling satisfied that some unusually favourable circumstances
had brought it about. Had South Australia been as distant from the older
colonies on the continent as Swan River, the amount of stock she would
have possessed in an equal length of time, could not have amounted to a
tenth of what they now number. It is to the discovery of the Darling and
the Murray that South Australia owes the superabundance of her flocks and
herds, and in that superabundance the full and complete establishment of
her pastoral interests. I stated in the course of my preliminary
observations on the progress of Australian discovery, that when I was
toiling down those rivers, with wide spread deserts on either side of me,
I had little idea for what purposes my footsteps had been directed into
the interior of the Australian Continent. If I ever entertained even a
distant hope that the hilly country from which I turned back at the
termination of the Murray, after having floated on its broad waters for
eighty-eight days, might ever be occupied, I certainly never hoped that
the discoveries I was then making would one day or other prove of
advantage to many a friend, and that I was marking the way for thousands
of herds and flocks, the surplus stock of New South Wales, to pass into
the province of South Australia.

If then such consequences have resulted from enterprises, apparently of
almost as hopeless a character as the one from which I have so recently
returned, why, I would ask, should I despair, as to its one day or other
being instrumental in benefiting my countrymen. There may yet be that in
the womb of time which shall repay me for all I suffered in the
performance of that dreary task--when I shall have it in my power to say,
that I so far led the way across the continent as to make the remainder
of easy attainment, and under the guidance and blessing of Providence
have been mainly instrumental in establishing a line of communication
between its northern and southern coasts. I see no reason why I should
despair that such may one day be the case. The road to the point which
may be termed my farthest north is clear before the explorer. That point
gained, less probably than 200 miles--a week's journey with horses less
jaded than mine unfortunately were, and with strength less reduced--would
place him beyond the limits of that fearful desert, and crown his labours
with success. I believe that I could, on my old route, make the north
coast of Australia, to the westward of the Gulf of Carpentaria, before
any party from Moreton Bay. If it is asked what practical good I should
expect to result from such an undertaking, I would observe, that nothing
would sooner tend to establish an intercourse with the inhabitants of the
Malay archipelago, than the barter of cattle and sheep, that in truth
there is no knowing what the ultimate results would be. The Malays who
visit the northern coasts of Australia to collect the sea slug, have
little inducement to keep up an intercourse with our settlements in
Torres Straits, but there can be no doubt of their readiness to enter
into commercial intercourse with us, which, if Torres Straits are to be
navigated by steamers, would be doubly important.

When the stock from New South Wales was first brought down the Murray,
the journey occupied from three to four months. Latterly it did not take
half that time. In less than fifty days, from the Murray, on his way to
the north, the stock-holder would find that he had passed the centre, and
an equal number of days from that point would, it appears to me, take him
to his journey's end. This, however, would depend on the nature of the
country beyond where it is at present known, and the nature of the season
during which it was undertaken, but experience alone, as in the instance
of the journey down the Murray, would be the best guide and the best
instructor.

In the early part of the year 1840, I had occasion to address a number of
the colonists at the conclusion of a public entertainment and availed
myself of the opportunity to state that whatever prospects of success the
pastoral capabilities of the province appeared to hold out, I felt
assured it was to the mountains, the colonists would have to look for
their future wealth, for that no one who pretended to the eye of a
geologist could cross them as I had done, without the conviction that
they abounded in mineral veins. There is something, in truth, in the
outline and form of the Mount Lofty chain that betrays its character.
Rounded spurs, of very peculiar form, having deep valleys on either side,
come down from the main range, the general outline of which bears a
strong resemblance to that of the Ural chain.

