[Clark, April 15, 1805]
15th of April Monday 1805
Set out at an early hour, Captn Lewis walked on Shore and Killed a
goose, passed a Island in a bend to the L. S. the wind hard from the S.
E. after brackfast I walked on Shore and assended to the high Countrey
on the S. S. and off from the Missouri about three miles the countrey
is butifull open fertile plain the dreans take theer rise near the
Clifts of the river and run from the river in a N E derection as far as
I could See, this is the part of the River which Mouse river the waters
of Lake Winnipec approaches within a fiew miles of Missouri, and I
believe those dreans lead into that river. we passed a creek about 20
yds. wide on the S. S. the bottoms of this Creek is extensive &
fertile, the water of this as also, all the Streams which head a fiew
miles in the hills discharge water which is black & unfit for use (and
can Safely Say that I have not Seen one drop of water fit for use above
fort Mandan except Knife and the little Missouris Rivers and the
Missouri, the other Streams being So much impregnated with mineral as
to be verry disagreeble in its present State.) I saw the remains of
Several Camps of ossinniboins, near one of those camps & at no great
distance from the mouth of the aforesid Creek, in a hollow, I saw a
large Strong pen made for the purpose of Catching the antelope, with
wings projecting from it widining from the pen

Saw Several gangs of Buffalow and Some elk at a distance, a black bear
Seen from the Perogues to day- passed a rock in the Middle of the
river, Some Smaller rocks from that to the L. Shore, the dog that came
to us yesterday morning continues to follow us, we camped on a Sand
point to the L. S.

[Lewis, April 16, 1805]
Tuesday April 16th 1805.
Set out very early this morning. Capt. Clark walked on Shore this
morning, and killed an Antelope, rejoined us at 1/2 after eight A.M.-
he informed me that he had seen many Buffaloe Elk and deer in his
absence, and that he had met with a great number of old hornets nests
in the woody bottoms through which he had passed.- the hills of the
river still continue extreemly broken for a few miles back, when it
becomes a fine level country of open fertile lands immediately on the
river there are many fine leavel extensive and extreemly fertile high
plains and meadows. I think the quantity of timbered land on the river
is increasing. the mineral appearances still continue. I met with
several stones today that had the appearance of wood first carbonated
and then petrefyed by the water of the river, which I have discovered
has that effect on many vegitable substances when exposed to it's
influence for a length of time. l believe it to be the stratas of Coal
seen in those hills which causes the fire and birnt appearances
frequently met with in this quarter. where those birnt appearances are
to be seen in the face of the river bluffs, the coal is seldom seen,
and when you meet with it in the neighbourhood of the stratas of birnt
earth, the coal appears to be presisely at the same hight, and is
nearly of the same thickness, togeter with the sand and a sulphurious
substance which ususually accompanys it. there was a remarkable large
beaver caught by one of the party last night. these anamals are now
very abundant. I have met with several trees which have been felled by
them 20 Inches in diameter. bark is their only food; and they appear to
prefer that of the Cotton wood and willow; as we have never met with
any other species of timber on the Missouri which had the appearance of
being cut by them.- we passed three small creeks on the Stard. side.
they take their rise in the river hills at no great distance. we saw a
great number of geese today, both in the plains and on the river- I
have observed but few ducks, those we have met with are the Mallard and
blue winged Teal

[Clark, April 16, 1805]
16th of April Tuesday 1805
Wind hard from the S. E I walked on Shore and Killed an antilope which
was verry meagre, Saw great numbers of Elk & some buffalow & Deer, a
verry large Beaver Cought this morning. Some verry handsom high planes
& extensive bottoms, the mineral appearances of Coal & Salt together
with Some appearance of Burnt hils continue. a number of old hornets
nests Seen in every bottom more perticularly in the one opposit to the
place we camped this night- the wooded bottoms are more extensive to
day than Common. passed three Small Creeks on the S. S. to day which
take their rise in the hills at no great distance, Great numbers of
Gees in the river & in the Plains feeding on the Grass.

[Lewis, April 17, 1805]
Wednesday April 17th 1805.
A delightfull morning, set out at an erly hour. the country though
which we passed to (lay was much the same as that discribed of
yesterday; there wase more appearance of birnt hills, furnishing large
quanties of lava and pumice stone, of the latter some pieces were seen
floating down the river. Capt. Clark walked on shore this morning on
the Stard. side, and did not join us untill half after six in the
evening. he informed me that he had seen the remains of the Assinniboin
encampments in every point of woodland through which he had passed. we
saw immence quantities of game in every direction around us as we
passed up the river; consisting of herds of Buffaloe, Elk, and
Antelopes with some deer and woolves. tho we continue to see many
tracks of the bear we have seen but very few of them, and those are at
a great distance generally runing from us; I thefore presume that they
are extreemly wary and shy; the Indian account of them dose not
corrispond with our experience so far. one black bear passed near the
perogues on the 16th and was seen by myself and the party but he so
quickly disappeared that we did not shoot at him.- at the place we
halted to dine on the Lard. side we met with a herd of buffaloe of
which I killed the fatest as I concieved among them, however on
examining it I found it so poar that I thought it unfit for uce and
only took the tongue; the party killed another which was still more
lean. just before we encamped this evening we saw some tracks of
Indians who had passed about 24 hours; they left four rafts of timber
on the Stard. side, on which they had passed. we supposed them to have
been a party of the Assinniboins who had been to war against the rocky
mountain Indians, and then on their return. Capt. Clark saw a Curlou
today. there were three beaver taken this morning by the party. the men
prefer the flesh of this anamal, to that of any other which we have, or
are able to procure at this moment. I eat very heartily of the beaver
myself, and think it excellent; particularly the tale, and liver. we
had a fair wind today which enabled us to sail the greater part of the
distance we have travled, encamped on the Lard shore the extremity of
the last course

[Clark, April 17, 1805]
17th of April Wednesday 1805
a fine morning wind from the S E. Genly to day handsom high extencive
rich Plains on each Side, the mineral appearances continue with greater
appearances of Coal, much greater appearance of the hills haveing been
burnt, more Pumice Stone & Lava washed down to the bottoms and some
Pumice Stone floating in the river, I walked on the S. S. Saw great
numbs. of Buffalow feeding in the Plains at a distance Capt. Lewis
killed 2 Buffalow buls which was near the water at the time of dineing,
they were So pore as to be unfit for use. I Saw Several Small parties
of antelopes large herds of Elk, Some white wolves, and in a pond
(formed on the S. S. by the Missouries Changeing its bead) I Saw Swan
Gees & different kinds of Ducks in great numbers also a Beaver house.
Passed a Small Creek on the S. S. & Several runs of water on each Side,
Saw the remains of Indian camps in every point of timbered land on the
S. S. in the evining a thunder gust passed from the S W, without rain,
about Sunset Saw Some fresh Indians track and four rafts on the shore
S. S. Those I prosume were Ossinniboins who had been on a war party
against the Rockey Mountain Indians- Saw a Curlow, Some verry large
beaver taken this morning. those animals are made use of as food and
preferred by the party to any other at this Season

[Lewis, April 18, 1805]
Thursday April 18th 1805.
A fine morning, set out at an early hour. one Beaver caught this
morning by two traps, having a foot in each; the traps belonged to
different individuals, between whom, a contest ensued, which would have
terminated, most probably, in a serious rencounter had not our timely
arrival at the place prevented it. after breakfast this morning, Capt.
Clark walked on Stad. shore, while the party were assending by means of
their toe lines, I walked with them on the bank; found a species of pea
bearing a yellow flower, and now in blume; it seldom rises more than 6
inches high, the leaf & stalk resembles that of the common gardin pea,
the root is pirenial. (See specimen of vegitables No. 3.) I also saw
several parsels of buffaloe's hair hanging on the rose bushes, which
had been bleached by exposure to the weather and became perfectly
white. it every appearance of the wool of the sheep, tho much finer and
more silkey and soft. I am confident that an excellent cloth may be
made of the wool of the Buffaloe. the Buffaloe I killed yesterday had
cast his long hare, and the poll which remained was very thick, fine,
and about 2 inches in length. I think this anamal would have furnished
about five pounds of wool. we were detained today from one to five P.M.
in consequence of the wind which blew so violently from N. that it was
with difficulty we could keep the canoes from filling with water altho
they were along shore; I had them secured by placing the perogues on
the out side of them in such manner as to break the waves off them. at
5 we proceed, and shortly after met with Capt. Clark, who had killed an
Elk and a deer and was wating our arrival. we took the meat on board
and continued our march untill nearly dark when we came too on the
Stard side under a boald welltimbered bank which sheltered us from the
wind which had abated but not yet ceased. here we encamped, it being
the extremity of the last course of this day.-

[Clark, April 18, 1805]
18th of April Thursday 1805
Set out at an early hour one Beaver & a Musrat Cought this morning, the
beaver cought in two traps, which like to have brought about a
missunderstanding between two of the party &c. after brackfast I
assended a hill and observed that the river made a great bend to the
South, I concluded to walk thro the point about 2 miles and take
Shabono, with me, he had taken a dost of Salts &c. his Squar followed
on with his child, when I Struck the next bend of the river could See
nothing of the Party, left this man & his wife & Child on the river
bank and went out to hunt, Killed a young Buck Elk, & a Deer, the Elk
was tolerable meat, the Deer verry pore, Butcherd the meat and
Continued untill near Sunset before Capt Lewis and the party Came up,
they were detained by the wind, which rose Soon after I left the boat
from the N W. & blew verry hard untill verry late in the evening. we
Camped on the S. S. in an excellent harbor, Soon after We came too, two
men went up the river to Set their beaver traps they met with a Bear
and being without their arms thought prodent to return &c. the wild
Cheries are in bloom, Great appearance of Burnt hills Pumice Stone &c.
the Coal & Salt appearance Continued, the water in the Small runs much
better than below,- Saw Several old Indian Camps, the game, Such as
Buffalow Elk, antelopes & Deer verry plenty

[Lewis, April 19, 1805]
Friday April 19th 1805.
The wind blew So hard this morning from N. W. that we dared not to
venture our canoes on the river.- Observed considerable quantities of
dwarf Juniper on the hillsides (see specimen No. 4) it seldom rises
higher then 3 feet.- the wind detained us through the couse of this
day, tho we were fortunate in having placed ourselves in a safe
harbour. the party killed one Elk and a beaver today. The beaver of
this part of the Missouri are larger, fatter, more abundant and better
clad with fur than those of any other part of the country that I have
yet seen; I have remarked also that their fur is much darker.

[Clark, April 19, 1805]
19th of April Friday 1805
a blustering windey day the wind So hard from the N, W. that we were
fearfull of ventering our Canoes in the river, lay by all day on the S.
Side in a good harber, the Praries appear to green, the cotton trees
bigin to leave, Saw some plumb bushes in full bloom, those were the
plumb bushes which I have Seen for Some time. Killed an Elk an a Beaver
to day- The beaver of this river is much larger than usial, Great deal
of Sign of the large Bear,

[Lewis, April 20, 1805]
Saturday April 20th 1805.
The wind continued to blow tolerably hard this morning but by no means
as violently as it (lid yesterday; we determined to set out and
accordingly departed a little before seven. I walked on shore on the N.
side of the river, and Capt Clark proceeded with the party. the river
bottoms through which I passed about seven miles were fertil and well
covered with Cottonwood some Box alder, ash and red Elm. the under
brush, willow, rose bushes Honeysuccle, red willow, goosbury, currant
and servicebury & in the open grounds along the foot of the river hills
immence quantities of the hisop. in the course of my walk I killed two
deer, wounded an Elk and a deer; saw the remains of some Indian hunting
camps, near which stood a small scaffold of about 7 feet high on which
were deposited two doog slays with their harnis. underneath this
scaffold a human body was lying, well rolled in several dressed
buffaloe skins and near it a bag of the same materials containg sundry
articles belonging to the disceased; consisting of a pare of
mockersons, some red and blue earth, beaver's nails, instruments for
dressing the Buffalo skin, some dryed roots, several platts of the
sweet grass, and a small quantity of Mandan tobacco.- I presume that
the body, as well as the bag containing these articles, had formerly
been placed on the scaffold as is the custom of these people, but had
fallen down by accedent. near the scaffold I saw the carcase of a large
dog not yet decayed, which I supposed had been killed at the time the
human body was left on the scaffold; this was no doubt the reward,
which the poor doog had met with for performing the ____-friendly
office to his mistres of transporting her corps to the place of
deposit. it is customary with the Assinniboins, Mandans, Minetares &c
who scaffold their dead, to sacrefice the favorite horses and doggs of
their disceased relations, with a view of their being servicable to
them in the land of sperits. I have never heard of any instances of
human sacrefices on those occasions among them.

The wind blew so hard that I concluded it was impossible fror the
perogues and canoes to proceed and therefore returned and joined them
about three in the evening. Capt. Clark informed me that soon after
seting out, a part of the bank of the river fell in near one of the
canoes and had very nearly filled her with water. that the wind became
so hard and the waves so high that it was with infinite risk he had
been able to get as far as his present station. the white perrogue and
several of the canoes had shiped water several times but happily our
stores were but little injured; those which were wet we put out to dry
and determined to remain untill the next morning. we sent out four
hunters who soon added 3 Elk 4 gees and 2 deer to our stock of
provisions. the party caught six beaver today which were large and in
fine order. the Buffaloe, Elk and deer are poor at this season, and of
tours are not very palitable, however our good health and apetites make
up every necessary deficiency, and we eat very heartily of them.-
encamped on Stard side; under a high well timbered bank.

[Clark, April 20, 1805]
20th of April Satturday 1805
wind a head from the N W. we Set out at 7 oClock proceeded on, Soon
after we Set out a Bank fell in near one of the Canoes which like to
have filled her with water, the wind became hard and waves So rought
that we proceeded with our little Canoes with much risque, our
Situation was Such after Setting out that we were obliged to pass round
the 1st Point or lay exposed to the blustering winds & waves, in
passing round the Point Several canoes took in water as also our large
Perogue but without injuring our Stores & much I proceeded on to the
upper part of the 1st bend and came too at a butifull Glade on the S.
S., about 1 mile below Capt Lewis who had walked thro the point, left
his Coat & a Deer on the bank which we took on board,-. a Short
distance below our Camp I Saw Some rafts on the S. S. near which, an
Indian woman was Scaffeled in the Indian form of Deposing their dead, &
fallen down She was or had been raised about 6 feet inclosed in Several
robes tightly laced around her, with her dog Slays, her bag of
Different coloured earths paint Small bones of animals beaver nales and
Several other little trinkets, also a blue jay, her dog was killed and
lay near her. Capt. Lewis joined me Soon after I landed & informed me
he has walked Several miles higher, & in his walk killed 2 Deer &
wounded an Elk & a Deer, our party Shot in the river four beaver &
cought two, which were verry fat and much admired by the men, after we
landed they killed 3 Elk 4 Gees & 2 Deer we had Some of our Provisions
& which got a little wet aired, the wind Continued So hard that we were
Compelled to delay all day. Saw Several buffalow lodged in the drift
wood which had been drouned in the winter in passing the river; Saw the
remains of 2 which had lodged on the Side of the bank & eate by the
bears.

This morning was verry cold, Some Snow about 2 oClock from flying
clouds, Some frost this morning & the mud at the edge of the water was
frosed

[Lewis, April 21, 1805]
Sunday April 21st 1805.
Set out at an early hour this morning. Capt Clark walked on shore; the
wind tho a head was not violent. the country through which we passed is
very simelar in every rispect to that through which we have passed for
several days.- We saw immence herds of buffaloe Elk deer & Antelopes.
Capt Clark killed a buffaloe and 4 deer in the course of his walk
today; and the party with me killed 3 deer, 2 beaver, and 4 buffaloe
calves. the latter we found very delicious. I think it equal to any
veal I ever tasted. the Elk now begin to shed their horns. passed one
large and two small creeks on the Lard. side, tho neither of them
discharge any water at present. the wind blew so hard this evening that
we were obliged to halt several hours. we reached the place of
incampment after dark, which was on the Lard. side a little above White
earth river which discharges itself on the Stard. side. immediately at
the mouth of this river it is not more than 10 yards wide being choked
up by the mud of the Missouri; tho after leaving the bottom lands of
this river, or even sooner, it becomes a boald stream of sixty yards
wide and is deep and navigable. the course of this river as far as I
could see from the top of Cut bluff, was due North. it passes through a
beatifull level and fertile vally about five miles in width. I think I
saw about 25 miles up this river, and did not discover one tree or bush
of any discription on it's borders. the vally was covered with Elk and
buffaloe. saw a great number of gees today as usual, also some swan and
ducks.

[Clark, April 21, 1805]
21st of April Sunday 1805
Set out early the wind gentle & from the N. W. the river being verry
Crooked, I concluded to walk through the point, the Countrey on either
Side is verry Similar to that we have passed, Saw an emence number of
Elk & Buffalow, also Deer Antelopes Geese Ducks & a fiew Swan, the
Buffalow is about Calveing I killed a Buffalow & 4 Deer in my walk to
day, the party killed 2 deer 2 beaver & 4 Buffalow Calves, which was
verry good veele. I Saw old Camps of Indians on the L. Side, we passed
1 large & 2 Small Creeks on the L. Side neither of them discharge any
water into the river, in the evening the wind became verry hard a head,
we made Camp at a late hour which was on the L. Side a little above the
mouth of White Earth River which falls in on the Stad Side and is 60
yds. wide, several Mes. up

[Lewis, April 22, 1805]
Monday April 22cd 1805.
Set out at an early hour this morning; proceeded pretty well untill
breakfat, when the wind became so hard a head that we proceeded with
difficulty even with the assistance of our toe lines. the party halted
and Cpt. Clark and myself walked to the white earth river which
approaches the Missouri very near at this place, being about 4 miles
above it's entrance. we found that it contained more water than streams
of it's size generally do at this season. the water is much clearer
than that of the Missouri. the banks of the river are steep and not
more than ten or twelve feet high; the bed seems to be composed of mud
altogether. the salts which have been before mentioned as common on the
Missouri, appears in great quantities along the banks of this river,
which are in many places so thickly covered with it that they appear
perfectly white. perhaps it has been from this white appearance of it's
banks that the river has derived it's name. this river is said to be
navigable nearly to it's source, which is at no great distance from the
Saskashawan, and I think from it's size the direction which it seems to
take, and the latitude of it's mouth, that there is very good ground to
believe that it extends as far North as latitude 50°.- this stream passes
through an open country generally.- the broken hills of the Missouri
about this place exhibit large irregular and broken masses of rocks and
stones; some of which tho 200 feet above the level of the water seem at
some former period to have felt it's influence, fo they appear smoth as
if woarn by the agetation of the water. this collection consists of
white & grey gannite, a brittle black rock, flint, limestone,
freestone, some small specimens of an excellent pebble and occasionally
broken stratas of a stone which appears to be petrefyed wood, it is of
a black colour, and makes excellent whetstones. Coal or carbonated wood
pumice stone lava and other mineral apearances still continue. the coal
appears to be of better quality; I exposed a specimen of it to the fire
and found that it birnt tolerably well, it afforded but little flame or
smoke, but produced a hot and lasting fire.- I asscended to the top of
the cutt bluff this morning, from whence I had a most delightfull view
of the country, the whole of which except the vally formed by the
Missouri is void of timber or underbrush, exposing to the first glance
of the spectator immence herds of Buffaloe, Elk, deer, & Antelopes
feeding in one common and boundless pasture. we saw a number of bever
feeding on the bark of the trees alonge the verge of the river, several
of which we shot, found them large and fat. walking on shore this
evening I met with a buffaloe calf which attatched itself to me and
continued to follow close at my heels untill I embarked and left it. it
appeared allarmed at my dog which was probably the cause of it's so
readily attatching itself to me. Capt Clark informed me that he saw a
large drove of buffaloe pursued by wolves today, that they at length
caught a calf which was unable to keep up with the herd. the cows only
defend their young so long as they are able to keep up with the herd,
and seldom return any distance in surch of them.-

[Clark, April 22, 1805]
22nd of April Monday 1805
a verry cold morning Some frost, we Set out at an early hour and
proceeded on verry well untill brackfast at which time the wind began
to blow verry hard ahead, and Continued hard all day we proceeded on
with much dificuelty with the assistance of the toe Ropes. Capt. Lewis
& my Self walked to the ____ River which is near the Missouri four
miles above its mouth, this river is 60 yards wide and contains a
greater perportion of water at this time than is Common for Rivers of
its Size it appears navagable as fur as any of the party was, and I am
told to near its Source in morrasses in the open Plains, it passes (as
far as we can See which is 6 or 7 Leagus) thro a butifull extinsive
vallie, rich & fertile and at this time Covered with Buffalow, Elk &
antelopes, which may be Seen also in any other direction in this
quarter- this river must take its rise at no great distance Easte of
the Saskashawan, and no doubt as far N. as Latd. 50°

Some of the high plains or the broken Revien of the river contains
great quantity of Pebble Stones of various Sizes, The Stratum of Coal
is much richer than below, the appearances of Mineral & burnt hills
Still continue the river riseing a little, Saw an emence number of
beaver feeding on the waters edge & Swiming Killed Several, Capt. Lewis
assended a hill from the top of which he had a most inchanting prospect
of the Countrey around & the meanderings of the two rivers, which is
remarkable Crooked- a buffalow calf which was on the Shore alone
followed Cap Lewis Some distance,- I observed a large drove of buffalow
prosued by wolves the wolves cought one of their Calves in my view,
those animals defend their young as long as they Can keep up with the
drove

[Lewis, April 23, 1805]
Tuesday April 23rd
Set out at an early hour this morning. about nine A.M. the wind arose,
and shortly after became so violent that we were unabled to proceed, in
short it was with much difficulty and some risk that I was enabled to
get the canoes and perogues into a place of tolerable safety, there
being no timber on either side of the river at this place. some of the
canoes shiped water, and wet several parsels of their lading, which I
directed to be opened and aired we remained untill five in the evening
when the wind abating in some measure, we reloaded, and proceeded.
shortly after we were joined by Capt. Clark who had walked on shore
this morning, and passing through the bottom lands had fallen on the
river some miles above, and concluding that the wind had detained us,
came down the river in surch of us. he had killed three blacktaled, or
mule deer, and a buffaloe Calf, in the course of his ramble. these hard
winds, being so frequently repeated, become a serious source of
detention to us.- incamped on the Stard. side.-

[Clark, April 23, 1805]
23rd of April 1805
a cold morning at about 9 oClock the wind as usial rose from the N W
and continued to blow verry hard untill late in the evening I walked on
Shore after brackfast in my walk on the S side passed through extensive
bottoms of timber intersperced with glades & low open plains, I killed
3 mule or black tail Deer, which was in tolerable order, Saw Several
others, I also killed a Buffalow Calf which was verry fine, I Struck
the river above the Perogus which had Come too in a bend to the L. S.
to Shelter from the wind which had become violently hard, I joined Capt
Lewis in the evening & after the winds falling which was late in the
evening we proceeded on & encamped on the S. S. The winds of this
Countrey which blow with Some violence almost every day, has become a
Serious obstruction in our progression onward, as we Cant move when the
wind is high without great risque, and if there was no risque the winds
is generally a head and often too violent to proceed

[Lewis, April 24, 1805]
Wednesday April 24th
The wind blew so hard during the whole of this day, that we were unable
to move. notwithstanding that we were sheltered by high timber from the
effects of the wind, such was it's violence that it caused the waves to
rise in such manner as to wet many articles in the small canoes before
they could be unloaded. we sent out some hunters who killed 4 deer & 2
Elk, and caught some young wolves of the small kind.- Soar eyes is a
common complaint among the party. I believe it origenates from the
immence quantities of sand which is driven by the wind from the
sandbars of the river in such clouds that you are unable to discover
the opposite bank of the river in many instances. the particles of this
sand are so fine and light that they are easily supported by the air,
and are carried by the wind for many miles, and at a distance
exhibiting every appearance of a collumn of thick smoke. so penitrating
is this sand that we cannot keep any article free from it; in short we
are compelled to eat, drink, and breath it very freely. my pocket
watch, is out of order, she will run only a few minutes without
stoping. I can discover no radical defect in her works, and must
therefore attribute it to the sand, with which, she seems plentifully
charged, notwithstanding her cases are double and tight.

[Clark, April 24, 1805]
24th of April Wednesday 1805
The wind rose last night and continued blowing from the N. & N W. and
Sometimes with great violence, untill 7 oClock P. M, Several articles
wet in the Perogues by their takeing water &c. as the wind was a head
we could not move today Sent out hunters, they killed 4 Deer 2 Elk &
cought Some young wolves of the Small kind, The party complain much of
the Sand in their eyes, the Sand is verry fine and rises in clouds from
the Points and bars of the river, I may Say that dureing those winds we
eat Drink & breeth a prepotion of Sand.

[Lewis, April 25, 1805]
Thursday April 25th 1805.
The wind was more moderate this morning, tho still hard; we set out at
an early hour. the water friezed on the oars this morning as the men
rowed. about 10 oclock A.M. the wind began to blow so violently that we
were obliged to lye too. my dog had been absent during the last night,
and I was fearfull we had lost him altogether, however, much to my
satisfaction he joined us at 8 Oclock this morning. The wind had been
so unfavorable to our progress for several days past, and seeing but
little prospect of a favourable chang; knowing that the river was
crooked, from the report of the hunters who were out yesterday, and
beleiving that we were at no very great distance from the Yellow stone
River; I determined, in order as mush as possible to avoid detention,
to proceed by land with a few men to the entrance of that river and
make the necessary observations to determine it's position, which I
hoped to effect by the time that Capt. Clark could arrive with the
party; accordingly I set out at 1 t OCk. on the Lard. side, accompanyed
by four men. we proceeded about four miles, when falling in with some
bufaloe I killed a yearling calf, which was in good order; we soon
cooked and made a hearty meal of a part of it, and renewed our march
our rout lay along the foot of the river hills. when we had proceeded
about four miles, I ascended the hills from whence I had a most
pleasing view of the country, perticularly of the wide and fertile
values formed by the missouri and the yellowstone rivers, which
occasionally unmasked by the wood on their borders disclose their
meanderings for many miles in their passage through these delightfull
tracts of country. I could not discover the junction of the rivers
immediately, they being concealed by the woods, however, sensible that
it could not be distant I determined to encamp on the bank of the
Yellow stone river which made it's appearance about 2 miles South of
me. the whol face of the country was covered with herds of Buffaloe,
Elk & Antelopes; deer are also abundant, but keep themselves more
concealed in the woodland. the buffaloe Elk and Antelope are so gentle
that we pass near them while feeding, without apearing to excite any
alarm among them, and when we attract their attention, they frequently
approach us more nearly to discover what we are, and in some instances
pursue us a considerable distance apparenly with that view.- in our way
to the place I had determined to encamp, we met with two large herds of
buffaloe, of which we killed three cows and a calf. two of the former,
wer but lean, we therefore took their tongues and a part of their
marrow-bones only. I then proceeded to the place of our encampment with
two of the men, taking with us the Calf and marrowbones, while the
other two remained, with orders to dress the cow that was in tolerable
order, and hang the meat out of the reach of the wolves, a precaution
indispensible to it's safe keeping, even for a night. we encamped on
the bank of the yellowstone river, 2 miles South of it's confluence
with the Missouri. On rejoining Capt. Clark, the 26th in the evening,
he informed me, that at 5 P.M. after I left him the wind abated in some
measure and he proceeded a few miles further and encamped.

[Clark, April 25, 1805]
25th of April Thursday 1805
The wind was moderate & ahead this morning, we Set out at an early hour
The morning cold, Some flying Clouds to be Seen, the wind from the N.
ice collected on the ores this morning, the wind increased and became
So violent about 1 oClock we were obliged to lay by our Canoes haveing
taken in Some water, the Dog which was lost yesterday, joined us this
morning.

finding that the winds retarded our progression for maney days past,
and no apparance of an alteration, and the river being Crooked that we
could never have 3 miles fair wind, Capt. Lewis concluded to go by land
as far as the Rochejhone or yellow Stone river, which we expect is at
no great distance by land and make Some Selestial observations to find
the Situation of its mouth, and by that measure not detain the Perogues
at that place any time for the purpose of makeing those necessary
observations he took 4 men & proceeded on up the Missouri on the L.
Side, at 5 oClock the wind luled and we proceeded on and incamped.

[Lewis, April 26, 1805]
Friday April 26th 1805.
This morning I dispatched Joseph Fields up the yellowstone river with
orders to examine it as far as he could conveniently and return the
same evening; two others were directed to bring in the meat we had
killed last evening, while I proceeded down the river with one man in
order to take a view of the confluence of this great river with the
Missouri, which we found to be two miles distant on a direct line N. W.
from our encampment. the bottom land on the lower side of the
yellowstone river near it's mouth for about one mile in width appears
to be subject to inundation; while that on the opposite side of the
Missouri and the point formed by the junction of these rivers is of the
common elivation, say from twelve to 18 feet above the level of the
water, and of course not liable to be overflown except in extreem high
water, which dose not appear to be very frequent there is more timber
in the neighbourhood of the junction of these rivers, and on the
Missouri as far below as the White earth river, than there is on any
part of the Missouri above the entrance of the Chyenne river to this
place. the timber consists principally of Cottonwood, with some small
elm, ash and boxalder. the under growth on the sandbars and verge of
the river is the small leafed willow; the low bottoms, rose bushes
which rise to three or four feet high, the redburry, servicebury, and
the redwood; the high bottoms are of two discriptions either timbered
or open; the first lies next to the river and it's under brush is the
same with that of the low timbered bottoms with the addition of the
broad leafed willow, Goosbury, choke cherry, purple currant; and
honeysuckle bushis; the open bottoms border on the hills, and are
covered in many parts by the wild hyssop which rises to the hight of
two feet. I observe that the Antelope, Buffaloe Elk and deer feed on
this herb; the willow of the sandbars also furnish a favorite winter
food to these anamals as well as the growse, the porcupine, hare, and
rabbit. about 12 Olock I heard the discharge of several guns at the
junction of the rivers, which announced to me the arrival of the paty
with Capt Clark; I afterwards learnt that they had fired on some
buffaloe which they met with at that place, and of which they killed a
cow and several Calves; the latter are now fine veal. I dispatched one
of the men to Capt Clark requesting him to send up a canoe to take down
the meat we had killed and our baggage to his encampmt, which was
accordingly complyed with. after I had completed my observations in the
evening I walked down and joined the party at their encampment on the
point of land fromed by the junction of the rivers; found them all in
good health, and much pleased at having arrived at this long wished for
spot, and in order to add in some measure to the general pleasure which
seemed to pervade our little community, we ordered a dram to be issued
to each person; this soon produced the fiddle, and they spent the
evening with much hilarity, singing & dancing, and seemed as perfectly
to forget their past toils, as they appeared regardless of those to
come. in the evening, the man I had sent up the river this morning
returned, and reported that he had ascended it about eight miles on a
streight line; that he found it crooked, meandering from side to side
of the valley formed by it; which is from four to five miles wide. the
corrent of the river gentle, and it's bed much interrupted and broken
by sandbars; at the distance of five miles he passed a large Island
well covered with timber, and three miles higher a large creek falls in
on the S. E. sides above a high bluff in which there are several
stratas of coal. the country bordering on this river as far as he could
percieve, like that of the Missouri, consisted of open plains. he saw
several of the bighorned anamals in the couse of his walk; but they
were so shy that he could not get a shoot at them; he found a large
horn of one of these anamals which he brought with him. the bed of the
yellowstone river is entirely composed of sand and mud, not a stone of
any kind to be seen in it near it's entrance. Capt Clark measured these
rivers just above their confluence; found the bed of the Missouri 520
yards wide, the water occupying 330. it's channel deep. the yellowstone
river including it's sandbar, 858 yds. of which, the water occupyed 297
yards; the depest part 12 feet; it was falling at this time & appeard
to be nearly at it's summer tide.- the Indians inform that the
yellowstone river is navigable for perogues and canoes nearly to it's
source in the Rocky Mountains, and that in it's course near these
mountains it passes within less than half a day's march of a navigable
part of the Missouri. it's extreem sources are adjacent to those of the
Missouri, river platte, and I think probably with some of the South
branch of the Columbia river. the first part of its course lies through
a mountanous rocky country tho well timbered and in many parts fertile;
the middle, and much the most extensive portion of the river lies
through a delightfull rich and fertile country, well covered with
timber, intersperced with plains and meadows, and well watered; it is
some what broken in many parts. the lower portion consists of fertile
open plains and meadows almost entirely, tho it possesses a
considerable proportion of timber on it's borders. the current of the
upper portion is extreemly rappid, that of the middle and lower
portions much more gentle than the Missouri. the water of this river is
turbid, tho dose not possess as much sediment as that of the Missouri.
this river in it's course recieves the waters of many large tributary
strains principally from the S. E. of which the most considerable are
the Tongue and bighorn rivers the former is much the largest, and heads
with the river Platte and Bighorn river, as dose the latter with the
Tongue river and the river Platte.- a suficient quantity of limestone
may be readily procured for building near the junction of the Missouri
and yellowstone rivers. I could observe no regular stratas of it, tho
it lies on the sides of the river hills in large irregular masses, in
considerable quantities; it is of a light colour, and appears to be of
an excellent quality.-

[Clark, April 26, 1805]
26th of April Friday 1805
last night was verry Cold. the Thermometer Stood at 32 abov 0 this
morning. I Set out at an early hour, as it was cold I walked on the
bank, & in my walk Shot a beaver & 2 Deer, one of the Deer in tolerable
order, the low bottom of the river is generaly Covered with wood
willows & rose bushes, red berry, wild Cherry & red or arrow wood
intersperced with glades The timber is Cottonwood principally, Elm
Small ash also furnish a portion of the timber, The Clay of the bluffs
appear much whiter than below, and Contain Several Stratums of Coal, on
the hill Sides I observe pebbles of different Size & Colour- The river
has been riseing for Several days, & raised 3 inches last night, at 12
oClock arrived at the forks of the Roche Johne & Missouri and formed a
Camp on the point Soon after George Drewyer Came from Capt Lewis &
informed me that he was a little way up the Roche johne and would join
me this evining, I Sent a canoe up to Capt Lewis and proceeded measure
the width of the rivers, and find the debth. The Missouri is 520 yards
wide above the point of yellow Stone and the water covers 330 yards;
the YellowStone River is 858 yards wide includeing its Sand bar, the
water covers 297 yards and the deepest part is 12 feet water, it is at
this time falling, the Missouri rising The Indians inform that the
yellow Stone River is navagable for Perogues to near its Source in the
Rocky Mountains, it has many tributary Streams, principally on the S.
E. Side, and heads at no great distance from the Missouri, the largest
rivers which fall into it is Tongue river which heads with the waters
of River Platt, and Big horn river which also heads with Platt & Tongue
R the current of this river is Said to be rapid near its mouth it is
verry jentle, and its water is of a whitish colour much Clearer of
Sediment than the Missouri. the Countrey on this river is Said to be
broken in its whole Course & Contains a great deel of wood, the
countrey about its mouth is verry fine, the bottoms on either Side is
wooded with Cotton wood, ash, Elm &c. near the banks of the river back
is higher bottoms and Covered with red berry, Goose berry & rose bushes
&. interspersed with Small open Glades, and near the high land is
Generally open rich bottoms- at our arrival at the forks I observed a
Drove of Buffalow Cows & Calves on a Sand bar in the point, I directed
the men to kill the fattest Cow, and 3 or 4 Calves, which they did and
let the others pass, the Cows are pore, Calves fine veele.

Capt Lewis joined me in the evening after takeing equal altitudes a
little way up the YellowStone river the Countrey in every direction is
plains except the moist bottoms of the river, which are covered with
Some indifferent timber Such as Cotton wood Elm & Small ash, with
different kind of Stubs & bushes in the forks about 1 mile from the
point at which place the 2 rivers are near each other a butifull low
leavel plain Commences, and extends up the Missourie & back, this plain
is narrow at its commencement and widens as the Missouri bends north,
and is bordered by an extencive wood land for many miles up the yellow
Stone river, this low plain is not Subject to over flow, appear to be a
few inches above high water mark and affords a butifull commanding
Situation for a fort near the commencement of the Prarie, about ____
miles from the Point & ____ yards from the Missouri a Small lake is
Situated, from this lake the plain rises gradually to a high butifull
Countrey, the low Plain continues for Some distance up both rivers on
the Yellow Stone it is wide & butifull opsd. the point on the S. Side
is Some high timbered land, about 11/2 miles below on the Same Side a
little distance from the water is an elivated plain- Several of the
party was up the yellow Stone R Several miles, & informed that it
meandered throught a butifull Countrey Joseph Fields discovered a large
Creek falling into the Yellowstone River on the S E Side 8 miles up
near which he Saw a big horn animal, he found in the Prarie the horn of
one of those animals which was large and appeared to have laid Several
years I Saw maney buffalow dead on the banks of the river in different
places Some of them eaten by the white bears & wolves all except the
Skin & bones, others entire, those animals either drounded in
attempting to Cross on the ice dureing the winter or Swiming across to
bluff banks where they Could not get out & too weak to return we Saw
several in this Situation.

emence numbers of antelopes in the forks of the river, Buffalow & Elk &
Deer is also plenty beaver is in every bend. I observe that the Magpie
Goose duck & Eagle all have their nests in the Same neighbourhood, and
it is not uncommon for the Magpie to build in a few rods of the eagle,
the nests of this bird is built verry Strong with Sticks Covered verry
thickly with one or more places through which they enter or escape, the
Goose I make no doubt falls a pray to those vicious eagles

[Lewis, April 27, 1805]
Saturday April 27th 1805. Previous to our seting out this morning I
made the following observations.

This morning I walked through the point formed by the junction of the
rivers; the woodland extends about a mile, when the rivers approach
each other within less than half a mile; here a beatifull level low
plain commences and extends up both rivers for many miles, widening as
the rivers recede from each other, and extending back half a mile to a
plain about 12 feet higher than itself; the low plain appears to be a
few inches higher than high water mark and of course will not be liable
to be overflown; tho where it joins the high plain a part of the
Missouri when at it's greatest hight, passes through a channel of 60 or
70 yards wide and falls into the yellowstone river. on the Missouri
about 21/2 miles from the entrance of the yellowstone river, and
between this high and low plain, a small lake is situated about 200
yards wide extending along the edge of the high plain parallel with the
Missouri about one mile. on the point of the high plain at the lower
extremity of this lake I think would be the most eligible site for an
establishment. between this low plain and the Yellowstone river their
is an extensive body of timbered land extending up the river for many
miles. this site recommended is about 400 yards distant from the
Missouri and about double that distance from the river yellowstone;
from it the high plain, rising very gradually, extends back about three
miles to the hills, and continues with the same width between these
hills and the timbered land on the yellowstone river, up that stream,
for seven or eight miles; and is one of the hadsomest plains I ever
beheld. on the Missouri side the hills sircumscribe it's width, & at
the distance of three miles up that river from this site, it is not
more than 400 yards wide. Capt Clark thinks that the lower extremity of
the low plane would be most eligible for this establishment; it is true
that it is much nearer both rivers, and might answer very well, but I
think it reather too low to venture a permanent establishment,
particularly if built of brick or other durable materials, at any
considerable expence; for so capricious, and versatile are these
rivers, that it is difficult to say how long it will be, untill they
direct the force of their currents against this narrow part of the low
plain, which when they do, must shortly yeald to their influence; in
such case a few years only would be necessary, for the annihilation of
the plain, and with it the fortification.- I continued my walk on
shore; at 11 A.M. the wind became very hard from N. W. insomuch that
the perogues and canoes were unable either to proceede or pass the
river to me; I was under the necessity therefore of shooting a goose
and cooking it for my dinner. the wind abated about 4. P.M. and the
party proceeded tho I could not conveniently join them untill night.
altho game is very abundant and gentle, we only kill as much as is
necessary for food. I believe that two good hunters could conveniently
supply a regiment with provisions. for several days past we have
observed a great number of buffaloe lying dead on the shore, some of
them entire and others partly devoured by the wolves and bear. those
anamals either drownded during the winter in attempting to pass the
river on the ice during the winter or by swiming acrss at present to
bluff banks which they are unable to ascend, and feeling themselves too
weak to return remain and perish for the want of food; in this
situation we met with several little parties of them.- beaver are very
abundant, the party kill several of them every day. The Eagles,
Magpies, and gees have their nests in trees adjacent to each other; the
magpye particularly appears fond of building near the Eagle, as we
scarcely see an Eagle's nest unaccompanyed with two or three Magpies
nests within a short distance.- The bald Eagle are more abundant here
than I ever observed them in any part of the country.

[Clark, April 27, 1805]
27th of April Satturday 1805
after take the azmuth of the Sun & brackfasting we Set out wind
moderate & a head, at 11 oClock the wind rose and continued to blow
verry hard a head from the N. W. untill 4 oClock P M, which blew the
Sand off the Points in Such clouds as almost Covered us on the opposit
bank, at 4 I Set out from my unpleasent Situation and proceeded on,
Capt. Lewis walked on Shore in the Point to examine & view the Countrey
and could not get to the boats untill night, Saw great numbers of Goats
or antilopes, Elk, Swan Gees & Ducks, no buffalow to day I Saw Several
beaver and much Sign, I Shot one in the head which imediately Sunk,
altho the game of different kinds are in abundance we Kill nothing but
what we can make

[Lewis, April 28, 1805]
Sunday April 28th 1805.
Set out this morning at an early hour; the wind was favourable and we
employed our sails to advantage. Capt Clark walked on shore this
morning, and I proceeded with the party. the country through which we
passed today is open as usual and very broken on both sides near the
river hills, the bottoms are level fertile and partially covered with
timber. the hills and bluffs exhibit their usual mineral appearances,
some birnt hills but no appearance of Pumicestone; coal is in great
abundance and the salts still increase in quantity; the banks of the
river and sandbars are incrusted with it in many places and appear
perfectly white as if covered with snow or frost.- the woods are now
green, tho the plains and meadows appear to abate of the verdure those
below exhibited some days past. we past three small runs today. two
falling in on the Stard. and one on the Lard. side, they are but small
afford but little water and head a few miles back in the hills. we saw
great quantities of game today; consisting of the common and mule deer,
Elk, Buffaloe, and Antelopes; also four brown bear, one of which was
fired on and wounded by one of the party but we did not get it; the
beaver have cut great quantities of timber; saw a tree nearly 3 feet in
diameter that had been felled by them. Capt. Clark in the course of his
walk killed a deer and a goose; & saw three black bear; he thinks the
bottoms are not so wide as they have been for some days past.

[Clark, April 28, 1805]
28th of April Sunday 1805
a fine day river falling, wind favourable from the S. E. and moderate,
I walked on Shore to view the Countrey, from the top of the high hills,
I beheld a broken & open Countrey on both Sides, near the river Some
verry handsom low plains, I killd. a Deer & a goose, Saw three black
bear great numbers of Elk antelopes & 2 Gangues of Buffalow, the hills
& Bluffs Shew the Straturs of Coal, and burnt appearances in maney
places, in and about them I could find no appearance of Pumice Stone,
the wood land have a green appearance, the Plains do not look So green
as below, The bottoms are not So wide this afternoon as below Saw four
bear this evening, one of the men Shot at one of them. The Antilopes
are nearly red, on that part which is Subject to change i e the Sides &
2/3 of the back from the head, the other part as white as Snow, 2 Small
runs fall in on the S. Side and one this evening on the Lard Side those
runs head at a fiew miles in the hills and discharge but little water,
the Bluffs in this part as also below Shew different Straturs of Coal
or carbonated wood, and Coloured earth, such as dark brown, yellow a
lightish brown, & a dark red &c.

[Lewis, April 29, 1805]
Monday April 29th 1805.
Set out this morning at the usual hour; the wind was moderate; I walked
on shore with one man. about 8 A.M. we fell in with two brown or yellow
bear; both of which we wounded; one of them made his escape, the other
after my firing on him pursued me seventy or eighty yards, but
fortunately had been so badly wounded that he was unable to pursue so
closely as to prevent my charging my gun; we again repeated our fir and
killed him. it was a male not fully grown, we estimated his weight at
300 lbs. not having the means of ascertaining it precisely. The legs of
this bear are somewhat longer than those of the black, as are it's
tallons and tusks incomparably larger and longer. the testicles, which
in the black bear are placed pretty well back between the thyes and
contained in one pouch like those of the dog and most quadrupeds, are
in the yellow or brown bear placed much further forward, and are
suspended in seperate pouches from two to four inches asunder; it's
colour is yellowish brown, the eyes small, black, and piercing; the
front of the fore legs near the feet is usually black; the fur is finer
thicker and deeper than that of the black bear. these are all the
particulars in which this anamal appeared to me to differ from the
black bear; it is a much more furious and formidable anamal, and will
frequently pursue the hunter when wounded. it is asstonishing to see
the wounds they will bear before they can be put to death. the Indians
may well fear this anamal equiped as they generally are with their bows
and arrows or indifferent fuzees, but in the hands of skillfull
riflemen they are by no means as formidable or dangerous as they have
been represented. game is still very abundant we can scarcely cast our
eyes in any direction without percieving deer Elk Buffaloe or
Antelopes. The quantity of wolves appear to increase in the same
proportion; they generally hunt in parties of six eight or ten; they
kill a great number of the Antelopes at this season; the Antelopes are
yet meagre and the females are big with young; the wolves take them
most generally in attempting to swim the river; in this manner my dog
caught one drowned it and brought it on shore; they are but clumsey
swimers, tho on land when in good order, they are extreemly fleet and
dureable. we have frequently seen the wolves in pursuit of the Antelope
in the plains; they appear to decoy a single one from a flock, and then
pursue it, alturnately relieving each other untill they take it. on
joining Capt Clark he informed me that he had seen a female and faun of
the bighorned anamal; that they ran for some distance with great
aparent ease along the side of the river bluff where it was almost
perpendicular; two of the party fired on them while in motion without
effect. we took the flesh of the bear on board and proceeded. Capt.
Clark walked on shore this evening, killed a deer, and saw several of
the bighorned anamals. there is more appearance of coal today than we
have yet seen, the stratas are 6 feet thick in some instances; the
earth has been birnt in many places, and always appears in stratas on
the same level with the stratas of coal. we came too this evening in
the mouth of a little river, which falls in on the Stard. side. This
stream is about 50 yards wide from bank to bank; the water occupyes
about 15 yards. the banks are of earth only, abrupt, tho not high- the
bed, is of mud principally. Capt Clark, who was up this streeam about
three miles, informed me that it continued about the same width, that
it's current was gentle and it appeared navigable for perogus it
meanders through an extensive, fertile, and beautifull vally as far as
could bee seen about N. 30°W. there was but one solitary tree to be seen
on the banks of this river after it left the bottom of the Missouri.
the water of this river is clear, with a brownish yelow tint. here the
highlands receede from the Missouri, leaving the vally formed by the
river from seven to eight miles wide, and reather lower then usual.-
This stream my friend Capt. C. named Marthas river

[Clark, April 29, 1805]
29th of April Monday 1805
Set out this morning at the usial hour. the wind is moderate & from the
N E had not proceeded far eer we Saw a female & her faun of the Bighorn
animal on the top of a Bluff lying, the noise we made allarmed them and
they came down on the Side of the bluff which had but little Slope
being nearly purpindicular, I directed two men to kill those anamals,
one went on the top and the other man near the water they had two Shots
at the doe while in motion without effect, Those animals run & Skiped
about with great ease on this declivity & appeared to prefur it to the
leavel bottom or plain. Capt Lewis & one man walkd on Shore and he
killed a yellow Bear & the man with him wounded one other, after
getting the flesh of the bear on bord which was not far from the place
we brackfast, we proceeded on Saw 4 gangus of buffalow and great
numbers of Antelopes in every direction also Saw Elk and Several
wolves, I walked on Shore in the evening & killed a Deer which was So
meager as to be unfit for use The hills Contain more Coal, and has a
greater appearance of being burnt that below, the burnt parts appear on
a parrilel with the Stratiums of Coal, we Came too in the mouth of a
Little river on the S. S. which is about 50 or 60 yards from bank to
bank, I was up this Stream 3 miles it continues its width and glides
with a gentle Current, its water is about 15 yards wide at this time,
and appears to be navagable for Canoes &c. it meanders through a
butifull & extencive vallie as far as can be Seen about N 30° W. I saw
only a Single tree in this fertile vallie The water of the River is
clear of a yellowish Colour, we call this river Martheys river in honor
to the Selebrated M. F

Here the high land widen from five to Eight miles and much lower than
below, Saw Several of the big horn animals this evening. The Wolves
distroy great numbers of the antilopes by decoying those animals
Singularly out in the plains and prosueing them alternetly, those
antelopes are Curious and will approach any thing which appears in
motion near them &c.

[Lewis, April 30, 1805]
Tuesday April 30th 1805.
Set out at sunrise. the wind blew hard all last night, and continued to
blow pretty hard all day, but not so much, as to compell us to ly by.
the country as usual is bare of timber; the river bottoms are level and
fertile and extensive, but possess but little timber and that of an
indifferent quality even of it's kind; principally low cottonwood,
either too small for building, or for plank or broken and dead at top
and unsound in the center of the trunk. saw great quantities of game as
usual. Capt. Clark walked on shore the greater part of the day, past
some old Indian lodges built of drift wood; they appear to be of
antient date and not recently inhabited. I walked on shore this evening
and killed a buck Elk, in tolerable order; it appeared to me to be the
largest I had seen, and was therefore induced to measure it; found it
five feet three inches from the point of the hoof, to the top of the
sholders; the leg and hoof being placed as nearly as possible in the
same position they would have been had the anamal been standing.

[Clark, April 30, 1805]
30th of April Tuesday 1805
The wind blew hard from the N E all last night, we Set out at Sunrise
the wind blew hard the greater part of the day and part of the time
favourable, we did not lie by to day on account of the wind I walked on
Shore to day our interpreter & his Squar followed, in my walk the Squar
found & brought me a bush Something like the Current, which She Said
bore a delicious froot and that great quantites grew on the Rocky
Mountains, this Srub was in bloom has a yellow flower with a deep Cup,
the froot when ripe is yellow and hangs in bunches like Cheries, Some
of those berries yet remained on the bushes. The bottoms above the
mouth of the last river is extensive level & fertile and covered with
indifferent timber in the points, the up land appear to rise gradually,
I saw Great numbers of Antelopes, also Scattering Buffalow, Elk, Deer,
wolves, Gees, ducks & Grows- I Killed 2 Gees which we dined on to day
Capt Lewis walked on Shore and killed an elk this evening, and we Came
too & camped on the S. S the Countrey on both Sides have a butifull
appearance.

[Lewis, May 1, 1805]
Wednesday May 1st 1805.
Set out this morning at an early, the wind being favourable we used our
sales which carried us on at a good pace untill about 12 OCk. when the
wind became so high that the small canoes were unable to proceed one of
them which seperated from us just befor the wind became so violent, is
now lying on the opposite side of the river, being unable to rejoin us
in consequence of the waves, which during those gusts run several feet
high. we came too on the Lard. shore in a handsome bottom well stocked
with cottonwood timber; here the wind compelled us to spend the
ballance of the day. we sent out some hunters who killed a buffaloe, an
Elk, a goat and two beaver. game is now abundant. the country appears
much more pleasant and fertile than that we have passed for several
days; the hills are lower, the bottoms wider, and better stocked with
timber, which consists principally of cottonwood, not however of large
size; the under-growth willow on the verge of the river and sandbars,
rose bushes, red willow and the broad leafed willow in the bottom
lands; the high country on either side of the river is one vast plain,
intirely destitute of timber, but is apparently fertile, consisting of
a dark rich mellow looking lome. John Shields sick today with the
rheumatism. Shannon killed a bird of the plover kind. weight one pound.
it measured from the tip of the toe, to the extremity of the beak, 1
foot 10 Inches; from tip to tip of wings when extended 2 F. 5 I.; Beak
3 5/8 inches; tale 3 1/8 inches; leg and toe 10 Ins.- the eye black,
piercing, prominent and moderately large. the legs are Hat thin,
slightly imbricated and of a pale sky blue colour, being covered with
feathers as far as the mustle extends down it, which is about half it's
length. it has four toes on each foot, three of which, are connected by
a web, the fourth is small and placed at the heel about the 1/8 of an
inch up the leg. the nails are black and short, that of the middle toe
is extreemly singular, consisting of two nails the one laping on or
overlaying the other, the upper one somewhat the longest and sharpest.
the tale contains eleven feathers of equal length, & of a bluish white
colour. the boddy and underside of the wings, except the large feathers
of the 1st & 2cd joints of the same, are white; as are also the
feathers of the upper part of the 4th joint of the wing and part of
those of the 3rd adjacent thereto, the large feathers of the 1st or
pinion and the 2cd joint are black; a part of the larger feathers of
the 3rd joint on the upper side and all the small feathers which cover
the upper part of the wings are black, as are also the tuft of long
feathers on each side of the body above the joining of the wing,
leaving however a stripe of white betwen them on the back. the head and
neck are shaped much like the grey plover, and are of a light brickdust
brown; the beak is black and flat, largest where it joins the head, and
from thence becoming thiner and tapering to a very sharp point, the
upper chap being 1/8 of an inch the longest turns down at the point and
forms a little hook. the nostrils, which commence near the head are
long, narrow, connected, and parallel with the beak; the beak is much
curved, the curvature being upwards in stead of downwards as is common
with most birds; the substance of the beak precisely resembles
whalebone at a little distance, and is quite as flexable as that
substance their note resembles that of the grey plover, tho is reather
louder and more varied, their habits appear also to be the same, with
this difference; that it sometimes rests on the water and swims which I
do not recollect having seen the plover do. this bird which I shall
henceforth stile the Missouri plover, generally feeds about the shallow
bars of the river; to collect it's food which consists of ____, it
immerces it's beak in the water and throws it's head and beak from side
to side at every step it takes.

[Clark, May 1, 1805]
May the 1st Wednesday 1805
We Set out at Sun rise under a Stiff Breeze from the East, the morning
Cool & Cloudy. one man J. Shields Sick with rhumetism- one of the men
(Shannon) Shot a Gull or pleaver, which is about the Size of an Indian
hen, with a Sharp pointed bill turning up & 4 Inches long, the head and
neck of a light brown, the breast, the underfeathers of the 2nd and 3d
joint of the wings, the Short feathers on the upper part of the 3rd
joint of the wings, down the back the rump & tail white. The large
feathers of the 1st joints of the wing the upper feathers of the 2d
joints of the wings, on the body on the joints of the wing and the bill
is black.- the legs long and of a Skie blue. The feet webed &c. This
fowl may be properly Stiled the Missouri Pleaver- the wind became verry
Hard and we put too on the L. Side, as the wind Continued with Some
degree of violence and the waves too high for the Canoes we were
obliged to Stay all day

[Lewis, May 1, 1805]
May 1st 1805.
Shannon killed a bird of the plover kind the weight one pound.- eye
black percing and prominent

Measure                                                         F.
Inchs
from the tip of the toe to the extremity of the beak                1
10
from tip to tip of wing when extended                         2        5
length of beak                                                         3
5/8
length of tale                                                         3
1/8
length of leg and toe 
10

the legs are flat, of pale skye blue colour and but slightly
imbricated. the second joint, as low as the mustle extends is covered
with feathers which is about half it's length. it has three toes on a
foot connected by a web. there is also a small toe on each foot placed
about the eighth of an inch up the leg behind. the nails are black and
short and those of the middle toes ar singular-there being two nails on
each the one above the other the upper one the longest and sharpest.-
the tale contains eleven feathers of the same length of a bluish white
colour. the body and under side of the wings except the large feathers
of the 1 & 2cd joints of the wings are white, as are also the feathers
of the upper part of the 4th joint of the wing. and some of those of
the 3rd adjoining.- the large feathers of the pinion or first (joint) &
the second joint are black; a part of the larger feathers of the third
joint on the upper side and all the smaller feathers which cover the
upper part of these joints ar black; as are also the tuft of long
feathers on each side of the body above the joining of the wing,
leaving however a stripe of white between them on the back. the head
and neck are shaped much like the grey plover, and is a light brickdust
brown. the beak is black and flat, largest where it joins the head and
from thence tapering every way gradually to a very sharp point the
upper beak being 1/8 of an inch the longest turning down at the point.
the nostrils are parrallal with the beak and are long narrow and
connected. the beak is curvated and invirted; the Curvature being
upwards in stead of downwards as those of most birds are- the substance
of the beak is as flexable as whalebone and at a little distance
precisely resembles that substance. their note is like that of the
common whistling or grey plover tho reather louder, and more varied,
and their habits are the same with that bird so far as I have been
enabled to learn, with this difference however that this bird sometimes
lights in the water and swims.- it generally feads about the shallow
bars of the river; to collect it's food, it immerces it's beak in the
water, and thows it's head and beak from side to side at every step it
takes.

[Lewis, May 2, 1805]
Thursday May 2ed 1805
The wind continued violent all night nor did it abate much of it's
violence this morning, when at daylight it was attended with snow which
continued to fall untill about 10 A.M. being about one inch deep, it
formed a singular contrast with the vegitation which was considerably
advanced. some flowers had put forth in the plains, and the leaves of
the cottonwood were as large as a dollar. sent out some hunters who
killed 2 deer 3 Elk and several buffaloe; on our way this evening we
also shot three beaver along the shore; these anamals in consequence of
not being hunted are extreemly gentle, where they are hunted they never
leave their lodges in the day, the flesh of the beaver is esteemed a
delecacy among us; I think the tale a most delicious morsal, when
boiled it resembles in flavor the fresh tongues and sounds of the
codfish, and is usually sufficiently large to afford a plentifull meal
for two men. Joseph Fields one of the hunters who was out today found
several yards of scarlet cloth which had been suspended on the bough of
a tree near an old indian hunting camp, where it had been left as a
sacrefice to the deity by the indians, probably of the Assinniboin
nation, it being a custom with them as well as all the nations
inhabiting the waters of the Missouri so far as they are known to us,
to offer or sacrefice in this manner to the deity watever they may be
possessed off which they think most acceptable to him, and very
honestly making their own feelings the test of those of the deity offer
him the article which they most prize themselves. this being the most
usual method of weshiping the great sperit as they term the deity, is
practiced on interesting occasions, or to produce the happy eventuation
of the important occurrances incident to human nature, such as relief
from hungar or mallady, protection from their enemies or the delivering
them into their hands, and with such as cultivate, to prevent the
river's overflowing and distroying their crops &c. screfices of a
similar kind are also made to the deceased by their friends and
relatives. the are was very piercing this evening the water friezed on
the oars as they rowed. the wind dying at 5 P.M. we set out.

every thing which is incomprehensible to the indians they call big
medicine, and is the opperation of the presnts and power of the great
sperit. this morning one of the men shot the indian dog that had
followed us for several days, he would steal their cooked provision.

[Clark, May 2, 1805]
May 2nd Thursday 1805
The wind blew verry hard all the last night, this morning about Sunrise
began to Snow, (The Thermomtr. at 28 abov o) and Continued untill about
10 oClock, at which time it Seased, the wind Continued hard untill
about 2 P.M. the Snow which fell to day was about 1 In deep, a verry
extroadernaley Climate, to behold the trees Green & flowers Spred on
the plain, & Snow an inch deep. we Set out about 3 oClock and proceeded
on about five 1/2 miles and encamped on the Std Side, the evening verry
cold, Ice freesing to the Ores, I Shot a large beaver & Drewyer three
in walking on the bank, the flesh of those animals the party is fond of
eating &c.

[Lewis, May 3, 1805]
Friday May 3rd 1805.
The morning being very could we did not set out as early as usual; ice
formed on a kettle of water 1/4 of an inch thick. the snow has melted
generally in the bottoms, but the hills still remain covered. on the
lard side at the distance of 2 miles we passed a curious collection of
bushes which had been tyed up in the form of a faciene and standing on
end in the open bottom it appeared to be about 30 feet high and ten or
twelve feet in diameter, this we supposed to have been placed there by
the Indians, as a sacrefice for some purpose. The wind continued to
blow hard from the West but not so strong as to compel us to ly by.
Capt. Clark walked on shore and killed an Elk which he caused to be
butched by the time I arrived with the party, here we halted and dined
being about 12 OCk. our usual time of halting for that purpose. after
dinner Capt. Clark pursued his walk, while I continued with the party,
it being a rule which we had established, never to be absent at the
same time from the party. the plains or high lands are much less
elivated than they were, not being more than from 50 to 60 feet above
the river bottom, which is also wider than usual being from 5 to 9 ms.
in width; traces of the ancient beds of the river are visible in many
places through the whole extent of this valley. since the hills have
become lower the appearance of the stratas of coal burnt hills and
pumice stone have in a great measure ceased; I saw none today. we saw
vast quantities of Buffaloe, Elk, deer principally of the long tale
kind, Antelope or goats, beaver, geese, ducks, brant and some swan.
near the entrance of the river mentioned in the 10th course of this
day, we saw an unusual number of Porcupines from which we determined to
call the river after that anamal, and accordingly denominated it
Porcupine river. this stream discharges itself into the Missouri on the
Stard. side 2000 miles above the mouth of the latter, it is a beatifull
bold runing stream, 40 yards wide at it's entrance; the water is
transparent, it being the first of this discription that I have yet
seen discharge itself into the Missouri; before it enters a large sand
bar through which it discharges itself into the missouri it's banks and
bottom are formed of a stiff blue and black clay; it appears to be
navigable for canoes and perogues at this time and I have no doubt but
it might be navigated with boats of a considerable size in high water.
it's banks appear to be from 8 to ten feet high and seldom overflow;
from the quantity of water furnished by this river, the appearance of
the country, the direction it pursues, and the situation of it's
entrance, I have but little doubt but it takes it's source not far from
the main body of the Suskashawan river, and that it is probably
navigable 150 miles; perhaps not very distant from that river. should
this be the case, it would afford a very favorable communication to the
Athebaskay country, from whence the British N. W. Company derive so
large a portion of their valuable furs.- Capt. Clark who ascended this
river several miles and passed it above where it entered the hills
informed me on his return that he found the general width of the bed of
the river about one hundred yards, where he passed the river the bed
was 112 yards wide, the water was knee deep and 38 yard in width; the
river which he could observe from the rising grounds for about 20
miles, bore a little to the East of North. there was a considerable
portion of timber in the bottom lands of this river. Capt Clark also
met with limestone on the surface of the earth in the course of his
walk. he also saw a range of low mountains at a distance to the W of N
, their direction being N. W. the country in the neighborhood of this
river, and as far as the eye can reach, is level, fertile, open and
beatifull beyond discription. 1/4 of a mile above the entrance of this
river a large creek falls in which we called 2000 mile creek. I sent
Rubin Fields to examine it, he reported it to be a bold runing stream,
it's bed 30 yards wide. we proceeded about 3 miles abov this creek and
encamped on the Stard. shore. I walked out a little distance and met
with 2 porcupines which were feeding on the young willow which grow in
great abundance on all the sandbars; this anamal is exceedingly clumsy
and not very watchfull I approached so near one of them before it
percieved me that I touched it with my espontoon.- found the nest of a
wild goose among some driftwood in the river from which we took three
eggs. this is the only nest we have met with on driftwood, the usual
position is the top of a broken tree, sometimes in the forks of a large
tree but almost invariably, from 15 to 20 feet or upwards high.-

[Clark, May 3, 1805]
May 3rd Friday 1805
we Set out reather later this morning than usial owing to weather being
verry cold, a frost last night and the Thermt. Stood this morning at 26
above 0 which is 6 Degrees blow freeseing- the ice that was on the
Kittle left near the fire last night was 1/4 of an inch thick. The Snow
is all or nearly all off the low bottoms, the Hills are entireley
Covered. three of our party found in the back of a bottom 3 pieces of
Scarlet one brace in each, which had been left as a Sacrifice near one
of their Swet houses, on the L. S. we passed to day a curious
collection of bushes tied up in the shape of fascene about 10 feet
diamuter, which must have been left also by the natives as an offering
to their medison which they Convinced protected or gave them relief
near the place, the wind Continued to blow hard from the West, altho
not Sufficently So to detain us, I walked on Shore and killed an Elk &
had him bucchured by the time the Perogus Came up which was the usial
time of dineing. The high lands are low and from 8 to 9 miles apart and
there is evident marks of the bead of the river having been changed
frequently but little appearance of the Coal & burnt hills to day-
Great numbers of Buffalow, Elk, Deer, antilope, beaver, Porcupins, &
water fowls Seen to day, Such as, Geese, ducks of dift. kinds, & a fiew
Swan- I continued my walk on Shore after dinner, and arrived at the
mouth of a river on the St. Side, which appeared to be large, and I
concluded to go up this river a few miles to examine it accordingly I
Set out North 1 mile thro wood or timbered bottom, 2 miles through a
butifull leavel plain, and 1 mile over a high plain about 50 feet
higher than the bottom & Came to the little river, which I found to be
a butifull clear Stream of about 100 yds. from bank to bank, (I waded
this river at the narrowest part and made it 112 Steps from bank to
bank and at this place which was a kind of fording place the water was
near Knee deep, and 38 steps wide, the bottom of a hard stiff Black
Clay,) I observed a Great perportion of timber in the bottoms of this
river as far as I could See which was to the East of N. 18 or 20 miles,
it appears to be navigable at this time for Canoes, and from
appearances must be navagable a long distance for Perogus & boats in
high water. This river we call Porcupine from the great number of those
anamals found about it's mouth.- a Short distance above about 1/4 mile
and on the Lard Side a large Creek falls in, which R. Fields went to
examine & reports that it is a bold running Stream, 30 yds wide as this
Creek is 2000 miles up the Missouri we Call it the 2000 mile Creek, we
proceeded on 3 miles & Camped on the S. S. here I joined Capt Lewis who
had in my absens walkd. on the upper Side of Porcupine River for Some
distance- This river from its Size & quantity of water must head at no
great distance from the Saskashawan on this river I Saw emence herds
Elk & Buffalow & many deer & Porcupine. I also Saw the top of a
mountain which did not appear verry high to the West of N. & bore N W.
I Saw on the high land limestone & pebble- The Countrey about the mouth
of this river and as far as the eye Can reach is butifull open
Countrey. The greater part of the Snow is melted.

[Lewis, May 4, 1805]
Saturday May 4th 1805.
We were detained this morning untill about 9 OCk. in order to repare
the rudder irons of the red perogue which were broken last evening in
landing; we then set out, the wind hard against us. I walked on shore
this morning, the weather was more plesant, the snow has disappeared;
the frost seems to have effected the vegetation much less than could
have been expected the leaves of the cottonwood the grass the box alder
willow and the yellow flowering pea seem to be scarcely touched; the
rosebushes and honeysuckle seem to have sustaned the most considerable
injury. The country on both sides of the Missouri continues to be open
level fertile and beautifull as far as the eye can reach which from
some of the eminences is not short of 30 miles. the river bottoms are
very extensive and contain a much greater proportion of timber than
usual; the fore part of this day the river was bordered with timber on
both sides, a circumstance which is extreemly rare and the first which
has occurred of any thing like the same extent since we left the
Mandans, in the after part of the day we passed an extensive beautifull
plain on the Stard. side which gradually ascended from the river. I saw
immence quantities of buffaloe in every direction, also some Elk deer
and goats; having an abundance of meat on hand I passed them without
firing on them; they are extreemly gentle the bull buffaloe
particularly will scarcely give way to you. I passed several in the
open plain within fifty paces, they viewed me for a moment as something
novel and then very unconcernedly continued to feed. Capt. Clark walked
on shore this evening and did not rejoin us untill after dark, he
struck the river several miles above our camp and came down to us. we
saw many beaver some which the party shot, we also killed two deer
today. much sign of the brown bear. passed several old Indian hunting
camps in the course of the day one of them contained two large lodges
which were fortifyed with old driftwood and fallen timber; this
fortification consisted of a circular fence of timber lade horizontally
laping on and over laying each other to the hight of 5 feet. these
pounds are sometimes built from 20 to 30 feet in diameter and covered
over with the trunks and limbs of old timber. the usual construction of
the lodges we have lately passed is as follows. three or more strong
sticks the thickness of a man's leg or arm and about 12 feet long are
attatched together at one end by a with of small willows, these are
then set on end and spread at the base, forming a circle of ten twelve
or 14 feet in diameter; sticks of driftwood and fallen timber of
convenient size are now placed with one end on the ground and the other
resting against those which are secured together at top by the with and
which support and give the form to the whole, thus the sticks are laid
on untill they make it as thick as they design, usually about three
ranges, each piece breaking or filling up the interstice of the two
beneath it, the whole forming a connic figure about 10 feet high with a
small apperture in one side which answers as a door. leaves bark and
straw are sometimes thrown over the work to make it more complete, but
at best it affords a very imperfect shelter particularly without straw
which is the state in which we have most usually found them.

At noon the sun was so much obscured that I could not obtain his
maridian Altitude which I much wished in order to fix the latitude of
the entrance of Porcupine river. Joseph Fields was very sick today with
the disentary had a high fever I gave him a doze of Glauber salts,
which operated very well, in the evening his fever abated and I gave
him 30 drops of laudnum.-

[Clark, May 4, 1805]
May 4th Satturday 1805
The rudder Irons of our large Perogue broke off last night, the
replaceing of which detained us this morning untill 9 oClock at which
time we Set out the wind a head from the west, The Countrey on each
Side of the Missouri is a rich high and butifull the bottoms are
extencive with a great deal of timber on them all the fore part of this
day the wood land bordered the river on both Sides, in the after part a
butifull assending plain on the Std Side we Camped on the Std. Side a
little above we passed a Small Creek on the L. Side near which I Saw
where an Indian lodge had been fortified many year past. Saw great
numbers of anamals of different kinds on the banks, I Saw the black
martin to day-in the evening I walkd. on Shore on the Std Side & Struck
the river Several miles above our Camp & did not get to Camp untill
Some time after night- we have one man Sick, The river has been falling
for Several days passed; it now begins to rise a little; the rate of
rise & fall is from one to 3 inches in 24 hours.

[Lewis, May 5, 1805]
Sunday May 5th 1805
A fine morning I walked on shore untill 8 A M when we halted for
breakfast and in the course of my walk killed a deer which I carried
about a mile and a half to the river, it was in good order. soon after
seting out the rudder irons of the white perogue were broken by her
runing fowl on a sawyer, she was however refitted in a few minutes with
some tugs of raw hide and nales. as usual saw a great quantity of game
today; Buffaloe Elk and goats or Antelopes feeding in every direction;
we kill whatever we wish, the buffaloe furnish us with fine veal and
fat beef, we also have venison and beaver tales when we wish them; the
flesh of the Elk and goat are less esteemed, and certainly are
inferior. we have not been able to take any fish for some time past.
The country is as yesterday beatifull in the extreme.

saw the carcases of many Buffaloe lying dead along the shore partially
devoured by the wolves and bear. saw a great number of white brant also
the common brown brant, geese of the common kind and a small species of
geese which differ considerably from the common canadian goose; their
neck head and beak are considerably thicker shorter and larger than the
other in proportion to it's size, they are also more than a third
smaller, and their note more like that of the brant or a young goose
which has not perfectly acquired his notes, in all other rispects they
are the same in colour habits and the number of feathers in the tale,
they frequently also ascociate with the large geese when in flocks, but
never saw them pared off with the large or common goose. The white
brant ascociate in very large flocks, they do not appear to be mated or
pared off as if they intended to raise their young in this quarter, I
therefore doubt whether they reside here during the summer for that
purpose.

this bird is about the size of the common brown brant or two thirds of
the common goose, it is not so long by six inches from point to point
of the wings when extended as the other; the beak head and neck are
also larger and stronger; their beak legs and feet are of a redish or
fleshcoloured white. the eye is of moderate size, the puple of a deep
sea green incircled with a ring of yellowish brown. it has sixteen
feathers of equal length in the tale; their note differs but little
from the common brant, their flesh much the same, and in my opinion
preferable to the goose, the flesh is dark. they are entirely of a
beatifull pure white except the large feathers of the 1st and second
joints of the wings which are jut black. form and habits are the same
with the other brant; they sometimes ascociate and form one common
flock. Capt Clark found a den of young wolves in the course of his walk
today and also saw a great number of those anamals; they are very
abundant in this quarter, and are of two species the small woolf or
burrowing dog of the praries are the inhabitants almost invariably of
the open plains; they usually ascociate in bands of ten or twelve
sometimes more and burrow near some pass or place much frequented by
game; not being able alone to take a deer or goat they are rarely ever
found alone but hunt in bands; they frequently watch and seize their
prey near their burrows; in these burrows they raise their young and to
them they also resort when pursued; when a person approaches them they
frequently bark, their note being precisely that of the small dog. they
are of an intermediate size between that of the fox and dog, very
active fleet and delicately formed; the ears large erect and pointed
the head long and pointed more like that of the fox; tale long; the
hair and fur also resembles the fox tho is much coarser and inferior.
they are of a pale redish brown colour. the eye of a deep sea green
colour small and piercing. their tallons are reather longer than those
of the ordinary wolf or that common to the atlantic states, none of
which are to be found in this quarter, nor I believe above the river
Plat.- The large woolf found here is not as large as those of the
atlantic states. they are lower and thicker made shorter leged. their
colour which is not effected by the seasons, is a grey or blackish
brown and every intermediate shade from that to a creen coloured white;
these wolves resort the woodlands and are also found in the plains, but
never take refuge in the ground or burrow so far as I have been able to
inform myself. we scarcely see a gang of buffaloe without observing a
parsel of those faithfull shepherds on their skirts in readiness to
take care of the mamed & wounded. the large wolf never barks, but howls
as those of the atlantic states do. Capt. Clark and Drewyer killed the
largest brown bear this evening which we have yet seen. it was a most
tremendious looking anamal, and extreemly hard to kill notwithstanding
he had five balls through his lungs and five others in various parts he
swam more than half the distance acoss the river to a sandbar & it was
at least twenty minutes before he died; he did not attempt to attact,
but fled and made the most tremendous roaring from the moment he was
shot. We had no means of weighing this monster; Capt. Clark thought he
would weigh 500 lbs. for my own part I think the estimate too small by
100 lbs. he measured 8 Feet 71/2 Inches from the nose to the extremety
of the hind feet, 5 F. to 1/2 Inch arround the breast, 1 F. 11 I.
arround the middle of the arm, & 3 F. 11 I. arround the neck; his
tallons which were five in number on each foot were 4 1/8 Inches in
length. he was in good order, we therefore divided him among the party
and made them boil the oil and put it in a cask for future uce; the oil
is as hard as hogs lard when cool, much more so than that of the black
bear. this bear differs from the common black bear in several respects;
it's tallons are much longer and more blont, it's tale shorter, it's
hair which is of a redish or bey brown, is longer thicker and finer
than that of the black bear; his liver lungs and heart are much larger
even in proportion with his size; the heart particularly was as large
as that of a large Ox. his maw was also ten times the size of black
bear, and was filled with flesh and fish. his testicles were pendant
from the belly and placed four inches assunder in seperate bags or
pouches.- this animal also feeds on roots and almost every species of
wild fruit.

The party killed two Elk and a Buffaloe today, and my dog caught a
goat, which he overtook by superior fleetness, the goat it must be
understood was with young and extreemly poor. a great number of these
goats are devowered by the wolves and bear at this season when they are
poor and passing the river from S. W. to N. E. they are very inactive
and easily taken in the water, a man can out swim them with great ease;
the Indians take them in great numbers in the river at this season and
in autumn when they repass to the S. W.

[Clark, May 5, 1805]
5th of May Sunday 1805
We Set out verry early and had not proceeded far before the rudder
Irons of one of the Perogus broke which detained us a Short time Capt
Lewis walked on Shore this morning and killed a Deer, after brackfast I
walked on Shore Saw great numbers of Buffalow & Elk Saw also a Den of
young wolves, and a number of (frown wolves in every direction, the
white & Grey Brant is in this part of the Missouri I shot at the white
brant but at So great a distance I did not kill, The Countrey on both
sides is as yesterday, handsom & fertile- The river rising & Current
Strong & in the evening we Saw a Brown or Grisley beare on a Sand
beech, I went out with one man Geo. Drewyer & Killed the bear, which
was verry large and a turrible looking animal, which we found verry
hard to kill we Shot ten Balls into him before we killed him, & 5 of
those Balls through his lights This animal is the largest of the
Carnivorous kind I ever Saw we had nothing that could way him, I think
his weight may be Stated at 500 pounds, he measured 8 feet 71/2 In.
from his nose to the extremity of the Toe, 5 feet 101/2 in. arround the
breast, 1 feet 11 Ins. around the middle of the arm, 3 feet 11 Ins.
arround the neck his tallents was 4 Inches &3/8 long, he was good
order, and appeared verry different from the Common black bear in as
much as his tallents were blunt, his tail Short, his liver & lights
much larger, his maw ten times as large and Contained meat or flesh &
fish only- we had him Skined and divided, the oile tried up & put in
Kegs for use. we Camped on the Stard Side, our men killed three Elk and
a Buffalow to day, and our Dog Cought an antilope a fair race, this
animal appeared verry pore & with young.

[Lewis, May 6, 1805]
Monday May 6th 1805.
The morning being fair and pleasant and wind favourable we set sale at
an early hour, and proceeded on very well the greater part of the day;
the country still continues level fertile and beautifull, the bottoms
wide and well timbered comparitively speaking with other parts of the
river; no appearance of birnt hills pumice stone or coal, the salts of
tartar or vegitable salts continues to appear on the river banks, sand
bars and in many parts of the plains most generally in the little
revines at the base of the low hills. passed three streames today which
discharged themselves on the Lard. side; the first of these we call
little dry creek it contained some water in standing pools but
discharged none, the 2ed 50 yards wide no Water, we called it Big dry
Creek, the 3rd is bed of a conspicuous river 200 yards wide which we
called little dry river; the banks of these streams are low and bottoms
wide with but little timber, their beds are almost entirely formed of a
fine brown sand intermixed with a small proportion of little pebbles,
which were either transparent, white, green, red, yellow or brown.
these streams appeared to continue their width without diminution as
far as we could perceive them, which with rispect to the river was many
miles, they had recenly discharged their waters. from the appearance of
these streams, and the country through which they passed, we concluded
that they had their souces in level low dry plains, which probably is
the character of the country for a great distance west of this, or to
the vicinity of the black hills, that the country being low on the same
level nearly and in the same parallel of latitude, that the rains in
the spring of the year suddonly melts the snow at the same time and
causes for a few days a vast quantity of water which finds it's way to
the Missouri through those channels; by reference to the diary of the
weather &c it will be percieved that there is scarcely any rain during
the summer Autumn and winter in this open country distant from the
mountains. Fields still continues unwell. saw a brown bear swim the
river above us, he disappeared before we can get in reach of him; I
find that the curiossity of our party is pretty well satisfyed with
rispect to this anamal, the formidable appearance of the male bear
killed on the 5th added to the difficulty with which they die when even
shot through the vital parts, has staggered the resolution several of
them, others however seem keen for action with the bear; I expect these
gentlemen will give us some amusement shotly as they soon begin now to
coppolate. saw a great quantity of game of every species common here.
Capt Clark walked on shore and killed two Elk, they were not in very
good order, we therefore took a part of the meat only; it is now only
amusement for Capt. C. and myself to kill as much meat as the party can
consum; I hope it may continue thus through our whole rout, but this I
do not much expect. two beaver were taken in traps this morning and one
since shot by one of the party. saw numbers of these anamals peeping at
us as we passed out of their wholes which they form of a cilindric
shape, by burrowing in the face of the abbrupt banks of the river.

[Clark, May 6, 1805]
May 6th Monday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N. E. we Set out early and proceeded on
verry well under Sail the greater part of the day, passed two Creeks &
a River to day on the Lard. Side, neither of them discharged any water
into the Missouri, they were wide and Continued their width for Some
distance, the little water of those Creeks & the little river must wash
the low Country, I believe those Streams to be the Conveyance of the
water of the heavy rains & melting Snows in the Countrey back &c. &c. I
walked on Shore and Killed two Elk neither of which was fat, we saved
the best of the meat, one beaver Shot to day. the countrey on both
Sides butifull no appearances of either Coal or pumice Stone & burnt
hills, The Salts of Tarter or white aprs. of Salts are yet to be Seen.

[Lewis, May 7, 1805]
Tuesday May 7th 1805.
A fine morning, set out at an early hour; the drift wood begins to come
down in consequence of the river's rising; the water is somewhat
clearer than usual, a circumstance I did not expect on it's rise. at 11
A.M. the wind became so hard that we were compelled to ly by for
several hours, one of the small canoes by the bad management of the
steersman filled with water and had very nearly sunk; we unloaded her
and dryed the baggage; at one we proceed on the wind having in some
measure abated. the country we passed today on the North side of the
river is one of the most beautifull plains we have yet seen, it rises
gradually from the river bottom to the hight of 50 or 60 feet, then
becoming level as a bowling green. extends back as far as the eye can
reach; on the S. side the river hills are more broken and much higher
tho some little destance back the country becomes level and fertile. no
appearance of birnt hills coal or pumicestone, that of salts still
continue. vegitation appears to have advanced very little since the
28th Ulto.- we continue to see a great number of bald Eagles, I presume
they must feed on the carcases of dead anamals, for I see no fishing
hawks to supply them with their favorite food. the water of the river
is so terbid that no bird wich feeds exclusively on fish can subsist on
it; from it's mouth to this place I have neither seen the blue crested
fisher nor a fishing hawk. this day we killed 3 Buffaloe 1 Elk & 8
beaver; two of the Buffaloe killed by Capt Clark near our encampment of
this evening wer in good order dressed them and saved the meat, the Elk
I killed this morning, thought it fat, but on examineation found it so
lean that we took the tongue marrowbones and Skin only.

[Clark, May 7, 1805]
May 7th Tuesday, 1805
A fine morning river rose 11/2 Inches last night, the drift wood
beginning to run the water Something Clearer than usial, the wind
became verry hard, and at 11 oClock one Canoe by bad Stearing filled
with water, which detained us about 3 hours, had a Meridian altitude,
the Laid. from which is 47°36' 11" 6/10 The Countrey on the North Side of
the Missouri is one of the handsomest plains we have yet Seen on the
river the plain rises from the river bottom gradually. The Hills on the
South Side is high & uneavin. no appearance of Coal or burnt hills,
that of Salts Still appear; vegitation appears to be Slow, I walked on
the bank to day and Shot 2 beaver, in the evening Killed two Buffalow
in tolerable order which we Saved and Camped on the Lard Side. 8
beaver, 3 buffalow & an Elk killed to day

[Lewis, May 8, 1805]
Wednesday May 8th 1805.
Set out at an early hour under a gentle brieze from the East. a black
cloud which suddonly sprung up at S. E. soon over shaddowed the
horizon; at 8 A.M. it gave us a slight sprinke of rain, the wind became
much stronger but not so much so as to detain us. we nooned it just
above the entrance of a large river which disimbogues on the Lard.
side; I took the advantage of this leasure moment and examined the
river about 3 miles; I found it generally 150 yards wide, and in some
places 200. it is deep, gentle in it's courant and affords a large
boddy of water; it's banks which are formed of a dark rich loam and
blue clay are abbrupt and about 12 feet high. it's bed is principally
mud. I have no doubt but it is navigable for boats perogues and canoes,
for the latter probably a great distance. the bottoms of this stream ar
wide, level, fertile and possess a considerable proportion of timber,
principally Cottonwood. from the quantity of water furnised by this
river it must water a large extent of country; perhaps this river also
might furnish a practicable and advantageous communication with the
Saskashiwan river; it is sufficiently large to justify a belief that it
might reach to that river if it's direction be such. the water of this
river possesses a peculiar whiteness, being about the colour of a cup
of tea with the admixture of a tablespoonful) of milk. from the colour
of it's water we called it Milk river. (we think it possible that this
may be the river called by the Minitares the river which scoalds at all
others or ____) Capt Clark who walked this morning on the Lard. shore
ascended a very high point opposite to the mouth of this river; he
informed me that he had a perfect view of this river and the country
through which it passed for a great distance (probably 50 or 60 Miles,)
that the country was level and beautifull on both sides of the river,
with large herds of Buffaloe distributed throughout that the river from
it's mouth boar N. W. for 12 or 15 Miles when it forked, the one taking
a direction nearly North, and the other to the West of N. West. from
the appearance of the vallies and the timber on each of these streams
Capt. C. supposed that they were about the same size. great appearance
of beaver on this river, and I have no doubt but what they continue
abundant, there being plenty of cottonwood and willow, the timber on
which they subsist. The country on the Lard. side of the river is
generally high broken hills, with much broken, grey black and brown
grannite scattered on the surface of the earth in a confused manner.
The wild Licquorice is found on the sides of these hills, in great
abundance. at a little distance from the river there is no timber to be
seen on either side; the bottom lands are not more than one fifth
covered with timber; the timber as below is confined to the borders of
the river. in future it will be understood that there is no timber of
any discription on the upland unless particularly mentioned; and also
that one fifth of the bottom lands being covered with timber is
considered a large proportion. The white apple is found in great
abundance in this neighbourhood; it is confined to the highlands
principally. The whiteapple, so called by the French Engages, is a
plant which rises to the hight of 6 or 9 Inchs. rarely exceeding a
foot; it puts forth from one to four and sometimes more stalks from the
same root, but is most generally found with one only, which is branched
but not defusely, is cylindric and villose; the leafstalks, cylindric,
villose and very long compared with the hight of the plant, tho
gradually diminish in length as they ascend, and are irregular in point
of position; the leaf, digitate, from three to five in number, oval 1
Inch long, absolutely entire and cottony; the whole plant of a pale
green, except the under disk of the leaf which is of a white colour
from the cottony substance with which it is covered. the radix a
tuberous bulb; generally ova formed, sometimes longer and more rarely
partially divided or brancing; always attended with one or more
radicles at it's lower extremity which sink from 4 to 6 inches deep.
the bulb covered with a rough black, tough, thin rind which easily
seperates from the bulb which is a fine white substance, somewhat
porus, spungy and moist, and reather tough before it is dressed; the
center of the bulb is penitrated with a small tough string or ligament,
which passing from the bottom of the stem terminates in the extremity
of the radicle, which last is also covered by a prolongation of the
rind which invellopes the bulb. The bulb is usually found at the debth
of 4 inches and frequently much deeper. This root forms a considerable
article of food with the Indians of the Missouri, who for this purpose
prepare them in several ways. they are esteemed good at all seasons of
the year, but are best from the middle of July to the latter end of
Autumn when they are sought and gathered by the provident part of the
natives for their winter store. when collected they are striped of
their rhind and strung on small throngs or chords and exposed to the
sun or placed in the smoke of their fires to dry; when well dryed they
will keep for several years, provided they are not permitted to become
moist or damp; in this situation they usually pound them between two
stones placed on a piece of parchment, untill they reduce it to a fine
powder thus prepared they thicken their soope with it; sometimes they
also boil these dryed roots with their meat without breaking them; when
green they are generally boiled with their meat, sometimes mashing them
or otherwise as they think proper. they also prepare an agreeable dish
with them by boiling and mashing them and adding the marrow grease of
the buffaloe and some buries, until the whole be of the consistency of
a haisty pudding. they also eat this root roasted and frequently make
hearty meals of it raw without sustaining any inconvenience or injury
therefrom. The White or brown bear feed very much on this root, which
their tallons assist them to procure very readily. the white apple
appears to me to be a tastless insippid food of itself tho I have no
doubt but it is a very healthy and moderately nutricious food. I have
no doubt but our epicures would admire this root very much, it would
serve them in their ragouts and gravies in stead of the truffles
morella.

We saw a great number buffaloe, Elk, common and Black taled deer, goats
beaver and wolves. Capt C. killed a beaver and a wolf, the party killed
3 beaver and a deer. We can send out at any time and obtain whatever
species of meat the country affords in as large quantity as we wish. we
saw where an Indian had recently grained, or taken the hair off of a
goatskin; we do not wish to see those gentlemen just now as we presume
they would most probably be the Assinniboins and might be troublesome
to us. Capt C. could not be certain but thought he saw the smoke and
some Indian lodges at a considrable distance up Milk river.

[Clark, May 8, 1805]
May the 8th Wednesday 1805
a verry black Cloud to the S W. we Set out under a gentle breeze from
the N. E. about 8 oClock began to rain, but not Sufficient to wet, we
passed the mouth of a large river on the Starboard Side 150 yards wide
and appears to be navagable. the Countrey thro which it passes as far
as Could be seen from the top of a verry high hill on which I was, a
butifull leavil plain this river forks about N W from its mouth 12 or
15 miles one fork runs from the North & the other to the West of N W.
the water of this river will justify a belief that it has its Sourse at
a considerable distance, and waters a great extent of Countrey- we are
willing to believe that this is the River the Minitarres Call the river
which Scolds at all others

the Countrey on the Lard. Side is high & broken with much Stone
Scattered on the hills, In walking on Shore with the Interpreter & his
wife, the Squar Geathered on the Sides of the hills wild Lickerish, &
the white apple as called by the angegies and gave me to eat, the
Indians of the Missouri make great use of the white apple dressed in
different ways- Saw great numbers of Buffalow, Elk, antelope & Deer,
also black tale deer beaver & wolves, I killed a beaver which I found
on the bank, & a wolf. The party killed 3 Beaver 1 Deer I saw where an
Indian had taken the hair off a goat Skin a fiew days past- Camped
early on the Lard. Side. The river we passed today we call Milk river
from the peculiar whiteness of it's water, which precisely resembles
tea with a considerable mixture of milk.

[Lewis, May 9, 1805]
Thursday May 9th 1805.
Set out at an early hour; the wind being favourable we used our sails
and proceeded very well; the country in appearance is much as yester,
with this difference that the land appears more fertile particularly of
the Lard. hills which are not so stoney and less broken; the timber has
also in some measure declined in quantity. today we passed the bed of
the most extraordinary river that I ever beheld. it is as wide as the
Missouri is at this place or 1/2 a mile wide and not containing a
single drop of runing water; some small standing pools being all the
water that could be per-ceived. it falls in on the Lard. side. I walked
up this river about three miles and ascended an eminence from which I
could perceive it many miles; it's course about South for 10 or 12
miles, when it viered around to the E of S. E. as far as I could see.
the valley of this river is wide and possesses but a scanty proportion
of timber; the hills which border it are not very high nor is the
country very broken; it is what may properly be designated a wavy or
roling country intersperced with some handsom level plains. the bank
are low and abbrupt, seldom more than 6 or eight feet above the level
of the bed, yet show but little appearance of being overflown; they are
of black or yellow clay or a rich sandy loam. the bed is entirely
composed of a light brown sand the particles of which as well as that
of the Missoury are remarkably fine. this river I presume must extend
back as far as the black hills and probably is the channel through
which a great extent of plain country discharge their superfluous
waters in the spring season. it had the appearance of having recently
discharged it's waters; and from the watermark, it did not appear that
it had been more than 2 feet deep at it's greatest hight. This stream
(if such it can properly be termed) we called Big dry river. about a
mile below this river on the same side a large creek falls in also dry
at present. The mineral salts and quarts appear in large quantities in
this neighbourhood. the sand of the Missouri from it's mouth to this
place has always possessed a mixture of granulated talk or I now think
most probably that it is this quarts. Capt C. killed 2 bucks and 2
buffaloe, I also killed one buffaloe which proved to be the best meat,
it was in tolerable order; we saved the best of the meat, and from the
cow I killed we saved the necessary materials for making what our
wrighthand cook Charbono calls the boudin blanc, and immediately set
him about preparing them for supper; this white pudding we all esteem
one of the greatest delacies of the forrest, it may not be amiss
therefore to give it a place. About 6 feet of the lower extremity of
the large gut of the Buffaloe is the first mosel that the cook makes
love to, this he holds fast at one end with the right hand, while with
the forefinger and thumb of the left he gently compresses it, and
discharges what he says is not good to eat, but of which in the squel
we get a moderate portion; the mustle lying underneath the shoulder
blade next to the back, and fillets are next saught, these are needed
up very fine with a good portion of kidney suit; to this composition is
then added a just proportion of pepper and salt and a small quantity of
flour; thus far advanced, our skilfull opporater C-o seizes his
recepticle, which has never once touched the water, for that would
intirely distroy the regular order of the whole procedure; you will not
forget that the side you now see is that covered with a good coat of
fat provided the anamal be in good order; the operator sceizes the
recepticle I say, and tying it fast at one end turns it inwards and
begins now with repeated evolutions of the hand and arm, and a brisk
motion of the finger and thumb to put in what he says is bon pour
manger; thus by stuffing and compressing he soon distends the
recepticle to the utmost limmits of it's power of expansion, and in the
course of it's longtudinal progress it drives from the other end of the
recepticle a much larger portion of the ____ than was prevously
discharged by the finger and thumb of the left hand in a former part of
the operation; thus when the sides of the recepticle are skilfully
exchanged the outer for the iner, and all is compleatly filled with
something good to eat, it is tyed at the other end, but not any cut
off, for that would make the pattern too scant; it is then baptised in
the missouri with two dips and a flirt, and bobbed into the kettle;
from whence after it be well boiled it is taken and fryed with bears
oil untill it becomes brown, when it is ready to esswage the pangs of a
keen appetite or such as travelers in the wilderness are seldom at a
loss for.

we saw a great quantity of game today particularly of Elk and Buffaloe,
the latter are now so gentle that the men frequently throw sticks and
stones at them in order to drive them out of the way. we also saw this
evening emence quantities of timber cut by the beaver which appeared to
have been done the preceeding year, in place particularly they had cut
all the timber down for three acres in front and on nearly one back
from the river and had removed a considerable proportion of it, the
timber grew very thick and some of it was as large as a man's body. the
river for several days has been as wide as it is generally near it's
mouth, tho it is much shallower or I should begin to dispair of ever
reaching it's source; it has been crouded today with many sandbars; the
water also appears to become clearer, it has changed it's complexin
very considerably. I begin to feel extreemly anxious to get in view of
the rocky mountains.

I killed four plover this evening of a different species from any I
have yet seen; it resembles the grey or whistling plover more than any
other of this family of birds; it is about the size of the yellow
legged or large grey plover common to the lower part of this river as
well as most parts of the Atlantic States where they are sometimes
called the Jack curloo; the eye is moderately large, are black with a
narrow ring of dark yellowish brown; the head, neck, upper part of the
body and coverts of the wings are of a dove coloured brown, which when
the bird is at rest is the predominant colour; the brest and belley are
of a brownish white; the tail is composed of 12 feathers of 3 Ins.
being of equal length, of these the two in the center are black, with
traverse bars of yellowish brown; the others are a brownish white. the
large feathers of the wings are white tiped with blacked. the beak is
black, 21/2 inches in length, slightly tapering, streight of a
cilindric form and blontly or roundly pointed; the chaps are of equal
length, and nostrils narrow. longitudional and connected; the feet and
legs are smoth and of a greenish brown; has three long toes and a short
one on each foot, the long toes are unconnected with a web, and the
short one is placed very high up the leg behind, insomuch that it dose
not touch the ground when the bird stands erect. the notes of this bird
are louder and more various than any other of this family that I have
seen.

[Clark, May 9, 1805]
May 9th Thursday 1805
a fine Day wind from the East we proceeded on verry well the Countrey
much the appearance which it had yesterday the bottom & high land rich
black earth, Timber not so abondant as below, we passed the mouth of a
river (or the appearance of a river) on the Lard. Side the bend of
which as far as we went up it or could See from a high hill is as large
as that of the Missouri at this place which is near half a mile this
river did not Contain one drop of running water, about a mile below
this river a large Creeke joins the river L. S. which is also Dry-
Those dry Streams which are also verry wide, I think is the Conveyance
of the melted Snow, & heavy rains which is Probable fall in from the
high mountanious Countrey which is Said to be between this river & the
Yellow Stone river- I walked on Shore the fore part of this day, &
observed Great quantities of the Shining Stone which we view as quarts,
I killed 2 Bucks & a Buffalow, Capt Lewis also killed one which verry
good meat, I saw emunerable herds of buffalow, & goats to day in every
derection- The Missouri keeps its width which is nearly as wide as near
its mouth, great number of Sand bars, the water not So muddy & Sand
finer & in Smaller perpotion. Capt. Lewis killed 4 pleaver different
from any I have ever before Seen, larger & have white breast & the
underfeathers of the wings are white &c.

[Lewis, May 9, 1805]
May 9th 1805.
I killed four plover this evening of a different kind from any I have
yet seen. it resembles the grey or whistling plover more than any other
of this family of birds, tho it is much larger. it is about the size of
the yellow leged plover common to the U States, and called the jack
curlooe by some. the legs are of a greenish brown; the toes, three and
one high at the heel unconnected with a webb, the breast and belly of a
brownish white; the head neck upper part of the body and coverts of the
wings are of a dove colured brown which when the bird is at rest is the
predomanent colour. the tale has 12 feathers of the same length of
which the two in the center are black with transverse bars of yellowish
bron, the others are a brownish white. the large feathers of the wings
are white tiped with black. the eyes are black with a small ring of
dark yellowish brown- the beak is black, 21/2 inches long, cilindrical,
streight, and roundly or blountly pointed. the notes of this bird are
louder and more various than of any other species which I have seen.-

[Lewis, May 10, 1805]
Friday May 10th 1805.
Set out at sunrise and proceeded but a short distance ere the wind
became so violent that we were obliged to come too, which we did on the
Lard. side in a suddon or short bend of the river where we were in a
great measure sheltered from the effects of the wind. the wind
continued violent all day, the clouds were thick and black, had a
slight sprinkle of rain several times in the course of the day. we sent
out several hunters to scower the country, to this we were induced not
so much from the want of provision as to discover the Indians whome we
had reasons to believe were in the neighbourhood, from the circumstance
of one of their dogs comeing to us this morning shortly after we
landed; we still beleive ourselves in the country usually hunted by the
Assinniboins, and as they are a vicious illy disposed nation we think
it best to be on our guard, accordingly we inspected the arms and
accoutrements the party and found them all in good order. The hunters
returned this evening having seen no tents or Indians nor any fresh
sign of them; they killed two Mule deer, one common fallow or
longtailed deer, 2 Buffaloe and 5 beaver, and saw several deer of the
Mule kind of immence size, and also three of the Bighorned anamals.
from the appearance of the Mule deer and the bighorned anamals we
beleive ourselves fast approaching a hilly or mountainous country; we
have rarely found the mule deer in any except a rough country; they
prefer the open grounds and are seldom found in the woodlands near the
river; when they are met with in the woodlands or river bottoms and are
pursued, they invariably run to the hills or open country as the Elk
do. the contrary happens with the common deer ther are several
esscential differences between the Mule and common deer as well in form
as in habits. they are fully a third larger in general, and the male is
particularly large; I think there is somewhat greater disparity of size
between the male and female of this speceis than there is between the
male and female fallow deer; I am convinced I have seen a buck of this
species twice the volume of a buck of any other species. the ears are
peculiarly large; I measured those of a large buck which I found to be
eleven inches long and 31/2 in width at the widest part; they are not
so delicately formed, their hair in winter is thicker longer and of a
much darker grey, in summer the hair is still coarser longer and of a
paleer red, more like that of the Elk; in winter they also have a
considerable quantity of a very fine wool intermixed with the hair and
lying next to the skin as the Antelope has. the long hair which grows
on the outer sides of the 1st joint of the hinder legs, and which in
the common deer do not usually occupy more than 2 inches in them
occupys from 6 to eight; their horns also differ, these in the common
deer consist of two main beams from which one or more points project
the beam graduly deminishing as the points procede from it, with the
mule deer the horns consist of two beams which at the distance of 4 or
6 inches from the head divide themselves each into two equal branches
which again either divide into two other equal branches or terminate in
a smaller, and two equal ones; having either 2 4 or 6 points on a beam;
the horn is not so rough about the base as the common deer and are
invariably of a much darker colour. the most striking difference of
all, is the white rump and tale. from the root of the tail as a center
there is a circular spot perfectly white, of abot 3 inches radius,
which occupys a part of the rump and extremitys of the buttocks and
joins the white of the belley underneath; the tail which is usually
from 8 to 9 inches long, for the first 4 or 5 inches from it's upper
extremity is covered with short white hairs, much shorter indeed than
the hairs of the body; from hence for about one inch further the hair
is still white but gradually becomes longer, the tail then terminates
in a tissue of black hair of about 3 Inches long. from this black hair
of the tail they have obtained among the French engages the appelation
of the black taled deer, but this I conceive by no means characteristic
of the anamal as much the larger portion of the tail is white. the year
and the tail of this anamal when compared with those of the common
(leer, so well comported with those of the mule when compared with the
horse, that we have by way of distinction adapted the appellation of
the mule deer which I think much more appropriate. on the inner corner
of each eye there is a drane or large recepicle which seems to answer
as a drane to the eye which gives it the appearance of weeping, this in
the common deer of the atlantic states is scarcely perceptable but
becomes more conspicuous in the fallow deer, and still more so in the
Elk; this recepticle in the Elk is larger than in any of the pecora
order with which I am acquainted.

Boils and imposthumes have been very common with the party Bratton is
now unable to work with one on his hand; soar eyes continue also to be
common to all of us in a greater or less degree. for the imposthume I
use emmolient poltices, and for soar eyes a solution of white vitriol
and the sugar of lead in the proportion of 2 grs. of the former and one
of the latter to each ounce of water.

[Clark, May 10, 1805]
May the 10th Friday 1805
river fell 3/4 of an inch last night, wind from the N. W, we proceeded
on but a short distance e'r'e the wind became So violent we could not
proceed came to on the Lard. Side in a Short bend, the wind Continued
all day Several times in the course of the day We had some fiew drops
of rain from verry black Clouds, no thunder or lightning latterly, Soon
after we landed a Dog came to us from the opposit Side, which induced a
belief that we had not passd. the Assinniboin Indians, parties wer Sent
on the hills in different derections to examine but Saw no tents or
fresh Sign. examined the arms &c. of the party found all in good order.
Three mule deer, two Buffalow & 5 beaver killed, 3 of the mountain ram
Seen.

[Lewis, May 11, 1805]
Saturday May 11th 1805. Set out this morning at an early hour, the
courant strong; and river very crooked; the banks are falling in very
fast; I sometimes wonder that some of our canoes or perogues are not
swallowed up by means of these immence masses of earth which are
eternally precipitating themselves into the river; we have had many
hair breadth escapes from them but providence seems so to have ordered
it that we have as yet sustained no loss in consequence of them. The
wind blue very hard the forepart of last night but abated toward
morning; it again arose in the after part of this day and retarded our
progress very much. the high lands are broken, the hills higher and
approach nearer the river, tho the soil of both hills and bottoms
appear equally as furtile as below; it consists of a black looking tome
with a moderate portion of sand; the hills and bluffs to the debth of
20 or thirty feet, seemed to be composed entirely of this loam; when
thrown in the water it desolves as readily as loaf sugar and
effervesses like marle. great appearance of quarts and mineral salts,
the latter appears both on the hills and bottoms, in the bottoms of the
gullies which make down from the hills it lies incrusting the earth to
the debth of 2 or 3 inches, and may with a fether be swept up and
collected in large quantities, I preserved several specimines of this
salts. the quarts appears most commonly in the faces of the bluffs. no
coal, burnt hills, or pumice stone. saw today some high hills on the
Stard. whose summits were covered with pine. Capt Clark went on shore
and visited them; he brought with him on his return som of the boughs
of this pine it is of the pitch kind but I think the leaves somewhat
longer than ours in Virginia. Capt C. also in his walk killed 2 Mule
deer a beaver and two buffaloe; these last he killed about 3 miles
above where we encamped this evening in the expectation that we would
reach that place, but we were unable to do so from the adverse winds
and other occurrences, and he came down and joined us about dark. there
is a dwarf cedar growing among the pine on the hills; it rises to the
hight thre sometimes 4 feet, but most generally spreads itself like a
vine along the surface of the earth, which it covers very closely,
puting out roots from the underside of the limbs; the leaf is finer and
more delicate than the common red ceader, it's fruit and smell are the
same with the red ceader. the tops of these hills which produce the
pine and cedar is of a different soil from that just described; it is a
light coloured poor sterile sandy soil, the base usually a yellow or
white clay; it produces scarcely any grass, some scattering tuffts of
sedge constitutes the greater part of it's grass. About 5 P.M. my
attention was struck by one of the Party runing at a distance towards
us and making signs and hollowing as if in distress, I ordered the
perogues to put too, and waited untill he arrived; I now found that it
was Bratton the man with the soar hand whom I had permitted to walk on
shore, he arrived so much out of breath that it was several minutes
before he could tell what had happened; at length he informed me that
in the woody bottom on the Lard. side about 11/2 below us he had shot a
brown bear which immediately turned on him and pursued him a
considerable distance but he had wounded it so badly that it could not
overtake him; I immediately turned out with seven of the party in quest
of this monster, we at length found his trale and persued him about a
mile by the blood through very thick brush of rosbushes and the large
leafed willow; we finally found him concealed in some very thick brush
and shot him through the skull with two balls; we proceeded dress him
as soon as possible, we found him in good order; it was a monstrous
beast, not quite so large as that we killed a few days past but in all
other rispects much the same the hair is remarkably long fine and rich
tho he appears parshally to have discharged his winter coat; we now
found that Bratton had shot him through the center of the lungs,
notwithstanding which he had pursued him near half a mile and had
returned more than double that distance and with his tallons had
prepared himself a bed in the earth of about 2 feet deep and five long
and was perfectly alive when we found him which could not have been
less than 2 hours after he received the wound; these bear being so hard
to die reather intimedates us all; I must confess that I do not like
the gentlemen and had reather fight two Indians than one bear; there is
no other chance to conquer them by a single shot but by shooting them
through the brains, and this becomes difficult in consequence of two
large muscles which cover the sides of the forehead and the sharp
projection of the center of the frontal bone, which is also of a pretty
good thickness. the flece and skin were as much as two men could
possibly carry. by the time we returned the sun had set and I
determined to remain here all night, and directed the cooks to render
the bear's oil and put it in the kegs which was done. there was about
eight gallons of it.

the wild Hysop grows here and in all the country through which we have
passed for many days past; tho from big Dry river to this place it has
been more abundant than below, and a smaller variety of it grows on the
hills, the leaves of which differ considerably being more deeply
indented near it's extremity. the buffaloe deer and Elk feed on this
herb in the winter season as they do also on the small willow of the
sandbars. there is another growth that begins now to make it's
appearance in the bottom lands and is becoming extreemly troublesome;
it is a shrub which rises to the hight of from two to four feet, much
branched, the bark of the trunk somewhat rough hard and of light grey
colour; the wood is firm and stif, the branches beset with a great
number of long, shap, strong, wooddy looking thorns; the leaf is about
3/4 or an inch long, and one 1/8 of an inch wide, it is obtuse,
absolutely entire, veinless fleshy and gibbose; has no perceptable
taste or smell, and no anamal appears to eat it. by way of designating
when I mention it hereafter I shall call it the fleshey leafed thorn

[Clark, May 11, 1805]
May the 11th Satturday 1805.
Wind hard fore part of last night the latter part verry Cold a white
frost this morning, the river riseing a little and verry Crooked the
high land is rugged and approaches nearer than below, the hills and
bluff exhibit more mineral quats & Salts than below, the gullies in
maney places are white, and their bottoms one, two & 3 Inches deep of
this mineral, no appearance of either burnt pumice Stone or Coal, the
Countrey hilley on both Sides of a rich black earth, which disolves
This kind of Countrey Continues of the Same quallity for maney miles on
either Side, we observed Some hills which appeared to be timbered, I
walked to this timber and found it to pitch pine & Dwarf Cedar, we
observe in every derection Buffalow, Elk, Antelopes & Mule deer
inumerable and So jintle that we Could approach near them with great
ease, I killed 2 Mule Deer for the benifit of their Skins for the
party, and about the place I expected the party would get to Camp I
killed 2 fat Bulls for theire use, in my absence they had killed a fine
fat Yellow bear below which detained them and they did not reach the
place I expected, but had Camped on the Lard. Side about 2 miles below
on my return to the party I killed a fat Beaver the wind blew verry
hard from the S. W. all the after part of this day which retarded our
progress verry much. river rose 2 In

[Lewis, May 12, 1805]
Sunday May 12th 1805.
Set out at an early hour, the weather clear and Calm; I walked on shore
this morning for the benifit of exersize which I much wanted, and also
to examine the country and it's productions, in these excurtions I most
generally went alone armed with my rifle and espontoon; thus equiped I
feel myself more than an equal match for a brown bear provided I get
him in open woods or near the water, but feel myself a little diffident
with respect to an attack in the open plains, I have therefore come to
a resolution to act on the defencive only, should I meet these
gentlemen in the open country. I ascended the hills and had a view of a
rough and broken country on both sides of the river; on the North side
the summits of the hills exhibit some scattering pine and cedar, on the
South side the pine has not yet commenced tho there is some cedar on
the face of the hills and in the little ravines. the choke cherry also
grows here in the hollows and at the heads of the gullies; the choke
Cherry has been in blume since the ninth inst. this growth has
freequently made it's appearance on the Missouri from the neighbourhood
of the Baldpated Prarie, to this place in the form of it's leaf colour
and appearance of it's bark, and general figure of it's growth it
resembles much the Morillar cherry,1 tho much smaller not generally
rising to a greater hight than from 6 to 10 feet and ascociating in
thick clusters or clumps in their favorit situations which is usually
the heads of small ravines or along the sides of small brooks which
flow from the hills. the flowers which are small and white are
supported by a common footstalk as those of the common wild cherry are,
the corolla consists of five oval petals, five stamen and one
pistillum, and of course of the Class and order Pentandria Monogynia.
it bears a fruit which much resembles the wild cherry in form and
colour tho larger and better flavoured; it's fruit ripens about the
begining of July and continues on the trees untill the latter end of
September- The Indians of the Missouri make great uce of this cherry
which they prepare for food in various ways, sometimes eating when
first plucked from the trees or in that state pounding them mashing the
seed boiling them with roots or meat, or with the prarie beans and
white-apple; again for their winter store they geather them and lay
them on skins to dry in the sun, and frequently pound them and make
them up in small roles or cakes and dry them in the sun; when thus
dryed they fold them in skins or put them in bags of parchment and keep
them through the winter either eating them in this state or boiling
them as before mentioned. the bear and many birds also feed on these
burries. the wild hysop sage, fleshey leaf thorn, and some other herbs
also grow in the plains and hills, particularly the arromatic herb on
which the Antelope and large hare feed. The soil has now changed it's
texture considerably; the base of the hills and river bottoms continue
the same and are composed of a rich black loam while the summits of the
hills and about half their hight downwards are of a light brown colour,
poor sterile and intermixed with a coarse white sand. about 12 OClock
the wind veered about to the N. W. and blew so hard that we were
obliged to Ly by the ballance of the day. we saw great quantities of
game as usual. the bottom lands still becomeing narrower.

About sunset it began to rain, and continued to fall a few drops at a
time untill midnight; the wind blew violently all night.

[Clark, May 12, 1805]
May 12th Sunday 1805.
Set out at an early hour, the morning Clear and Calm, Capt. Lewis
walked on Shore this morning about 12 oClock the wind becam Strong from
the E. about half past one oClock the wind Shifted round to the N. W.
and blew verry hard all the latter part of the day, which obliged us to
Lay by- The Countrey is hilley & rugged and the earth of a lightish
brown and but indifferent, Some Small Cedar is Scattered on the Sides
of the hils & in the hollars, Some pine ridges is also to be Seen on
the North Side, we observe great quantites of game as usual. I killed a
beaver in the water, Saw Several Sitting on the bank near the waters
edge about Sunset it began to rain, and rained very moderately only a
fiew drops at a time for about half the night, wind Continued violent
all night

[Lewis, May 13, 1805]
Monday May 13th 1805.
The wind continued to blow so violently this morning that we did not
think it prudent to set out. sent out some hunters. At 1 P.M. the wind
abated, and altho the hunters had not all returned we set out; the
courant reather stronger than usual and the water continues to become
reather clearer, from both which I anticipate a change of Country
shortly. the country much the same as yesterday; but little timber in
the bottoms and a scant proportion of pine an cedar crown the Stard.
hills. Capt C. who was on shore the greater part of the day killed a
mule and a Common deer, the party killed several deer and some Elk
principally for the benefit of their skins which are necessary to them
for cloathing, the Elk skins I now begin to reserve for making the
leather boat at the falls. the hunters joined us this evening; Gibson
had wounded a very large brown bear but it was too late in the evening
to pursue him.

[Clark, May 13, 1805]
13th of May Monday 1805
The wind Continued to blow hard untill one oClock P M. to day at which
time it fell a little and we Set out and proceeded on verry well about
9 miles and Camped on the Lard Side. the countrey much the Same
appearance as yesterday but little timber in the bottoms; Some Pine in
places on the Stard. Hills. I killed two deer this evening one a mule
deer & the other a common Deer, the party killed Several this morning
all for the use of their Skins which are now good, one man Gibson
wounded a verry large brown bear, too late this evening to prosue him-
We passed two Creeks in a bend to the Lard Side neither them had any
water, are somewhat wider; passed some high black bluffs. saw immence
herds of buffaloe today also Elk deer wolves and Antelopes. passed
three large creeks one on the Stard. and two others on the Lard. side,
neither of which had any runing water. Capt Clark walked on shore and
killed a very fine buffaloe cow. I felt an inclination to eat some veal
and walked on shore and killed a very fine buffaloe calf and a large
woolf, much the whitest I had seen, it was quite as white as the wool
of the common sheep. one of the party wounded a brown bear very badly,
but being alone did not think proper to pursue him. In the evening the
men in two of the rear canoes discovered a large brown bear lying in
the open grounds about 300 paces from the river, and six of them went
out to attack him, all good hunters; they took the advantage of a small
eminence which concealed them and got within 40 paces of him
unperceived, two of them reserved their fires as had been previously
conscerted, the four others fired nearly at the same time and put each
his bullet through him, two of the balls passed through the bulk of
both lobes of his lungs, in an instant this monster ran at them with
open mouth, the two who had reserved their fires discharged their
pieces at him as he came towards them, boath of them struck him, one
only slightly and the other fortunately broke his shoulder, this
however only retarded his motion for a moment only, the men unable to
reload their guns took to flight, the bear pursued and had very nearly
overtaken them before they reached the river; two of the party betook
themselves to a canoe and the others seperated an concealed themselves
among the willows, reloaded their pieces, each discharged his piece at
him as they had an opportunity they struck him several times again but
the guns served only to direct the bear to them, in this manner he
pursued two of them seperately so close that they were obliged to throw
aside their guns and pouches and throw themselves into the river altho
the bank was nearly twenty feet perpendicular; so enraged was this
anamal that he plunged into the river only a few feet behind the second
man he had compelled take refuge in the water, when one of those who
still remained on shore shot him through the head and finally killed
him; they then took him on shore and butched him when they found eight
balls had passed through him in different directions; the bear being
old the flesh was indifferent, they therefore only took the skin and
fleece, the latter made us several gallons of oil; it was after the sun
had set before these men come up with us, where we had been halted by
an occurrence, which I have now to recappitulate, and which altho
happily passed without ruinous injury, I cannot recollect but with the
utmost trepidation and horror; this is the upseting and narrow escape
of the white perogue It happened unfortunately for us this evening that
Charbono was at the helm of this Perogue, in stead of Drewyer, who had
previously steered her; Charbono cannot swim and is perhaps the most
timid waterman in the world; perhaps it was equally unluckey that Capt.
C. and myself were both on shore at that moment, a circumstance which
rarely happened; and tho we were on the shore opposite to the perogue,
were too far distant to be heard or to do more than remain spectators
of her fate; in this perogue ____ were embarked, our papers,
Instruments, books medicine, a great part of our merchandize and in
short almost every article indispensibly necessary to further the
views, or insure the success of the enterprize in which we are now
launched to the distance of 2200 miles. surfice it to say, that the
Perogue was under sail when a sudon squawl of wind struck her
obliquely, and turned her considerably, the steersman allarmed, in
stead of puting her before the wind, lufted her up into it, the wind
was so violent that it drew the brace of the squarsail out of the hand
of the man who was attending it, and instantly upset the perogue and
would have turned her completely topsaturva, had it not have been from
the resistance mad by the oarning against the water; in this situation
Capt. C and myself both fired our guns to attract the attention if
possible of the crew and ordered the halyards to be cut and the sail
hawled in, but they did not hear us; such was their confusion and
consternation at this moment, that they suffered the perogue to lye on
her side for half a minute before they took the sail in, the perogue
then wrighted but had filled within an inch of the gunwals; Charbono
still crying to his god for mercy, had not yet recollected the rudder,
nor could the repeated orders of the Bowsman, Cruzat, bring him to his
recollection untill he threatend to shoot him instantly if he did not
take hold of the rudder and do his duty, the waves by this time were
runing very high, but the fortitude resolution and good conduct of
Cruzat saved her; he ordered 2 of the men to throw out the water with
some kettles that fortunately were convenient, while himself and two
others rowed her ashore, where she arrived scarcely above the water; we
now took every article out of her and lay them to drane as well as we
could for the evening, baled out the canoe and secured her; there were
two other men beside Charbono on board who could not swim, and who of
course must also have perished had the perogue gone to the bottom.
while the perogue lay on her side, finding I could not be heard, I for
a moment forgot my own situation, and involluntarily droped my gun,
threw aside my shot pouch and was in the act of unbuttoning my coat,
before I recollected the folly of the attempt I was about to make,
which was to throw myself into the river and indevour to swim to the
perogue; the perogue was three hundred yards distant the waves so high
that a perogue could scarcely live in any situation, the water
excessively could, and the stream rappid; had I undertaken this project
therefore, there was a hundred to one but what I should have paid the
forfit of my life for the madness of my project, but this had the
perogue been lost, I should have valued but little.- After having all
matters arranged for the evening as well as the nature of circumstances
would permit, we thought it a proper occasion to console ourselves and
cheer the sperits of our men and accordingly took a drink of grog and
gave each man a gill of sperits.

[Clark, May 14, 1805]
14th of May Tuesday 1805
A verry Clear Cold morning a white frost & some fog on the river the
Thermomtr Stood at 32 above 0, wind from the S. W. we proceeded on
verry well untill about 6 oClock a Squawl of wind Struck our Sale broad
Side and turned the perogue nearly over, and in this Situation the
Perogue remained untill the Sale was Cut down in which time She nearly
filed with water- the articles which floated out was nearly all caught
by the Squar who was in the rear. This accident had like to have cost
us deerly; for in this perogue were embarked our papers, Instruments,
books, medicine, a great proportion of our merchandize, and in short
almost every article indispensibly necessary to further the views, or
insure the success of the enterprize in which, we are now launched to
the distance of 2,200 miles. it happened unfortunately that Capt. Lewis
and myself were both on shore at the time of this occurrence, a
circumstance which seldom took place; and tho we were on the shore
opposit to the perogue were too far distant to be heard or do more than
remain spectators of her fate; we discharged our guns with the hope of
attracting the attention of the crew and ordered the sail to be taken
in but such was their consternation and confusion at the instant that
they did not hear us. when however they at length took in the sail and
the perogue wrighted; the bowsman Cruzatte by repeated threats so far
brought Charbono the Sternman to his recollection that he did his duty
while two hands bailed the perogue and Cruzatte and two others rowed
her on shore were she arrived scarcely above the water. we owe the
preservation of the perogue to the resolution and fortitude of Cruzatte

The Countrey like that of yesterday, passed a Small Island and the
enterence of 3 large Creeks, one on the Stard. & the other 2 on the
Lard Side, neither of them had any running water at this time- Six good
hunters of the party fired at a Brown or Yellow Bear Several times
before they killed him, & indeed he had like to have defeated the whole
party, he pursued them Seperately as they fired on him, and was near
Catching Several of them one he pursued into the river, this bear was
large & fat would way about 500 wt; I killed a Buffalow, & Capt. Lewis
a Calf & a wolf this evening.

[Lewis, May 15, 1805]
Wednesday May 15th
as soon as a slight shower of rain passed over this morning, we spread
the articles to dry which had got wet yesterday in the white perogue;
tho the day proved so cloudy and damp that they received but little
benifit from the sun or air; we were enabled to put them in such a
state as to prevent their sustaining further injury. our hunters killed
several deer, and saw three bear one of which they wounded.

[Clark, May 15, 1805]
May 15th Wednesday 1805
Our medisons, Instruments, merchandize, Clothes, provisions &c. &c.
which was nearly all wet we had put out to air and dry. the day being
Cloudy & rainey those articles dried but little to day- our hunters
killed Several deer &c. and Saw three Bear one of which they wounded &c.

We see Buffalow on the banks dead, others floating down dead, and
others mired every day, those buffalow either drown in Swiming the
river or brake thro the ice

[Lewis, May 16, 1805]
Thursday May 16th
The morning was fair and the day proved favorable to our operations; by
4 oClock in the evening our Instruments, Medicine, merchandize
provision &c, were perfectly dryed, repacked and put on board the
perogue. the loss we sustained was not so great as we had at first
apprehended; our medicine sustained the greatest injury, several
articles of which were intirely spoiled, and many others considerably
injured; the ballance of our losses consisted of some gardin seeds, a
small quantity of gunpowder, and a few culinary articles which fell
overboard and sunk, the Indian woman to whom I ascribe equal fortitude
and resolution, with any person onboard at the time of the accedent,
caught and preserved most of the light articles which were washed
overboard all matters being now arranged for our departure we lost no
time in seting out; proceeced on tolerably well about seven miles and
encamped on the Stard. side. in the early part of the day two of our
men fired on a panther, a little below our encampment, and wounded it;
they informed us that it was very large, had just killed a deer partly
devoured it, and in the act of concealing the ballance as they
discovered him. we caught two Antelopes at our encampment in attempting
to swim the river; these anamals are but lean as yet, and of course not
very pleasant food. I walked on shore this evening and killed a
buffaloe cow and calf, we found the calf most excellent veal. the
country on either side of the river is broken and hills much higher
than usual, the bottoms now become narrow and the timber more scant;
some scattering pine and cedar on the steep declivities of the hills.-
this morning a white bear toar Labuiche's coat which he had left in the
plains.

[Clark, May 16, 1805]
May 16th Thursday 1805 a fair morning our articles all out to Dry at 4
oClock we had every thing that was Saved dry and on bord, our loss is
Some medison, Powder, Seeds, & Several articles which Sunk, and maney
Spoiled had a medn. altitude which gave for Latd. _° _' _" N.- two of our
men fired at a pant hr a little below our Camp, this animale they say
was large, had Caught a Deer & eate it half & buried the ballance. a
fiew antilope Swam the river near our Camp two of them were Cought by
the party in the river. at half past 4 oClock we Set out and proceeded
on verry well ____ miles and incamped on the Std. Side the Countrey as
before hilley & broken verry Small proprotion of timber in the points,
Some little pine & Ceader in the hills

Buffalow & Deer is yet plenty on the river in the small timbered
bottoms Capt Lewis walked out on the Std. Side and killed a Cow & Calf
the calf was verry fine their bases. it is somewhat singular that the
lower part of these hills appear to be formed of a dark rich loam while
the upper region about 150 feet is formed of a whiteish brown sand, so
hard in many parts as to resemble stone; but little rock or stone of
any kind to be seen in these hills. the river is much narrower than
usual, the bed from 200 to 300 yards only and possessing a much larger
proportion of gravel than usual. a few scattering cottonwood trees are
the only timber near the river; the sandbars, and with them the willow
points have almost entirely disappeared. greater appearance than usual
of the saline incrustations of the banks and river hills. we passed two
creeks the one on Stard. side, and the other just below our camp on the
Lard. side; each of these creeks afford a small quantity of runing
water, of a brackish tast. the great number of large beds of streams
perfectly dry which we daily pass indicate a country but badly watered,
which I fear is the case with the country through which we have been
passing for the last fifteen or twenty days. Capt Clark walked on shore
this evening and killed an Elk; buffaloe are not so abundant as they
were some days past. the party with me killed a female brown bear, she
was but meagre, and appeared to have suckled young very recently. Capt.
Clark narrowly escaped being bitten by a rattlesnake in the course of
his walk, the party killed one this evening at our encampment, which he
informed me was similar to that he had seen; this snake is smaller than
those common to the middle Atlantic States, being about 2 feet 6 inches
long; it is of a yellowish brown colour on the back and sides,
variagated with one row of oval spots of a dark brown colour lying
transversely over the back from the neck to the tail, and two other
rows of small circular spots of the same colour which garnis the sides
along the edge of the scuta. it's bely contains 176 scuta on the belly
and 17 on the tale. Capt Clark informed me that he saw some coal which
had been brought down by the water of the last creek we passed; this
creek also throws out considerable quantities of Driftwood, though
there is no timber on it which can be perceived from the Missouri; we
called this stream rattlesnake creek. Capt Clark saw an Indian
fortifyed camp this evening, which appeared to have been recently
occupyed, from which we concluded it was probable that it had been
formed by a war party of the Menetares who left their vilage in March
last with a view to attack the blackfoot Indians in consequence of
their having killed some of their principal warriors the previous
autumn. we were roused late at night by the Sergt. of the guard, and
warned of the danger we were in from a large tree that had taken fire
and which leant immediately over our lodge. we had the loge removed,
and a few minutes after a large proportion of the top of the tree fell
on the place the lodge had stood; had we been a few minutes later we
should have been crushed to attoms. the wind blew so hard, that
notwithstanding the lodge was fifty paces distant from the fire it
sustained considerable injury from the burning coals which were thrown
on it; the party were much harrassed also by this fire which
communicated to a collection of fallen timber, and could not be
extinguished.

[Clark, May 17, 1805]
May 17th Friday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N W. mercury at 60° a 0. river falling a
little. we Set out at an early hour and proceeded on verry well by the
assistance of the Toe rope principally, the Countrey verry rugged &
hills high and the river washing the base on each Side, Great
appearance of the Salt Substance. a fiew Cotton trees is the only
timber which is Scattered in the bottoms & the hills contain a fiew
Pine & Cedar, which is Scattered. river much narrower than below from 2
to 300 yards wide, the bottoms muddey & hills rich earth except near
their topes- We passed 2 large Creeks to day one on the Starbd Side and
the other just below our camp on the Lard. Side each of those creeks
has a little running water near their mouthes which has a brackish
taste, I was nearly treading on a Small fierce rattle Snake different
from any I had ever Seen &c. one man the party killed another of the
Same kind. I walked on Shore after dinner & killed an Elk- the party in
my absence Killed a female Brown or yellow Bear which was meagre the
appearances of the Hills & Countrey is as before mentioned except a
greater appearance of the white appearance of Salts or tarter and Some
Coal which has been thrown out by the floods in the last Creek-
Buffalow & Deer is not plenty to day, Elk is yet to be Seen in
abundance we Camped in the upper part of a Small timbered bottom on the
Lard. Side in which I Saw a fortified Indian Camp, which I Suppose is
one of the Camps of a Mi ne tar re war party of about 15 men, that Set
out from their village in March last to war against the Blackfoot
Indians.

we were roused late at night and warned of the danger of fire from a
tree which had Cought and leaned over our Lodge, we had the lodge moved
Soon after the Dry limbs & top of the tree fell in the place the Lodge
Stood, the wind blew hard and the dry wood Cought & fire flew in every
direction, burnt our Lodge verry much from the Coals which fell on it
altho at Some distance in the plain, the whole party was much disturbed
by this fire which could not be extinguished &c

[Lewis, May 18, 1805]
Saturday May 18th 1805.
The wind blew hard this morning from the West. we were enabled to
employ our toe line the greater part of the day and therefore proceeded
on tolerably well. there are now but few sandbars, the river is narrow
and current gentle. the timber consists of a few cottonwood trees along
the verge of the river; the willow has in a great measure disappeared.
in the latter part of the day the hills widened, the bottoms became
larger, and contained more timber. we passed a creek on the Stard. side
about three oclock, which afforded no water; came too and encamped on
the Lard. side opposite to the lower point of a small Island, two miles
short of the extremity of the last course of this day. Capt Clark in
the course of his walk this evening killed four deer, two of which were
the black tailed or mule deer; the skins are now good, they have not
yet produced their young.- we saw a number of buffaloe, Elk, deer and
Antelopes.- the saline substance frequently mentioned continues to
appear as usual.-

[Clark, May 18, 1805]
May 18th Satturday 1805
A windey morning wind from the West we proceeded on verry well with the
assistance of the Toe Coard, river narrow but flew Sand bars, & current
jentle, but a few Cotton Trees Contained in the bottoms willow is not
common on the bears as usial Some little on the Sides of the river is
yet to be Seen, the after part of the day was Cloudy & at about 12
oClock it began to rain and continued moderately for about 11/2 hours,
not Sufficient to wet a man thro his clothes; this is the first rain
Since we Set out this Spring The hills widen and the bottoms Contain
more timber than for Several days past, we passed a Wisers Creek on the
Std. Side about 3 oClock and Camped on the Lard Side opposit the lower
point of a handsom little Island near the middle of the river. I walked
on Shore and killed four Deer, 2 common & 2 mule deer, one of which had
3 fauns, 2 others had 2 each, those deer are fat, & their Skins
tolerable good, which are now in demand with us for clothes Such as
Legins & Mockersons, I Saw great numbers of Buffalows & Elk; Some of
the party Shoot & Catch beaver every day & night

[Lewis, May 19, 1805]
Sunday May 19th 1805.
The last night was disagreeably could; we were unable to set out untill
8 oclock A.M. in consequence of a heavy fogg, which obscured the river
in such a manner that we could not see our way; this is the first we
have experienced in any thing like so great a degree; there was also a
fall of due last evening, which is the second we have experienced since
we have entered this extensive open country. at eight we set out and
proceeded as yesterday by means of the cord principally, the hills are
high and the country similar to that of yesterday. Capt Clark walked on
shore with two of the hunters and killed a brown bear; notwithstanding
that it was shot through the heart it ran at it's usual pace near a
quarter of a mile before it fell. one of the party wounded a beaver,
and my dog as usual swam in to catch it; the beaver bit him through the
hind leg and cut the artery; it was with great difficulty that I could
stop the blood; I fear it will yet prove fatal to him. on Capt. Clark's
return he informed me that he had from the top of one of the adjacent
hights discovered the entrance of a large stream which discharged
itself into the Missouri on the Lard. side distant 6 or seven miles;
from the same place he also saw a range of Mountains, bearing W.
distant 40 or 50 miles; they appeared to proceed in a S. S. W.
direction; the N. N. E. extremity of these mountains appeared abrupt.

This afternoon the river was croked, rappid and containing more sawyers
than we have seen in the same space since we left the entrance of the
river Platte. Capt. C. in the course of his walk killed three deer and
a beaver, I also walked on shore this evening a few miles and killed an
Elk, a buck, and a beaver. the party killed and caught 4 other beaver &
3 deer.

The men complain much of sore eyes and imposthumes.

[Clark, May 19, 1805]
May 19th Sunday 1805
a verry cold night, the murckery Stood at 38 at 8 oClock this morning,
a heavy dew which is the 2d I have Seen this Spring. The fog (which was
the first) was So thick this morning that we could not Set out untill
the Sun was about 2 hours up, at which time a Small breeze Sprung up
from the E. which Cleared off the fog & we proceeded on by means of the
Cord The hills are high & rugged the Countrey as yesterday- I walked on
Shore with two men we killed a white or grey bear; not withstanding
that it was Shot through the heart it ran at it's usial pace near a
quarter of a mile before it fell. Capt Lewis's dog was badly bitten by
a wounded beaver and was near bleading to death-. after killing the
Bear I continued my walk alone, & killed 3 Deer & a Beaver; finding
that the Perogues were below I assended the highest hill I could See,
from the top of which I Saw the mouth of M. Shell R & the meanderings
of the Missouri for a long distance. I also Saw a high mountain in a
westerley direction, bearing S. S W. about 40 or 50 miles distant, in
the evening the river was verry Crooked and much more rapid &
Containing more Sawyers than any which we have passed above the River
Platte Capt Lewis walked on Shore this after noon & killed an Elk, Buck
& a Beaver, I kiled three Deer at dinner, the hunters killed three
other Deer to day Several beaver also killed. We Camped on the Stard
Side in a bottom of Small Cotton wood

[Lewis, May 20, 1805]
Monday May 20th 1805
Set out at an early hour as usual, the banks being favourable and water
strong we employed the toe rope principally; river narrow and croked;
country much as that of yesterday; immence number of the prickley pears
in the plains and on the hills. At the distance of 21/4 miles passed
the entrance of a large Creek, affording but little water; this stream
we named Blowing Fly Creek, from the immence quantities of those
insects found in this neighbourhood, they infest our meat while
roasting or boiling, and we are obliged to brush them off our provision
as we eat. At 11 A.M. we arrived at the entrance of a handsome bold
river which discharges itself into the Missouri on the Lard. side; this
stream we take to be that called by the Minnetares the ____ or
Muscleshell River; if it be the same, of which I entertain but little
doubt, it takes it's rise, by their information in the 1st Chain of the
Rocky Mountains at no great distance from the Yellow stone river, from
whence in it's course to this place it passes through a high and broken
country pretty well timbered, particularly on it's borders, and
intersperced with handsome fertile plains and medows. but from the
circumstance of the same Indians informing us that we should find a
well timbered country in the neighbourhood of it's mouth, I am induced
to beleive that the timbered country of which they speak is similar to
that we have passed for a day or two, or that in our view above, which
consists of nothing more than a few scattering small scrubby pine and
dwarf cedar on the summits of some of the highest hills nine tenths of
the country being wholy destitute of timber of any kind, covered with a
short grass, arromatic herbs and the prickley pear; the river bottom
however, so far as we have explored it or 8 m. are well stocked with
Cottonwood timber of tollerable size, & lands of excellent quality. We
halted at thentrance of the river on the point formed by it's junction
with the Missouri determining to spend the day, make the necessary
observations and send out some hunters to explore the country. The
Muscle Shell river falls into the Missouri 2270 miles above it's mouth,
and is 110 yards in width, it affords much more water than streams of
it's width generally do below, it's courant is by no means rappid, and
from appearances it might be navigated with canoes a considerable
distance; it's bed is coarse sand and gravel principally with an
occasion mixture of black mud; it's banks abbrupt and about 12 feet
high yet never appear to overflow; the waters of this river is of a
greenish yellow cast, much more transparent than the Missouri, which
last is also much more transparent than below but still retains it's
whiteish hue and a proportion of it's sedement. the Missouri opposite
to this point is deep, gentle in it's courant, and 222 yards in width.
The hunters returned this evening and informed us that the country
continued much the same in appearance as that we saw where we were or
broken, and that about five miles abe the mouth of shell river a
handsome river of about fifty yards in width discharged itself into the
shell river on the Stard. or upper side; this stream we called
Sah-ca-gar me-ah or bird woman's River, after our interpreter the Snake
woman. Shields also found a bould spring or fountain issuing from the
foot of the Lard. hills about 4 miles up the Missouri; a fountain in
this plain country is a great novelty; I have not seen a bould fountain
of pure water except one since I left the Mandans; there a number of
small ones but all without exception are impregnated with the salts
which abound in this country, and with which I believe the Missoury
itself considerably impregnated but to us in the habit of useing it not
perceptible; the exception I make is a very fine fountain under the
bluffs on the Lard. side of the Missouri and at a distance from the
river about five miles below the entrance of the yellowstone River. The
sands of the Missouri are not so abundant as they have been for some
time past, being confined to the points only; the bed of the river
principally mud and still too deep to use the seting pole. Capt. Clark
walked out today and killed two deer and an Elk, the hunters killed 4
deer and elk and a buffaloe. I saw two large Owls with remarkable long
feathers on the sides of the head which resembled ears; I take them to
be the large hooting owl tho they are somewhat larger and their colours
brighter than those common to the J States.-

[Clark, May 20, 1805]
May 20th Monday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N E. river falling a little We Set out at
7 oClock and proceeded on verry well as usial by the assistance of the
Cord passed Some verry Swift water, river narrow and Crooked, at 11
oClock arrived at the mouth of Shell river on the Lard Side and formed
a Camp for the present. haveing passed a large Creek about 4 miles
below on the Ld Side which we call Blowing fly Creek from the emence
quantites of those insects which geather on our meat in Such numbers
that we are oblige to brush them off what we eate.

muscle Shell River falls in on Lard Side 2270 miles up Contains a
greater perportion of water than Rivers of its Size below, I measured
it and find it to be 110 yards wide, the water of a Greenish yellow
Colour, and appers to be navagable for Small Craft, The Minetarras
inform us that this river heads in the 1st of the rockey Mountains &
passes through a broken Countrey. its head at no great distance from
the Yellow Stone River The Countrey about this river as described
yesterday we took the Meredian altitude 59° 50' 0" back observation and
found the Latd. to be 47° 0' 24"

The Missouri at the mouth of Shell River is 222 yards wide with a Smoth
Current the Missouri water is not So muddey as below, but retains
nearly its usial Cholour, and the Sands principally Confined to the
points I killed two Deer & an Elk, the hunters killed an Elk & Several
deer mearly for their Skins to make Leagins,- Sent men out in every
derection, the Countrey generally verry broken Some leavel plains up
the Shell river The bottoms of the Shell river is well timbered as also
a Small river which falls into that river on the upper Side 5 miles
above its mouth. The hills on the Lard. Contain Scattering Pine & Cedar.

[Lewis, May 21, 1805]
Tuesday May 21st 1805
A delightfull morning set out at an early hour and proceeded on very
well, imployed the chord principally; the shores are abbrupt and bould
and composed of a black and yellow clay; see no extensive collection of
pure sand, the bars are composed black mud and a small poportion of
fine sand; the courant still pretty strong. the Missouri in it's course
downward makes a suddon and extensive bend to receive the Muscle shell
river, the point of country thus formed tho high is still much lower
than that surrounding it, thus forming a valley of wavey country which
extends itself for a great distance in a Northerly direction; the soil
is fertile, produces a fine turf of low grass and some herbs, also
immence quantities of the Prickley pear, without a stick of timber of
any discription. the country on the South side is high broken and
crowned with some scrubby pines and dwarf cedar; the leaf of this pine
is much longer than the common pitch or red pine of Virginia, the cone
is also longer and slimer, and the imbrications wider and thicker, and
the whole frequently covered with rosin. Mineral appearances as usual.
the growse or praire hen are now less abundant on the river than they
were below; perhaps they betake themselves to the open plains at a
distance from the river at this season.-

The wind which was moderate all the fore part of the day continued to
encrease in the evening, and about dark veered about to N. W. and blew
a storm all night, in short we found ourselves so invelloped with
clouds of dust and sand that we could neither cook, eat, nor sleep; and
were finally compelled to remove our lodge about eight oClock at night
to the foot of an adjacent hill where we were covered in some measure
from the wind by the hills. several loose articles blown over board and
lost. our first station was on a bar on Stard. opposite the lower point
of a small Island, which we now called windy Island. the bends of the
river are short and suddon, the points covered with some cottonwood,
larger willow, or broadleafed willow with an abundance of the wild rose
and some small honeysuckle bushes constitute the undergrowth, the
redwood is also found in small quantities. Capt. C walked on shore
today and killed 2 Elk; the party killed several deer and a buffaloe
Cow.-

[Clark, May 21, 1805]
May 21st Tuesday 1805.
a butifull morning, wind from the West, river falling a little, we Set
out at an early hour and proceed on in the usial way by the assistance
of the Coard principally, but little use of the Oares & less with the
poles as the bottoms are muddey, we Se no great bodies of pure Sand the
bars & points are rich mud mixed with fine Sand. I walked on Shore
Stard. Side the river makes a great bend to the South to receve Shell
River, the boint for many miles out in a Northerley direction is a rich
uneaven valley Contain Some Short grass, and Prickley pears without
timber The Countrey on the South Side of the Missouri is high, Soil and
mineral appearance as usial, more Scattering pine & Cedar on the hills,
the wind which blew moderatly all the forepart of the day increassd and
about Dark Shifted to the N W. and Stormed all night, Several loose
articles were blown over board, our lodge & Camp which was on a Sand
bar on the Std. Side & opposite to the lower point of an Island we were
obliged to move under the hills, the dust & Sand blew in clouds. The
bends of the river are Short and points Covered with Cotton wood under
groth wild rose bushes I killed 2 Elk to day Several Deer Killd. & a
Buffalow Cow.

[Lewis, May 22, 1805]
Wednesday May 22cd 1805.
The wind blew so violently this morning that we did not think it
prudent to set out untill it had in some measure abated; this did not
happen untill 10 A.M. when we proceeded principally by the toe lines
the bottoms somewhat wider than usual, the lands fertile or apparently
so tho the short grass and the scantey proportion of it on the hills
would indicate no great fertility. passed Windy Island on Lard. at 1 M.
51/2 miles above passed a large Island in a bend on Stard. side, and
three miles further on the same side passed the entrance of grows Creek
20 yds wide, affords but little water. this creek we named from seeing
a number of the pointed tail praire hen near it's mouth, these are the
fist we have seen in such numbers for some days. I walked on shore this
morning the country is not so broken as yesterday tho still high and
roling or wavy; the hills on Lard. side possess more pine than usual;
some also on the Stard. hills. Salts and other mineral appearances as
usual. the river continues about the same width or from 200 to 250 yds.
wide, fewer sandbars and the courant more gentle and regular; game not
so abundant as below the Muscle Shell river. I killed a deer in the
course of my walk today. Capt. C. also walked out this evening and took
a view of the country from a conspicuous point and found it the same as
has been discribed. we have caught but few fish since we left the
Mandans, they do not bite freely, what we took were the white cat of 2
to 5 lbs. I presume that fish are scarce in this part of the river. We
encamped earlyer this evening than usual in order render the oil of a
bear which we killed. I do not believe that the Black bear common to
the lower part of this river and the Atlantic States, exists in this
quarter; we have neither seen one of them nor their tracks which would
be easily distinguished by it's shortness of tallons when compared with
the brown grizly or white bear. I believe that it is the same species
or family of bears which assumes all those colours at different ages
and seasons of the year.

[Clark, May 22, 1805]
May 22nd Wednesday 1805
The wind Continued to blow So violently hard we did not think it
prudent to Set out untill it luled a little, about 10 oClock we Set out
the morning Cold, passed a Small Island in the bend to the Lard Side, &
proceeded on at 5 miles higher passed a Island in a bend to the Stard
Side, and a Creek a Short distance above on the Stard Side 20 yds. w
Capt Lewis walked out before dinner & Killed a Deer, I walked out after
dinner and assended & but a few miles to view the Countrey, which I
found roleing & of a verry rich Stickey Soil produceing but little
vegitation of any kind except the prickley-piar, but little grass &
that verry low. a great deal of Scattering Pine on the Lard Side & Some
fur on the Stard. Sd. The mineral productions as described in the
proceeding days, game not So abundant as below, the river Continue
about the Same width, fewer Sand bars & current more regular, river
falls about an inch a day We camped on the Stard. Side, earlier than we
intend on account of Saveing the oil of a bear which the party killed
late this afternoon.

Maney of the Creeks which appear to have no water near ther mouths have
Streams of running water higher up which rise & waste in the Sand or
gravel. the water of those Creeks are So much impregnated with the Salt
Substance that it cannot be Drank with pleasure.

[Lewis, May 23, 1805]
Thursday May 23rd 1805.
Set out early this morning, the frost was severe last night, the ice
appeared along the edge of the water, water also freized on the oars.
at the distance of one mile passed the entrance of a creek 15 yds. wide
on Stard. side, this we call Teapot Creek, it affords no water at it's
mouth but has runing water at some small distance above, this I beleive
to be the case with many of those creekes which we have passed since we
entered this hilley country, the water is absorbed by the earth near
the river and of course appear dry; they afford but little water at any
rate, and that is so strongly impregnated with these salts that it is
unfit for uce; all the wild anamals appear fond of this water; I have
tryed it by way of experiment & find it moderately pergative, but
painfull to the intestens in it's opperation. this creek runs directly
towards some low mountains which lye N. W. of it and appear to be about
30 mes. distant, perhaps it heads in them. This range of mountains
appear to be about 70 miles long runing from E to W. having their
Eastern extremity about 30 mes. distant in a northwardly direction from
pot Island.- also passed two small creeks on Lard. and two others on
Stard. all inconsiderable and dry at their entrances. just above the
entrance of Teapot Creek on the stard. there is a large assemblage of
the burrows of the Burrowing Squirrel they generally seelect a south or
a south Easterly exposure for their residence, and never visit the
brooks or river for water; I am astonished how this anamal exists as it
dose without water, particularly in a country like this where there is
scarcely any rain during Yi of the year and more rarely any due; yet we
have sometimes found their villages at the distance of five or six
miles from any water, and they are never found out of the limits of the
ground which their burrows occupy; in the Autumn when the hard frosts
commence they close their burrows and do not venture out again untill
spring, indeed some of them appear to be yet in winter quarters. passed
3 Islands the two first covered with tall cottonwood timber and the
last with willows only. river more rappid, & the country much the same
as yesterday. some spruce pine of small size appears among the pitch
pine, and reather more rock than usual on the face of the hills. The
musquetoes troublesome this evening, a circumstance I did not expect
from the temperature of the morning. The Gees begin to lose the
feathers of their wings and are unable to fly. Capt Clark walked on
shore and killed 4 deer and an Elk. We killed a large fat brown bear
which took the water after being wounded and was carried under some
driftwood where he sunk and we were unable to get him. Saw but few
buffaloe today, but a great number of Elk, deer, some antelopes and 5
bear. The wild rose which is now in blume are very abundant, they
appear to differ but little from those common to the Atlantic States,
the leaves of the bushes and the bush itself appear to be of somewhat
smaller size.

[Clark, May 23, 1805]
May 23rd Thursday 1805
a Severe frost last night, the Thrmotr. Stood at the freesing point
this morning i e 32 a 0. wind S W. the water freeses on the oars. Ice
on the edge of the river we Set out at an early hour and passed the
mouth a Creek at 1 mile on the Stard. Side which heads in a mountain N
W of its mouth 30 or _____ miles, the Countrey on each Side is as
passed yesterday passed 2 Small Creeks on the Stard & 2 on the Lard.
Side to day. a mountain which appears to be 60 or 70 miles long bearing
E. & W is about 25 miles distant from this river on the Stard Side
Notherley of Pot Island I walked on Shore and killed 4 deer & an Elk, &
a beaver in the evening we killed a large fat Bear, which we
unfortunately lost in the river, after being Shot took the water & was
Carried under a drift passed in course of this day three Islands, two
of them Covered with tall timber & a 3rd with willows

The after part of this day was worm & the Misquitors troublesome. Saw
but five Buffalow a number of Elk & Deer & 5 bear & 2 Antilopes to day.
the river beginning to rise, and Current more rapid than yesterday, in
maney places I saw Spruces on the hills Sides Stard. this evening.

[Lewis, May 24, 1805]
Friday May 24th 1805.

The water standing in the vessels freized during the night 1/8 of an
inch thick, ice also appears along the verge of the river. the folage
of some of the cottonwood trees have been entirely distroyed by the
frost and are again puting forth other buds. the high country in which
we are at present and have been passing for some days I take to be a
continuation of what the Indians as well as the French Engages call the
Black hills. This tract of country so called consists of a collection
of high broken and irregular hills and short chain of mountains
sometimes 120 miles in width and again becomeing much narrower, but
always much higher than the country on either side; they commence about
the head of the Kanzas river and to the West of that river near the
Arkansas, from whence they take their course a little to the W. of N.
W. approaching the rockey Mountains obliquely, passing the river platte
above the forks and intercepting the Yellowstone river near the big
bend and passing the Missouri at this place and probably continuing to
swell the country as far North as the Saskashawan river tho they are
lower here than they are discribed to the Sth. and may therefore
probably terminate before they reach the Suskashawan. the black hills
in their course nothwardly appear to approach more nearly to the Rocky
Mountains.

We set out at an early hour this morning and proceed on principally by
the chord untill about 9 A.M. when a fine breeze sprung up from the S.
E. and enabled us though the ballance of the day to employ our sails to
advantage; we proceed at a pretty good pace notwithstanding the courant
of the river was very strong. we passed two large and four small
Islands; also several streams on either side; the first of these is a
large Creek or small river which disinboged on the Stard. side about
11/2 miles above our encampment of last evening, it is 30 yards wide
and contains some water. the bed is gravley and intermixed with some
stone, it takes its rise in the mountains which are situated in a
Northwardly direction from its entrance, distant about 30 miles. the
air is so pure in this open country that mountains and other elivated
objects appear much nearer than they really are; these mountains do not
appear to be further than 15 m. we sent a man up this creek to explore
the country he returned late in the evening and informed that he had
proceeded ten miles directly towards these mountains and that he did
not think himself by any mean half way these mountains are rockey and
covered with some scattering pine. This stream we call North Mountain
creek. the next stream in order is a creek which falls in on Lard. 21/2
miles higher; this is 15 yds. wide no water; a large village of the
burrowing or barking squirrels on the Stard. side opposite it's
entrance, hence the name Little dog Ck. that being the name by which
the French Engages call this anamal. at three miles and at 10 ms. from
hence still ascending 2 Small creek fall in on the Stard. side, no
water. 51/2 miles higher a small river falls in on Lard. side this we
called South Mountain creek as from it's direction it appeared to take
it's rise in a range of Mountains lying in a S. Westerly direction from
it's entrance distant 50 or 60 m.; this creek is 40 yards wide and
discharges a handsome stream of water. it's bed is rockey with gravel
and sand, the banks high and country broken it's bottom narrow and no
timber. The country high and broken, a considerable portion of black
rock and brown sandy rock appear in the faces of the hills; the tops of
the hills covered with scattering pine spruce and dwarf cedar; the soil
poor and sterile, sandy near the tops of the hills, the whole producing
but little grass; the narrow bottoms of the Missouri producing little
else but Hysop or southern wood and the pulpy leafed thorn. Capt. Clark
walked on shore this evening and killed a buffaloe cow, we left 2
Canoes and six men to dress the Cow and bring on the meat, they did not
overtake us this evening. game is becoming more scarce, particularly
beaver, of which we have seen but few for several days the beaver
appears to keep pace with the timber as it declines in quantity they
also become more scarce.

[Clark, May 24, 1805]
May 24th Friday 1805
a Cold night the water in the Small vestles frosed 1/8 of an inch
thick, and the thermometer Stood this morning at the freesing point. we
Set out at an early hour and proceeded on, at 9 oClock we had a Breeze
from the S E which Continued all day. This Breeze afforded us good
Sailing, the river rising fast Current verry rapid. passed Several
Small Islands, two large & two Small Creeks, the 1st of those Creeks or
Small rivers 11/2 m. above our Camp is 30 yards wide and Contains water
and appears to take its rise in the North Mountns. which is Situated in
a northerley detection about 20 miles distant. 21/2 m. higher a Creek
falls in on the Lard. Side, opposit a large village of Barking
Squirels. 3 miles Still higher a Small Creek falls in on the Stard. 13
miles higher up a Small river falls in on the Lard Side which is 40
yards wide and has running water. This Stream appears to take its rise
in the South Mountains which is Situated in a Southerly direction 30 or
40 miles distant. I walked on the high countrey on the Stard. Side
found it broken & Dry Some pine, Spruce & Dwarf Cedar on the hill
sides, I Sent one man 10 mile out he reports a Similarity of Countrey
back I killed a fat buffalow a Short distance below the place we dined
2 Canoes & 6 men we left to get the meat did not join us this evening.
we Camped on the Lard point. the Cotton wood in this point is beginning
to put out a Second bud, the first being killed by the frost

[Lewis, May 25, 1805]
Saturday May 25th 1805.
The Two canoes which we left behind yesterday to bring on the meat did
not arrive this morning untill 8 A M. at which time we set out; the
wind being against us we did not proceed with so much ease or
expedition as yesterday, we imployed the toe line principally which the
banks favored the uce off; the courant strong particularly arround the
points against which the courant happened to set, and at the entrances
of the little gullies from the hills, those rivulets having brought
down considerable quantities of stone and deposited it at their
entrances forming partial barriers to the water of the river to the
distance of 40 or 50 feet from the shore, arround these the water run
with great violence, and compelled us in some instances to double our
force in order to get a perorogue or canoe by them. as we ascended the
river today I saw several gangs of the bighorned Anamals on the face of
the steep bluffs and clifts on the Stard. side and sent drewyer to kill
one which he accomplished; Capt. Clark and Bratton who were on shore
each killed one of these anamals this evening. The head and horns of
the male which Drewyer killed weighed 27 lbs. it was somewhat larger
than the male of the common deer, the boddy reather thicker deeper and
not so long in proportion to it's hight as the common deer; the head
and horns are remakably large compared with the other part of the
anamal; the whole form is much more delicate than that of the common
goat, and there is a greater disparity in the size of the male and
female than between those of either the deer or goat. the eye is large
and prominant, the puple of a deep sea green and small, the iris of a
silvery colour much like the common sheep; the bone above the eye is
remarkably prominant; the head nostrils and division of the upper lip
are precisely in form like the sheep. there legs resemble the sheep
more than any other animal with which I am acquainted tho they are more
delicately formed, like the sheep they stand forward in the knee and
the lower joint of the foreleg is smallest where it joins the knee, the
hoof is black & large in proportion, is divided, very open and roundly
pointed at the toe, like the sheep; is much hollowed and sharp on the
under edge like the Scotch goat, has two small hoofs behind each foot
below the ankle as the goat sheep and deer have. the belley, inside of
the legs, and the extremity of the rump and butocks for about two
inches arround the but of the tale, are white, as is also the tale
excet just at it's extremity on the upper side which is of a dark
brown. the tail is about three inches in length covered with short
hair, or at least not longer than that of the boddy; the outher parts
of the anamal are of a duskey brown or reather a leadcoloured light
brown; the anamal is now sheding it's winter coat which is thick not
quite as long as that of the deer and appears to be intermixed with a
considerable quantity of a fine fur which lyes next to the skin &
conceald by the coarcer hear; the shape of the hair itself is celindric
as that of the antelope is but is smaller shorter, and not compressed
or flattened as that of the deer's winter coat is, I believe this
anamal only sheds it's hair once a year. it has eight fore teeth in the
under jaw and no canine teeth. The horns are lagest at their base, and
occupy the crown of the head almost entirely. they are compressed, bent
backwards and lunated; the surface swelling into wavy rings which
incircleing the horn continue to succeed each other from the base to
the extremity and becoming less elivated and more distant as they
recede from the head. the horn for about two thirds of it's length is
filled with a porus bone which is united with the frontal bone. I
obtained the bones of the upper part of the head of this animal at the
big bone lick. the horns of the female are small, but are also compress
bent backwards and incircled with a succession of wavy rings. the horn
is of a light brown colour; when dressed it is almost white extreemly
transparent and very elastic. this horn is used by the natives in
constructing their bows; I have no doubt but it would eligant and
ucefull hair combs, and might probably answer as many valuable purposes
to civilized man, as it dose to the savages, who form their watercups
spoons and platters of it. the females have already brought forth their
young indeed from the size of the young I suppose that they produce
them early in March. they have from one to two at a birth. they feed on
grass but principally on the arromatic herbs which grow on the clifts
and inaccessable hights which they usually frequent. the places they
gerally celect to lodg is the cranies or cevices of the rocks in the
faces of inacessable precepices, where the wolf nor bear can reach them
and where indeed man himself would in many instancies find a similar
deficiency; yet these anamals bound from rock to rock and stand
apparently in the most careless manner on the sides of precipices of
many hundred feet. they are very shye and are quick of both sent and
sight.

At the distance of two 3/4 miles above our encampment of last evening
we passed a Creek 20 yard wide affording no runing water, we also
passed 7 Islands in the course of the day. The Country on either hand
is high broken and rockey; the rock is either soft brown sand stone
covered with a thin strata of limestone, or a hard black rugged
grannite, both usually in horizontal stratas and the Sandy rock
overlaying the other.- Salts and quarts still appear, some coal and
pumice stone also appear; the river bottoms are narrow and afford
scarcely any timber. the bars of the river are composed principally of
gravel, but little pine on the hills. We saw a Pole-cats this evening
it is the first we have seen for many days. buffalow are now scarce and
I begin to fear our harvest of white puddings are at an end.

[Clark, May 25, 1805]
May 25th Satturday 1805"
The two Canoes left for meat yesterday did not joint us untill 8 oClock
this morning at which time we Set out, the morning Cool & pleasent wind
a head all day from the S. W. we pass a Creek on the Lard. Side about
20 yards wide, which does not run, we also passd 7 Islands, I walked on
Shore and killed a female Ibex or big horn animal in my absence Drewyer
& Bratten killed two others, this animale is a species peculiar to this
upper part of the Missouri, the head and horns of the male which
Drewyer killed to day weighed 27 lbs it was Somewhat larger than the
Mail of the Common Deer;) The body reather thicker deeper and not So
long in proportion to its hight as the common Deer; the head and horns
of the male are remarkably large Compared with the other parts of the
animal; the whole form is much more delicate than that of the common
goat, and there is a greater disparity in the Size of the mail and
female than between those of either the deer or goat. the eye is large
and prominant, the puple of a deep Sea green and Small, the iris of a
Silvery Colour much like the common Sheep; the bone above the Eye is
remarkably prominant; the head nostrils and division of the upper lip
are precisely in form like the Sheep. their legs resemble the Sheep
more than any other animal with which I am acquainted tho they are more
delicately formed, like the Sheep they stand foward in the Knee and the
lower joint of the fore leg is Smallest where it joins the Knee, the
hoof is black and large in perpotion, is divided, very open and roundly
pointed at the toe; like the Sheep; is much hollowed and Sharp on the
under edge like the Scotch goat, has two Small Hoofs behind each foot
below the ankle as the goat Sheep and Deer have. the belley, iner Side
of the legs, and the extremity of the rump and buttocks for about two
inches 1/2 around the but of the tail, are white, as is also the tail
except just at its extremity on the upper Side which is of a dark
brown. the tail is about 3 inches in length covered with Short hair, or
at least not longer than that of the boddy; the outer part of the
animal are of a duskey brown or reather a lead coloured light brown;
the animal is now Sheding its winter coat which is thick not quite as
long as that of the Deer and appears to be inter mixt with a
considerable quantity of fine fur which lies next to the Skin and
concealed by the Coarcer hair; the Shape of the hair itself is
cylindric as that of the Antilope is, but is Smaller, Shorter and not
Compressed or flattened as that of the deers winter Coat is. I believe
this animal only Sheds it's hair once a year. it has Eight fore teeth
in the underjaw and no canine teeth. The Horns are large at their base,
and occupy the Crown of the head almost entirely, they are compressed,
bent backwards and lunated; the Surface Swelling into wavey rings which
incircleing the horn continue to Succeed each other from the base to
the extremity and becomeing less elivated and more distant as they
receed from the head. The horn for about two thirds of its length is
filled with a porus bone which is united with the frontal bone (Capt.
Lewis obtained the bones of the upper part of the head of this Animal
at the big Bone Lick in the State of Kentucky which I Saw and find to
be the Same in every respect with those of the Missouri and the Rockey
Mountains) the horns of the female are Small, but are also compressed
and bent backwards and incircled with a Succession of wavy rings. the
horn is of a light brown Colour; when Dressed it is almost white
extreamly transparent and very elastic. this horn is used by the nativs
in constructing their bows; I have no doubt of it's elegance and
usefullness in hair Combs, and might probably answer as maney valuable
purpoces to civilized man, as it does to the native indians, who form
their water Cups, Spoons and platters of it. the females have already
brought forth their young indeed from the Size of the young, I Suppose
that they produce them early in March. they have from one to two at a
birth. they feed on grass, but principally on the arramatic herbs which
grow on the Clifts and inaccessable hights which they frequent most
commonly, and the places they generally collect to lodge is the Cranies
or Cevices of the rocks in the face of inaccessable precepices, where
the wolf nor Bear Can reach them, and where indeed man himself would in
maney instances find a Similar deficiency; yet those animals bound from
rock to rock and Stand apparently in the most Careless manner on the
Side of precipices of maney hundred feet. they are very Shy and quick
of both Sent and Sight. The flesh of this animal is dark and I think
inferior to the flesh of the Common Deer, and Superior to the antilope
of the Missouri and the Columbian Plains-. In my walk of this day I saw
mountts. on either side of the river at no great distance, those
mountains appeared to be detached, and not ranges as laid down by the
Minetarrees, I also think I saw a range of high mounts. at a great
distance to the S S W. but am not certain as the horozon was not clear
enough to view it with Certainty. The country on either side is high
broken and rockey a dark brown hard rugid Stone intermixed with a Soft
white Sand Stone. the hills contain Coal or cabonated wood as below and
Some Scattering pumistone. the Sides of the river is bordered with
coars gravel, which in maney places have washed either together or down
Small brooks and forms bars at Some distance in the water, around which
the current passes with great valocity. the bottoms between hills and
river are narrow and Contain Scercely any timber. The appearence of
Salts, and bitumun Still Continue. we Saw a polecat to day being the
first which we have Seen for Some time past. The Air of this quarter is
pure and helthy. the water of the Missouri well tasted not quite So
muddy as it is below, not withstanding the last rains has raised the
river a little it is less muddy than it was before the rain.

[Lewis, May 26, 1805]
Sunday May 26th 1805.
Set out at an early hour and proceeded principally by the toe line,
using the oars mearly to pass the river in order to take advantage of
the shores. scarcely any bottoms to the river; the hills high and
juting in on both sides, to the river in many places. the stone
tumbleing from these clifts and brought down by the rivulets as
mentioned yesterday became more troublesome today. the black rock has
given place to a very soft sandstone which appears to be washed away
fast by the river, above this and towards the summits of the hills a
hard freestone of a brownish yellow colour shews itself in several
stratas of unequal thicknesses frequently overlain or incrusted by a
very thin strata of limestone which appears to be formed of concreted
shells. Capt. Clark walked on shore this morning and ascended to the
summit of the river hills he informed me on his return that he had seen
mountains on both sides of the river runing nearly parrallel with it
and at no great distance; also an irregular range of mountains on lard.
about 50 mes. distant, the extremities of which boar W and N. W. from
his station. he also saw in the course of his walk, some Elk, several
herds of the Big horn, and the large hare; the latter is common to
every part of this open country. scarcely any timber to be seen except
the few scattering pine and spruce which crown the high hills, or in
some instances grow along their sides. In the after part of the day I
also walked out and ascended the river hills which I found sufficiently
fortiegueing. on arriving to the summit one of the highest points in
the neighbourhood I thought myself well repaid for any labour; as from
this point I beheld the Rocky Mountains for the first time, I could
only discover a few of the most elivated points above the horizon, the
most remarkable of which by my pocket compass I found bore N. 65° W.
being a little to the N. of the N. W. extremity of the range of broken
mountains seen this morning by Capt. C. these points of the Rocky
Mountains were covered with snow and the sun shone on it in such manner
as to give me the most plain and satisfactory view. while I viewed
these mountains I felt a secret pleasure in finding myself so near the
head of the heretofore conceived boundless Missouri; but when I
reflected on the difficulties which this snowey barrier would most
probably throw in my way to the Pacific, and the sufferings and
hardships of myself and party in them, it in some measure
counterballanced the joy I had felt in the first moments in which I
gazed on them; but as I have always held it a crime to anticipate evils
I will believe it a good comfortable road untill I am compelled to
beleive differently. saw a few Elk & bighorns at a distance on my
return to the river I passed a creek about 20 yds. wide near it's
entrance it had a handsome little stream of runing water; in this creek
I saw several softshelled Turtles which were the first that have been
seen this season; this I believe proceeded reather from the season than
from their non existence in the portion of the river from the Mandans
hither. on the Stard. shore I killed a fat buffaloe which was very
acceptable to us at this moment; the party came up to me late in the
evening and encamped for the night on the Lard. side. it was after dark
before we finished butchering the buffaloe, and on my return to camp I
trod within five inches of a rattle snake but being in motion I passed
before he could probably put himself in a striking attitude and
fortunately escaped his bite, I struck about at random with my
espontoon being directed in some measure by his nois untill I killed
him. Our hunters had killed two of the Bighorned Anamals since I had
left them. we also passed another creek a few miles below Turtle Creek
on the Stard. 30 yds in width which also had runing water bed rockey.-
late this evening we passed a very bad rappid which reached quite
across the river, the party had considerable difficulty in ascending it
altho they doubled their crews and used both the rope and the pole.
while they were passing this rappid a female Elk and it's fawn swam
down throught the waves which ran very high, hence the name of Elk
rappids which they instantly gave this place, these are the most
considerable rappids which we have yet seen on the missouri and in
short the only place where there has appeared to be a suddon decent.
opposite to these rappids there is a high bluff and a little above on
Lard. a small cottonwood bottom in which we found sufficient timber for
our fires and encampment. here I rejoined the party after dark. The
appearances of coal in the face of the bluffs, also of birnt hills,
pumice stone salt and quarts continue as yesterday. This is truly a
desert barren country and I feel myself still more convinced of it's
being a continuation of the black hills. we have continued every day to
pass more or less old stick lodges of the Indians in the timbered
points, there are two even in this little bottom where we lye.-

[Clark, May 26, 1805]
May 26th Sunday 1805
We Set out early and proceeded as yesterday wind from the S. W. the
river enclosed with very high hills on either Side. I took one man and
walked out this morning, and ascended the high countrey to view the
mountains which I thought I Saw yesterday, from the first Sumit of the
hill I could plainly See the Mountains on either Side which I Saw
yesterday and at no great distance from me, those on the Stard Side is
an errigular range, the two extremities of which bore West and N. West
from me. those Mountains on the Lard. Side appeared to be Several
detached Knobs or mountains riseing from a leven open Countrey, at
different distances from me, from South West to South East, on one the
most S. Westerly of those Mountains there appeared to be Snow. I
crossed a Deep holler and assended a part of the plain elevated much
higher than where I first viewed the above mountains; from this point I
beheld the Rocky Mountains for the first time with Certainty, I could
only discover a fiew of the most elivated points above the horizon. the
most remarkable of which by my pocket Compas I found bore S. 60 W.
those points of the rocky Mountain were Covered with Snow and the Sun
Shown on it in Such a manner as to give me a most plain and
Satisfactory view. whilst I viewed those mountains I felt a Secret
pleasure in finding myself So near the head of the heretofore Conceived
boundless Missouri; but when I reflected on the difficulties which this
Snowey barrier would most probably throw in my way to the Pacific
Ocean, and the Sufferings and hardships of my Self and party in them,
it in Some measure Counter ballanced the joy I had felt in the first
moments in which I gazed on them; but as I have always held it little
Short of Criminality to anticipate evils I will allow it to be a good
Comfortable road untill I am Compelled to believe otherwise The high
Country in which we are at present and have been passing for Some days
I take to be a continuation of what the Indians as well as the French
Engages call the Black hills. This tract of Country So Called Consists
of a Collection of high broken and irregular hills and Short Chains of
Mountains, sometimes 100 miles in width and again becoming much
narrower, but always much higher than the Country on either Side; they
commence about the head of the Kanzas river and to the west of that
river near the Arkansaw river, from whence they take their Cource a
little to the west of N. W. approaching the Rocky Mountains obliquely
passing the river Platt near the forks, and intersepting the River
Rochejhone near the big bend of that river, and passing the Missouri at
this place-, and probably Continueing to Swell the Country as far North
as the Saskashawan river. tho they are lower here than they are
discribed to the South and may therefore termonate before they reach
the Saskashawan. the Black hills in their Course northerly appear to
approach more nearly the Rocky Mountains. I Saw a great number of white
brant, also the common brown brant, Geese of the common Size & kind and
a Small Species of geese, which differs considerably from the Common or
Canadian Goose; their necks, head and backs are considerably thicker,
Shorter and larger than the other in propotion to its Size they are
also more than a third Smaller, and their note more like that of the
brant or young goose which has not perfectly acquired his note, in all
other respect they are the Same in Colour habits and the number of
feathers in the tail, they frequently also ascocate with the large
Geese when in flocks, but never Saw them pared off with the larger or
common goose. The white Brant ascocates in very large flocks, they do
not appear to be mated or pared off as if they intended to raise their
young in this quarter, I therefore doubt whether they reside here
dureing the Summer for that purpose. this bird is larger than the
Common brown brant or 2/3 of the common goose. it is not So long by Six
inches from point to point of the wings when extended as the other; the
back head and neck are also larger and Stronger; their beak, legs and
feet are of a redish flesh coloured white. the eye of a moderate Size,
the puple of a deep Sea green encircled with a ring of yellowish brown.
it has 16 feathers of equal length in the tail their note differs but
little from the Common brant. they are of a pure white except the large
feathers of the 1st and 2d joint of the wings which are jut black.

The country which borders the river is high broken and rocky, generally
imbeded with a Soft Sand Stone higher up the hill the Stone is of a
brownish yellow hard and gritty those Stones wash down from the hills
into the river and cause the Shore to be rocky &c. which we find
troublesom to assend there is Scerce any bottom between the Hills &
river and but a fiew trees to be Seen on either Side except Scattering
pine on the Sides of the emence hills; we passed 2 Creeks on the Stard
Side both of them had running water in one of those Creek Capt Lewis
tells me he saw Soft Shell Turtle Capt Lewis in his walk killed a fat
Buffalow which we were in want of our hunters killed 2 Mountain rams or
bighorns in the evening late we passed a rapid which extended quite
across the river we assended it by the assistance of a Cord & poles on
the Lard. Side the Cliffs jut over, the opposit Side is a Small leavel
bottom, we Camped a little above in a Small grove of Cotton trees on
the Lard. Side in the rapid we saw a Dow Elk & her faun, which gave
rise to the name of Elk & faun Riffle we had a few drops of rain at
Dark.- the Salts Coal & Burnt hills & Pumicston Still Continue, game
Scerce this Countrey may with propriety I think be termed the Deserts
of America, as I do not Conceive any part can ever be Settled, as it is
deficent in water, Timber & too Steep to be tilled. We pass old Indian
lodges in the woody points everry day & 2 at our camp &c

[Lewis, May 26, 1805]
May 26, 1805.
One of the party killed a bighorned, the head and horns of which
weighed 27 lbs. a hare was also killed which weighed 81/2 lbs. the hare
are now of a plale lead brown colour-

[Lewis, May 27, 1805]
Monday May 27th 1805.
The wind blew so hard this morning that we did not sent out untill 10
A.M. we employed the chord most of the day; the river becomes more
rappid and is intercepted by shoals and a greater number of rocky
points at the mouths of the little gulies than we experienced
yesterday. the bluffs are very high steep rugged, containing
considerable quantities of stone and border the river closely on both
sides; once perhaps in the course of several miles there will be a few
acres of tolerably level land in which two or thre impoverished
cottonwood trees will be seen. great quantities of stone also lye in
the river and garnish it's borders, which appears to have tumbled from
the bluffs where the rains had washed away the sand and clay in which
they were imbeded. the bluffs are composed of irregular tho horizontal
stratas of yellow and brown or black clay, brown and yellowish white
sand, of soft yellowish white sand stone and a hard dark brown free
stone, also of large round kidneyformed and irregular seperate masses
of a hard black Iron stone, which is imbeded in the Clay and sand. some
little pine spruce and dwarf cedar on the hills. some coal or
carbonated wood still makes it's appearance in these bluffs,
pumicestone and birnt hills it's concommutants also are seen. the salts
and quarts are seen but not in such abundance. the country more broken
and barren than yesterday if possible. about midday it was very warm to
this the high bluffs and narrow channel of the river no doubt
contributed greatly. we passed a small untimbered Island this morning
on the Lard. side of the river just above our encampment of last
evening. saw a few small herds of the Bighorned anamals and two Elk
only, of the last we killed one, the river is generally about 200 yds.
wide, very rappid and has a perceptable fall or declination through
it's whole course.

This evening we encamped, for the benefit of wood, near two dead toped
cottonwood trees on the Lard. side; the dead limbs which had fallen
from these trees furnished us with a scanty supply only, and more was
not to be obtained in the neighbourhood.-

[Clark, May 27, 1805]
May 27th Monday 1805.
The wind blew hard from the S W. which detained us untill about 10
oClock, at which time we Set out and proceeded on, passed a Small
nacked Island on the Lard Side imediately above the timber in which we
Camped The river is verry Shoaley and the bad places are verry
numerous, i e at the mouth of every Drean the rocks which is a hard
dark gritey Stone is thrown out Some distance in the river which Cause
a Considerable riffle on that Side, the hills approach the river verry
Close on either Side, river narrow & no timber except Some Scattering
pine on the hills & hill Sides, the Salts, Coal, burn hills & Pumice
Stone &c. Continue, the hills are Generally Bluffs of various Coloured
earth most commonly black with different quallities stone intermixed
Some Stratums of Soft Sand Stone, Some hard, Some a dark brown & yellow
hard grit, those Stones are loosened by the earths washing from them
into the river and ultimately role down into the river, which appears
to be Crowded with them. This day is verry worm- we only Saw a fiew
Small herds of the big horn animals on the hills, and two Elk one of
which We killed, we Camped at 2 dead top trees on the Lard Side. The
river is Genly about 200 yards wide and Current very Swift to day and
has a verry perceptiable fall in all its Course- it rises a little.

[Lewis, May 28, 1805]
Tuesday May 28th 1805.
This morning we set forward at an early hour; the weather dark and
cloudy, the are smokey, had a few drops of rain; we employed the chord
generally to which we also gave the assistance of the pole at the
riffles and rocky points; these are as numerous and many of them much
worse than those we passed yesterday; arround those points the water
drives with great force, and we are obliged in many instaces to steer
our vessels through the appertures formed by the points of large sharp
rocks which reach a few inches above the surface of the water, here
sould our chord give way the bough is instantly drivin outwards by the
stream and the vessel thrown with her side on the rocks where she must
inevitably overset or perhaps be dashed to peices; our ropes are but
slender, all of them except one being made of Elk's skin and much
woarn, frequently wet and exposed to the heat of the weather are weak
and rotten; they have given way several times in the course of the day
but happily at such places that the vessel had room to wheel free of
the rocks and therefore escaped injury; with every precaution we can
take it is with much labour and infinite risk that we are enabled to
get around these points. found a new indian lodge pole today which had
been brought down by the stream, it was woarn at one end as if draged
by dogs or horses; a football also, and several other articles were
found, which have been recently brought down by the courant; these are
strong evedences of Indians being on the river above us, and probably
at no great distance; the football is such as I have seen among the
Minetaries and therefore think it most probable that they are a band of
the Minetaries of Fort de Prarie. the river country &c continued much
as yesterday untill late in the evening when we arrived at the entrance
of a large Creek discharges itself on the Stard. side, is 35 Yd. wide
and contains runing water; here the hills recede from the river on both
sides, the bottoms extensive particularly on the Stard. side where the
hills are comparitively low and open into three large vallies which
extend for a considerable distance in a Northwardly direction; here
also the river spreads to more than 3 times it's former width and is
filled with a number of small and handsome Islands covered with
cottonwood some timber also in the bottoms, the land again fertile.
These appearances were quite reviving after the drairy country through
which we had been passing. Capt. C. walked on shore in the early part
of the day and killed a big horned anamal; he saw a great number of
them as well as ourselves in the broken country. at 10 A.M. a few drops
of rain again fell and were attended with distant thunder which is the
first we have heated since we left the Mandans.- This evening we
encamped on Stard. opposite to the entrance of a small Creek. I beleive
the bighorn have their young at a very early season, say early in March
for they appear now to be half grown. One of the party saw a very large
bear today but being some distance from the river and no timber to
conceal him he did not think proper to fire on him.

[Clark, May 28, 1805]
May 28th Tuesday 1805
a Cloudy morning Some fiew drops of rain and verry Smokey wind from the
S. W. we Set out at an early hour, the Shoaley places are verry
numerous and Some bad to get around we have to make use of the Cord &
Poles, and our tow. ropes are all except one of Elkskin, & Stretch and
Sometimes brake which indanger the Perogues or Canoe, as it imedeately
turns and if any rock Should chance to be below, the rapidity of the
current would turn her over, She Should chance to Strike the rock we
observe great Caution at those places.

I walked on Shore found the Countrey ruged and as described yesterday,
I Saw great numbers of the Big horned animals, one of which I killed
their fauns are nearly half grown- one of the Party Saw a verry large
bear, picked up on the Shore a pole which had been made use of by the
Nativs for lodge poles, & haul'd by dogs it is new and is a Certain
Sign of the Indians being on the river above a foot ball and Several
other articles are also found to Substantiate this oppinion-. at 1
oClock we had a few drops of rain and Some thunder whic is the first
thunder we have had Sinc we Set out from Fort Mandan; at 10 miles the
the hills begin to widen & the river Spreds & is crouded with Islands
the bottoms Contain Some Scattering Cotton wood the Islands also
Contain timber- passed a Creek of running water on the Stard Side about
35 yards wide and camped imedeately opposit to a Small Creek on the
Lard. Side we call Bull Creek from the Circumstance of a Buffalow Bull
swiming from the opposit Side and comeing out of the river imedeately
across one of the Perogues without Sinking or injureing any thing in
the Perogue, and passing with great violence thro our Camp in the night
makeing 3 angles without hurting a man, altho they lay in every
direction, and it was very dark The Creek below 35 yards wide I call
Thompsons Creek after a valuable member of our party- this Creek
contains a Greater preportion of running water than Common.

[Lewis, May 29, 1805]
Wednesday May 29th 1905.
Last night we were all allarmed by a large buffaloe Bull, which swam
over from the opposite shore and coming along side of the white
perogue, climbed over it to land, he then alarmed ran up the bank in
full speed directly towards the fires, and was within 18 inches of the
heads of some of the men who lay sleeping before the centinel could
allarm him or make him change his course, still more alarmed, he now
took his direction immediately towards our lodge, passing between 4
fires and within a few inches of the heads of one range of the men as
they yet lay sleeping, when he came near the tent, my dog saved us by
causing him to change his course a second time, which he did by turning
a little to the right, and was quickly out of sight, leaving us by this
time all in an uproar with our guns in or hands, enquiring of each
other the case of the alarm, which after a few moments was explained by
the centinel; we were happy to find no one hirt. The next morning we
found that the buffaloe in passing the perogue had trodden on a rifle,
which belonged to Capt. Clark's black man, who had negligently left her
in the perogue, the rifle was much bent, he had also broken the
spindle, pivit, and shattered the stock of one of the bluntderbushes on
board, with this damage I felt well content, happey indeed, that we had
sustaned no further injury. it appears that the white perogue, which
contains our most valuable stores, is attended by some evil gennii.
This morning we set out at an early hour and proceded as usual by the
Chord. at the distance of 21/2 miles passed a handsome river which
discharged itself on the Lard. side, I walked on shore and acended this
river about a mile and a half in order to examine it. I found this
river about 100 yds. wide from bank to bank, the water occupying about
75 yard. the bed was formed of gravel and mud with some sand; it
appeared to contain much more water as the Muscle-Shell river, was more
rappid but equally navigable; there were no large stone or rocks in
it's bed to obstruct the navigation; the banks were low yet appeared
seldom to overflow; the water of this River is Clear than any we have
met with great abundance of the Argalia or Bighorned animals in the
high country through which this river passes Cap. C who assended this
R. much higher than I did has thought proper to call it Judieths River.
The bottoms of this stream as far as I could see were wider and
contained more timber than the Missouri; here I saw some box alder
intermixed with the Cottonwood willow rose bushes and honeysuckle with
some red willow constitute the undergrowth. on the Missouri just above
the entrance of the Big Horn River I counted the remains of the fires
of 126 Indian lodges which appeared to be of very recent date perhaps
12 or 15 days. Capt. Clark also saw a large encampent just above the
entrance of this river on the Stard. side of reather older date,
probably they were the same Indians. The Indian woman with us exmined
the mockersons which we found at these encampments and informed us that
they were not of her nation the Snake Indians, but she beleived they
were some of the Indians who inhabit the country on this side of Rocky
Mountains and North of the Missoury and I think it most probable that
they were the Minetaries of Fort de Prarie. At the distance of six 1/2
ms. from our encampment of last night we passed a very bad rappid to
which we gave the name of the Ash rappid from a few trees of that wood
growing near them; this is the first ash I have seen for a great
distance. at this place the hills again approach the river closely on
both sides, and the same seen which we had on the 27th and 28th in the
morning again presents itself, and the rocky points and riffles reather
more numerous and worse; there was but little timber; salts coal &c
still appear. today we passed on the Stard. side the remains of a vast
many mangled carcases of Buffalow which had been driven over a
precipice of 120 feet by the Indians and perished; the water appeared
to have washed away a part of this immence pile of slaughter and still
their remained the fragments of at least a hundred carcases they
created a most horrid stench. in this manner the Indians of the
Missouri distroy vast herds of buffaloe at a stroke; for this purpose
one of the most active and fleet young men is scelected and disguised
in a robe of buffaloe skin, having also the skin of the buffaloe's head
with the years and horns fastened on his head in form of a cap, thus
caparisoned he places himself at a convenient distance between a herd
of buffaloe and a precipice proper for the purpose, which happens in
many places on this river for miles together; the other indians now
surround the herd on the back and flanks and at a signal agreed on all
shew themselves at the same time moving forward towards the buffaloe;
the disguised indian or decoy has taken care to place himself
sufficiently nigh the buffaloe to be noticed by them when they take to
flight and runing before them they follow him in full speede to the
precepice, the cattle behind driving those in front over and seeing
them go do not look or hesitate about following untill the whole are
precipitated down the precepice forming one common mass of dead an
mangled carcases; the decoy in the mean time has taken care to secure
himself in some cranney or crivice of the clift which he had previously
prepared for that purpose. the part of the decoy I am informed is
extreamly dangerous, if they are not very fleet runers the buffaloe
tread them under foot and crush them to death, and sometimes drive them
over the precepice also, where they perish in common with the
buffaloe.- we saw a great many wolves in the neighbourhood of these
mangled carcases they were fat and extreemly gentle, Capt. C. who was
on shore killed one of them with his espontoon. just above this place
we came too for dinner opposite the entrance of a bold runing river 40
yds. wide which falls in on Lard. side. this stream we called slaughter
river. it's bottoms are but narrow and contain scarcely any timber. our
situation was a narrow bottom on the Stard. possessing some cottonwood.
soon after we landed it began to blow & rain, and as there was no
appearance of even wood enough to make our fires for some distance
above we determined to remain here untill the next morning, and
accordingly fixed our camp and gave each man a small dram.
notwithstanding the allowance of sperits we issued did not exceed 1/2
pn. man several of them were considerably effected by it; such is the
effects of abstaining for some time from the uce of sperituous liquors;
they were all very merry.- The hunters killed an Elk this evening, and
Capt. C. killed two beaver.

[Clark, May 29, 1805]
May 29th Wednesday 1805
In the last night we were alarmed by a Buffalow which Swam from the
opposit Shore landed opposit the Perogue in which Capt Lewis & my Self
were in he Crossed the perogue, and went with great force up to the
fire where Several men were Sleeping and was 18 inches of their heads,
when one man Sitting up allarmed him and he turned his course along the
range of men as they lay, passing between 4 fires and within a fiew
Inches of Some of the mens heads as they lay imediately in a direction
to our lodge about which Several men were lying. our Dog flew out & he
changed his course & passed without doeing more damage than bend a
rifle & brakeing hir Stock and injureying one of the blunder busts in
the perogue as he passed through- We Set out this morning at the usial
hour & proceeded on at 21/2 miles passed the mouth of a river ____
yards wide, discharging a great quantity of water, and Containing more
wood in its bottoms than the Missouri- this river Capt Lewis walked up
for a Short distance & he Saw an old encampment of Indians (I also saw
large encampment on the Stard Side at the mouth of a Small Creek of
about 100 Lodges which appeared to be 5 or 6 weeks past, the Indian
woman examined the mockersons &c. and told us they were the Indians
which resided below the rocky mountains & to the North of this
river,that her nation make their mockersons differently) at 61/2 miles
passed a considerable rapid at which place the hills approach near the
river on both Sides, leaveing a narrow bottom on the Stard. Side, (ash
rapid) and continue Close all day but little timber, I walked on the
bank in the evening and saw the remains of a number of buffalow, which
had been drove down a Clift of rocks I think from appearances that
upwards of 100 of those animals must have perished here, Great numbers
of wolves were about this place & verry jentle I killed one of them
with my Spear. The hills above ash rapid Contains more rock and Coal,
and the more rapid points. we Came too for Dinner opposit the enterence
of a Small river which falls in on the Lard Side and is about ____
yards wide, has a bold running Stream, Soon after we Came too it began
to rain & blow hard, and as we were in a good harbor & Small point of
woods on the Stard Side, and no timber for some distance above, induced
us to conclude to Stay all night. we gave the men a dram, altho verry
Small it was Sufficent to effect Several men. one of our hunters killed
an elk this evening- I killed 2 beaver on the Side of the bank a table
Spoon full of water exposed to the air in a Saucer would avaperate in
36 hours when the mercury did not Stand higher than the temperate point
in the heat of the day.

[Lewis, May 30, 1805]
Thursday May 30th 1805.
The rain which commenced last evening continued with little
intermission untill 11this morning when we set out; the high wind which
accompanied the rain rendered it impracticable to procede earlyer. more
rain has now fallen than we have experienced since the 15th of
September last. many circumstances indicate our near approach to a
country whos climate differs considerably from that in which we have
been for many months. the air of the open country is asstonishingly dry
as well as pure. I found by several experiments that a table spoon full
of water exposed to the air in a saucer would avaporate in 36 hours
when the murcury did not stand higher than the temperate point at the
greatest heat of the day; my inkstand so frequently becoming dry put me
on this experiment. I also observed the well seasoned case of my
sextant shrunk considerably and the joints opened. The water of the
river still continues to become clearer and notwithstanding the rain
which has fallen it is still much clearer than it was a few days past.
this day we proceded with more labour and difficulty than we have yet
experienced; in addition to the imbarrasments of the rappid courant,
riffles, & rockey point which were as bad if not worse than yesterday,
the banks and sides of the bluff were more steep than usual and were
now rendered so slippery by the late rain that the men could scarcely
walk. the chord is our only dependance for the courant is too rappid to
be resisted with the oar and the river too deep in most places for the
pole. the earth and stone also falling from these immence high bluffs
render it dangerous to pass under them. the wind was also hard and
against us. our chords broke several times today but happily without
injury to the vessels. we had slight showers of rain through the course
of the day, the air was could and rendered more disagreeable by the
rain. one of the party ascended the river hills and reported on his
return that there was snow intermixed with the rain which fell on the
hights; he also informed us that the country was level a little back
from the river on both sides. there is now no timber on the hills, an
only a few scattering cottonwood, ash, box Alder and willows to be seen
along the river. in the course of the day we passed several old
encampment of Indians, from the apparent dates of which we conceived
that they were the several encampments of a band of about 100 lodges
who were progressing slowly up the river; the most recent appeared to
have been evacuated about 5 weeks since. these we supposed to be the
Minetares or black foot Indians who inhabit the country watered by the
Suskashawan and who resort to the establishment of Fort de Prarie, no
part of the Missouri from the Minetaries to this place furnishes a
perminent residence for any nation yet there is no part of it but what
exhibits appearances of being occasionally visited by some nation on
hunting excurtions. The Minnetares of the Missoury we know extend their
excurtions on the S. side as high as the yellowstone river; the
Assinniboins still higher on the N. side most probably as high as about
Porcupine river and from thence upwards most probably as far as the
mountains by the Minetares of Fort de Prarie and the Black Foot Indians
who inhabit the S. fork of the Suskashawan. I say the Missouri to the
Rocky mountains for I am convinced that it penetrates those mountains
for a considerable distance.- Two buffaloe killed this evening a little
above our encampment.

[Clark, May 30, 1805]
May 30th Thursday 1805
The rain conmmenced yesterday evining, and continued moderately through
the course of the night, more rain has now fallin than we have
experienced Since the 15th of September last, the rain continued this
morning, and the wind too high for us to proceed, untill about 11
oClock at which time we Set out, and proceeded on with great labour, we
were obliged to make use of the Tow rope & the banks were So muddey &
Slipery that the men could Scercely walk not with Standing we proceeded
on as well as we could wind hard from the N W. in attempting to assend
a rapid our toe Cord broke & we turned without injurey, those rapids or
Shoaley points are noumerous and dificuelt, one being at the mouth of
every drean Some little rain at times all day one man assended the high
Countrey and it was raining & Snowing on those hills, the day has
proved to be raw and Cold. Back from the river is tollerably leavel, no
timber of any kind on the hills, and only a fiew Scattering cotton
willow & ash near the river, much hard rock; & rich earth, the Small
portion of rain which has fallen causes the rich earth as deep as is
wet to Slip into the river or bottoms &c.

we discover in Several places old encampments of large bands of
Indians, a fiew weeks past and appear to be makeing up the river- Those
Indians we believe to be the Blackfoot Inds. or Menetares who inhabit
the heads of the Saskashowin & north of this place and trade a little
in the Fort de Prarie establishments. we Camped in a grove of Cotton
trees on the Stard Side, river rise 11/2 In.

[Lewis, May 31, 1805]
Friday May 31st 1805.
This morning we proceeded at an early hour with the two perogues
leaving the canoes and crews to bring on the meat of the two buffaloe
that were killed last evening and which had not been brought in as it
was late and a little off the river. soon after we got under way it
began to rain and continued untill meridian when it ceased but still
remained cloudy through the ballance of the day. The obstructions of
rocky points and riffles still continue as yesterday; at those places
the men are compelled to be in the water even to their armpits, and the
water is yet very could, and so frequent are those point that they are
one fourth of their time in the water, added to this the banks and
bluffs along which they are obliged to pass are so slippery and the mud
so tenacious that they are unable to wear their mockersons, and in that
situation draging the heavy burthen of a canoe and walking ocasionally
for several hundred yards over the sharp fragments of rocks which
tumble from the clifts and garnish the borders of the river; in short
their labour is incredibly painfull and great, yet those faithfull
fellows bear it without a murmur. The toe rope of the white perogue,
the only one indeed of hemp, and that on which we most depended, gave
way today at a bad point, the perogue swung and but slightly touched a
rock, yet was very near overseting; I fear her evil gennii will play so
many pranks with her that she will go to the bottomm some of those
days.- Capt. C. walked on shore this morning but found it so
excessively bad that he shortly returned. at 12 OCk. we came too for
refreshment and gave the men a dram which they received with much
cheerfullness, and well deserved.

The hills and river Clifts which we passed today exhibit a most
romantic appearance. The bluffs of the river rise to the hight of from
2 to 300 feet and in most places nearly perpendicular; they are formed
of remarkable white sandstone which is sufficiently soft to give way
readily to the impression of water; two or thre thin horizontal stratas
of white free-stone, on which the rains or water make no impression,
lie imbeded in these clifts of soft stone near the upper part of them;
the earth on the top of these Clifts is a dark rich loam, which forming
a graduly ascending plain extends back from 1/2 a mile to a mile where
the hills commence and rise abruptly to a hight of about 300 feet more.
The water in the course of time in decending from those hills and
plains on either side of the river has trickled down the soft sand
clifts and woarn it into a thousand grotesque figures, which with the
help of a little immagination and an oblique view at a distance, are
made to represent eligant ranges of lofty freestone buildings, having
their parapets well stocked with statuary; collumns of various
sculpture both grooved and plain, are also seen supporting long
galleries in front of those buildings; in other places on a much nearer
approach and with the help of less immagination we see the remains or
ruins of eligant buildings; some collumns standing and almost entire
with their pedestals and capitals; others retaining their pedestals but
deprived by time or accident of their capitals, some lying prostrate an
broken othes in the form of vast pyramids of connic structure bearing a
sereis of other pyramids on their tops becoming less as they ascend and
finally terminating in a sharp point. nitches and alcoves of various
forms and sizes are seen at different hights as we pass. a number of
the small martin which build their nests with clay in a globular form
attatched to the wall within those nitches, and which were seen
hovering about the tops of the collumns did not the less remind us of
some of those large stone buildings in the U States. the thin stratas
of hard freestone intermixed with the soft sandstone seems to have
aided the water in forming this curious scenery. As we passed on it
seemed as if those seens of visionary inchantment would never have and
end; for here it is too that nature presents to the view of the
traveler vast ranges of walls of tolerable workmanship, so perfect
indeed are those walls that I should have thought that nature had
attempted here to rival the human art of masonry had I not recollected
that she had first began her work. These walls rise to the hight in
many places of 100 feet, are perpendicular, with two regular faces and
are from one to 12 feet thick, each wall retains the same thickness at
top which it possesses at bottom. The stone of which these walls are
formed is black, dence and dureable, and appears to be composed of a
large portion of earth intermixed or cemented with a small quantity of
sand and a considerable portion of talk or quarts. these stones are
almost invariably regular parallelepipeds, of unequal sizes in the
walls, but equal in their horizontal ranges, at least as to debth.
these are laid regularly in ranges on each other like bricks, each
breaking or covering the interstice of the two on which it rests. thus
the purpendicular interstices are broken, and the horizontal ones
extend entire throughout the whole extent of the walls. These stones
seem to bear some proportion to the thickness of the walls in which
they are employed, being larger in the thicker walls; the greatest
length of the parallelepiped appears to form the thickness of the
thiner walls, while two or more are employed to form that of the
thicker walls. These walls pass the river in several places, rising
from the water's edge much above the sandstone bluffs, which they seem
to penetrate; thence continuing their course on a streight line on
either side of the river through the gradually ascending plains, over
which they tower to the hight of from ten to seventy feet until) they
reach the hills, which they finally enter and conceal themselves. these
walls sometimes run parallel to each other, with several ranges near
each other, and at other times interscecting each other at right
angles, having the appearance of the walls of ancient houses or
gardens. I walked on shore this evening and examined these walls
minutely and preserved a specimine of the stone. I found the face of
many of the river hills formed of Clifts of very excellent free stone
of a light yellowish brown colour; on these clifts I met with a species
of pine which I had never seen, it differs from the pitchpine in the
particular of it's leaf and cone, the first being vastly shorter, and
the latter considerably longer and more pointed. I saw near those
bluffs the most beautiful) fox that I ever beheld, the colours appeared
to me to be a fine orrange yellow, white and black, I endevoured to
kill this anamal but it discovered me at a considerable distance, and
finding that I could get no nearer, I fired on him as he ran, and
missed him; he concealed himself under the rocks of the clift; it
appeared to me to be about the size of the common red fox of the
Atlantic states, or reather smaller than the large fox common to this
country; convinced I am that it is a distinct species. The appearance
of coal continues but in small quantities, but little appearance of
birnt hills or pumice stones the mineral salts have in some measure
abated and no quarts. we saw a great number of the Bighorn some mule
deer and a few buffaloe and Elk, no antelopes or common deer. Drewyer
who was with me and myself killed two bighorned anamals; the sides of
the Clifts where these anamals resort much to lodg, have the peculiar
smell of the sheepfolds. the party killed in addition to our hunt 2
buffaloe and an Elk. the river today has been from 150 to 250 yds. wide
but little timber today on the river.

[Clark, May 31, 1805]
May 31st Friday 1805.
A cloudy morning we dispatched all the Canoes to Collect the meat of 2
Buffalow killed last night a head and a little off the river, and
proceeded on with the perogues at an early hour. I attempted to walk on
Shore Soon found it verry laborious as the mud Stuck to my mockersons &
was verry Slippery. I return'd on board. it continued to rain
moderately untill about 12 oClock when it ceased, & Continued Cloudy.
the Stone on the edge of the river continue to form verry Considerable
rapids, which are troublesom & dificuelt to pass, our toe rope which we
are obliged to make use of altogether broke & we were in Some danger of
turning over in the perogue in which I was, we landed at 12 and
refreshed the men with a dram, our men are obliged to under go great
labour and fatigue in assending this part of the Missouri, as they are
compelled from the rapidity of the Current in many places to walk in
the water & on Slippery hill Sides or the Sides of rocks, on Gravel &
thro a Stiff mud bear footed, as they Cannot keep on Mockersons from
the Stiffness of the mud & decline of the Slipy. hills Sides- the Hills
and river Clifts of this day exhibit a most romantick appearance on
each Side of the river is a white Soft Sand Stone bluff which rises to
about half the hight of the hills, on the top of this Clift is a black
earth on points, in maney places this Sand Stone appears like antient
ruins some like elegant buildings at a distance, Some like Towers &c.
&c. in maney places of this days march we observe on either Side of the
river extraodanary walls of a black Semented Stone which appear to be
regularly placed one Stone on the other, Some of those walls run to the
hite of 100 feet, they are from about 1 foot to 12 feet thick and are
perpendicular, those walls Commence at the waters edge & in Some places
meet at right angles- those walls appear to Continue their Course into
the Sand Clifts, the Stones which form those walls are of different
Sizes all Squar edged, Great numbers has fallen off from the walls near
the river which cause the walls to be of uneaquil hite, in the evening
the Countrey becomes lower and the bottoms wider, no timber on the
uplands, except a few Cedar & pine on the Clifts a few Scattering
Cotton trees on the points in the river bottoms, The apparance of Coal
Continus Capt Lewis walked on Shore & observed a Species of Pine we had
never before Seen, with a Shorter leaf than Common & the bur different,
he also Collected Some of the Stone off one of the walls which appears
to be a Sement of Isin glass black earth we Camped on the Stard Side in
a Small timbered bottom above the mouth of a Creek on the Stard Side
our hunters killed, 2 animals with big horns, 2 Buffalow & an Elk, we
Saw Great numbers of those big horned animals on the Clifts, but fiew
Buffalow or Elk, no antelope, a fiew mule deer, Saw a fox to day. The
river rises a little it is from 150 to 250 yds. wide

[Clark, May 31, 1805]
May 31st Friday 1805
Cloudy morning, we proceeded on at an early hour with the two Perogues
leaving the Canoes and crews to bring on the meat of two Buffalow that
were killed last evening and which had not been brought in as it was
late and a little off the river. Soon after we got under way it began
to rain and Continued untill 12 oClock when it Seased but Still
remained cloudy through the ballance of the day. the obstructions of
rocky points and riffles Still continue as yesterday; at those places
the men are compelled to be in the water even to their armpits, and the
water is yet very cold, and So frequent are those points that they are
one fourth of their time in the water. added to this the bank and bluff
along which they are obliged to pass are So Slippery and the mud So
tenatious that they are unable to bare their mockersons, and in that
Situation dragging the heavy burthen of a Canoe and Walking
occasionally for Several hundred yards over the Sharp fragments of
rocks which tumble from the Clifts; and in Short their labour is
incredibly painfull and great, yet those faithfull fellows bear it
without a murmer.

The toe rope of the white perogue, the only one indeed of hemp, and
that on which we most depended, gave way to day at a bad point, the
perogue Swong and but slightly touched a rock, yet was very near
oversetting; I fear her evil Ginnie will play So many pranks with her
that She will go to the bottom Some of those days.

I attempted to walk on Shore this morning but found it so excessivily
bad that I Soon returned on board. at 12 oClock we came too for
refreshment and gave the men a dram which they received with much
Chearfulness, and well deserved all wet and disagreeable. Capt. Lewis
walked on Shore, he informed one that he Saw "the most butifull fox in
the world" the Colour appeared to him to be of a fine Orrange yellow,
white and black, he fired at this fox running and missed him, he
appeared to be about the size of the common red fox of the united
States, or rather smaller.

The hills and river clifts which we pass to day exhibit a most romantic
appearance. The Bluffs of the river rise to the hight of from 2 to 300
feet and in most places nearly perpendicular; they are formed of
remarkable white Sandstone which is Sufficiently Soft to give way
readily to the impression of water; two or three thin horizontal
Stratas of white free Stone, on which the rains or water make no
impression, lie imbeded in those clifts of Soft Stone near the upper
part of them; the earth on the top of these clifts is a dark rich loam,
which forming a gradual ascending plain extend back from 1/2 a mile to
a mile where the hills commence and rise abruptly to the hight of about
300 feet more. The water in the Course of time acecending from those
hills and plains on either Side of the river has trickled down the Soft
Sand Clifts and woarn it into a thousand grotesque figures; which with
the help of a little imagination and an oblique view at a distance are
made to represent elegant ranges of lofty freestone buildings, haveing
their parapets well Stocked with Statuary; Colloms of various
Sculptures both Grooved and plain, are also Seen Supporting long
galleries in part of those buildings; in other places on a much nearer
approach and with the with the help of less immagination we See the
remains of ruins of eligant buildings; Some Collumns Standing and
almost entire with their pedestals and Capitals, others retaining their
pedestals but deprived by time or accedint of their capitals, Some
lying prostrate and broken, others in the form of vast Pyramids of
connic Structure bearing a Serious of other pyramids on their tops
becomeing less as they ascend and finally termonateing in a Sharp
point. nitches and alcoves of various forms and Sizes are Seen at
different hights as we pass. a number of the Small martin which build
their nests with Clay of a globular form attached to the wall within
those nitches, and which were Seen hovering about the top of the
collumns did not the less remind us of Some of those large Stone
buildings in the United States. The thin Stratas of hard free Stone
intermixed with the Soft Sand Stone Seems to have aided the water in
forming this Curious Scenery.

as we passed on it Seemed as if those Seens of Visionary enchantment
would never have an end; for here it is too that nature presents to the
view of the traveler vast ranges of walls of tolerable workmanship, So
perfect indeed are those walls that I Should have thought that nature
had attempted here to rival the human art of Masonry had I not
recollected that She had first began her work. These walls rise to the
hight in many places of 100 feet, are perpindicular, with two regular
faces, and are from one to 12 feet thick, each wall retains the Same
thickness to the top which it possesses at bottom. The Stone of which
these walls are formed is black, dense and dureable, and appears to be
Composed of a large portion of earth intermixed or Cemented with a
Small quantity of Sand and a Considerable portion of quarts. these
Stones are almost invariably regular parallelepipeds, of unequal Sizes
in the wall, but equal in their horizontal ranges, at least as to
debth. These are laid regularly in ranges on each other like bricks,
each breaking or covering this interstice of the two on which it rests,
thus the pirpendicular interstices are broken, and the horizontal ones
extend entire throughout the whole extent of the walls. These Stones
Seam to bear Some proportion to the thickness of the walls in which
they are employd, being larger in the thicker walls; the greatest
length of the parallelepiped appear to form the thickness of the thiner
walls, while two or more are employed to form that of the thicker
walls. Those walls pass the river in Several places rising from the
waters edge much above the Sand Stone Bluffs, which they Seam to
penetrate; thence Continueing their course on a Streight line on either
Side of the river thorough the gradually ascending plains over which
they tower to the hight of from ten to 90 feet untill they reach the
hills which they finally enter and Conceal themselves. these walls
Sometimes run parallel to each other, with Several ranges near each
other, and at other times intersecting each other at right angles,
haveing the appearance of the walls of ancient houses or gardins. both
Capt Lewis and My self walked on Shore this evening and examined those
walls minutely and preserved a Specimine of the Stone.- I found many
clifts of very excellent free Stone of a light yellowish brown Colour.
Capt. Lewis observed a Species of pine which I had never Seen, it
differs from the pitch pine in the particular of its leaf and Cone, the
first being partly Shorter, and the latter considerably longer and more
pointed. The appearance of Coal Continues but in Smaller quantities,
but little appearance of burnt hills or pumicestone. the mineral Salt
in Some measure have abated and no quarts. we Saw a great number of the
Big Horn, Some mule deer, and a few Buffalow and Elk, no antelopes or
Common Deer-. Capt. Lewis killed a Big horn animal. the party killed 2
Buffalow one Elk and a Big horn or Ibex to day-. The river has been
from 150 to 250 yards wide but little timber on the river to day. river
less muddy than it was below.

[Lewis, June 1, 1805]
Saturday June 1st 1805
The moring was cloudy and a few drops of rain. Set out at an early hour
and proceeded as usual by the help of our chords. the river Clifts and
bluffs not so high as yesterday and the country becomes more level. a
mountain or a part of the N. Mountain appears to approach the river
within 8 or 10 ms. bearing N. from our encampment of the last evening.
Capt C. who walked on shore today informed me that the river hills were
much lower than usual and that from the tops of those hills he had a
delightfull view of rich level and extensive plains on both sides of
the river; in those plains, which in many places reach the river
clifts, he observed large banks of pure sand which appeared to have
been driven by the S W. winds from the river bluffs and there
deposited. the plains are more fertile at some distance from the river
than near the bluffs where the surface of the earth is very generally
covered with small smothe pebbles which have the appearance of having
been woarn by the agitation of the waters in which they were no doubt
once immerced. A range of high Mountains appear to the S. W. at a
considerable distance covered with snow, they appear to run Westerly.
no timber appears on the highlands; but much more than yesterday on the
river and Islands. rockey points and shoals less freequent than
yesterday but some of them quite as bad when they did occur. the river
from 2 to 400 yards wide, courant more gentle and still becoming
clearer. game is by no means as abundant as below; we killed one male
bighorn and a mule deer today; saw buffalow at a distance in the plains
particularly near a small Lake on Lard. side about 8 ms. distant. some
few drops of rain again fell this evening. we passed six Islands and
encamped on the 7th; they are all small but contain some timber. the
wind has been against us all day.- I saw the choke cherry the yellow
and red courant bushes; the wild rose appears now to be in full bloom
as are also the prickley pear which are numerous in these plains.- We
also saw some Indian Lodges of sticks today which did not appear to
have been long evacuated.- some coal appear in the bluffs.

[Clark, June 1, 1805]
June 1st Satterday 1805
a Cloudy morning we Set out at an early hour and proseeded on as usial
with the toe rope The Countrey appears to be lower and the Clifts not
So high or Common, a mountain or a part of the north Mountain about 8
or 10 miles N. of this place, I walked on Shore to day found the Plains
much lower than we have Seen them and on the top we behold an extencive
plain on both Sides, in this plain I observed maney noles of fine Sand
which appeared to have blown from the river bluffs and collected at
these points Those plains are fertile near the river a great no. of
Small Stone, I observed at Some distance to the S. W. a high mountain
which appears to bear westerly The Cole appear as usial, more Cotton
trees Scattered on the Shores & Islands than yesterday- no timber on
the high land, the river from 2 to 400 yards wide & current more jentle
than yesterday but fiew bad rapid points to day- the wild animals not
So plenty as below we only killed a ram & mule Deer to day, we Saw
Buffalow at a distance in the plains, particularly near a Lake on the
Lard. Side about 8 miles distant from the river- We passed Six Islands
and encamped on the 7th all those Islands are Small but contain Some
timber on them The river riseing a little Wind to day from the S. W.
Som fiew drops of rain in the morning and also in the evening, flying
Clouds all day

Saw Several Indian camps made of Sticks & bark Set up on end and do not
appear to belong evacuated- The roses are in full bloome, I observe
yellow berries, red berry bushes Great numbers of Wild or choke
Cheries, prickley pares are in blossom & in great numbers

[Lewis, June 2, 1805]
Sunday June 2ed 1805
The wind blew violently last night and was attended by a slight shower
of rain; the morning was fair and we set out at an early hour. imployed
the chord as usual the greater part of the day. the courant was strong
tho regular, and the banks afforded us good toeing. the wind was hard
and against us yet we proceded with infinitely more ease than the two
precedeing days. The river bluffs still continue to get lower and the
plains leveler and more extensive; the timber on the river increases in
quantity; the country in all other rispects much as discribed
yesterday. I think we are now completely above the black hills we had a
small shower of rain today but it lasted only a few minutes and was
very moderate. Game becomeing more abundant this morning and I thought
it best now to loose no time or suffer an opportunity to escape in
providing the necessary quantity of Elk's skins to cover my leather
boat which I now expect I shall be obliged to use shortly. Accordingly
I walked on shore most of the day with some of the hunters for that
purpose and killed 6 Elk 2 buffale 2 Mule deer and a bear. these
anamals were all in good order we therefore took as much of the meat as
our canoes and perogues could conveniently carry. the bear was very
near catching Drewyer; it also pursued Charbono who fired his gun in
the air as he ran but fortunately eluded the vigilence of the bear by
secreting himself very securely in the bushes untill Drewyer finally
killed it by a shot in the head; the shot indeed that will conquer the
farocity of those tremendious anamals.- in the course of the day we
passed 9 Islands all of them small and most of them containing some
timber.

we came too on the Lard. side in a handsome bottom of small cottonwood
timber opposite to the entrance of a very considerable river; but it
being too late to examine these rivers minutely to night we determined
to remain here untill the morning, and as the evening was favourable to
make some obsevations.-

[Clark, June 2, 1805]
June 2nd Sunday 1805
we had a hard wind and a little rain last night, this morning fair we
Set out at an early hour, wind from the S W. Some little rain to day
wind hard a head, the Countrey much like that of yesterday as discribed
Capt Lewis walked on Shore, himself & the hunters killed 6 Elk & a Bear
and 2 mule deer, and 2 buffalow which was all in good order a beaver
also killed to day, passed 9 Islands to day the Current Swift but
regular, we Camped on the Lard Side at the forks of the river the
Currents & Sizes of them we Could not examine this evening a fair night
we took Some Luner observations of moon & Stears

[Lewis, June 3, 1805]
Monday June 3rd 1805
This morning early we passed over and formed a camp on the point formed
by the junction of the two large rivers. here in the course of the day
I continued my observations as are above stated. An interesting
question was now to be determined; which of these rivers was the
Missouri, or that river which the Minnetares call Amahte Arz zha or
Missouri, and which they had discribed to us as approaching very near
to the Columbia river. to mistake the stream at this period of the
season, two months of the traveling season having now elapsed, and to
ascend such stream to the rocky Mountain or perhaps much further before
we could inform ourselves whether it did approach the Columbia or not,
and then be obliged to return and take the other stream would not only
loose us the whole of this season but would probably so dishearten the
party that it might defeat the expedition altogether. convinced we were
that the utmost circumspection and caution was necessary in deciding on
the stream to be taken. to this end an investigation of both streams
was the first thing to be done; to learn their widths, debths,
comparitive rappidity of their courants and thence the comparitive
bodies of water furnished by each; accordingly we dispatched two light
canoes with three men in each up those streams; we also sent out
several small parties by land with instructions to penetrate the
country as far as they conveniently can permiting themselves time to
return this evening and indeavour if possible to discover the distant
bearing of those rivers by ascending the rising grounds. between the
time of my A.M. and meridian Capt. C & myself stroled out to the top of
the hights in the fork of these rivers from whence we had an extensive
and most inchanting view; the country in every derection around us was
one vast plain in which innumerable herds of Buffalow were seen
attended by their shepperds the wolves; the solatary antelope which now
had their young were distributed over it's face; some herds of Elk were
also seen; the verdure perfectly cloathed the ground, the weather was
pleasent and fair; to the South we saw a range of lofty mountains which
we supposed to be a continuation of the S. Mountains, streching
themselves from S. E. to N. W. terminating abbrubtly about S. West from
us; these were partially covered with snow; behind these Mountains and
at a great distance, a second and more lofty range of mountains
appeared to strech across the country in the same direction with the
others, reaching from West, to the N of N. W., where their snowey tops
lost themselves beneath the horizon. this last range was perfectly
covered with snow. the direction of the rivers could be seen but little
way, soon loosing the break of their channels, to our view, in the
common plain. on our return to camp we boar a little to the left and
discovered a handsome little river falling into the N. fork on Lard.
side about 11/2 ms. above our camp. this little river has as much
timber in it's bottoms as either of the larger streams. there are a
great number of prickley pears in these plains; the Choke cherry grows
here in abundance both in the river bottoms and in the steep ravenes
along the river bluffs. saw the yellow and red courants, not yet ripe;
also the goosberry which begins to ripen; the wild rose which grows
here in great abundance in the bottoms of all these rivers is now in
full bloom, and adds not a little to the beaty of the cenery. we took
the width of the two rivers, found the left hand or S. fork 372 yards
and the N. fork 200. The noth fork is deeper than the other but it's
courant not so swift; it's waters run in the same boiling and roling
manner which has uniformly characterized the Missouri throughout it's
whole course so far; it's waters are of a whitish brown colour very
thick and terbid, also characteristic of the Missouri; while the South
fork is perfectly transparent runds very rappid but with a smoth
unruffled surface it's bottom composed of round and flat smooth stones
like most rivers issuing from a mountainous country. the bed of the N.
fork composed of some gravel but principally mud; in short the air &
character of this river is so precisely that of the missouri below that
the party with very few exceptions have already pronounced the N. fork
to be the Missouri; myself and Capt. C. not quite so precipitate have
not yet decided but if we were to give our opinions I believe we should
be in the minority, certain it is that the North fork gives the
colouring matter and character which is retained from hence to the
gulph of Mexico. I am confident that this river rises in and passes a
great distance through an open plain country I expect that it has some
of it's souces on the Eastern side of the rocky mountain South of the
Saskashawan, but that it dose not penetrate the first range of these
Mountains and that much the greater part of it's sources are in a
northwardly direction towards the lower and middle parts of the
Saskashawan in the open plains. convinced I am that if it penetrated
the Rocky Mountains to any great distance it's waters would be clearer
unless it should run an immence distance indeed after leaving those
mountains through these level plains in order to acquire it's turbid
hue. what astonishes us a little is that the Indians who appeared to be
so well acquainted with the geography of this country should not have
mentioned this river on wright hand if it be not the Missouri; the
river that scolds at all others, as they call it if there is in
reallity such an one, ought agreeably to their account, to have fallen
in a considerable distance below, and on the other hand if this
righthand or N. fork be the Missouri I am equally astonished at their
not mentioning the S. fork which they must have passed in order to get
to those large falls which they mention on the Missouri. thus have our
cogitating faculties been busily employed all day.

Those who have remained at camp today have been busily engaged in
dressing skins for cloathing, notwithstanding that many of them have
their feet so mangled and bruised with the stones and rough ground over
which they passed barefoot, that they can scarcely walk or stand; at
least it is with great pain they do either. for some days past they
were unable to wear their mockersons; they have fallen off
considerably, but notwithstanding the difficulties past, or those which
seem now to mennace us, they still remain perfectly cheerfull. In the
evening the parties whom we had sent out returned agreeably to
instructions. The parties who had been sent up the rivers in canoes
informed that they ascended some distance and had then left their
canoes and walked up the rivers a considerable distance further barely
leaving themselves time to return; the North fork was not so rappid as
the other and afforded the easiest navigation of course; Six feet
appeared to be the shallowest water of the S. Branch and 5 feet that of
the N. Their accounts were by no means satisfactory nor did the
information we acquired bring us nigher to the decision of our question
or determine us which stream to take. Sergt. Pryor had ascended the N.
fork and had taken the following courses and distances-viz-

Joseph and Reubin Fields reported that they had been up the South fork
about 7 mes. on a streight course somewhat N of W. and that there the
little river which discharges itself into the North fork just above us,
was within 100 yards of the S. fork; that they came down this little
river and found it a boald runing stream of about 40 yds. wide containg
much timber in it's bottom, consisting of the narrow and wide leafed
cottonwood with some birch and box alder undrgrowth willows rosebushes
currents &c. they saw a great number of Elk on this river and some
beaver. Those accounts being by no means satisfactory as to the
fundamental point; Capt. C. and myself concluded to set out early the
next morning with a small party each, and ascend these rivers untill we
could perfectly satisfy ourselves of the one, which it would be most
expedient for us to take on our main journey to the Pacific.
accordingly it was agreed that I should ascend the right hand fork and
he the left. I gave orders to Sergt. Pryor Drewyer, Shields, Windsor,
Cruzatte and La Page to hold themselves in readiness to accompany me in
the morning. Capt. Clark also selected Reubin &Joseph Fields, Sergt.
Gass, Shannon and his black man York, to accompany him. we agreed to go
up those rivers one day and a halfs march or further if it should
appear necessary to satisfy us more fully of the point in question. the
hunters killed 2 Buffaloe, 6 Elk and 4 deer today. the evening proved
cloudy. we took a drink of grog this evening and gave the men a dram,
and made all matters ready for an early departure in the morning. I had
now my sack and blanket happerst in readiness to swing on my back,
which is the first time in my life that I had ever prepared a burthen
of this kind, and I am fully convinced that it will not be the last. I
take my Octant with me also, this I confide La Page.

[Clark, June 3, 1805]
June 3rd Monday 1805
we formed a Camp on the point in the junction of the two rivers, and
dispatched a Canoe & three men up each river to examine and find if
possible which is the most probable branch, the left fork which is the
largest we are doubtfull of, the Indians do not mention any river
falling in on the right in this part of the Missouri, The Scolding
river, if there is Such a one Should have fallen in below agreeable to
their accts. we also dispatched men in different dircts. by land, to a
mountain Covered with Snow to the South & other up each river- Capt
Lewis and my Self walked out & assended the hill in the point observed
a leavel open Countrey to the foot of the mountains which lye South of
this, also a River which falls into the Right hand fork about 11/2
miles above its mouth on the Lard. Side this little river discharges a
great deal of water & contains as much Cotton timber in its bottoms as
either of the others we saw Buffalow & antelopes &c. wild Cheries, red
& yellow hurries, Goose berries &c. abound in the river bottoms,
prickley pares on the high plains, we had a meridian altitude and the
Lattd. produced was 47° 24' 12" N. the after part of the day proved
Cloudy, we measured each river and found the one to Right hand 200
yards wide of water & the Left hand fork 372 yards wide & rapid- the
right hand fork falling the other at a Stand and Clear, the right fork
and the river which fall into it is Coloured & a little muddey. Several
men Complain of their feet being Sore in walking in the Sand & their
being Cut by the Stones They to be Sure have a bad time of it obliged
to walk on Shore & haul the rope and 9/10 of their time bear footed, in
the evening late the Canoes returned and the men informed us that they
had assended Some miles by water & left their Canoes & walked on land
the greater part of the day, their accounts by no means Satisfactory,
Serjt. Pryor assended the right hand fork and took the following
Courses, &c

Joseph & Rubin Fields went up the left fork 7 miles on a direct line at
which place, the Small river which falls into the right hand fork
approaches within 100 yards of the South fork, they Came down the Small
river which is a bold Stream Covered with Elk & Some beaver, its
bottoms Covered with wood, as the Information given by those parties
respecting the rivers did not Satisfy us as to the main & principal
branch Capt. Lewis & my Self deturmined to go up each of those rivers
one Day & a half with a view to Satisfy ourselves which of the two was
the principal Stream and best calculated for us to assend- The hunters
Killed 2 buffalow, 6 Elk & Several deer to day we refreshed our party
with a dram &c Cloudy evining.-

[Lewis, June 4, 1805]
Tuesday June 4th 1805
This morning early Capt. C. departed, and at the same time I passed the
wright hand fork opposite to our camp below a small Island; from hence
I steered N. 30 W. 41/2 to a commanding eminence; here I took the
following bearings of the mountains which were in view. The North
Mountains appear to change their direction from that of being parallel
with the Missouri turning to the North and terminating abruptly; their
termineation bearing N. 48° E distant by estimate 30 mes. The South
Mountains appear to turn to the S. also terminating abrubtly, their
extremity bearing S. 8 W. distant 25 mes. The Barn Mountain, a lofty
mountain so called from it's resemblance to the roof of a large Barn,
is a seperate Mountain and appears reather to the wright of and
retreating from the extremity of the S. mts.; this boar S. 38 W.
distant 35 ms. The North fork which I am now ascending lies to my left
and appears to make a considerable bend to the N. W. on it's Western
border a range of hills about 10 mes. long appear to lye parallel with
the river and from hence bear N. 60° W. to the N. of this range of hills
an Elivated point of the river bluff on it's Lard. side boar N. 72° W.
distant 12 mes. to this last object I now directed my course through a
high level dry open plain. the whole country in fact appears to be one
continued plain to the foot of the mountains or as far as the eye can
reach; the soil appears dark rich and fertile yet the grass is by no
means as high nor dose it look so luxurient as I should have expected,
it is short just sufficient to conceal the ground. great abundance of
prickly pears which are extreemly troublesome; as the thorns very
readily perce the foot through the Mockerson; they are so numerous that
it requires one half of the traveler's attention to avoid them In these
plains I observed great numbers of the brown Curloos, a small species
of curloo or plover of a brown colour about the size of the common
snipe and not unlike it in form with a long celindric curved and
pointed beak; it's wings are proportionately long and the tail short;
in the act of liteing this bird lets itself down by an extention of
it's wings without motion holding their points very much together above
it's back, in this rispect differing ascentially from any bird I ever
observed. a number of sparrows also of three distinct species I
observed. also a small bird which in action resembles the lark, it is
about the size of a large sparrow of a dark brown colour with some
white fathers in the tail; this bird or that which I take to be the
male rises into the air about 60 feet and supporting itself in the air
with a brisk motion of the wings sings very sweetly, has several shrill
soft notes reather of the plaintive order which it frequently repeats
and varies, after remaining stationary about a minute in his aireal
station he descends obliquely occasionly pausing and accomnying his
decension with a note something like twit twit twit; on the ground he
is silent. thirty or forty of these birds will be stationed in the air
at a time in view, these larks as I shall call them add much to the
gayety and cheerfullness of the scene. All those birds are now seting
and laying their eggs in the plains; their little nests are to be seen
in great abundance as we pass. there are meriads of small grasshoppers
in these plains which no doubt furnish the principal aliment of this
numerous progeny of the feathered creation. after walking about eight
miles I grew thisty and there being no water in the plains I changed my
direction and boar obliquely in towards the river, on my arrival at
which about 3 mes. below the point of observation, we discovered two
deer at feed at some distance near the river; I here halted the party
and sent Drewyer to kill one of them for breakfast; this excellent
hunter soon exceded his orders by killing of them both; they proved to
be two Mule Bucks in fine order; we soon kindled a fire cooked and made
a hearty meal. it was not yet twelve when we arrived at the river and I
was anxious to take the Meridian Altd. of the sun but the clouds prevent
ed my obtaining the observation. after refreshing ourselves we proceded
up the river to the extremity of the first course, from whence the
river boar on it's general course N. 15° W. 2 M. to a bluff point on
Stard. here Drewyer killed four other deer of the common kind; we
skined them and hung up a part of the meat and the skins as we did also
of the first, and took as much of the meat as we thought would answer
for our suppers and proceeded N. 30 W. 2 m. to the entrance of a large
creek on Lard. side the part of the river we have passed is from 40 to
60 yds. wide, is deep, has falling banks, the courant strong, the water
terbid and in short has every appearance of the missouri below except
as to size. it's bottoms narrow but well timbered. Salts coal and other
mineral appearances as usual; the bluffs principally of dark brown,
yellow and some white clay; some freestone also appears in places. The
river now boar N. 20° E. 12 mes. to a bluff on Lard. At the commencement
of this course we ascended the hills which are about 200 feet high, and
passed through the plains about 3 m. but finding the dry ravines so
steep and numerous we determined to return to the river and travel
through it's bottoms and along the foot and sides of the bluffs,
accordingly we again reached the river about 4 miles from the
commencement of the last course and encamped a small distant above on
the Stard. side in a bend among the willow bushes which defended us
from the wind which blew hard from the N. W. it rained this evening and
wet us to the skin; the air was extremely could. just before we
encamped Drewyer fired at a large brown bar across the river and
wounded him badly but it was too late to pursue him. killed a braro and
a beaver, also at the place of our encampment, a very fine Mule deer.
we saw a great number of Buffaloe, Elk, wolves and foxes today. the
river bottoms form one emence garden of roses, now in full bloe.

[Clark, June 4, 1805]
June 4th Tuesday 1805
Capt. Lewis & my Self each with a Small party of men Set out earlythose
who accompanied Capt Lewis were G. Drewyer Serjt. Pryor, J Shields, P.
Crusat J. B. de Page, R. Winser, went up the N. side of the N. fork.
those who accompanied me were Serjt. Gass Jos. & Ruben Fields G.
Shannon & my black man York, and we Set out to examine the South fork,
our first Course was S. 25° W. 7 miles to the S. fork at a Spring, at
which place the little river which falls into the N. fork is 100 yards
distant only Seperated from the South fork by a narrow ridge. our
course from thence S. 20° W. 8 miles to the river at an Island where we
dined below a Small river falls in on the S E Side which heads in a
mountain to the S. E about 20 miles. North of this place about 4 miles
the little river brakes thro a high ridge into the open Leavel plain
thro which we have passd. from the point, this plain is covered with
low grass & prickley pear, emence number of Prarie dogs or barking
Squirel are thro this plain- after eating we proceeded on N. 45° W.
Struck the river at 3 miles 5, 9 & 13 miles at which place we encamped
in an old Indian lodge made of Stiks and bark at the river near our
camp we Saw two white Bear, one of them was nearly catching Joseph
Fields who could not fire, as his gun was wet the bear was So near that
it Struck his foot, and we were not in a Situation to give him
assistance, a Clift of rocks Seperated us the bear got allarmed at our
Shot & yells & took the river.- Some rain all the afternoon Saw Several
Gangues of Buffalow at a distance in the open plains on each Side, Saw
Mule deer antilopes & wolves- The river is rapid & Closely himed on one
or the other Side with high bluffs, Crouded with Islands & graveley
bars Containing but a Small quantity of timber on its bottoms & none on
the high land.

[Lewis, June 5, 1805]
Wednesday June 5th 1805.
This morning was cloudy and so could that I was obleged to have
recourse to a blanket coat in order to keep myself comfortable altho
walking. the rain continued during the greater part of last night. the
wind hard from N. W. we set out at sunrise and proceded up the river
eight miles on the course last taken yesterday evening, at the
extremity of which a large creek falls in on the Stard. 25 yards. wide
at it's entrance, some timber but no water, notwithstanding the rain;
it's course upwards is N. E. it is astonishing what a quantity of water
it takes to saturate the soil of this country, the earth of the plains
are now opened in large crivices in many places and yet looks like a
rich loam from the entrance of this Creek (which I called Lark C.) the
river boar N. 50. W. 4 m. at the entrance of this creek the bluffs were
very steep and approached the river so near on the Stard. side that we
ascended the hills and passed through the plains; at the extremity of
this course we returned to the river which then boar North 2 rues. from
the same point, I discovered a lofty single mountain which appeard to
be at a great distance, perhaps 80 or more miles it boar N. 52 W. from
it's conic figure I called it tower Mountain. we now passed through the
river bottoms to the extremity of the last course thence with the river
S 60° W 11/2 m. S 10 W. 3 m N 50 W 11/2 at the extremity of which I again
ascended the bluffs and took a course to a point of the Lard. bluffs of
the river which boar West 10 m. the river making a deep bend to the
south that is of at least five miles from the center of the chord line
to the center of the bend. on this course we passed through the plains
found the plains as yesterday extreemly leavel and beautifull, great
quanties of Buffaloe, some wolves foxes and Antelopes seen. near the
river the plain is cut by deep ravines in this plain and from one to
nine miles from the river or any water, we saw the largest collection
of the burrowing or barking squirrels that we had ever yet seen; we
passed through a skirt of the territory of this community for about 7
miles. I saw a flock of the mountain cock, or a large species of heath
hen with a long pointed tail which the Indians informed us were common
to the Rockey Mountains, I sent Shields to kill one of them but he was
obliged to fire a long distance at them and missed his aim. as we had
not killed or eat anything today we each killed a burrowing squrrel as
we passed them in order to make shure of our suppers. we again
intersepted the river at the expiration of the last course or the lard.
bluffs, from whence it now boar N 80° W. 2 mes. from this point saw some
other lofty mountains to the N. W. of Tower Mtn. which boar N. 65°W. 80
or 100 mes. distant at the expiration of this course we killed five Elk
and a blacktailed or mule deer and encamped on Stard. side of the river
in a handsome well timbered bottom where there were several old stick
lodges. in the forepart of the day there was but little timber in the
river bottoms but the quantity is now greater than usual. the river is
about 80 yds. wide with a strong steady courant and from 6 to 10 feet
water. I had the burrowing squirrels roasted by way of experiment and
found the flesh well flavored and tender; some of them were very fat.

[Clark, June 5, 1805]
June 5th Wednesday 1805
Some little rain & Snow last night the mountains to our S E. covered
with Snow this morning air verry Cold & raining a little, we Saw 8
buffalow opposit, they made 2 attempts to Cross, the water being So
Swift they Could not, about the time we were Setting out three white
bear approached our Camp we killed the three & eate part of one & Set
out & proceeded on N. 20° W 11 miles. -k the river at maney places in
this distance to a ridge on the N. Side t m the top of which I could
plainly See a mountain to the South & W. covered with Snow at a long
distance, The mountains opposit to us to the S. E. is also Covered with
Snow this morning.- a high ridge from those mountains approach the
river on the S E Side forming Some Clifts of hard dark Stone.- From the
ridge at which place I Struck the river last, I could ____ discover
that the river run west of South a long distance, and has a Strong
rapid Current, as this river Continued its width debth & rapidity and
the Course west of South, going up further would be useless, I
deturmined to return, I accordingly Set out, thro the plain on a Course
N. 30° E on my return & Struck the little river at 20 miles passing thro
a Leavel plain, at the little river we killed 2 buck Elk & dined on
their marrow, proceeded on a few miles & Camped, haveing killed 2 deer
which was verry fat, Some few drops of rain to day, the evening fair
wind hard from the N. E. I Saw great numbers of Elk & white tale deer,
Some beaver, antelope mule deer & wolves & one bear on this little
river marked my name in a tree N. Side near the ridge where the little
river brakes thro

[Lewis, June 6, 1805]
Thursday June 6th 1805.
I now became well convinced that this branch of the Missouri had it's
direction too much to the North for our rout to the Pacific, and
therefore determined to return the next day after taking an observation
of the sun's Meridian Altitude in order to fix the latitude of the
place. The forepart of the last evening was fair but in the latter part
of the night clouded up and contnued so with short intervals of
sunshine untill a little before noon when the whole horizon was
overcast, and I of course disappointed in making the observation which
I much wished. I had sent Sergt. Pryor and Windsor early this morning
with orders to procede up the river to some commanding eminence and
take it's bearing as far as possible. in the mean time the four others
and myself were busily engaged in making two rafts on which we purposed
descending the river; we had just completed this work when Sergt. Pryor
and Windsor returned, it being about noon; they reported that they had
proceded from hence S 70 W. 6 m. to the summit of a commanding eminence
from whence the river on their left was about 21/2 miles distant; that
a point of it's Lard. bluff, which was visible boar S 80 W. distant
about 15 ms.; that the river on their left bent gradually arround to
this point, and from thence seemed to run Northwardly. we now took
dinner and embarcked with our plunder and five Elk's skins on the rafts
but were soon convinced that this mode of navigation was hazerdous
particularly with those rafts they being too small and slender. we wet
a part of our baggage and were near loosing one of our guns; I
therefore determined to abandon the rafts and return as we had come, by
land. I regreted much being obliged to leave my Elk's skins, which I
wanted to assist in forming my leather boat; those we had prepared at
Fort Mandan being injured in such manner that they would not answer. we
again swung our packs and took our way through the open plains for
about 12 mes. when we struck the river; the wind blew a storm from N.
E. accompanyed by frequent showers of rain; we were wet and very could.
continued our rout down the river only a few miles before the
Abruptness of the clifts and their near approach to the river compelled
us take the plains and once more face the storm; here we boar reather
too much to the North and it was late in the evening before we reached
the river, in our way we killed two buffaloe and took with us as much
of the flesh as served us that night, and a part of the next day. we
encamped a little below the entrance of the large dry Creek called Lark
C. having traveled abut 25 mes. since noon. it continues to rain and we
have no shelter, an uncomfortable nights rest is the natural
consequence.

[Clark, June 6, 1805]
June 6th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy Cold raw day wind hard from the N. E. we Set out early &
traveled down the little river which was imedeately in our Course on
this river we killed 7 Deer for their Skins the bottoms of this little
river is in everry respect except in extent like the large bottoms of
the Missouri below the forks containing a great perpotion of a kind of
Cotton wood with a leaf resembling a wild Cherry-. I also observed wild
Tanzey on this little river in great quantities, we halted at 12 oClock
and eate a part of a fat Buck, after Dinner we assended the Plain at
which time it began to rain and Continued all day, at 5 oClock we
arrived at our Camp on the point, where I expected to meet Capt Lewis-
he did not return this evening.- my Self and party much fatigued
haveing walked Constantly as hard as we Could march over a Dry hard
plain, dcending & assending the Steep river hills & gullies, in my
absence the party had killed an Elk & 2 buffalow, I Sent out for the
meat a part of which was brought in- nothing remarkable had transpired
at camp in my absence

[Lewis, June 7, 1805]
Friday June 7th 1805.
It continued to rain almost without intermission last night and as I
expected we had a most disagreable and wrestless night. our camp
possessing no allurements, we left our watery beads at an early hour
and continued our rout down the river. it still continues to rain the
wind hard from N. E. and could. the grownd remarkably slipry, insomuch
that we were unable to walk on the sides of the bluffs where we had
passed as we ascended the river. notwithstanding the rain that has now
fallen the earth of these bluffs is not wet to a greater debth than 2
inches; in it's present state it is precisely like walking over frozan
grownd which is thawed to small debth and slips equally as bad. this
clay not only appears to require more water to saturate it as I before
observed than any earth I ever observed but when saturated it appears
on the other hand to yeald it's moisture with equal difficulty. In
passing along the face of one of these bluffs today I sliped at a
narrow pass of about 30 yards in length and but for a quick and
fortunate recovery by means of my espontoon I should been precipitated
into the river down a craggy pricipice of about ninety feet. I had
scarcely reached a place on which I could stand with tolerable safety
even with the assistance of my espontoon before I heard a voice behind
me cry out god god Capt. what shall I do on turning about I found it
was Windsor who had sliped and fallen abut the center of this narrow
pass and was lying prostrate on his belley, with his wright hand arm
and leg over the precipice while he was holding on with the left arm
and foot as well as he could which appeared to be with much difficulty.
I discovered his danger and the trepedation which he was in gave me
still further concern for I expected every instant to see him loose his
strength and slip off; altho much allarmed at his situation I disguised
my feelings and spoke very calmly to him and assured him that he was in
no kind of danger, to take the knife out of his belt behind him with
his wright hand and dig a hole with it in the face of the bank to
receive his wright foot which he did and then raised himself to his
knees; I then directed him to take off his mockersons and to come
forward on his hands and knees holding the knife in one hand and the
gun in the other this he happily effected and escaped. those who were
some little distance bhind returned by my orders and waded the river at
the foot of the bluff where the water was breast deep. it was useless
we knew to attempt the plains on this part of the river in consequence
of the numerous steep ravines which intersected and which were quite as
had as the river bluffs. we therefore continued our rout down the river
sometimes in the mud and water of the bottom lands, at others in the
river to our breasts and when the water became so deep that we could
not wade we cut footsteps in the face of the steep bluffs with our
knives and proceded. we continued our disagreeable march through the
rain mud and water untill late in the evening having traveled only
about 18 miles, and encamped in an old Indian stick lodge which
afforded us a dry and comfortable shelter. during the day we had killed
six deer some of them in very good order altho none of them had yet
entirely discarded their winter coats. we had reserved and brought with
us a good supply of the best peices; we roasted and eat a hearty supper
of our venison not having taisted a mosel before during the day; I now
laid myself down on some willow boughs to a comfortable nights rest,
and felt indeed as if I was fully repaid for the toil and pain of the
day, so much will a good shelter, a dry bed, and comfortable supper
revive the sperits of the waryed, wet and hungry traveler.

[Clark, June 7, 1805]
June 7th Friday 1805
rained moderately all the last night and Continus this morning, the
wind from the S. W, off the mountains, The Themometer Stood at 40° above
0, I allow Several men to hunt a Short time to day, the rain Continue
moderately all day the bottom verry muddey 2 buffalow an Elk & Deer
killed to day- Capt. Lewis not returned yet. river falling

[Lewis, June 8, 1805]
Saturday June 8th 1805
It continued to rain moderately all last night this morning was cloudy
untill about ten oClock when it cleared off and became a fine day. we
breakfasted and set out about sunrise and continued our rout down the
river bottoms through the mud and water as yesterday, tho the road was
somewhat better than yesterday and we were not so often compelled to
wade in the river. we passed some dangerous and difficult bluffs. The
river bottoms affording all the timber which is to be seen in the
country they are filled with innumerable litle birds that resort
thither either for shelter or to build their nests. when sun began to
shine today these birds appeared to be very gay and sung most
inchantingly; I observed among them the brown thrush, Robbin, turtle
dove, linnit goaldfinch, the large and small blackbird, wren and
several other birds of less note. some of the inhabitants of the
praries also take reffuge in these woods at night or from a storm. The
whole of my party to a man except myself were fully peswaided that this
river was the Missouri, but being fully of opinion that it was neither
the main stream or that which it would be advisable for us to take, I
determined to give it a name and in honour of Miss Maria W-d. called it
Maria's River. it is true that the hue of the waters of this turbulent
and troubled stream but illy comport with the pure celestial virtues
and amiable qualifications of that lovely fair one; but on the other
hand it is a noble river; one destined to become in my opinion an
object of contention between the two great powers of America and Great
Britin with rispect to the adjustment of the North westwardly boundary
of the former; and that it will become one of the most interesting
brances of the Missouri in a commercial point of view, I have but
little doubt, as it abounds with anamals of the fur kind, and most
probably furnishes a safe and direct communication to that productive
country of valuable furs exclusively enjoyed at present by the subjects
of his Britanic Majesty; in adition to which it passes through a rich
fertile and one of the most beatifully picteresque countries that I
ever beheld, through the wide expance of which, innumerable herds of
living anamals are seen, it's borders garnished with one continued
garden of roses, while it's lofty and open forrests, are the habitation
of miriads of the feathered tribes who salute the ear of the passing
traveler with their wild and simple, yet sweet and cheerfull melody.- I
arrived at camp about 5 OClock in the evening much fatiegued, where I
found Capt. Clark and the ballance of the party waiting our return with
some anxiety for our safety having been absent near two days longer
than we had engaged to return. on our way to camp we had killed 4 deer
and two Antelopes; the skins of which as well as those we killed while
on the rout we brought with us. Maria's river may be stated generally
from sixty to a hundred yards wide, with a strong and steady current
and possessing 5 feet water in the most sholly parts.

As the incidents which occurred Capt. C. during his rout will be more
fully and satisfactoryley expressed by himself I here insert a copy of
his journal during the days we wer seperated.-

I now gave myself this evening to rest from my labours, took a drink of
grog and gave the men who had accompanyed me each a dram. Capt. Clark
ploted the courses of the two rivers as far as we had ascended them. I
now began more than ever to suspect the varacity of Mr. Fidler or the
correctness of his instruments. for I see that Arrasmith in his late
map of N. America has laid down a remarkable mountain in the chain of
the Rocky mountains called the tooth nearly as far South as Latitude 45°,
and this is said to be from the discoveries of Mr. Fidler? we are now
within a hundred miles of the Rocky Mountains, and I find from my
observation of the 3rd Inst that the latitude of this place is 47° 24'
12.8". the river must therefore turn much to the South, between this
and the rocky Mountain to have permitted Mr. Fidler to have passed
along the Eastern border of these mountains as far S. as nearly 45°
without even seeing it. but from hence as far as Capt. C. had ascended
the S. fork or Missouri being the distance of 55 miles it's course is
S. 29°W. and it still appeared to bear considerably to the W. of South as
far as he could see it. I think therefore that we shall find that the
Missouri enters the rocky mountains to the North of 45°- we did take the
liberty of placing his discoveries or at least the Southern extremity
of them about a degree further N. in the sketh which we sent on to the
government this spring mearly from the Indian information of the
bearing from Fort Mandan of the entrance of the Missouri into the Rocky
Mountains, and I reather suspect that actual observation will take him
at least one other degree further North. The general Course of Maria's
river from hence to the extremity of the last course taken by Sergt.
pryor is N 69° W. 59 mes.

[Clark, June 8, 1805]
June 8th Saturday 1805
rained moderately all the last night & Some this morning untill 10
oClock, I am Some what uneasy for Capt. Lewis & party as days has now
passed the time he was to have returned, I had all the arms put in
order and permited Severall men to hunt, aired and dried our Stores &c.
The rivers at this point has fallen 6 Inches Sinc our arrival, at 10
oClock cleared away and became fair- the wind all the morning from the
S. W. & hard- The water of the South fork is of a redish brown colour
this morning the other river of a whitish colour as usual-The mountains
to the South Covered with Snow. Wind Shifted to the N E in the evening,
about 5 oClock Capt. Lewis arrived with the party much fatigued, and
inform'd me that he had assended the river about 60 miles by Land and
that the river had a bold current of about 80 or 100 yards wide the
bottoms of Gravel & mud, and may be estimated at 5 feet water in
Sholest parts

Some rain in the evening. the left hand fork rose a little.

[Lewis, June 9, 1805]
Sunday June 9th 1805.
We determined to deposite at this place the large red perogue all the
heavy baggage which we could possibly do without and some provision,
salt, tools powder and Lead &c with a view to lighten our vessels and
at the same time to strengthen their crews by means of the seven hands
who have been heretofore employd. in navigating the red perogue;
accordingly we set some hands to diging a hole or cellar for the
reception of our stores. these holes in the ground or deposits are
called by the engages cashes; on enquiry I found that Cruzatte was well
acquainted this business and therefore left the management of it
intirely to him. today we examined our maps, and compared the
information derived as well from them as from the Indians and fully
settled in our minds the propryety of addopting the South fork for the
Missouri, as that which it would be most expedient for us to take. The
information of Mr. Fidler incorrect as it is strongly argued the
necessity of taking the South fork, for if he has been along the
Eastern side of the rocky mountains as far as even Latd. 47°, which I
think fully as far south as he ever was in that direction, and saw only
small rivulets making down from those mountains the presumption is very
strong that those little streams do not penetrate the rocky Mountains
to such distance as would afford rational grownds for a conjecture that
they had their sources near any navigable branch of the Columbia, and
if he has seen those rivulets as far south as 47° they are most probably
the waters of some Nothern branch of the Missouri or South fork
probably the river called by the Indians Medicine River; we therefore
cannot hope by going Northwardly of this place being already in
Latititude 47° 24" to find a stream between this place and the
Saskashawan which dose penetrate the Rocky mountains, and which
agreeably to the information of the Indians with rispect to the
Missouri, dose possess a navigable curent some distance in those
mountains. The Indian information also argued strongly in favour of the
South fork. they informed us that the water of the Missouri was nearly
transparent at the great falls, this is the case with the water of the
South fork; that the falls lay a little to the South of sunset from
them; this is also brobable as we are only a few minutes North of Fort
Mandan and the South fork bears considerably South from hence to the
Mountains; that the falls are below the rocky mountains and near the
Nothern termineation of one range of those mountains. a range of
mountains which apear behind the S. Mountains and which appear to
terminate S. W. from this place and on this side of the unbroken chain
of the Rocky Mountains gives us hope that this part of their
information is also correct, and there is sufficient distance between
this and the mountains for many and I fear for us much too many falls.
another impression on my mind is that if the Indians had passed any
stream as large as the South fork on their way to the Missouri that
they would not have omitted mentioning it; and the South fork from it's
size and complexion of it's waters must enter the Ry. Mountains and in
my opinion penetrates them to a great distance, or els whence such an
immence body of water as it discharges; it cannot procede from the dry
plains to the N. W. of the Yellow Stone river on the East side of the
Rocky Mountains for those numerous large dry channels which we
witnessed on that side as we ascended the Missouri forbid such a
conjecture; and that it should take it's sourses to the N. W. under
those mountains the travels of Mr. Fidler fobid us to beleive. Those
ideas as they occurred to me I indevoured to impress on the minds of
the party all of whom except Capt. C. being still firm in the beleif
that the N. Fork was the Missouri and that which we ought to take; they
said very cheerfully that they were ready to follow us any wher we
thought proper to direct but that they still thought that the other was
the river and that they were affraid that the South fork would soon
termineate in the mountains and leave us at a great distance from the
Columbia. Cruzatte who had been an old Missouri navigator and who from
his integrity knowledge and skill as a waterman had acquired the
confidence of every individual of the party declared it as his opinion
that the N. fork was the true genuine Missouri and could be no other.
finding them so determined in this beleif, and wishing that if we were
in an error to be able to detect it and rectify it as soon as possible
it was agreed between Capt. C. and myself that one of us should set out
with a small party by land up the South fork and continue our rout up
it untill we found the falls or reached the snowy Mountains by which
means we should be enabled to determine this question prety accurately.
this expedition I prefered undertaking as Capt. C best waterman &c. and
determined to set out the day after tomorrow; I wished to make some
further observations at this place, and as we had determined to leave
our blacksmith's bellows and tools here it was necessary to repare some
of our arms, and particularly my Airgun the main spring of which was
broken, before we left this place. these and some other preperations
will necessarily detain us two perhaps three days. I felt myself very
unwell this morning and took a portion of salts from which I feel much
releif this evening. The cash being completed I walked to it and
examined it's construction. it is in a high plain about 40 yards
distant from a steep bluff of the South branch on it's nothern side;
the situation a dry one which is always necessary. a place being fixed
on for a cash, a circle abut 20 inches in diameter is first discribed,
the terf or sod of this circle is carefully removed, being taken out as
entire as possible in order that it may be replaced in the same
situation when the chash is filled and secured. this circular hole is
then sunk perpendicularly to the debth of one foot, if the ground be
not firm somewhat deeper. they then begin to work it out wider as they
proceed downwards untill they get it about six or seven feet deep
giving it nearly the shape of the kettle or lower part of a large
still. it's bottom is also somewhat sunk in the center. the dementions
of the cash is in proportion to the quantity of articles intended to be
deposited. as the earth is dug it is handed up in a vessel and
carefully laid on a skin or cloth and then carryed to some place where
it can be thrown in such manner as to conseal it usually into some
runing stream wher it is washed away and leaves no traces which might
lead to the discovery of the cash. before the goods are deposited they
must be well dryed; a parsel of small dry sticks are then collected and
with them a floor is maid of three or four inches thick which is then
covered with some dry hay or a raw hide well dryed; on this the
articles are deposited, taking care to keep them from touching the
walls by putting other dry sticks between as you stoe away the
merchandize, when nearly full the goods are covered with a skin and
earth thrown in and well ramed untill with the addition of the turf
furst removed the whole is on a level with the serface of the ground.
in this manner dryed skins or merchandize will keep perfectly sound for
several years. the traders of the Missouri, particularly those engaged
in the trade with the Siouxs are obliged to have frequent recourse to
this method in order to avoyd being robed. most of the men are busily
engaged dressing skins for cloathing. In the evening Cruzatte gave us
some music on the violin and the men passed the evening in dancing
singing &c and were extreemly cheerfull.-

[Clark, June 9, 1805]
June 9th Sunday a fair morning the wind hard from the S. W. the river
during the night fell 1 Inch, we conclude to burry a few of our heavy
articles, Some Powder & Lead provisions & a fiw Tools, in case of
accident and leave one perogue at this place, and as Soon as those
things are accomplished to assend the South fork, which appears to be
more in our Course than the N. fork the Genl. Course of the South fork
for 35 miles is S. 29° W.- that of the N. fork is N. 69° W. for 59 miles,
and as we are North of Fort mandan it is probable the most Southerley
fork is the best for us.- Capt. Lewis a little unwell to day & take
Salts &c. Send out 7 men to make a cache or hole to burry the Stores,
air out Cloathes &c. &c. finish'd the cache or Seller &c. the men all
engaged dressing Skins for their clothes, in the evening the party
amused themselves danceing and Singing Songes in the most Social
manner. had a meridian altitude which gave 47° 24' 29" took some Luner
observations which gave for Longitude ____ variation 151/2° East

[Lewis, June 10, 1805]
Monday June 10th 1805.
The day being fair and fine we dryed all our baggage and merchandize.
Shields renewed the main Spring of my air gun we have been much
indebted to the ingenuity of this man on many occasions; without having
served any regular apprenticeship to any trade, he makes his own tools
principally and works extreemly well in either wood or metal, and in
this way has been extreenely servicable to us, as well as being a good
hunter and an excellent waterman. in order to guard against accedents
we thout it well to conceal some ammunicion here and accordingly buryed
a tin cannester of 4 lbs. of powder and an adequate quantity of lead
near our tent; a cannester of 6 lbs. lead and an ax in a thicket up the
S. Fork three hundred yards distant from the point. we concluded that
we still could spare more amunition for this deposit Capt. Clark was
therefore to make a further deposit in the morning, in addition to one
Keg of 20 lbs. and an adequate proportion of lead which had been laid
by to be buryed in the large Cash. we now scelected the articles to be
deposited in this cash which consisted of 2 best falling axes, one
auger, a set of plains, some files, blacksmiths bellowses and hammers
Stake tongs &c. 1 Keg of flour, 2 Kegs of parched meal, 2 Kegs of Pork,
1 Keg of salt, some chissels, a cooper's Howel, some tin cups, 2
Musquets, 3 brown bear skins, beaver skins, horns of the bighorned
anamal, a part of the men's robes clothing and all their superfluous
baggage of every discription, and beaver traps.- we drew up the red
perogue into the middle of a small Island at the entrance of Maria's
river, and secured and made her fast to the trees to prevent the high
floods from carrying her off put my brand on several trees standing
near her, and covered her with brush to shelter her from the effects of
the sun. At 3 P.M. we had a hard wind from the S. W. which continued
about an hour attended with thunder and rain. as soon as the shower had
passed over we drew out our canoes, corked, repared and loaded them. I
still feel myself somewhat unwell with the disentary, but determined to
set out in the morning up the South fork or Missouri leaving Capt.
Clark to compleat the deposit and follow me by water with the party;
accordingly gave orders to Drewyer, Joseph Fields, Gibson and Goodrich
to hold themselves in readiness to accompany me in the morning.
Sah-cah-gah, we a, our Indian woman is very sick this evening; Capt. C.
blead her. the night was cloudy with some rain.

I saw a small bird today which I do not recollect ever having seen
before. it is about the size of the blue thrush or catbird, and it's
contour not unlike that bird. the beak is convex, moderately curved,
black, smoth, and large in proportion to its size. the legs were black,
it had four toes of the same colour on eah foot, and the nails appeared
long and somewhat in form like the tallons of the haulk, the eye black
and proportionably large. a bluish brown colour occupyed the head,
neck, and back, the belly was white; the tail was reather long in
proportion and appeared to be composed of feathers of equal length of
which a part of those in the center were white the others black. the
wings were long and were also varigated with white and black. on each
side of the head from the beak back to the neck a small black stripe
extended imbrasing the eye. it appeared to be very busy in catching
insects which I presume is it's usual food; I found the nest of this
little bird, the female which differed but little in size or plumage
from the male was seting on four eggs of a pale blue colour with small
black freckles or dots.- the bee martin or Kingbird is common to this
country tho there are no bees in this country, nor have we met with a
honey bee since we passed the entrance of the Osage river.

[Clark, June 10, 1805]
June 10th Monday 1805
a fine day dry all our articles arrange our baggage burry Some Powder &
lead in the point, Some Lead a canister of Powder & an ax in a thicket
in the point at Some distance, buried on this day and in the large
cache or whole we buried on the up land near the S. fork 1 mile up S.
S. we drew up our large Perogue into the middle of a Small Island in
the North fork and covered her with bushes after makeing her fast to
the trees, branded several trees to prevent the Indians injureing her,
at 3 oClock we had hard wind from the S. W. thunder and rain for about
an hour after which we repaired & Corked the Canoes & loadded them- Sah
cah gah, we a our Indian woman verry Sick I blead her, we deturmined to
assend the South fork, and one of us, Capt. Lewis or My self to go by
land as far as the Snow mountains S. 20° W. and examine the river &
Countrey Course & to be Certain of our assending the proper river, Capt
Lewis inclines to go by land on this expedition, according Selects 4
men George Drewyer, Gibson, Jo. Fields & S. Gutrich to accompany him &
deturmine to Set out in the morning- The after noon or night Cloudy
Some rain, river riseing a little.

[Lewis, June 11, 1805]
Tuesday June 11th 1805
This morning I felt much better, but somewhat weakened by my disorder.
at 8 A.M. I swung my pack, and set forward with my little party.
proceeded to the point where Rose River a branch Maria's River
approaches the Missouri so nearly. from this hight we discovered a herd
of Elk on the Missouri just above us to which we desended and soon
killed four of them. we butchered them and hung up the meat and skins
in view of the river in order that the party might get them. I
determined to take dinner here, but before the meal was prepared I was
taken with such violent pain in the intestens that I was unable to
partake of the feast of marrowbones. my pain still increased and
towards evening was attended with a high fever; finding myself unable
to march, I determined to prepare a camp of some willow boughs and
remain all night. having brought no medecine with me I resolved to try
an experiment with some simples; and the Choke cherry which grew
abundanly in the bottom first struck my attention; I directed a parsel
of the small twigs to be geathered striped of their leaves, cut into
pieces of about 2 Inches in length and boiled in water untill a strong
black decoction of an astringent bitter tact was produced; at sunset I
took a point of this decoction and abut an hour after repeated the dze
by 10 in the evening I was entirely releived from pain and in fact
every symptom of the disorder forsook me; my fever abated, a gentle
perspiration was produced and I had a comfortable and refreshing nights
rest. Goodrich who is remarkably fond of fishing caught several douzen
fish of two different species- one about 9 inches long of white colour
round and in form and fins resembles the white chub common to the
Potomac; this fish has a smaller head than the Chubb and the mouth is
beset both above and below with a rim of fine sharp teeth; the eye
moderately large, the puple dark and the iris which is narrow is of a
yellowish brown colour, they bite at meat or grasshoppers. this is a
soft fish, not very good, tho the flesh is of a fine white colour. the
other species is precisely the form and about the size of the well
known fish called the Hickory Shad or old wife, with the exception of
the teeth, a rim of which garnish the outer edge of both the upper and
lower jaw; the tonge and pallet are also beset with long sharp teeth
bending inwards, the eye of this fish is very large, and the iris of a
silvery colour and wide. of the 1st species we had caught some few
before our arrival at the entrance of Maria's river, but of the last we
had seen none untill we reached that place and took them in Missouri
above it's junction with that river. the latter kind are much the best,
and do not inhabit muddy water; the white cat continue as high as the
entrance of Maria's R, but those we have caught above Mandans never
excede 6 lbs. I beleive that there are but few in this part of the
Missouri. saw an abundance of game today even in our short march of 9
miles.

[Clark, June 11, 1805]
June 11th Tuesday 1805
a fair morning wind from the S W. hard we burry 1 keg in the Cash & 2
Canisters of Powder in 2 seperate places all with Lead; & in the Cash 2
axes, auger, Plains, 1 Keg flour, 2 Kegs Pork, 2 Kegs Parchd meal 1 Keg
salt, files Chisel, 2 Musquits, Some tin cups, bowel, 3 bear Skins,
Beaver Skins, Horns, & parts of the mens robes & clothes.- Beaver Traps
and blacksmith's tools. Capt. Lewis Set out at 8 oClock we delayed to
repare Some guns out of order & complete our deposit, which took us the
day the evening fair and fine wind from the N. W. after night it became
cold & the wind blew hard, the Indian woman verry Sick, I blead her
which appeared to be of great Service to her both rivers riseing fast

[Lewis, June 12, 1805]
Wednesday June 12th 1805.
This morning I felt myself quite revived, took another portion of my
decoction and set out at sunrise. I now boar out from the river in
order to avoid the steep ravines of the river which usually make out in
the plain to the distance of one or two miles; after gaining the leavel
plain my couse was a litte to the West of S. W.- having traveled about
12 miles by 9 in the morning, the sun became warm, and I boar a little
to the south in order to gain the river as well to obtain water to
allay my thirst as to kill something for breakfast; for the plain
through which we had been passing possesses no water and is so level
that we cannot approach the buffaloe within shot before they discover
us and take to flight. we arrived at the river about 10 A.M. having
traveled about 15 m. at this place there is a handsom open bottom with
some cottonwood timber, here we met with two large bear, and killed
them boath at the first fire, a circumstance which I beleive has never
happend with the party in killing the brown bear before. we dressed the
bear, breakfasted on a part of one of them and hung the meat and skins
on the trees out of the reach of the wolves. I left a note on a stick
near the river for Capt. Clark, informing him of my progress &c.- after
refreshing ourselves abut 2 hours we again ascended the bluffs and
gained the high plain; saw a great number of burrowing squirrels in the
plains today. also wolves Antelopes mule deer and immence herds of
buffaloe. we passed a ridge of land considerably higher than the
adjacent plain on either side, from this hight we had a most beatifull
and picturesk view of the Rocky mountains which wer perfectly covered
with Snow and reaching from S. E. to the N. of N. W.- they appear to be
formed of several ranges each succeeding range rising higher than the
preceding one untill the most distant appear to loose their snowey tops
in the clouds; this was an august spectacle and still rendered more
formidable by the recollection that we had them to pass. we traveled
about twelve miles when we agin struck the Missoury at a handsome
little bottom of Cottonwood timber and altho the sun had not yet set I
felt myself somewhat weary being weakened I presume by late disorder;
and therfore determined to remain here during the ballance of the day
and night, having marched about 27 miles today. on our way in the
evening we had killed a buffaloe, an Antelope and three mule deer, and
taken a sufficient quantity of the best of the flesh of these anamals
for three meals, which we had brought with us. This evening I ate very
heartily and after pening the transactions of the day amused myself
catching those white fish mentioned yesterday; they are here in great
abundance I caught upwards of a douzen in a few minutes; they bit most
freely at the melt of a deer which goodrich had brought with him for
the purpose of fishing.

The narrow leafed cottonwood grows here in common with the other
species of the same tree with a broad leaf or that which has
constituted the major part of the timber of the Missouri from it's
junction with the Mississippi to this place. The narrow leafed
cottonwood differs only from the other in the shape of it's leaf and
greater thickness of it's bark. the leaf is a long oval acutely
pointed, about 21/2 or 3 Inches long and from 3/4 to an inch in width;
it is thick, sometimes slightly grooved or channeled; margin slightly
serrate; the upper disk of a common green while the under disk is of a
whiteish green; the leaf is smoth. the beaver appear to be extremely
fond of this tree and even seem to scelect it from among the other
species of Cottonwood, probably from it's affording a deeper and softer
bark than the other species.- saw some sign of the Otter as well as
beaver near our camp, also a great number of tracks of the brown bear;
these fellows leave a formidable impression in the mud or sand I
measured one this evening which was eleven inches long exclusive of the
tallons and seven and 1/4 in width.

[Clark, June 12, 1805]
June 12th 1805 Wednesday
last night was Clear and Cold, this morning fair we Set out at 8 oClock
& proceeded on verry well wind from the S. W. The interpreters wife
verry Sick So much So that I move her into the back part of our Covered
part of the Perogue which is Cool, her own situation being a verry hot
one in the bottom of the Perogue exposed to the Sun- Saw emence No. of
Swallows in the 1st bluff on the Lard. Side, water verry Swift, the
bluff are blackish Clay & Coal for about 80 feet. the earth above that
for 30 or 40 feet is a brownish yellow, a number of bars of corse
gravil and Stones of different Shape & Size &c. Saw a number of rattle
Snakes to day one of the men cought one by the head in Catch'g hold of
a bush on which his head lay reclined three canoes were in great danger
today one diped water, another was near turning over &c. at 2 oClock P
M a fiew drops of rain I walked thro a point and killed a Buck Elk &
Deer, and we camped on the Stard Side, the Interpreters woman verry
Sick worse than She has been. I give her medison one man have a fellon
riseing on his hand one other with the Tooth ake has taken cold in the
jaw &c.

[Lewis, June 13, 1805]
Thursday June 13th 1805.
This morning we set out about sunrise after taking breakfast off our
venison and fish. we again ascended the hills of the river and gained
the level country. the country through which we passed for the first
six miles tho more roling than that we had passed yesterday might still
with propryety he deemed a level country; our course as yesterday was
generally S W. the river from the place we left it appeared to make a
considerable bend to the South. from the extremity of this roling
country I overlooked a most beatifull and level plain of great extent
or at least 50 or sixty miles; in this there were infinitely more
buffaloe than I had ever before witnessed at a view. nearly in the
direction I had been travling or S. W. two curious mountains presented
themselves of square figures, the sides rising perpendicularly to the
hight of 250 feet and appeared to be formed of yellow clay; their tops
appeared to be level plains; these inaccessible hights appeared like
the ramparts of immence fortifications; I have no doubt but with very
little assistance from art they might be rendered impregnable. fearing
that the river boar to the South and that I might pass the falls if
they existed between this an the snowey mountains I altered my course
nealy to the South leaving those insulated hills to my wright and
proceeded through the plain; I sent Feels on my right and Drewyer and
Gibson on my left with orders to kill some meat and join me at the
river where I should halt for dinner. I had proceded on this course
about two miles with Goodrich at some distance behind me whin my ears
were saluted with the agreeable sound of a fall of water and advancing
a little further I saw the spray arrise above the plain like a collumn
of smoke which would frequently dispear again in an instant caused I
presume by the wind which blew pretty hard from the S. W. I did not
however loose my direction to this point which soon began to make a
roaring too tremendious to be mistaken for any cause short of the great
falls of the Missouri. here I arrived about 12 OClock having traveled
by estimate about 15 Miles. I hurryed down the hill which was about 200
feet high and difficult of access, to gaze on this sublimely grand
specticle. I took my position on the top of some rocks about 20 feet
high opposite the center of the falls. this chain of rocks appear once
to have formed a part of those over which the waters tumbled, but in
the course of time has been seperated from it to the distance of 150
yards lying prarrallel to it and forming a butment against which the
water after falling over the precipice beats with great fury; this
barrier extends on the right to the perpendicular clift which forms
that board of the river but to the distance of 120 yards next to the
clift it is but a few feet above the level of the water, and here the
water in very high tides appears to pass in a channel of 40 yds. next
to the higher part of the ledg of rocks; on the left it extends within
80 or ninty yards of the lard. Clift which is also perpendicular;
between this abrupt extremity of the ledge of rocks and the
perpendicular bluff the whole body of water passes with incredible
swiftness. immediately at the cascade the river is about 300 yds. wide;
about ninty or a hundred yards of this next the Lard. bluff is a smoth
even sheet of water falling over a precipice of at least eighty feet,
the remaining part of about 200 yards on my right formes the grandest
sight I ever beheld, the hight of the fall is the same of the other but
the irregular and somewhat projecting rocks below receives the water in
it's passage down and brakes it into a perfect white foam which assumes
a thousand forms in a moment sometimes flying up in jets of sparkling
foam to the hight of fifteen or twenty feet and are scarcely formed
before large roling bodies of the same beaten and foaming water is
thrown over and conceals them. in short the rocks seem to be most
happily fixed to present a sheet of the whitest beaten froath for 200
yards in length and about 80 feet perpendicular. the water after
decending strikes against the butment before mentioned or that on which
I stand and seems to reverberate and being met by the more impetuous
courant they role and swell into half formed billows of great hight
which rise and again disappear in an instant. this butment of rock
defends a handsom little bottom of about three acres which is
deversified and agreeably shaded with some cottonwood trees; in the
lower extremity of the bottom there is a very thick grove of the same
kind of trees which are small, in this wood there are several Indian
lodges formed of sticks. a few small cedar grow near the ledge of rocks
where I rest. below the point of these rocks at a small distance the
river is divided by a large rock which rises several feet above the
water, and extends downwards with the stream for about 20 yards. about
a mile before the water arrives at the pitch it decends very rappidly,
and is confined on the Lard. side by a perpendicular clift of about 100
feet, on Stard. side it is also perpendicular for about three hundred
yards above the pitch where it is then broken by the discharge of a
small ravine, down which the buffaloe have a large beaten road to the
water, for it is but in very few places that these anamals can obtain
water near this place owing to the steep and inaccessible banks. I see
several skelletons of the buffaloe lying in the edge of the water near
the Stard. bluff which I presume have been swept down by the current
and precipitated over this tremendious fall. about 300 yards below me
there is another butment of solid rock with a perpendicular face and
abot 60 feet high which projects from the Stard. side at right angles
to the distance of 134 yds. and terminates the lower part nearly of the
bottom before mentioned; there being a passage arround the end of this
butment between it and the river of about 20 yardes; here the river
again assumes it's usual width soon spreading to near 300 yards but
still continues it's rappidity. from the reflection of the sun on the
spray or mist which arrises from these falls there is a beatifull
rainbow produced which adds not a little to the beauty of this
majestically grand senery. after wrighting this imperfect discription I
again viewed the falls and was so much disgusted with the imperfect
idea which it conveyed of the scene that I determined to draw my pen
across it and begin agin, but then reflected that I could not perhaps
succeed better than pening the first impressions of the mind; I wished
for the pencil of Salvator Rosa or the pen of Thompson, that I might be
enabled to give to the enlightened world some just idea of this truly
magnifficent and sublimely grand object, which has from the
commencement of time been concealed from the view of civilized man; but
this was fruitless and vain. I most sincerely regreted that I had not
brought a crimee obscura with me by the assistance of which even I
could have hoped to have done better but alas this was also out of my
reach; I therefore with the assistance of my pen only indeavoured to
traces some of the stronger features of this seen by the assistance of
which and my recollection aided by some able pencil I hope still to
give to the world some faint idea of an object which at this moment
fills me with such pleasure and astonishment, and which of it's kind I
will venture to ascert is second to but one in the known world. I
retired to the shade of a tree where I determined to fix my camp for
the present and dispatch a man in the morning to inform Capt. C. and
the party of my success in finding the falls and settle in their minds
all further doubts as to the Missouri. the hunters now arrived loaded
with excellent buffaloe meat and informed me that they had killed three
very fat cows about 3/4 of a mile hence. I directed them after they had
refreshed themselves to go back and butcher them and bring another load
of meat each to our camp determining to employ those who remained with
me in drying meat for the party against their arrival. in about 2 hours
or at 4 OClock P.M. they set out on this duty, and I walked down the
river about three miles to discover if possible some place to which the
canoes might arrive or at which they might be drawn on shore in order
to be taken by land above the falls; but returned without effecting
either of these objects; the river was one continued sene of rappids
and cascades which I readily perceived could not be encountered with
our canoes, and the Clifts still retained their perpendicular structure
and were from 150 to 200 feet high; in short the river appears here to
have woarn a channel in the process of time through a solid rock. on my
return I found the party at camp; they had butchered the buffaloe and
brought in some more meat as I had directed. Goodrich had caught half a
douzen very fine trout and a number of both species of the white fish.
these trout are from sixteen to twenty three inches in length,
precisely resemble our mountain or speckled trout in form and the
position of their fins, but the specks on these are of a deep black
instead of the red or goald colour of those common to the U. States.
these are furnished long sharp teeth on the pallet and tongue and have
generally a small dash of red on each side behind the front ventral
fins; the flesh is of a pale yellowish red, or when in good order, of a
rose red.

I am induced to believe that the Brown, the white and the Grizly bear
of this country are the same species only differing in colour from age
or more probably from the same natural cause that many other anamals of
the same family differ in colour. one of those which we killed
yesterday was of a creemcoloured white while the other in company with
it was of the common bey or rdish brown, which seems to be the most
usual colour of them. the white one appeared from it's tallons and
teath to be the youngest; it was smaller than the other, and although a
monstrous beast we supposed that it had not yet attained it's growth
and that it was a little upwards of two years old. the young cubs which
we have killed have always been of a brownish white, but none of them
as white as that we killed yesterday. one other that we killed sometime
since which I mentioned sunk under some driftwood and was lost, had a
white stripe or list of about eleven inches wide entirely arround his
body just behind the shoalders, and was much darker than these bear
usually are. the grizly bear we have never yet seen. I have seen their
tallons in possession of the Indians and from their form I am perswaded
if there is any difference between this species and the brown or white
bear it is very inconsiderable. There is no such anamal as a black bear
in this open country or of that species generally denominated the black
bear

my fare is really sumptuous this evening; buffaloe's humps, tongues and
marrowbones, fine trout parched meal pepper and salt, and a good
appetite; the last is not considered the least of the luxuries.

[Clark, June 13, 1805]
June 13th Thursday 1805
a fair morning, Some dew this morning the Indian woman Verry sick I
gave her a doste of Salts. We Set out early, at a mile & 1/2 passed a
Small rapid Stream on the Lard Side which heads in a mountain to the S.
E 12 or 15 miles, which at this time covered with Snow, we call this
stream Snow river, as it is the conveyance of the melted snow from that
mountain at present. numbers of gees & goslings, the gees cannot fly at
this Season- goose berries are ripe and in great abundance, the yellow
Current is also Common, not yet ripe Killed a buffalow & Campd on the
Lard Side near an old Indian fortified campy one man Sick & 3 with
Swellings, the Indian woman verry Sick. Killed a goat & fraser 2
Buffalow

The river verry rapid maney Sholes great nos of large Stones passed
Some bluffs or low cliffts of Slate to day

[Lewis, June 14, 1805]
Friday June 14th 1805.
This morning at sunrise I dispatched Joseph Fields with a letter to
Capt. Clark and ordered him to keep sufficiently near the river to
observe it's situation in order that he might be enabled to give Capt.
Clark an idea of the point at which it would be best to halt to make
our portage. I set one man about preparing a saffold and collecting
wood to dry the meat Sent the others to bring in the ballance of the
buffaloe meat, or at least the part which the wolves had left us, for
those fellows are ever at hand and ready to partake with us the moment
we kill a buffaloe; and there is no means of puting the meat out of
their reach in those plains; the two men shortly after returned with
the meat and informed me that the wolves had devoured the greater part
of the meat. about ten OClock this morning while the men were engaged
with the meat I took my Gun and espontoon and thought I would walk a
few miles and see where the rappids termineated above, and return to
dinner. accordingly I set out and proceeded up the river about S. W.
after passing one continued rappid and three small cascades of abut for
or five feet each at the distance of about five miles I arrived at a
fall of about 19 feet; the river is hereabout 400 yds. wide. this pitch
which I called the crooked falls occupys about three fourths of the
width of the river, commencing on the South side, extends obliquly
upwards about 150 yds. then forming an accute angle extends downwards
nearly to the commencement of four small Islands lying near the N.
shore; among these Islands and between them and the lower extremity of
the perpendicular pitch being a distance of 100 yards or upwards, the
water glides down the side of a sloping rock with a volocity almost
equal to that of it's perpendicular decent. just above this rappid the
river makes a suddon bend to the right or Northwardly. I should have
returned from hence but hearing a tremendious roaring above me I
continued my rout across the point of a hill a few hundred yards
further and was again presented by one of the most beatifull objects in
nature, a cascade of about fifty feet perpendicular streching at
rightangles across the river from side to side to the distance of at
least a quarter of a mile. here the river pitches over a shelving rock,
with an edge as regular and as streight as if formed by art, without a
nich or brake in it; the water decends in one even and uninterupted
sheet to the bottom wher dashing against the rocky bottom rises into
foaming billows of great hight and rappidly glides away, hising
flashing and sparkling as it departs the sprey rises from one extremity
to the other to 50 f. I now thought that if a skillfull painter had
been asked to make a beautifull cascade that he would most probably
have pesented the precise immage of this one; nor could I for some time
determine on which of those two great cataracts to bestoe the palm, on
this or that which I had discovered yesterday; at length I determined
between these two great rivals for glory that this was pleasingly
beautifull, while the other was sublimely grand. I had scarcely infixed
my eyes from this pleasing object before I discovered another fall
above at the distance of half a mile; thus invited I did not once think
of returning but hurried thither to amuse myself with this newly
discovered object. I found this to be a cascade of about 14 feet
possessing a perpendicular pitch of about 6 feet. this was tolerably
regular streching across the river from bank to bank where it was about
a quarter of a mile wide; in any other neighbourhood but this, such a
cascade would probably be extoled for it's beaty and magnifficence, but
here I passed it by with but little attention, determining as I had
proceded so far to continue my rout to the head of the rappids if it
should even detain me all night. at every rappid cateract and cascade I
discovered that the bluffs grew lower or that the bed of the river rose
nearer to a level with the plains. still pursuing the river with it's
course about S. W. passing a continued sene of rappids and small
cascades, at the distance of 21/2 miles I arrived at another cataract
of 26 feet. this is not immediately perpendicular, a rock about 1/3 of
it's decent seems to protrude to a small distance and receives the
water in it's passage downwards and gives a curve to the water tho it
falls mostly with a regular and smoth sheet. the river is near six
hundred yards wide at this place, a beatifull level plain on the S.
side only a few feet above the level of the pitch; on the N. side where
I am the country is More broken and immediately behind me near the
river a high hill. below this fall at a little distance a beatifull
little Island well timbered is situated about the middle of the river.
in this Island on a Cottonwood tree an Eagle has placed her nest; a
more inaccessable spot I beleive she could not have found; for neither
man nor beast dare pass those gulphs which seperate her little domain
from the shores. the water is also broken in such manner as it decends
over this pitch that the mist or sprey rises to a considerable hight.
this fall is certainly much the greatest I ever behald except those two
which I have mentioned below. it is incomparably a geater cataract and
a more noble interesting object than the celibrated falls of Potomac or
Soolkiln &c. just above this is another cascade of about 5 feet, above
which the water as far as I could see began to abate of it's valosity,
and I therefore determined to ascend the hill behind me which promised
a fine prospect of the adjacent country, nor was I disappointed on my
arrival at it's summit. from hence I overlooked a most beatifull and
extensive plain reaching from the river to the base of the Snowclad
mountains to the S. and S. West; I also observed the missoury streching
it's meandering course to the South through this plain to a great
distance filled to it's even and grassey brim; another large river
flowed in on it's Western side about four miles above me and extended
itself though a level and fertile valley of 3 miles in width a great
distance to the N. W. rendered more conspicuous by the timber which
garnished it's borders. in these plains and more particularly in the
valley just below me immence herds of buffaloe are feeding. the
missouri just above this hill makes a bend to the South where it lies a
smoth even and unruffled sheet of water of nearly a mile in width
bearing on it's watry bosome vast flocks of geese which feed at
pleasure in the delightfull pasture on either border. the young geese
are now completely feathered except the wings which both in the young
and old are yet deficient. after feasting my eyes on this ravishing
prospect and resting myself a few minutes I determined to procede as
far as the river which I saw discharge itself on the West side of the
Missouri convinced that it was the river which the Indians call
medicine river and which they informed us fell into the Missouri just
above the falls I decended the hills and directed my course to the bend
of the Missouri near which there was a herd of at least a thousand
buffaloe; here I thought it would be well to kill a buffaloe and leave
him untill my return from the river and if I then found that I had not
time to get back to camp this evening to remain all night here there
being a few sticks of drift wood lying along shore which would answer
for my fire, and a few sattering cottonwood trees a few hundred yards
below which would afford me at least a semblance of a shelter. under
this impression I scelected a fat buffaloe and shot him very well,
through the lungs; while I was gazeing attentively on the poor anamal
discharging blood in streams from his mouth and nostrils, expecting him
to fall every instant, and having entirely forgotton to reload my
rifle, a large white, or reather brown bear, had perceived and crept on
me within 20 steps before I discovered him; in the first moment I drew
up my gun to shoot, but at the same instant recolected that she was not
loaded and that he was too near for me to hope to perform this
opperation before he reached me, as he was then briskly advancing on
me; it was an open level plain, not a bush within miles nor a tree
within less than three hundred yards of me; the river bank was sloping
and not more than three feet above the level of the water; in short
there was no place by means of which I could conceal myself from this
monster untill I could charge my rifle; in this situation I thought of
retreating in a brisk walk as fast as he was advancing untill I could
reach a tree about 300 yards below me, but I had no sooner terned
myself about but he pitched at me, open mouthed and full speed, I ran
about 80 yards and found he gained on me fast, I then run into the
water the idea struk me to get into the water to such debth that I
could stand and he would be obliged to swim, and that I could in that
situation defend myself with my espontoon; accordingly I ran haistily
into the water about waist deep, and faced about and presented the
point of my espontoon, at this instant he arrived at the edge of the
water within about 20 feet of me; the moment I put myself in this
attitude of defence he sudonly wheeled about as if frightened, declined
the combat on such unequal grounds, and retreated with quite as great
precipitation as he had just before pursued me. as soon as I saw him
run off in that manner I returned to the shore and charged my gun,
which I had still retained in my hand throughout this curious
adventure. I saw him run through the level open plain about three
miles, till he disappeared in the woods on medecine river; during the
whole of this distance he ran at full speed, sometimes appearing to
look behind him as if he expected pursuit. I now began to reflect on
this novil occurrence and indeavoured to account for this sudden
retreat of the bear. I at first thought that perhaps he had not smelt
me before he arrived at the waters edge so near me, but I then
reflected that he had pursued me for about 80 or 90 yards before I took
the water and on examination saw the grownd toarn with his tallons
immediately on the impression of my steps; and the cause of his allarm
still remains with me misterious and unaccountable.- so it was and I
feelt myself not a little gratifyed that he had declined the combat. My
gun reloaded I felt confidence once more in my strength; and determined
not to be thwarted in my design of visiting medicine river, but
determined never again to suffer my peice to be longer empty than the
time she necessarily required to charge her. I passed through the plain
nearly in the direction which the bear had run to medecine river, found
it a handsome stream, about 200 yds. wide with a gentle current,
apparently deep, it's waters clear, and banks which were formed
principally of darkbrown and blue clay were about the hight of those of
the Missouri or from 3 to 5 feet; yet they had not the appearance of
ever being overflown, a circumstance, which I did not expect so
immediately in the neighbourhood of the mountains, from whence I should
have supposed, that sudden and immence torrants would issue at certain
seasons of the year; but the reverse is absolutely the case. I am
therefore compelled to beleive that the snowey mountains yeald their
warters slowly, being partially effected every day by the influence of
the sun only, and never suddonly melted down by haisty showers of rain.

having examined Medecine river I now determined to return, having by my
estimate about 12 miles to walk. I looked at my watch and found it was
half after six P.M.- in returning through the level bottom of Medecine
river and about 200 yards distant from the Missouri, my direction led
me directly to an anamal that I at first supposed was a wolf; but on
nearer approach or about sixty paces distant I discovered that it was
not, it's colour was a brownish yellow; it was standing near it's
burrow, and when I approached it thus nearly, it couched itself down
like a cat looking immediately at me as if it designed to spring on me.
I took aim at it and fired, it instantly disappeared in it's burrow; I
loaded my gun and exmined the place which was dusty and saw the track
from which I am still further convinced that it was of the tiger kind.
whether I struck it or not I could not determine, but I am almost
confident that I did; my gun is true and I had a steady rest by means
of my espontoon, which I have found very serviceable to me in this way
in the open plains. It now seemed to me that all the beasts of the
neighbourhood had made a league to distroy me, or that some fortune was
disposed to amuse herself at my expence, for I had not proceded more
than three hundred yards from the burrow of this tyger cat, before
three bull buffaloe, which wer feeding with a large herd about half a
mile from me on my left, seperated from the herd and ran full speed
towards me, I thought at least to give them some amusement and altered
my direction to meet them; when they arrived within a hundred yards
they mad a halt, took a good view of me and retreated with
precipitation. I then continued my rout homewards passed the buffaloe
which I had killed, but did not think it prudent to remain all night at
this place which really from the succession of curious adventures wore
the impression on my mind of inchantment; at sometimes for a moment I
thought it might be a dream, but the prickley pears which pierced my
feet very severely once in a while, particularly after it grew dark,
convinced me that I was really awake, and that it was necessary to make
the best of my way to camp. it was sometime after dark before I
returned to the party; I found them extremely uneasy for my safety;
they had formed a thousand conjectures, all of which equally forboding
my death, which they had so far settled among them, that they had
already agreed on the rout which each should take in the morning to
surch for me. I felt myself much fortiegued, but eat a hearty supper
and took a good night's rest.- the weather being warm I had left my
leather over shirt and had woarn only a yellow flannin one.

[Clark, June 14, 1805]
June 14th Friday 1805
a fine morning, the Indian woman complaining all night & excessively
bad this morning- her case is Somewhat dangerous- two men with the
Tooth ake 2 with Turners, & one man with a Tumor & Slight fever passed
the Camp Capt. Lewis made the 1st night at which place he had left part
of two bear their skins &c three men with Turners went on shore and
Staycd out all night one of them killed 2 buffalow, a part of which we
made use of for brackfast, the Current excesevely rapid more So as we
assend we find great difficuelty in getting the Perogue & Canoes up in
Safety, Canoes take in water frequently, at 4 oClock this evening Jo.
Fields returned from Capt. Lewis with a letter for me, Capt Lewis dates
his letter from the Great falls of the Missouri, which Fields informs
me is about 20 miles in advance & about 10 miles above the place I left
the river the time I was up last week Capt. L. informs that those
falls; in part answer the discription given of them by the Indians,
much higher the Eagles nest which they describe is there, from those
Signs he is Convinced of this being the river the Indians call the
Missouri, he intends examineing the river above untill my arrival at a
point from which we can make a portage, which he is apprehensive will
be at least 5 miles & both above & below there is Several Small
pitches, & Swift troubled water we made only 10 miles to day and Camped
on the Lard Side, much hard Slate in the Clifts & but a Small quantity
of timber.

[Lewis, June 15, 1805]
Saturday June 15th 1805.
This morning the men again were sent to bring in some more meat which
Drewyer had killed yesterday, and continued the opperation of drying
it. I amused myself in fishing, and sleeping away the fortiegues of
yesterday. I caught a number of very fine trout which I made Goodrich
dry; goodrich also caught about two douzen and several small cat of a
yellow colour which would weigh about 4 lbs. the tails was seperated
with a deep angular nitch like that of the white cat of the missouri
from which indeed they differed only in colour. when I awoke from my
sleep today I found a large rattlesnake coiled on the leaning trunk of
a tree under the shade of which I had been lying at the distance of
about ten feet from him. I killed the snake and found that he had 176
scuta on the abdomen and i'7 half formed scuta on the tale; it was of
the same kinde which I had frequently seen before; they do not differ
in their colours from the rattle snake common to the middle attlantic
states, but considerably in the form and figures of those colours. This
evening after dark Joseph Fields returned and informed me that Capt
Clark had arrived with the party at the foot of a rappid about 5 miles
below which he did not think proper to ascend and would wait my arrival
there. I had discovered from my journey yesterday that a portage on
this side of the river will be attended by much difficulty in
consequence of several deep ravines which intersect the plains nearly
at right angles with the river to a considerable distance, while the
South side appears to be a delighfull smoth unbroken plain; the
bearings of the river also make it pobable that the portage will be
shorter on that side than on this.- I directed Fields to return early
in the morning to Capt. C. and request him to send up a party of men
for the dryed meat which we had made. I finde a very heavy due on the
grass about my camp every morning which no doubt procedes from the mist
of the falls, as it takes place no where in the plains nor on the river
except here.

[Clark, June 15, 1805]
June the 15th Satturday 1805
a fair morning and worm, we Set out at the usial time and proceeded on
with great dificuelty as the river is more rapid we can hear the falls
this morning verry distinctly- our Indian woman Sick &low Spirited I
gave her the bark & apply it exteranaly to her region which revived her
much. the curt. excessively rapid and dificuelt to assend great numbers
of dangerous places, and the fatigue which we have to encounter is
incretiatable the men in the water from morning untill night hauling
the Cord & boats walking on Sharp rocks and round Sliperery Stones
which alternately cut their feet & throw them down, not with Standing
all this dificuelty they go with great chearfulness, aded to those
dificuelties the rattle Snakes inumerable & require great caution to
prevent being bitten.- we passed a Small river on the Lard Side about
30 yards wide verry rapid which heads in the mountains to the S. E. I
Sent up this river 5 miles, it has Some timber in its bottoms and a
fall of 15 feet at one place, above this river the bluffs are of red
earth mixed with Stratums of black Stone, below this little river, we
pass a white clay which mixes with water like flour in every respect,
the Indian woman much wors this evening, She will not take any medison,
her husband petetions to return &c., river more rapid late in the
evening we arrived at a rapid which appeared So bad that I did not
think it prudent to attempt passing of it this evening as it was now
late, we Saw great numbers of Gees Ducks, Crows Blackbirds &c Geese &
Ducks with their young. after Landing I detached Joseph Fields to Capt.
Lewis to let him know where I was &c river rises a little this evening
we could not get a Sufficency of wood for our use

[Lewis, June 16, 1805]
Sunday June 16th 1805
J. Fields set out early on his return to the lower camp, at noon the
men arrived and shortly after I set out with them to rejoin the party.
we took with us the dryed meat consisting of about 600 lbs. and several
douzen of dryed trout. about 2 P.M. I reached the camp found the Indian
woman extreemly ill and much reduced by her indisposition. this gave me
some concern as well for the poor object herself, then with a young
child in her arms, as from the consideration of her being our only
dependence for a friendly negociation with the Snake Indians on whom we
depend for horses to assist us in our portage from the Missouri to the
columbia River. I now informed Capt. C. of my discoveries with rispect
to the most proper side for our portage, and of it's great length,
which I could not estimate at less than 16 miles. Capt. C. had already
sent two men this morning to examine the country on the S. side of the
river; he now passed over with the party to that side and fixed a camp
about a mile blow the entrance of a Creek where there was a sufficient
quantity of wood for fuel, an article which can be obtained but in few
places in this neighbourhood. after discharging the loads four of the
canoes were sent back to me, which by means of strong ropes we hawled
above the rappid and passed over to the south side from whence the
water not being rappid we can readily convey them into the creek by
means of which we hope to get them on the high plain with more ease.
one of the small canoes was left below this rappid in order to pass and
repass the river for the purpose of hunting as well as to procure the
water of the Sulpher spring, the virtues of which I now resolved to try
on the Indian woman. this spring is situated about 200 yards from the
Missouri on the N. E. side nearly opposite to the entrance of a large
creek; it discharges itself into the Missouri over a precepice of rock
about 25 feet, forming a pretty little ____ the water is as transparent
as possible strongly impregnated with sulpher, and I suspect Iron also,
as the colour of the hills and bluffs in the neighbourhood indicate the
existence of that metal. the water to all appearance is precisely
similar to that of Bowyer's Sulpher spring in Virginia. Capt. Clark
determined to set out in the morning to examine and survey the portage,
and discover the best rout. as the distance was too great to think of
transporting the canoes and baggage on the men's shoulders, we
scelected six men, and ordered them to look out some timber this
evening, and early in the morning to set about making a parsel of truck
wheels in order to convey our canoes and baggage over the portage. we
determined to leave the white perogue at this place, and substitute the
Iron boat, and also to make a further deposit of a part of our stores.
in the evening the men who had been sent out to examine the country and
made a very unfavourable report. they informed us that the creek just
above us and two deep ravenes still higher up cut the plain between the
river and mountain in such a manner, that in their opinions a portage
for the canoes on this side was impracticable. good or bad we must make
the portage. notwithstanding this report I am still convinced from the
view I had of the country the day before yesterday that a good portage
may be had on this side at least much better than on the other, and
much nearer also. I found that two dozes of barks and opium which I had
given her since my arrival had produced an alteration in her pulse for
the better; they were now much fuller and more regular. I caused her to
drink the mineral water altogether. wen I first came down I found that
her pulse were scarcely perceptible, very quick frequently irregular
and attended with strong nervous symptoms, that of the twitching of the
fingers and leaders of the arm; now the pulse had become regular much
fuller and a gentle perspiration had taken place; the nervous symptoms
have also in a great measure abated, and she feels herself much freeer
from pain. she complains principally of the lower region of the
abdomen, I therefore continued the cataplasms of barks and laudnumn
which had been previously used by my friend Capt Clark. I beleive her
disorder originated principally from an obstruction of the mensis in
consequence of taking could.- I determined to remain at this camp in
order to make some celestial observations, restore the sick woman, and
have all matters in a state of readiness to commence the portage
immediately on the return of Capt. Clark, who now furnished me with the
dayly occurrences which had taken place with himself and party since
our seperation which I here enter in his own words.

[Clark, June 16, 1805]
June 16th of Sunday 1805
Some rain last night a cloudy morning wind hard from the S. W. we Set
out passed the rapid by double manning the Perogue & Canoes and halted
at 1/4 of a mile to examine the rapids above, which I found to be an
Continued Cascade for as far as could be Seen which was about 2 miles,
I walked up on the Lard Side as high as a large Creek, which falls in
on the Lard. Side one mile above & opposit a large Sulpher Spring which
falls over the rocks on the Std. Side the wind rored from the S. W.
hard & Some rain, at about 2 oClock Capt Lewis joined me from the falls
5 miles distant, & infd. that the Lard Side was the best portage I
despatched 2 men this morning on the Lard. Side to examine the
portage.- the Indian woman verry bad, & will take no medisin what ever,
untill her husband finding her out of her Senses, easyly provailed on
her to take medison, if She dies it will be the fault of her husband as
I am now convinced-. we crossed the river after part of the day and
formed a Camp from which we intended to make the first portage, Capt.
Lewis stayed on the Std Side to direct the Canoes over the first riffle
4 of them passed this evening the others unloaded & part of the Perogue
Loading taken out- I deturmined to examine & Survey the Portage find a
leavel rout if possible- The 2 men despatched to examine the Portage
gave an unfavourable account of the Countrey, reporting that the Creek
& 2 deep reveens cut the Prarie in such a manner between the river and
mountain as to render a portage in their oppinion for the Canoes
impossible- we Selected 6 men to make wheels & to draw the Canoes on as
the distance was probably too far for to be caried on the mens Sholders

[Lewis, June 17, 1805]
Monday June 17th 1805.
Capt. Clark set out early this morning with five men to examine the
country and survey the river and portage as had been concerted last
evening. I set six men at work to pepare four sets of truck wheels with
couplings, toungs and bodies, that they might either be used without
the bodies for transporting our canoes, or with them in transporting
our baggage I found that the Elk skins I had prepared for my boat were
insufficient to compleat her, some of them having become dammaged by
the weather and being frequently wet; to make up this deficiency I sent
out two hunters this morning to hunt Elk; the ballance of the party I
employed first in unloading the white perogue, which we intend leaving
at this place, and bring the whole of our baggage together and
arranging it in proper order near our camp. this duty being compleated
I employed them in taking five of the small canoes up the creek which
we now call portage creek about 13/4 miles; here I had them taken out
and lyed in the sun to dry. from this place ther is a gradual ascent to
the top of the high plain to which we can now take them with ease; the
bluffs of this creek below and those of the river above it's entrance
are so steep that it would be almost impracticable to have gotten them
on the plain. we found much difficulty in geting the canoes up this
creek to the distance we were compelled to take them, in consequence of
the rappids and rocks which obstruct the channel of the creek. one of
the canoes overset and was very near injuring 2 men essencially. just
above the canoes the creek has a perpendicular fall of 5 feet and the
cliffts again become very steep and high. we were fortunate enough to
find one cottonwood tree just below the entrance of portage creek that
was large enough to make our carrage wheels about 22 Inches in
diameter; fortunate I say because I do not beleive that we could find
another of the same size perfectly sound within 20 miles of us. the
cottonwood which we are obliged to employ in the other parts of the
work is extreemly illy calculated for it being soft and brittle. we
have made two axeltrees of the mast of the white peroge, which I hope
will answer tolerably well tho it is reather small. The Indian woman
much better today, I have still continued the same course of medecine;
she is free from pain clear of fever, her pulse regular, and eats as
heartily as I am willing to permit her of broiled buffaloe well
seasoned with pepper and salt and rich soope of the same meat; I think
therefore that there is every rational hope of her recovery. saw a vast
number of buffaloe feeding in every direction arround us in the plains,
others coming down in large herds to water at the river; the fragments
of many carcases of these poor anamals daily pass down the river, thus
mangled I pesume in decending those immence cataracts above us. as the
buffaloe generally go in large herds to water and the passages to the
river about the falls are narrow and steep the hinder part of the herd
press those in front out of their debth and the water instatly takes
them over the cataracts where they are instantly crushed to death
without the possibility of escaping. in this manner I have seen ten or
a douzen disappear in a few minutes. their mangled carcases ly along
the shores below the falls in considerable quantities and afford fine
amusement for the bear wolves and birds of prey; this may be one reason
and I think not a bad one either that the bear are so tenatious of
their right of soil in this neighbourhood.

[Clark, June 17, 1805]
June 17th Monday 1805
a fine morning wind as usial Capt. Lewis with the party unloaded the
Perogue & he determined to keep the party employed in getting the
loading to the Creek about 1 mile over a low hill in my absence on the
Portage.

I Set out with 5 men at 8 oClock, and proceeded on up the Creek Some
distance to examine that & if possable assend that Suffcently high,
that a Streight Cours to the mouth of Medison river would head the 2
reveins, the Creek I found Confined rapid and Shallow generalley

Monday 17th of June passed through an open roleing Prarie, So as to
head the two reveins after heading two we Stand our Course So as to
Strike the river below the great pitch on our Course to the river
Crossed a Deep rivein near its mouth with Steep Clifts this rivein had
running water which was very fine, the river at this place is narrow &
Confined in perpindicular clifts of 170 feet from the tops of those
Clifts the Countrey rises with a Steep assent for about 250 feet more
we proceeded up the river passing a Sucession of rapids & Cascades to
the Falls, which we had herd for Several miles makeing a dedly Sound, I
beheld those Cateracts with astonishment the whole of the water of this
great river Confined in a Channel of 280 yards and pitching over a rock
of 97 feet 3/4 of an, from the foot of the falls arrises a Continued
mist which is extended for 150 yds. down & to near the top of the
Clifts on L Sd. the river below is Confined a narrow Chanl. Of 93 yards
haveing a Small bottom of timber on the Stard Side which is definded by
a rock, rangeing Cross wise the river a little below the Shoot, a Short
distance below this Cataract a large rock divides the Stream, I in
assendending the Clifts to take the hith of the fall was near Slipping
into the water, at which place I must have been Sucked under in an
instant, and with deficuelty and great risque I assended again, and
decended the Clift lower down (but few places Can be descended to the
river) and took the hight with as much accuricy as possible with a
Spirit Leavels &c. dined at a fine Spring 200 yards below the pitch
near which place 4 Cotton willow trees grew. on one of them I marked my
name the date, and hight of the falls,- we then proceeded up on the
river passing a Continued Cascade & rapid to a fall of 19 feet at 4
Small Islands, this fall is diaguanally across the river from the Lard
Side, forming an angle of 3/4 of the width from the Lard. from which
Side it pitches for 2/3 of that distance. on the Stard Side is a rapid
decline- below this Shoot a Deep revein falls in which we Camped for
the night which was Cold (The mountains in every derection has Snow on
Them) The plain to our left is leavel we Saw one Bear & inumerable
numbers of Buffalow, I Saw 2 herds of those animals watering
immediately above a considerable rapid, they decended by a narrow pass
to the bottom Small, the rier forced those forwd into the water Some of
which was taken down in an instant, and Seen no more others made Shore
with difficuelty, I beheld 40 or 50 of those Swimming at the Same time
those animals in this way are lost and accounts for the number of
buffalow carcases below the rapids

[Lewis, June 18, 1805]
Tuesday June 18th 1805.
This morning I employed all hands in drawing the perogue on shore in a
thick bunch of willow bushes some little distance below our camp;
fastened her securely, drove out the plugs of the gage holes of her
bottom and covered her with bushes and driftwood to shelter her from
the sun. I now scelected a place for a cash and set tree men at work to
complete it, and employed all others except those about the waggons, in
overhawling airing and repacking our indian goods ammunition, provision
and stores of every discription which required inspection. examined the
frame of my Iron boat and found all the parts complete except one
screw, which the ingenuity of Sheilds can readily replace, a resource
which we have very frequent occasion for. about 12 O'Clk. the hunters
returned; they had killed 10 deer but no Elk. I begin to fear that we
shall have some difficulty in procuring skins for the boat. I wold
prefer those of the Elk because I beleive them more durable and strong
than those of the Buffaloe, and that they will not shrink so much in
drying. we saw a herd of buffaloe come down to water at the sulpher
spring this evening, I dispatched some hunters to kill some of them,
and a man also for a cask of mineral water. the hunters soon killed two
of them in fine order and returned with a good quantity of the flesh,
having left the remainder in a situation that it will not spoil
provided the wolves do not visit it. The waggons are completed this
evening, and appear as if they would answer the purpose very well if
the axetrees prove sufficiently strong. the wind blew violently this
evening, as they frequently do in this open country where there is not
a tree to brake or oppose their force. The Indian woman is recovering
fast she set up the greater part of the day and walked out for the fist
time since she arrived here; she eats hartily and is free from fever or
pain. I continue same course of medecine and regimen except that I
added one doze of 15 drops of the oil of vitriol today about noon.

There is a species of goosberry which grows very common about here in
open situations among the rocks on the sides of the clifts. they are
now ripe of a pale red colour, about the size of a common goosberry.
and like it is an ovate pericarp of soft pulp invelloping a number of
smal whitish coloured seeds; the pulp is a yelloish slimy muselaginous
substance of a sweetish and pinelike tast, not agreeable to me. the
surface of the berry is covered with a glutinous adhesive matter, and
the frut altho ripe retains it's withered corollar. this shrub seldom
rises more than two feet high and is much branched, the leaves resemble
those of the common goosberry only not so large; it has no thorns. the
berry is supported by seperate peduncles or footstalks of half an inch
in length. immence quantities of small grasshoppers of a brown colour
in the plains, they no doubt contribute much to keep the grass as low
as we find it which is not generally more than three inches, the grass
is a narrow leaf, soft, and affords a fine pasture for the Buffaloe.-

[Clark, June 18, 1805]
June 18th Tuesday 1805
we Set out early and arrived at the second great Cataract at about 200
yds above the last of 19 feet pitch- this is one of the grandest views
in nature and by far exceeds any thing I ever Saw, the Missouri falling
over a Shelveing rock for 47 feet 8 Inches with a Cascade &c of 14 feet
7 Inches above the Shoot for a 1/4 mile I decended the Clift below this
Cateract with ease measured the hight of the purpendicular fall of 47
feet 8 Inches at which place the river is 473 yards wide as also the
hight of the Cascade &c. a continuel mist quite across this fall* after
which we proceeded on up the river a little more than a mile to the
largest fountain or Spring I ever Saw, and doubt if it is not the
largest in America Known, this water boils up from under th rocks near
the edge of the river and falls imediately into the river 8 feet and
keeps its Colour for 1/2 a mile which is emencely Clear and of a bluish
Cast, proceeded on up the river passed a Succession of rapids to the
next great fall of 26 Ft. 5 I. river 580 yards wide this fall is not
intirely perpdincular a Short bench gives a Curve to the water as it
falls a butifull Small Island at the foot of this fall near the Center
of the Channel Covered with trees, the Missouri at this fall is 36
yards wide, a Considerable mist rises at this fall ocasionally, from
this pitch to the head of the rapids is one mile & has a fall of 20
feet, this is also a handsome Scenery a fall in an open leavel plain,
after takeing the hight & measureing the river proceeded on, Saw a
gange of Buffalow Swiming the river above the falls, Several of which
was drawn in to the rapids and with dificuelty mad Shore half drowned,
we killed one of those Cows & took as much meat as we wished. emence
herds of those animals in every direction, passed 2 groves in the Point
just above the rapids & dined in one opposit the mouth of Medison
River, which fails in on the Stard. Side and is 137 yards wide at its
mouth the Missouri above is 800 yards wide, as the river Missouri
appears to bear S Easterley I assended about 4 miles high to a Creek
which appeared to head in South mountains passed a Island of ____ and a
little timber in an Easterly bend at 1 mile, passed Some timber in a
point at 2 mile at or near the lower point of a large Island on which
we Shot at a large white bear. passed a Small Island in the middle and
one close on the Lard Shore at 3 miles behind the head of which we
Camped. those 3 Islands are all opposit, Soon after we Camped two
ganges of Buffalow crossed one above & the other below we killed 7 of
them & a calf and Saved as much of the best of the meat as we could
this evening, one man A Willard going for a load of meat at 170 yards
distance on an Island was attact by a white bear and verry near being
Caught, prosued within 40 yards of Camp where I was with one man I
collected 3 others of the party and prosued the bear (who had prosued
my track from a buffalow I had killed on the Island at about 300 yards
distance and chance to meet Willard) for fear of his attacking one man
Colter at the lower point of the Island, before we had got down the
bear had allarmed the man and prosued him into the water, at our
approach he retreated, and we relieved the man in the water, I Saw the
bear but the bushes was So thick that I could not Shoot him and it was
nearly dark, the wind from the S W & Cool killed a beaver & an elk for
their Skins this evening

[Lewis, June 19, 1805]
Wednesday June 19th 1805.
This morning I sent over several men for the meat which was killed
yesterday, a few hours after they returned with it, the wolves had not
discovered it. I also dispatched George Drewyer Reubin Fields and
George Shannon on the North side of the Missouri with orders to proceed
to the entrance of Medecine river and indeavour to kill some Elk in
that neigh-bourhood. as there is more timber on that river than the
Missouri I expect that the Elk are more plenty. The cash completed
today. The wind blew violently the greater part of the day. the Indian
woman was much better this morning she walked out and gathered a
considerable quantity of the white apples of which she eat so heartily
in their raw state, together with a considerable quantity of dryed fish
without my knowledge that she complained very much and her fever again
returned. I rebuked Sharbono severely for suffering her to indulge
herself with such food he being privy to it and having been previously
told what she must only eat. I now gave her broken dozes of diluted
nitre untill it produced perspiration and at 10 P.M. 30 drops of
laudnum which gave her a tolerable nights rest. I amused myself in
fishing several hours today and caught a number of both species of the
white fish, but no trout nor Cat. I employed the men in making up our
baggage in proper packages for transportation; and waxed the stoppers
of my powder canesters anew. had the frame of my Iron boat clensed of
rust and well greased. in the evening the men mended their mockersons
and preparedthemselves for the portage. After dark my dog barked very
much and seemed extreemly uneasy which was unusual with him; I ordered
the sergt. of the guard to reconniter with two men, thinking it
possible that some Indians might be about to pay us a visit, or perhaps
a white bear; he returned soon after & reported that he believed the
dog had been baying a buffaloe bull which had attempted to swim the
river just above our camp but had been beten down by the stream landed
a little below our camp on the same side & run off.

[Clark, June 19, 1805]
June 19th Wednesday 1805
We went on the Island to hunt the White bear this morning but Could not
find him, after plotting my Courses &c. I deturmined to dry the meat we
killed and leave here, and proceed up the river as far as it bent to
the S. E. and examine a Small Creek above our Camp, I Set out and found
the Creek only Contained back water for 1 mile up, ascend near the
Missouri 3 miles to the bend, from which place it turnd. Westerly, from
this bend I with 2 men went forward towards the Camp of the party to
examine the best ground for the portage, the little Creek has verry
extencive bottoms which Spread out into a varriety of leavl rich
bottoms quite to the mountains to the East, between those bottoms is
hills low and Stoney on this declivity where it is Steep. I returned to
Camp late and deturmined that the best nearest and most eassy rout
would be from the lower part of the 3rd or white bear Island, the wind
all this day blew violently hard from the S W. off the Snowey
mountains, Cool, in my last rout I lost a part of my notes which could
not be found as the wind must have blown them to a great distance.
Summer duck Setting great numbers of buffalow all about our Camp

[Lewis, June 20, 1805]
Thursday June 20th 1805.
This morning we had but little to do; waiting the return of Capt.
Clark; I am apprehensive from his stay that the portage is longer than
we had calculated on. I sent out 4 hunters this morning on the opposite
side of the river to kill buffaloe; the country being more broken on
that side and cut with ravenes they can get within shoot of the
buffaloe with more ease and certainty than on this side of the river.
my object is if possible while we have now but little to do, to lay in
a large stock of dryed meat at this end of the portage to subsist the
party while engaged in the transportation of our baggage &c, to the
end, that they may not be taken from this duty when once commenced in
order to surch for the necessary subsistence. The Indian woman is qute
free from pain and fever this morning and appears to be in a fair way
for recovery, she has been walking about and fishing. In the evening 2
of the hunters returned and informed me that they had killed eleven
buffaloe eight of which were in very fine order, I sent off all hands
immediately to bring in the meat they soon returned with about half of
the best meat leaving three men to remain all night in order to secure
the ballance. the bufhaloe are in inimence numbers, they have been
constantly coming down in large herds to water opposite to us for some
hours sometimes two or three herds wartering at the same instant and
scarcely disappear before others supply their places. they appear to
make great use of the mineral water, whether this be owing to it's
being more convenient to them than the river or that they actually
prefer it I am at a loss to determine for they do not use it
invaryably, but sometimes pass at no great distance from it and water
at the river. brackish water or that of a dark colour impregnated with
mineral salts such as I have frequenly mentioned on the Missouri is
found in small quantities in some of the steep ravenes on the N. side
of the river opposite to us and the falls. Capt. Clark and party
returned late this evening when he gave me the following relation of
his rout and the occurrences which had taken place with them since
their departure.

Capt. Clark now furnished me with the field notes of the survey which
he had made of the Missouri and it's Cataracts cascades &c. from the
entrance of portage Creek to the South Eastwardly bend of the Missouri
above the White bear Islands, which are as follow.

[Clark, June 20, 1805]
June 20th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy morning, a hard wind all night and this morning, I direct
Stakes to be Cut to Stick up in the prarie to Show the way for the
party to transport the baggage &c. &c. we Set out early on the portage,
Soon after we Set out it began to rain and continued a Short time we
proceeded on thro a tolerable leavel plain, and found the hollow of a
Deep rivein to obstruct our rout as it Could not be passed with Canos &
baggage for Some distance above the place we Struck it I examined it
for Some time and finding it late deturmined to Strike the river & take
its Course & distance to Camp which I accordingly did the wind hard
from the S. W. a fair after noon, the river on both Sides Cut with
raveins Some of which is passes thro Steep Clifts into the river, the
Countrey above the falls & up the Medison river is leavel, with low
banks, a chain of mountains to the west Some part of which particuler
those to the N W. & S W are Covered with Snow and appear verry high- I
Saw a rattle Snake in an open plain 2 miles from any Creek or wood.
When I arrived at Camp found all well with great quantites of meet, the
Canoes Capt. Lewis had Carried up the Creek 1 mile to a good place to
assend the band & taken up. Not haveing Seen the Snake Indians or
knowing in fact whither to Calculate on their friendship or hostillity,
we have Conceived our party Sufficiently Small, and therefore have
Concluded not to dispatch a Canoe with a part of our men to St. Louis
as we have intended early in the Spring. we fear also that Such a
measure might also discourage those who would in Such Case remain, and
migh possibly hazard the fate of the expedition. we have never hinted
to any one of the party that we had Such a Scheem in contemplation, and
all appear perfectly to have made up their minds, to Succeed in the
expedition or perish in the attempt. we all believe that we are about
to enter on the most perilous and dificuelt part of our Voyage, yet I
See no one repineing; all appear ready to meet those dificuelties which
await us with resolution and becomeing fortitude.

We had a heavy dew this morning. the Clouds near those mountains rise
Suddonly and discharge their Contents partially on the neighbouring
Plains; the Same Cloud discharge hail alone in one part, hail and rain
in another and rain only in a third all within the Space of a fiew
Miles; and on the Mountains to the South & S. E. of us Sometimes Snow.
at present there is no Snow on those mountains; that which covered them
a fiew days ago has all disappeared. the Mountains to the N. W. and
West of us are Still entirely Covered are white and glitter with the
reflection of the Sun.

I do not believe that the Clouds that pervale at this Season of the
year reach the Summits of those lofty mountains; and if they do the
probability is that they deposit Snow only for there has been no
proceptable diminution of the Snow which they Contain Since we first
Saw them. I have thought it probable that these mountains might have
derived their appellation of Shineing Mountains, from their glittering
appearance when the Sun Shines in certain directions on the Snow which
Cover them.

Dureing the time of my being on the Plains and above the falls I as
also all my party repeatedly heard a nois which proceeded from a
Direction a little to the N. of West, as loud and resembling precisely
the discharge of a piece of ordinance of 6 pounds at the distance of 5
or six miles. I was informed of it Several times by the men J. Fields
particularly before I paid any attention to it, thinking it was thunder
most probably which they had mistaken. at length walking in the plains
yesterday near the most extreem S. E. bend of the River above the falls
I heard this nois very distinctly, it was perfectly calm clear and not
a Cloud to be Seen, I halted and listened attentively about two hour
dureing which time I heard two other discharges, and took the direction
of the Sound with my pocket Compass which was as nearly West from me as
I could estimate from the Sound. I have no doubt but if I had leasure I
could find from whence it issued. I have thought it probable that it
might be caused by running water in Some of the caverns of those emence
mountains, on the principal of the blowing caverns; but in Such case
the Sounds would be periodical and regular, which is not the Case with
this, being Sometimes heard once only and at other times Several
discharges in quick Succession. it is heard also at different times of
the day and night. I am at a great loss to account for this Phenomenon.
I well recollect hereing the Minitarees Say that those Rocky Mountains
make a great noise, but they could not tell me the Cause, neither Could
they inform me of any remarkable substance or situation in these
mountains which would autherise a conjecture of a probable cause of
this noise-. it is probable that the large river just above those Great
falls which heads in the detection of the noise has taken it's name
Medicine River from this unaccountable rumbling Sound, which like all
unacountable thing with the Indians of the Missouri is Called Medicine.

The Ricaras inform us of the black mountains making a Simalar noise &c.
&c. and maney other wonderfull tales of those Rocky mountains and those
great falls.

[Lewis, June 21, 1805]
Friday June 21st 1805.
This morning I employed the greater part of the men in transporting a
part of the bagage over portage creek to the top of the high plain
about three miles in advance on the portage. I also had one canoe
carryed on truck wheles to the same place and put the baggage in it, in
order to make an early start in the morning, as the rout of our portage
is not yet entirely settled, and it would be inconvenient to remain in
the open plain all night at a distance from water, which would probably
be the case if we did not set out early as the latter part of the rout
is destitute of water for about 8 miles- having determined to go to the
upper part of the portage tomorrow; in order to prepare my boat and
receive and take care of the stores as they were transported, I caused
the Iron frame of the boat and the necessary tools my private baggage
and Instruments to be taken as a part of this load, also the baggage of
Joseph Fields, Sergt. Gass and John sheilds, whom I had scelected to
assist me in constructing the leather boat. Three men were employed
today in shaving the Elk skins which had ben collected for the boat.
the ballance of the party were employed in cuting the meat we had
killed yesterday into thin Retches and drying it, and in bring in the
ballance of what had been left over the river with three men last
evening. I readily preceive several difficulties in preparing the
leather boat which are the want of convenient and proper timber; bark,
skins, and above all that of pitch to pay her seams, a deficiency that
I really know not how to surmount unless it be by means of tallow and
pounded charcoal which mixture has answered a very good purpose on our
wooden canoes heretofore. I have seen for the first time on the
Missouri at these falls, a species of fishing ducks with white wings,
brown and white body and the head and part of the neck adjoining of a
brick red, and the beak narrow; which I take to be the same common to
James river, the Potomac and Susquehanna. immence numbers of buffaloe
comeing to water at the river as usual. the men who remained over the
river last night killed several mule deer, and Willard who was with me
killed a young Elk. The wind blew violently all day. The growth of the
neighbourhood what little there is consists of the broad and narrow
leafed cottonwood, box alder, the large or sweet willow, the narrow and
broad leafed willow. the sweet willow has not been common to the
Missouri below this or the entrance of Maria's river; here attains to
the same size and in appearance much the same as in the Atlantic
States. the undergrowth consists of rosebushes, goosberry and current
bushes, honeysuckle small, and the red wood, the inner bark of which
the engages are fond of smoking mixed with tobacco.

[Clark, June 21, 1805]
June 21st Friday 1805
a fine morning wind from the S W. off the mountains and hard, Capt
Lewis with the men except a few take a part of the baggage & a Canoe up
the Hill 3 mile in advance, Several men employed in Shaveing & Graneing
Elk hides for the Iron boat as it is called- 3 men were Sent up the
Medison river yesterday to kill Elk for the Skins for the boat, I fear
that we Shall be put to Some dificuelty in precureing Elk Skins
Sufficent-, Cloudy afternoon, we dry meat for the men to eat on their
return from the upper part of the portage Capt Lewis determine to
proceed to the upper part of the Portage tomorrow & with 3 men proced
to fix the Iron boat with Skins &c. &c.

[Lewis, June 22, 1805]
Saturday June 22cd 1805.
This morning early Capt Clark and myself with all the party except
Sergt. Ordway Sharbono, Goodrich, york and the Indian woman, set out to
pass the portage with the canoe and baggage to the Whitebear Islands,
where we intend that this portage shall end. Capt. Clarke piloted us
through the plains. about noon we reached a little stream about 8 miles
on the portage where we halted and dined; we were obliged here to renew
both axeltrees and the tongues and howns of one set of wheels which
took us no more than 2 hours. these parts of our carriage had been made
of cottonwood and one axetree of an old mast, all of which proved
deficient and had broken down several times before we reached this
place we have now renewed them with the sweet willow and hope that they
will answer better. after dark we had reached within half a mile of our
intended camp when the tongues gave way and we were obliged to leave
the canoe, each man took as much of the baggage as he could carry on
his back and proceeded to the river where we formed our encampment much
fortiegued. the prickly pears were extreemly troublesome to us sticking
our feet through our mockersons. Saw a great number of buffaloe in the
plains, also immence quantities of little birds and the large brown
curloo; the latter is now seting; it lays it's eggs, which are of a
pale blue with black specks, on the ground without any preperation of a
nest. there is a kind of larke here that much resembles the bird called
the oldfield lark with a yellow brest and a black spot on the croop;
tho this differs from ours in the form of the tail which is pointed
being formed of feathers of unequal length; the beak is somewhat longer
and more curved and the note differs considerably; however in size,
action, and colours there is no perceptable difference; or at least
none that strikes my eye. after reaching our camp we kindled our fires
and examined the meat which Capt. Clark had left, but found only a
small proportion of it, the wolves had taken the greater part. we eat
our suppers and soon retired to rest.

[Clark, June 22, 1805]
June 22nd Satturday 1805
a fine morning, Capt Lewis my Self and all the party except a Sergeant
Ordway Guterich and the Interpreter and his wife Sar car gah we a (who
are left at Camp to take Care of the baggage left) across the portage
with one Canoe on truck wheels and loaded with a part of our Baggage I
piloted thro the plains to the Camp I made at which place I intended
the portage to end which is 3 miles above the Medesin River we had
great dificuelty in getting on as the axeltree broke Several times, and
the Cuppling tongus of the wheels which was of Cotton & willow, the
only wood except Boxelder & ____ that grow in this quarter, we got
within half a mile of our intended Camp much fatigued at dark, our
tongus broke & we took a load to the river on the mens back, where we
found a number of wolves which had distroyed a great part of our meat
which I had left at that place when I was up day before yesterday we
Soon went to Sleep & Slept Sound wind from the ____ we deturmine to
employ every man Cooks & all on the portage after to day

Canoe and baggage brought up, after which we breakfasted and nearly
consumed the meat which he had left here. he now set out on his return
with the party. I employed the three men with me in the forenoon
clearing away the brush and forming our camp, and puting the frame of
the boat together. this being done I sent Shields and Gass to look out
for the necessary timber, and with J. Fields decended the river in the
canoe to the mouth of Medicine river in surch of the hunters whom I had
dispatched thither on the 19th inst. and from whom we had not heard a
sentence. I entered the mouth of medicine river and ascended it about
half a mile when we landed and walked up the Stard. side. frequently
hooping as we went on in order to find the hunters; at length after
ascending the river about five miles we found Shannon who had passed
the Medecine river & fixed his camp on the Lard. side, where he had
killed seven deer and several buffaloe and dryed about 600 lbs. of
buffaloe meat; but had killed no Elk. Shannon could give me no further
account of R. Fields and Drewyer than that he had left them about noon
on the 19th at the great falls and had come on the mouth of Medicine
river to hunt Elk as he had been directed, and never had seen them
since. the evening being now far spent I thought it better to pass the
Medicine river and remain all night at Shannon's camp; I passed the
river on a raft which we soon constructed for the purpose. the river is
here about 80 yds. wide, is deep and but a moderate current. the banks
low as those of the Missouri above the falls yet never appear to
overflow. as it will give a better view of the transactions of the
party, I shall on each day give the occurrences of both camps during
our seperation as I afterwards learnt those of the lower camp from
Capt. Clark. on his return today he cut of several angles of the rout
by which we came yesterday, shortened the portage considerably,
measured it and set up stakes throughout as guides to marke the rout.
he returned this evening to the lower camp in sufficient time to take
up two of the canoes from portage creek to the top of the plain about a
mile in advance. this evening the men repaired their mockersons, and
put on double souls to protect their feet from the prickley pears.
during the late rains the buffaloe have troden up the praire very much,
which having now become dry the sharp points of earth as hard as frozen
ground stand up in such abundance that there is no avoiding them. this
is particulary severe on the feet of the men who have not only their
own wight to bear in treading on those hacklelike points but have also
the addition of the burthen which they draw and which in fact is as
much as they can possibly move with. they are obliged to halt and rest
frequently for a few minutes, at every halt these poor fellows tumble
down and are so much fortiegued that many of them are asleep in an
instant; in short their fatiegues are incredible; some are limping from
the soreness of their feet, others faint and unable to stand for a few
minutes, with heat and fatiegue, yet no one complains, all go with
cheerfullness. in evening Reubin Fields returned to the lower camp and
informed Capt. Clark of the absence of Shannon, with rispect to whome
they were extreemly uneasy. Fields and Drewyer had killed several
buffaloe at the bend of the missouri above the falls and had dryed a
considerable quantity of meat; they had also killed several deer but no
Elk.

[Clark, June 23, 1805]
June 23rd Sunday 1805
a Cloudy morning wind from the S. E, after getting the Canoe to Camp &
the articles left in the plains we eate brackfast of the remaining meat
found in Camp & I with the party the truck wheels & poles to Stick up
in the prarie as a guide, Set out on our return, we proceeded on, &
measured the Way which I Streightened considerably from that I went on
yesterday, and arrived at our lower camp in Suffcent time to take up 2
Canoes on the top of the hill from the Creek, found all Safe at Camp
the men mended their mockersons with double Soles to Save their feet
from the prickley pear, (which abounds in the Praries,) and the hard
ground which in Some & maney places So hard as to hurt the feet verry
much, the emence number of Buffalow after the last rain has trod the
flat places in Such a manner as to leave it uneaven, and that has tried
and is wors than frozen ground, added to those obstructions, the men
has to haul with all their Strength wate & art, maney times every man
all catching the grass & knobes & Stones with their hands to give them
more force in drawing on the Canoes & Loads, and notwithstanding the
Coolness of the air in high presperation and every halt, those not
employed in reparing the Couse; are asleep in a moment, maney limping
from the Soreness of their feet Some become fant for a fiew moments,
but no man Complains all go Chearfully on- to State the fatigues of
this party would take up more of the journal than other notes which I
find Scercely time to Set down. I had the best rout Staked out and
measured which is 17 miles 3/4 to the river & 1/2 a mile up i.e 181/4
miles portage- from the lower rapid to the 1st Creek is 286 poles, to a
Deep run of water, Called Willow Run is 6 miles thence to the river 3
miles above Medison Riv at 3 Island Called White Bear Islands is 11
miles all prarie without wood or water except at the Creek & run which
afford a plenty of fine water and a little wood the plain is tolerably
leavel except at the river a Small assent & passing a low hill from the
Creek a rough & Steep assent for about 1/4 of a mile and Several
Gullies & a gradual hill for 11/2 miles the heads of Several gullies
which have Short assents & the willow run of a Steep hill on this run
grows Purple & red Currents. the red is now ripe the Purple full grown,
an emence number of Prarie birds now Setting of two kinds one larger
than a Sparrow dark yellow the Center feathers of its tail yellow & the
out Sides black Some Streeks about its neck, the other about the Same
Size White tail

[Lewis, June 24, 1805]
Monday June 24th 1805.
Supposing that Drewyer and R. Fields might possibly be still higher up
medicine river, I dispatched J. Fields up the river with orders to
proceede about four miles and then return whether he found them or not
and join Shannon at this camp. I set out early and walked down the
South West side of the river and sent Shannon down the opposite side to
bring the canoe over to me and put me across the Missouri; having
landed on the Lard. side of the Missouri I sent Shannon back with the
canoe to ascend the Medicine river as far as his camp to meet J. Fields
and bring the dryed meat at that place to the camp at the white bear
Islands which accomplished and arrived with Fields this evening. the
party also arrived this evening with two canoes from the lower camp.
they were wet and fatiegued, gave them a dram. R. Fields came with them
and gave me an account of his & Drewyer's hunt, and informed me that
Drewyer was still at their camp with the meat they had dryed. the iron
frame of my boat is 36 feet long 41/2 F. in the beam and 26 Inches in
the hole.

This morning early Capt. Clark had the remaining canoe drawn out of the
water; and divided the remainder of our baggage into three parcels, one
of which he sent today by the party with two canoes. The Indian woman
is now perfectly recovered. Capt. C. came a few miles this morning to
see the party under way and returned. on my arrival at the upper camp
this morning, I found that Sergt. Gass and Shields had made but slow
progress in collecting timber for the boat; they complained of great
difficulty in geting streight or even tolerably streight sticks of 4/2
feet long. we were obliged to make use of the willow and box alder, the
cottonwood being too soft and brittle. I kept one of them collecting
timber while the other shaved and fitted them. I have found some pine
logs among the drift wood near this place, from which, I hope to obtain
as much pitch as will answer to pay the seams of the boat. I directed
Fraizer to remain in order to sew the hides together, and form the
covering for the boat.

[Clark, June 24, 1805]
June 24th Monday 1805
a Cloudy morning I rose early had, the remaining Canoe hauled out of
the water to dry and divided the baggage into 3 parcels, one of which
the party took on their backs & one waggon with truk wheels to the
Canoes 3 miles in advance (Those Canoes or 5 of our Canoes were Carried
up the Creek 13/4 of a mile taken out on the bank and left to dry from
which place they are taken up a point and intersects this rout from the
mouth of the Creek at 3 miles from the foot of the rapids) after
getting up their loads they divided men & load & proceeded on with 2
canoes on truck wheels as before, I accompaned them 4 miles and
returned, my feet being verry Sore from the walk over ruts Stones &
hills & thro the leavel plain for 6 days proceeding Carrying my pack
and gun. Some few drops of rain in the fore part of the day, at 6
oClock a black Cloud arose to the N West, the wind shifted from the S
to that point and in a short time the earth was entirely Covered with
hail, Some rain Succeeded, which Continud for about an hour very
moderately on this Side of the river, without the earths being wet 1/2
an inch, the riveins on the opposit or N W Side discharged emence
torrents of water into the river, & Showed evidently that the rain was
much heavyer on that Side, Some rain at different times in the night
which was worm- Thunder without lightning accompanied the hail Cloud

[Lewis, June 25, 1805]
Tuesday June 25th 1805.
This morning early I sent the party back to the lower camp; dispatched
Frazier down with the canoe for Drewyer and the meat he had collected,
and Joseph Fields up the Missouri to hunt Elk. at eight OCIk. sent Gass
and Sheilds over to the large Island for bark and timber. about noon
Fields returned and informed me that he had seen two white bear near
the river a few miles above and in attempting to get a shoot them had
stumbled uppon a third which immediately made at him being only a few
steps distant; that in runing in order to escape from the bear he had
leaped down a steep bank of the river on a stony bar where he fell cut
his hand bruised his knees and bent his gun. that fortunately for him
the bank hid him from the bear when he fell and that by that means he
had escaped. this man has been truly unfortunate with these bear, this
is the second time that he has narrowly escaped from them. about 2 P. M
Shields and Gass returned with but a small quantity of both bark and
timber and informed me that it was all they could find on the Island;
they had killed two Elk the skins of which and a part of the flesh they
brought with them. in the evening Drewyer and Frazier arrivd with about
800 lbs. of excellent dryed meat and about 100 lbs of tallow. The river
is about 800 yds. wide opposite to us above these islands, and has a
very gentle current the bottoms are hadsome level and extensive on both
sides; the bank on this side is not more than 2 feet above the level of
the water; it is a pretty little grove in which our camp is situated.
there is a species of wild rye which is now heading it rises to the
hight of 18 or 20 inches, the beard is remarkably fine and soft it is a
very handsome grass the culm is jointed and is in every rispect the
wild rye in minuture. great quantities of mint also are here it
resemble the pepper mint very much in taste and appearance. the young
blackbirds which are almost innumerable in these islands just begin to
fly. see a number of water tarripens. I have made an unsuccessfull
attempt to catch fish, and do not think there are any in this part of
the river. The party that returned this evening to the lower camp
reached it in time to take one canoe on the plain and prepare their
baggage for an early start in the morning after which such as were able
to shake a foot amused themselves in dancing on the green to the music
of the violin which Cruzatte plays extreemly well.

Capt. C. somewhat unwell today. he made Charbono kook for the party
against their return. it is worthy of remark that the winds are
sometimes so strong in these plains that the men informed me that they
hoisted a sail in the canoe and it had driven her along on the truck
wheels. this is really sailing on dry land.

[Clark, June 25, 1805]
June 25th Tuesday 1805
a fair worm morning, Clouded & a few drops of rain at 5 oClock A.M.
fair I feel my Self a little unwell with a looseness &c. &c. put out
the Stores to dry & Set Chabonah &c to Cook for the party against their
return-he being the only man left on this Side with me I had a little
Coffee for brackfast which was to me a riarity as I had not tasted any
Since last winter. The wind from the N. W. & worm. This Countrey has a
romantick appearance river inclosed between high and Steep hills Cut to
pieces by revines but little timber and that Confined to the Rivers &
Creek, the Missourie has but a fiew Scattering trees on its borders,
and only one Solitary Cotton tree in sight of my Camp the wood which we
burn is drift wood which is broken to pieces in passing the falls, not
one large tree longer than about 8 or 10 feet to be found drifted below
the falls the plains are inferior in point of Soil to those below, more
Stone on the sides of the hill, grass but a few inches high and but few
flowers in the Plains, great quantites of Choke Cheries, Goose burres,
red & yellow berries, & red & Purple Currents on the edges of water
Courses in bottoms & damp places, about my Camp the Cliffs or bluffs
are a hard red or redish brown earth Containing Iron. we Catch great
quantities of Trout, and a kind of mustel, flat backs & a Soft fish
resembling a Shad and a few Cat. at 5 oClock the party returned,
fatigued as usial, and proceeded to mend their mockersons &c. and G
Shannon & R, Fds. to of the men who ware Sent up the medison river to
hunt Elk, they killed no Elk, Several Buffalow & Deer, and reports that
the river is 120 yds wide and about 8 feet deep Some timber on its
borders- a powerfull rain fell on the party on their rout yesterday Wet
Some fiew articles, and Caused the rout to be So bad wet & Deep thay
Could with dificuelty proceed, Capt. Lewis & the men with him much
employd with the Iron Boat in fitting it for the water, dispatched one
man to George Drewyers Camp below medison river for meat &c. a fair
after noon- great numbers of buffalow water opposit to my Camp everry
day- it may be here worthy of remark that the Sales were hoised in the
Canoes as the men were drawing them and the wind was great relief to
them being Sufficeritly Strong to move the Canoes on the Trucks, this
is Saleing on Dry land in every Sence of the word, Serjeant N Pryor
Sick, the party amused themselves with danceing untill 10 oClock all
Chearfullness and good humer, they all tied up their loads to make an
early Start in the morning.

[Lewis, June 26, 1805]
Wednesday June 26th 1805.
The Musquetoes are extreemly troublesome to us. This morning early I
dispatched J. Fields and Drewyer in one of the canoes up the river to
hunt Elk. set Frazier at work to sew the skins together for the
covering of the boat. Sheilds and Gas I sent over the river to lurch a
small timbered bottom on that side opposite to the Islands for timber
and bark; and to myself I assign the duty of cook as well for those
present as for the party which I expect again to arrive this evening
from the lower camp. I collected my wood and water, boiled a large
quantity of excellent dryed buffaloe meat and made each man a large
suet dumpling by way of a treat. about 4 P.M. Shields and Gass returned
with a better supply of timber than they had yet collected tho not by
any means enough. they brought some bark principally of the Cottonwood
which I found was too brittle and soft for the purpose; for this
article I find my only dependence is the sweet willow which has a tough
& strong bark. Shields and Gass had killed seven buffaloe in their
absence the skins of which and a part of the best of the meat they
brought with them. if I cannot procure a sufficient quantity of Elk's
skins I shall substitute those of the buffaloe. late in the evening the
party arrived with two more canoes and another portion of the baggage.
Whitehouse one of them much heated and fortiegued on his arrivall dank
a very hearty draught of water and was taken almost instanly extreemly
ill. his pulse were very full and I therefore bled him plentifully from
which he felt great relief. I had no other instrument with which to
perform this opperation but my pen knife, however it answered very
well. the wind being from S. E today and favourable the men made
considerable progress by means of their sails.

At the lower Camp. The party set out very early from this place, and
took with them two canoes and a second alotment of baggage consisting
of Parched meal, Pork, powder lead axes, tools, bisquit, portable
soupe, some merchandize and cloathing. Capt. C. gave Sergt. Pryor a
doze of salts this morning and employed Sharbono in rendering the
buffaloe tallow which had been collected there, he obtained a
sufficient quantity to fill three empty kegs. Capt. C. also scelected
the articles to be deposited in the cash consisting of my desk which I
had left for that purpose and in which I had left some books, my
specimens of plants minerals &c. collected from fort Mandan to that
place. also 2 Kegs of Pork, 1/2 a Keg of flour 2 blunderbushes, 1/2 a
keg of fixed ammunition and some other small articles belonging to the
party which could be dispenced with. deposited the swivel and carriage
under the rocks a little above the camp near the river. great numbers
of buffaloe still continue to water daily opposite the camp. The
antelopes still continue scattered and seperate in the plains. the
females with their young only of which they generally have two, and the
males alone. Capt. Clarke measured the rout from the Camp at the
Whitebear Islands to the lower camp which is as follows.-

[Clark, June 26, 1805]
June 26th Wednesday 1805
Some rain last night this morning verry Cloudy the party Set out this
morning verry early with their loads to the Canoe Consisting of Parched
meal Pork Powder Lead axes, Tools Bisquit, P. Soup & Some Merchendize &
Clothes &c. &c. I gave Serjt. Pryor a dolt of Salts, & Set Chabonah to
trying up the Buffalow tallow & put into the empty Kegs &c. I assort
our articles for to be left at this place buried, ____ Kegs of Pork,
1/2 a Keg of flour, 2 blunderbuts, ____ Caterrages a few Small
lumbersom articles Capt Lewiss Desk and Some books & Small articles in
it

The wind from the N. W. verry worm flying Clouds in the evening the
wind Shifted round to the East & blew hard, which is a fair wind for
the two Canoes to Sail on the Plains across the portage, I had three
Kegs of Buffalow Grease tried up. Great numbers of Buffalow opposite to
our Camp watering to day.

[Lewis, June 27, 1805]
Thursday June 27th 1805.
The party returned early this morning for the remaining canoe and
baggage; Whitehouse was not quite well this morning I therefore
detained him and about 10 A.M. set him at work with Frazier sewing the
skins together for the boat; Shields and Gass continued the operation
of shaving and fiting the horizontall bars of wood in the sections of
the boat; the timber is so crooked and indifferent that they make but
little progress, for myself I continued to act the part of cook in
order to keep all hands employed. some Elk came near our camp and we
killed 2 of them at 1 P.M. a cloud arrose to the S. W. and shortly
after came on attended with violent Thunder Lightning and hail &c. (see
notes on diary of the weather for June). soon after this storm was over
Drewyer and J. Fields returned. they were about 4 miles above us during
the storm, the hail was of no uncommon size where they were. They had
killed 9 Elk and three bear during their absence; one of the bear was
the largest by far that we have yet seen; the skin appear to me to be
as large as a common ox. while hunting they saw a thick brushey bottom
on the bank of the river where from the tracks along shore they
suspected that there were bare concealed; they therefore landed without
making any nois and climbed a leaning tree and placed themselves on
it's branches about 20 feet above the ground, when thus securely fixed
they gave a hoop and this large bear instantly rushed forward to the
place from whence he had heard the human voice issue, when he arrived
at the tree he made a short paus and Drewyer shot him in the head. it
is worthy of remark that these bear never climb. the fore feet of this
bear measured nine inches across and the hind feet eleven and - 3/4 in
length & exclusive of the tallons and seven inches in width. a bear
came within thirty yards of our camp last night and eat up about thirty
weight of buffaloe suit which was hanging on a pole. my dog seems to be
in a constant state of alarm with these bear and keeps barking all
night. soon after the storm this evening the water on this side of the
river became of a deep crimson colour which I pesume proceeded from
some stream above and on this side. there is a kind of soft red stone
in the bluffs and bottoms. of the gullies in this neighbourhood which
forms this colouring matter.- At the lower camp. Capt. Clark completed
a draught of the river with the couses and distances from the entrance
of the Missouri to Ft. Mandan, which we intend depositing here in order
to guard against accedents. Sergt. Pryor is somewhat better this
morning. at 4 P.M. the party returned from the upper camp; Capt. C.
gave them a drink of grog; they prepared for the labour of the next
day. soon after the party returned it began to rain accompanyed by some
hail and continued a short time; a second shower fell late in the
evening accompanyed by a high wind from N. W.- the mangled carcases of
several buffaloe pass down the river today which had no doubt perished
in the falls.

[Clark, June 27, 1805]
June 27th Thursday 1805
a fair warm morning wind from the S, E, and moderate. Serjt. Pryor
Something better this morning, I proceed to finish a rough draugh of
the river & Distances to leave at this place, the wormest day we have
had this year, at 4 oClock the Party returned from the head of the
portage Soon after it began to hail and rain hard and continued for a
fiew minits & Ceased for an hour and began to rain again with a heavy
wind from the N W. I refresh the men with a drink of grog The river
beginning to rise a little the water is Coloured a redish brown, the
Small Streams, discharges in great torrents, and partake of the Choler
of the earth over which it passes-a great part of which is light & of a
redish brown. Several Buffalow pass drowned & in passing over the falls
Cloudy all night, Cold

[Lewis, June 28, 1805]
Friday June 28th 1805.
Set Drewyer to shaving the Elk skins, Fields to make the cross stays
for the boat, Frazier and Whitehouse continue their operation with the
skins, Shields and Gass finish the horizontal bars of the sections;
after which I sent them in surch of willow bark, a sufficient supply of
which they now obtained to bind the boat. expecting the party this
evening I prepared a supper for them but they did not arrive. not
having quite Elk skins enough I employed three buffaloe hides to cover
one section. not being able to shave these skins I had them singed
pretty closely with a blazeing torch; I think they will answer
tolerable well. The White bear have become so troublesome to us that I
do not think it prudent to send one man alone on an errand of any kind,
particularly where he has to pass through the brush. we have seen two
of them on the large Island opposite to us today but are so much
engaged that we could not spare the time to hunt them but will make a
frolick of it when the party return and drive them from these islands.
they come close arround our camp every night but have never yet
ventured to attack us and our dog gives us timely notice of their
visits, he keeps constantly padroling all night. I have made the men
sleep with their arms by them as usual for fear of accedents. the river
is now about nine inches higher than it was on my arrival. lower Camp.
early this morning Capt. C. dispatched the remaining canoe with some
baggage to the top of the plain above Portage creek three miles in
advance; some others he employed in carrying the articles to the cash
and depositing them and others to mend the carriages which wer somewhat
out of repair. this being accomplished he loaded the two carriages with
the remaining baggage and set out with all the party and proceeded on
with much difficulty to the canoe in the plain. portage creek had
arisen considerably and the water was of crimson colour and illy
tasted. on his arrival at the canoe he found there was more baggage
than he could possibly take at one load on the two sets of trucks and
therefore left some barrels of pork & flour and a few heavy boxes of
amunition which could not well be injured, and proceeded with the canoe
& one set of trucks loaded with baggage to willow run where he encamped
for the night, and killed two buffaloe to subsist the party. soon after
his arrival at willow run he experienced a hard shower of rain which
was succeeded by a violent wind from the S. W. off the snowy mountains,
accompanyed with rain; the party being cold and wet, he administered
the consolation of a dram to each.

[Clark, June 28, 1805]
June 28th Friday 1805
a fair morning wind from the South I dispatch the remaining Canoe with
baggage in her to the top of the Hill three miles, imploy Some hands in
Carrying those things we intend to deposit to the Carsh or hole, Some
to repareing one of the trucks &c. &c. the water is riseing and of a
redish brown Cholour after Covering the Carshe & loading the two
Carrges with the remaining part of our Baggage we all Set out passed
the Creek which had rose a little and the water nearly red, and bad
tasted, we assended the hill to the place the Canoe lay with great
labour, at the Canoe at which place we left Some boxes & Kegs of Pork &
flour for another Load, and proceeded on with the Canoe & what baggage
we could draw on the wheels to willow run 6 miles where we Camped, this
run mearly Some water remaining in holes &c. Soon after we halted we
had a Shower, and at dark we expereinced a most dredfull wind from off
the Snow Mountains to the S. W. accompd. with rain which continued at
intervales all night men wet. I refreshed them with a dram. Killed 2
Buffalow. Great nos. about

[Lewis, June 29, 1805]
Saturday June 29th 1805.
This morning we experienced a heavy shower of rain for about an hour
after which it became fair. not having seen the large fountain of which
Capt. Clark spoke I determined to visit it today as I could better
spare this day from my attention to the boat than probably any other
when the work would be further advanced; accordingly after seting the
hands at their several employments I took Drewyer and seet out for the
fountain and passed through a level beautiful plain for about Six miles
when I reached the brake of the river hills here we were overtaken by a
violent gust of wind and rain from the S. W. attended with thunder and
Litning. I expected a hail storm probably from this cloud and therefore
took refuge in a little gully wher there were some broad stones with
which I purposed protecting my head if we should have a repetition of
the seene of the 27th but fortunately we had but little hail and that
not large; I sat very composedly for about an hour without sheter and
took a copious drenching of rain; after the shower was over I continued
my rout to the fountain which I found much as Capt. C; had discribed &
think it may well be retained on the list of prodegies of this
neighbourhood towards which, nature seems to have dealt with a liberal
hand, for I have scarcely experienced a day since my first arrival in
this quarter without experiencing some novel occurrence among the party
or witnessing the appearance of some uncommon object. I think this
fountain the largest I ever beheld, and the hadsome cascade which it
affords over some steep and irregular rocks in it's passage to the
river adds not a little to it's beauty. it is about 25 yds. from the
river, situated in a pretty little level plain, and has a suddon decent
of about 6 feet in one part of it's course. the water of this fountain
is extreemly tranparent and cold; nor is it impregnated with lime or
any other extranious matter which I can discover, but is very pure and
pleasent. it's waters marke their passage as Capt. Clark observes for a
considerable distance down the Missouri notwithstanding it's rapidity
and force. the water of the fountain boil up with such force near it's
center that it's surface in that part seems even higher than the
surrounding earth which is a firm handsom terf of fine green grass.
after amusing myself about 20 minutes in examining the fountain I found
myself so chilled with my wet cloaths that I determined to return and
accordingly set out; on our way to camp we found a buffaloe dead which
we had shot as we came out and took a parsel of the meat to camp it was
in very good order; the hump and tongue of a fat buffaloe I esteem
great delicasies. on my arrival at camp I was astonished not to find
the party yet arrived, but then concluded that probably the state of
the praries had detained them, as in the wet state in which they are at
present the mud sticks to the wheels is such manner that they are
obliged to halt frequently and clense them. Transaction and
occurrencies which took place with Capt. Clark and party today.

Shortly after the rain which fell early this morning he found it
imposseble from the state of the plains for the party to reach the
upper extremity of the portage with their present load, and therefore
sent back almost all of the party to bring the baggage which had been
left behind yesterday. he determined himself to pass by the way of the
river to camp in order to supply the deficiency of some notes and
remarks which he had made as he first ascended the river but which he
had unfortunately lost. accordingly he left one man at Willow run to
guard the baggage and took with him his black man York, Sharbono and
his indian woman also accompanyed Capt. C. on his arrival at the falls
he perceived a very black cloud rising in the West which threatened
immediate rain; he looked about for a shelter but could find none
without being in great danger of being blown into the river should the
wind prove as violent as it sometimes is on those occasions in these
plains; at length about a 1/4 of a mile above the falls he discovered a
deep rivene where there were some shelving rocks under which he took
shelter near the river with Sharbono and the Indian woman; laying their
guns compass &c. under a shelving rock on the upper side of the rivene
where they were perfectly secure from the rain. the first shower was
moderate accompanyed by a violent rain the effects of which they did
but little feel; soon after a most violent torrent of rain decended
accompanyed with hail; the rain appeared to decend in a body and
instantly collected in the rivene and came down in a roling torrent
with irrisistable force driving rocks mud and everything before it
which opposed it's passage, Capt. C. fortunately discovered it a moment
before it reached them and seizing his gun and shot pouch with his left
hand with the right he assisted himself up the steep bluff shoving
occasionaly the Indian woman before him who had her child in her arms;
Sharbono had the woman by the hand indeavouring to pull her up the hill
but was so much frightened that he remained frequently motionless and
but for Capt. C. both himself and his woman and child must have
perished. so suddon was the rise of the water that before Capt C could
reach his gun and begin to ascend the bank it was up to his waist and
wet his watch; and he could scarcely ascend faster than it arrose till
it had obtained the debth of 15 feet with a current tremendious to
behold. one moment longer & it would have swept them into the river
just above the great cataract of 87 feet where they must have
inevitably perished. Sarbono lost his gun shot pouch, horn, tomahawk,
and my wiping rod; Capt. Clark his Umbrella and compas or
circumferenter. they fortunately arrived on the plain safe, where they
found the black man, York, in surch of them; york had seperated from
them a little while before the storm, in pursuit of some buffaloe and
had not seen them enter the rivene; when this gust came on he returned
in surch of them & not being able to find them for some time was much
allarmed. the bier in which the woman carrys her child and all it's
cloaths wer swept away as they lay at her feet she having time only to
grasp her child; the infant was therefore very cold and the woman also
who had just recovered from a severe indisposition was also wet and
cold, Capt C. therefore relinquished his intended rout and returned to
the camp at willow run in order also to obtain dry cloathes for himself
and directed them to follow him. on Capt. Clark's arrival at camp he
found that the party dispatched for the baggage had returned in great
confusion and consternation leaving their loads in the plains; the men
who were all nearly naked and no covering on the head were sorely
mawled with the hail which was so large and driven with such force by
the wind that it nocked many of them (town and one particulary as many
as three times most of them were bleeding freely and complained of
being much bruised. willow run raised about 6 feet with this rain and
the plains were so wet they could do nothing more this evening. Capt.
C. gave the party a dram to console them in some measure for their
general defeat.

[Clark, June 29, 1805]
Junne 29th Saltarday 1805
a little rain verry early this morning after Clear, finding that the
Prarie was So wet as to render it impossible to pass on to the end of
the portage, deturmined to Send hack to the top of the hill at the
Creek for the remaining part of the baggage left at that place
yesterday, leaveing one man to take care of the baggage at this place.
I deturmined any Self to proceed on to the falls and take the river,
according we all Set out., I took my Servent & one man Chabono our
Interpreter & his Squar accompanied, Soon after I arrived at the falls,
I perceived a Cloud which appeared black and threaten imediate rain, I
looked out for a Shelter but Could See no place without being in great
danger of being blown into the river if the wind Should prove as
turbelant as it is at Some times about 1/4 of a mile above the falls I
obsd a Deep rivein in which was Shelveing rocks under which we took
Shelter near the river and placed our guns the Compass &c. &c. Under a
Shelveing rock on the upper Side of the Creek, in a place which was
verry Secure from rain, the first Shower was moderate accompanied with
a violent wind, the effects of which we did not feel, Soon after a
torrent of rain and hail fell more violent than ever I Saw before, the
rain fell like one voley of water falling from the heavens and gave us
time only to get out of the way of a torrent of water which was Poreing
down the hill in the rivin with emence force tareing every thing before
it takeing with it large rocks & mud, I took my gun & Shot pouch in my
left hand, and with the right Scrambled up the hill pushing the
Interpreters wife (who had her Child in her arms) before me, the
Interpreter himself makeing attempts to pull up his wife by the hand
much Scared and nearly without motion- we at length retched the top of
the hill Safe where I found my Servent in Serch of us greatly agitated,
for our wellfar-. before I got out of the bottom of the revein which
was a flat dry rock when I entered it, the water was up to my waste &
wet my watch, I Scrcely got out before it raised 10 feet deep with a
torrent which turrouble to behold, and by the time I reached the top of
the hill, at least 15 feet water, I directed the party to return to the
Camp at the run as fast as possible to get to our lode where Clothes
Could be got to Cover the Child whose Clothes were all lost, and the
woman who was but just recovering from a Severe indispostion, and was
wet and Cold, I was fearfull of a relaps I caused her as also the
others of the party to take a little Spirits, which my Servent had in a
Canteen, which revived verry much. on arrival at the Camp on the willow
run-met the party who had returned in great Confusion to the run
leaveing their loads in the Plain, the hail & wind being So large and
violent in the plains, and them naked, they were much brused, and Some
nearly killed one knocked down three times, and others without hats or
any thing on their heads bloodey & Complained verry much; I refreshed
them with a little grog- Soon after the run began to rise and rose 6
feet in a few minits-. I lost at the river in the torrent the large
Compas, an eligant fusee, Tomahawk Humbrallo, Shot pouh, & horn wih
powder & Ball, mockersons, & the woman lost her Childs Bear & Clothes
bedding &c.- The Compass is a Serious loss; as we have no other large
one. The plains are So wet that we Can do nothing this evining
particilarly as two deep reveins are between ourselves & Load

[Lewis, June 30, 1805]
Sunday June 30th 1805.
We had a heavy dew this morning which is a remarkable event. Fraizer
and Whitehouse still continue their opperation of sewing the skins
together. I set Shields and gass to shaving bark and Fields continued
to make the cross brases. Drewyer and myself rendered a considerable
quantity of tallow and cooked. I begin to be extremely impatient to be
off as the season is now waisting a pace nearly three months have now
elapsed since we left Fort Mandan and not yet reached the Rocky
Mountains I am therefore fully preswaded that we shall not reach Fort
Mandan again this season if we even return from the ocean to the Snake
Indians. wherever we find timber there is also beaver; Drewyer killed
two today. There are a number of large bat or goatsucker here I killed
one of them and found that there was no difference between them and
those common to the U States; I have not seen the leather winged bat
for some time nor is there any of the small goatsuckers in this quarter
of the country. we have not the whip-poor-will either. this last is by
many persons in the U States confounded with the large goat-sucker or
night-hawk as it is called in the Eastern States, and are taken for the
same bird. it is true that there is a great resemblance but they are
distinct species of the goatsucker. here the one exists without the
other. the large goat sucker lays it's eggs in these open plains
without the preperation of a nest we have found their eggs in several
instances they lay only two before they set nor do I beleive that they
raise more than one brood in a season; they have now just hatched their
young.- This evening the bark was shaved and the leather covering for
the sections were also completed and I had them put into the water, in
order to toughen the bark, and prepare the leather for sewing on the
sections in the morning. it has taken 28 Elk skins and 4 Buffaloe skins
to complete her. the crossbars are also finished this evening; we have
therefore only the way strips now to obtain in order to complete the
wood work, and this I fear will be a difficult task. The party have not
returned from the lower camp I am therefore fearfull that some uncommon
accedent has happened.

Occurrences with Capt. Clark and Party

This morning Capt. Clark dispatched two men to kill some buffaloe, two
others to the falls to surch for the articles lost yesterday, one he
retained to cook and sent the others for the baggage left in the plains
yesterday. the hunters soon returned loaded with meat those sent for
the baggage brought it up in a few hours, he then set four men at work
to make axeltrees and repare the carrages; the others he employed in
conveying the baggage over the run on their sholders it having now
fallent to about 3 feet water. the men complained much today of the
bruises and wounds which they had received yesterday from the hail. the
two men sent to the falls returned with the compas which they found
covered in the mud and sand near the mouth of the rivene the other
articles were irrecoverably lost. they found that part of rivene in;
which Capt. C. had been seting yesterday, filled with huge rocks. at 11
A.M. Capt. Clark dispatched the party with a load of the baggage as far
as the 6 miles stake, with orders to deposit it there and return with
the carriages which they did accordingly. they experienced a heavy gust
of wind this evening from the S. W. after which it was a fair
afternoon. more buffaloe than usual were seen about their camp; Capt. C
assured me that he beleives he saw at least ten thousand at one view.

[Clark, June 30, 1805]
June 30th Sunday 1805.
a fair morning, I dispatch the party except 5 for the remaining baggage
Scattered in the plains, two to hunt for meat, two to the falls, and
one to Cook at 10 oClock the hunters Came in loaded with fat meat, &
those were dispatched for the baggage returned with it. I Set 4 men to
make new axeltrees & repare the Carrages, others to take the load
across the run which had fallen & is about 3 feet water, men Complain
of being Swore this day dull and lolling about, The two men dispatched
in Serch of the articls lost yesterday returned and brought the Compass
which they found in the mud & Stones near the mouth of the revein, no
other articles found, the place I Sheltered under filled up with hugh
Rocks, I Set the party out at 11 oClock to take a load to the 6 mile
Stake & return this evening, and I intend to take on the ballance to
the river tomorrow if the prarie will permit. at 3 oClock a Storm of
wind from the S. W. after which we had a clear evening. Great numbers
of Buffalow in every direction, I think 10,000 may be Seen in a view.

[Lewis, July 1, 1805]
Monday July 1st 1805.
This morning I set Frazier and Whitehouse to sewing the leather on the
sides of the sections of the boat; Shields and J. Fields to collect and
split light wood and prepare a pit to make tar. Gas I set at work to
make the way strips out of some willow limbs which tho indifferent were
the best which could be obtained. Drewyer and myself completed the
opperation of rendering the tallow; we obtained about 100 lbs. by
evening the skins were all attatched to their sections and I returned
them again to the water. all matters were now in readiness to commence
the opperation of puting the parts of the boat together in the morning.
the way strips are not yet ready but will be done in time as I have
obtained the necessary timber. the difficulty in obtaining the
necessary materials has retarded my operations in forming this boat
extreemly tedious and troublesome; and as it was a novel peice of
machinism to all who were employed my constant attention was necessary
to every part of the work; this together with the duties of cheif cook
has kept me pretty well employed. at 3 P.M. Capt. Clark arrived with
the party all very much fortiegued. he brought with him all the baggage
except what he had deposited yesterday at the six mile stake, for which
the party were too much fortiegued to return this evening. we gave them
a dram and suffered them to rest from their labours this evening. I
directed Bratton to assist in making the tar tomorrow, and scelected
several others to assist in puting the boat together. the day has been
warm and the Musquetoes troublesome of course the bear were about our
camp all last night, we have therefore determined to beat up their
quarters tomorrow, and kill them or drive them from their haunts about
this place.

[Clark, July 1, 1805]
White Bear Islands above the Falls of the Missouri July 1st Monday 1805
I arrived at this place to day at 3 oClock P.M. with the party from the
lower part of the portage much fatigued &c.

[Clark, July 1, 1805]
July 1st Monday 1805.
We Set out early this morning with the remaining load, and proceeded on
verry well to Capt Lewis's Camp where we arrived at 3 oClock, the Day
worm and party much fatigued, found Capt. Lewis and party all buisey
employd in fitting up the Iron boat, the wind hard from the S, W,- one
man verry unwell, his legs & theis broke out and Swelled the hail which
fell at Capt. Lewis Camp 27 Ins was 7 Inches in circumfrance & waied 3
ounces, fortunately for us it was not So large in the plains, if it had
we Should most certainly fallen victims to its rage as the men were
mostly naked, and but few with hats or any covering on their heads, The
hunters killed 3 white bear one large, the fore feet of which measured
9 Inchs across, the hind feet 11 Inchs 3/4 long & 7 Inch's wide a bear
nearly Catching Joseph Fields Chased him into the water, bear about the
Camp every night & Seen on an Isld. in the day

[Lewis, July 2, 1805]
Tuesday July 2cd 1805
A shower of rain fell very early this morning after which we dispatched
the men for the remaining baggage at the 6 mile stake. Shields and
Bratton seting their tarkiln, Sergts. Pryor and Gass at work on the
waystrips and myself and all other hands engaged in puting the boat
together which we accomplished in about 3 hours and I then set four men
at work sewing the leather over the cross bars of Iron on the inner
side of the boat, which form the ends of the sections. about 2 P.M. the
party returned with the baggage, all well pleased that they had
completed the laborious task of the portage. The Musquetoes uncommonly
troublesome the wind hard from the S. W. all day I think it possible
that these almost perpetual S. W. winds proceede from the agency of the
Snowey Mountains and the wide level and untimbered plains which streach
themselves along their bases for an immence distance (i e) that the air
comeing in contact with the snow is suddonly chilled and condenced,
thus becoming heaver than the air beneath in the plains, it glides down
the sides of these mountains & decends to the plains, where by the
constant action of the sun on the face of an untimbered country there
is a partial vacuum formed for it's reception. I have observed that the
winds from this quarter are always the coldest and most violent which
we experience, yet I am far from giving full credit to my own
hypothesis on this subject; if hoever I find on the opposite side of
these mountains that the winds take a contrary direction I shall then
have more faith. After I had completed my observation of Equal
Altitudes today Capt. Clark Myself and 12 men passed over to the large
Island to hunt bear. the brush in that part of it where the bear
frequent is an almost impenetrable thicket of the broad leafed willow;
this brush we entered in small parties of 3 or four together and
surched in every part. we found one only which made at Drewyer and he
shot him in the brest at the distance of about 20 feet, the ball
fortunately passed through his heart, the stroke knocked the bear down
and gave Drewyer time to get out of his sight; the bear changed his
course we pursued him about a hundred yards by the blood and found him
dead; we surched the thicket in every part but found no other, and
therefore returned. this was a young male and would weigh about 400
lbs. the water of the Missouri here is in most places about 10 feet
deep. after our return, in moving some of the baggage we caught a large
rata it was somewhat larger than the common European rat, of lighter
colour; the body and outer part of the legs and head of a light lead
colour, the belly and inner side of the legs white as were also the
feet and years. the toes were longer and the ears much larger than the
common rat; the ears uncovered with hair. the eyes were black and
prominent the whiskers very long and full. the tail was reather longer
than the body and covered with fine fur or poil of the same length and
colour of the back. the fur was very silkey close and short. I have
frequently seen the nests of these rats in clifts of rocks and hollow
trees but never before saw one of them. they feed very much on the
fruit and seed of the prickly pear; or at least I have seen large
quantities of the hulls of that fruit lying about their holes and in
their nests.

[Clark, July 2, 1805]
July 2nd Tuesday 1805
Some rain at day light this morning. dispatched the party for the
remaining baggage left at the 6 mile Stake, they returned in the
evening and we Crossed to a large Island nearly opposit to us to kill
bear which has been Seen frequently in the Island, we killed one bear &
returned at Sun Set. The Roreing of the falls for maney miles above us

[Clark, July 2, 1805]
July 2nd Tuesday 1805
Some rain at day light this morn'g after which a fair morning,
dispatched the men for the Kegs &c. left at the Six mile Stake, others
to get timber for the boat &c. Musquetors verry troublesom to day, day
worm, after the return of the men with the articles left at the 6 mile
Stake Capt. Lewis my Self & 12 men Crossed to an Island on which we Saw
a bear the evening before, & Several had been Seen by the party at this
place, we killed one of the bear and returned. The river at this place
is ____ yards wide and about 10 feet water Cought a rat in our Stores,
which had done some mischief, this rat was about the Sise of a Comn.
large rat, larger ears, long whiskers & toes, with a tail long & hairey
like a ground Squirel, verry fine fur and lighter than the Common rat.
Wind to day as usial from the S. W. and hard all the after part of the
day, those winds are also Cool and generally verry hard.

[Lewis, July 3, 1805]
Wednesday July 3rd 1805.
This morning early we employed all hands; some were making tar or
attempting to make it, others were attatching the skins on the boat,
other cuting and fiting the bark for lining puting in the woodworke &c
some hunters were sent out to kill buffaloe in order to make pemecon to
take with us and also for their skins which we now want to cover our
baggage in the boat and canoes when we depart from hence. the Indians
have informed us that we should shortly leave the buffaloe country
after passing the falls; this I much regret for I know when we leave
the buffaloe that we shal sometimes be under the necessity of fasting
occasionally. and at all events the white puddings will be
irretreivably lost and Sharbono out of imployment. our tar-kiln which
ought to have began to run this morning has yealded no tar as yet and I
am much affraid will not yeald any, if so I fear the whole opperation
of my boat will be useless. I fear I have committed another blunder
also in sewing the skins with a nedle which has sharp edges these have
cut the skin and as it drys I discover that the throng dose not fill
the holes as I expected tho I made them sew with a large throng for
that purpose. at 10 OCk A.M. we had a slight shower which scarcely wet
the grass. One buffaloe only and 2 Antelopes killed today six beaver
and 2 otter have been killed within the last three days. The current of
the river looks so gentle and inviting that the men all seem anxious to
be moving upward as well as ourselves. we have got the boat prety well
forward today and think we shall be able to complete her tomorrow
except paying her, to do which will require some little time to make
her first perfectly dry. she has assumed her shape and looks extreemly
well. She will be very light, more so than any vessel of her size that
I ever saw.

[Clark, July 3, 1805]
July 3rd Wednesday 1805
all of party employd in Sowing the Skins to the boat, burning Tare,
preparing timber, hunting buffalow for their meat & Skins, drying &
repacking the Stores, Goods &c. &c. at 1 oClock began to rain. in the
evening the hunters killed two antilopes & a Buffalow.

[Clark, July 3, 1805]
July 3rd Wednesday 1805
A fine morning wind from the S. W all the party employd, Some about the
boat, attaching the Skins & Sowing them to the Sections, others
prepareing timber, Some, burning tar of the drift pine, Some airring
and repacking the Stores & Goods, & others hunting for Meet to make
pemitigon & for the use of their Skins to Cover the Canoes & boat,-. a
Small Shower at 1 oClock which did Scercely wet the grass-. one
buffalow and two Antilopes Killed this evening. Six beaver & 2 orters
has been Killed at this camp within a fiew days we discover no fish
above the falls as yet- the only timber in this part of the Countrey is
willow, a fiew Cotton trees which is neither large nor tall, Boxalders
and red wood. (Boil roche arrow wood)

The water tolerably clear and Soft in the river, Current jentle and
bottoms riseing from the water; no appearance of the river riseing more
than a few feet above the falls, as high up as we have yet explored.
but few trees on the Std Side the grass is high and fine near the
river. the winds has blown for Several days from the S. W. I think it
possible that those almost perpetial S W. winds, proceed from the
agency of the Snowey mountains and the wide leavel and untimbered
plains which Streach themselves along their borders for an emence
distance, that the air comeing in Contact with the Snow is Suddenly
chilled and condensed, thus becomeing heavyer than the air beneath in
the plains it glides down the Sides of those mountains and decends to
the plains, where by the constant action of the Sun on the face of the
untimbered country there is a partial vacuom formed for it's reception
I have observed that the winds from this quarter is always the Coaldest
and most violent which we experience, yet I am far from giveing full
credit to this hypothesis on this Subject; if I find however on the
opposit Side of these mountains that the winds take a contrary
direction I Shall then have full faith. (The winds take a contrary
direction in the morning or from the mountains on the west Side)

[Lewis, July 4, 1805]
Thursday July 4th 1805.
Yesterday we permitted Sergt. Gass McNeal and several others who had
not yet seen the falls to visit them. no appearance of tar yet and I am
now confident that we shall not be able to obtain any; a serious
misfortune. I employed a number of hands on the boat today and by 4
P.M. in the evening completed her except the most difficult part of the
work that of making her seams secure. I had her turned up and some
small fires kindled underneath to dry her. Capt. C. completed a draught
of the river from Fort Mandan to this place which we intend depositing
at this place in order to guard against accedents. not having seen the
Snake Indians or knowing in fact whether to calculate on their
friendship or hostility or friendship we have conceived our party
sufficiently small and therefore have concluded not to dispatch a canoe
with a part of our men to St. Louis as we had intended early in the
spring. we fear also that such a measure might possibly discourage
those who would in such case remain, and might possibly hazzard the
fate of the expedition. we have never once hinted to any one of the
party that we had such a scheme in contemplation, and all appear
perfectly to have made up their minds to suceed in the expedition or
purish in the attempt. we all beleive that we are now about to enter on
the most perilous and difficult part of our voyage, yet I see no one
repining; all appear ready to met those difficulties which wait us with
resolution and becoming fortitude. we had a heavy dew this morning. the
clouds near these mountains rise suddonly and discharge their contents
partially on the neighbouring plains; the same cloud will discharge
hail alone in one part hail and rain in another and rain only in a
third all within the space of a few miles; and on the Mountains to the
S. E. of us sometimes snow. at present there is no snow on those
mountains; that which covered them when we first saw them and which has
fallen on them several times since has all disappeared. the Mountains
to the N. W. & W. of us are still entirely covered are white and
glitter with the reflection of the sun. I do not beleive that the
clouds which prevail at this season of the year reach the summits of
those lofty mountains; and if they do the probability is that they
deposit snow only for there has been no perceptible deminution of the
snow which they contain since we first saw them. I have thought it
probable that these mountains might have derived their appellation of
shining Mountains, from their glittering appearance when the sun shines
in certain directions on the snow which covers them. since our arrival
at the falls we have repeatedly witnessed a nois which proceeds from a
direction a little to the N. of West as loud and resembling precisely
the discharge of a piece of ordinance of 6 pounds at the distance of
three miles. I was informed of it by the men several times before I
paid any attention to it, thinking it was thunder most probably which
they had mistaken at length walking in the plains the other day I heard
this noise very distictly, it was perfectly calm clear and not a cloud
to be seen, I halted and listened attentively about an hour during
which time I heard two other discharges and tok the direction of the
sound with my pocket compass. I have no doubt but if I had leasure I
could find from whence it issued. I have thout it probable that it
might be caused by runing water in some of the caverns of those immence
mountains, on the principal of the blowing caverns; but in such case
the sounds would be periodical & regular, which is not the case with
this, being sometimes heard once only and at other times, six or seven
discharges in quick succession. it is heard also at different seasons
of the day and night. I am at a loss to account for this phenomenon.
our work being at an end this evening, we gave the men a drink of
sperits, it being the last of our stock, and some of them appeared a
little sensible of it's effects the fiddle was plyed and they danced
very merrily untill 9 in the evening when a heavy shower of rain put an
end to that part of the amusement tho they continued their mirth with
songs and festive jokes and were extreemly merry untill late at night.
we had a very comfortable dinner, of bacon, beans, suit dumplings &
buffaloe beaf &c. in short we had no just cause to covet the sumptuous
feasts of our countrymen on this day.- one Elk and a beaver were all
that was killed by the hunters today; the buffaloe seem to have
withdrawn themselves from this neighbourhood; tho the men inform us
that they are still abundant about the falls.

[Clark, July 4, 1805]
,July the 4th Thursday 1805
A fine morning, a heavy dew last night, all hands employed in
Completeing the leather boat, gave the Party a dram which made Several
verry lively, a black Cloud came up from the S. W, and rained a fiew
drops I employ my Self drawing a Copy of the river to be left at this
place for fear of Some accident in advance, I have left buried below
the falls a Map of the Countrey below Fort Mandan with Sundery private
papers the party amused themselves danceing untill late when a Shower
of rain broke up the amusement, all lively and Chearfull, one Elk and a
beaver kill'd to day. our Tar kill like to turn out nothing from the
following cause.

The climate about the falls of Missouri appears to be Singular Cloudy
every day (Since our arrival near them) which rise from defferent
directions and discharge themselves partially in the plains &
mountains, in Some places rain others rain & hail, hail alone, and on
the mountains in Some parts Snow. a rumbling like Cannon at a great
distance is heard to the west if us; the Cause we Can't account

[Lewis, July 5, 1805]
Friday July 5th 1805.
This morning I had the boat removed to an open situation, scaffold her
off the ground, turned her keel to the sun and kindled fires under her
to dry her more expeditiously. I then set a couple of men to pounding
of charcoal to form a composition with some beeswax which we have and
buffaloe tallow now my only hope and resource for paying my boat; I
sincerely hope it may answer yet I fear it will not. the boat in every
other rispect completely answers my most sanguine expectation; she is
not yet dry and eight men can carry her with the greatest ease; she is
strong and will carry at least 8,000 lbs. with her suit of hands; her
form is as complete as I could wish it. the stitches begin to gape very
much since she has began to dry; I am now convinced this would not have
been the case had the skins been sewed with a sharp point only and the
leather not cut by the edges of a sharp nedle. about 8 A M. a large
herd of buffaloe came near our camp and Capt. Clark with a party of the
hunters indeavoured to get a shoot at them but the wind proved
unfavourable and they ran off; the hunters pursued and killed three of
them; we had most of the meat brought in and set a party to drying it.
their skins were all brought in and streached to dry for the purpose of
covering the baggage. 2 Wolves and three Antelopes also killed today.
we permitted three other men to visit the falls today; these were the
last of the party who had not as yet indulged themselves with this
grand and interesting seen. the buffaloe again appear in great numbers
about our camp and seem to be moving down the river. it is somewhat
remarkable that altho you may see ten or a douzen herds of buffaloe
distinctly scattered and many miles distant yet if they are undisturbed
by pursuit, they will all be traveling in one direction. the men who
were permitted to visit the falls today returned in the evening and
reported that the buffaloe were very numerous in that quarter; and as
the country is more broken near the river in that quarter we conclude
to dispatch a couple of canoes tomorrow with some hunters to kill as
many as will answer our purposes.

The plains in this part of the country are not so fertile as below the
entrance of the Cockkle or missel shell river and from thence down the
Missouri there is also much more stone on the sides of the hills and on
the broken lands than below.-

[Clark, July 5, 1805]
July 5th Friday 1805
A fine morning and but little wind, worm and Sultrey at 8 oClock- I Saw
a large gangue of Buffalow and prosued them with Several men the wind
was unfavourable and we Could not get near them, the party Scattered &
Killed 3 buffalow and brought in their Skins and Some meat, Killed 2
wolves & 3 Antilopes for their Skins, Capt. Lewis much engaged in
Completeing the Leather boat. Three men went to See the Falls, Saw
great numbers of Buffalow on both Sides of the river. great numbers of
young black birds

[Lewis, July 6, 1805]
Saturday July 6th 1805
In the couse of last night had several showers of hail and rain
attended with thunder and lightning. about day a heavy storm came on
from the S W attended with hail rain and a continued roar of thunder
and some lightning. the hail was as large as musket balls and covered
the ground perfectly. we hand some of it collected which kept very well
through the day and served to cool our water. These showers and gusts
keep my boat wet in dispite of my exertions. she is not yet ready for
the grease and coal. after the hail and rain was over this morning we
dispatched 4 hunters and two canoes to the head of the rappids as we
had determined last evening. the red and yellow courants are now ripe
and abundant, they are reather ascid as yet. There is a remarkable
small fox which ascociate in large communities and burrow in the
praries something like the small wolf but we have not as yet been able
to obtain one of them; they are extreemly watchfull and take reffuge in
their burrows which are very deep; we have seen them no where except
near these falls.

[Clark, July 6, 1805]
July 6th Satturday 1805
a heavy wind from the S W and Some rain about mid night last, at day
light this morning a verry black Cloud from the S W, with a Contined
rore of thunder & Some lightening and rained and hailed tremendiously
for about 1/2 an hour, the hail was the Size of a musket ball and
Covered the ground. this hail & rain was accompand. by a hard wind
which lasted for a fiew minits. Cloudy all the forepart of the day,
after Part Clear. dispatched 4 men in 2 Canoes to the falls, to kill
Buffalow, for their Skins & Meat others employd about the boat, I
cought Some Small fish this evening.

[Lewis, July 7, 1805]
Sunday July 7th 1805.
The weather warm and cloudy therefore unfavourable for many operations;
I keep small fires under the boat; the blowing flies are innumerable
about it; the moisture retained by the bark prevents it from drying as
fast as it otherwise would. we dispatched two other hunters to kill Elk
or buffaloe for their skins to cover our baggage. we have no tents; the
men are therefore obliged to have recourse to the sails for shelter
from the weather and we have not more skins than are sufficient to
cover our baggage when stoed away in bulk on land. many of the men are
engaged in dressing leather to cloath themselves. their leather
cloathes soon become rotton as they are much exposed to the water and
frequently wet. Capt. Clarks black man York is very unwell today and he
gave him a doze of tartar emettic which operated very well and he was
much better in the evening. this is a discription of medecine that I
nevr have recourse to in my practice except in cases of the
intermittent fever. this evening the hunters returned with the canoes
and brought thre buffaloe skins only and two Antelope 4 deer and three
wolf skins; they reported that the buffaloe had gone further down the
river. the two hunters whom we sent out from hence returned also
without having killed anything except one Elk. I set one of the party
at work to make me some sacks of the wolf skins, to transport my
Instruments when occasion requirs their being carried any distance by
land.- we had a light shower of rain about 4 P.M. attended with some
thunder and lightning. one beaver caught this morning. the musquetoes
are excessively troublesome to us. I have prepared my composition which
I should have put on this evening but the rain prevented me.

[Clark, July 7, 1805]
July 7th Sunday 1805
A Warm day wind from the S. W Cloudy as usial, the four men hunters did
not return last night. dispatched 2 men to kill Elk for the use of
their Skin for the boat. my man York Sick, I give him a dosh of Tarter.
Some rain in the after part of the day in the evining the hunters
returned with three buffalow Skins two goat Skins, four Deer Skins, two
deer, & 3 wolve Skins, to be used in Covering the boat Canoes & to make
mockersons, one Elk also killed to day

[Lewis, July 8, 1805]
Monday July 8th 1805.
Capt. Clark Determined to make a second effort to replace the notes
which he had made with rispect to the river and falls accordingly he
set out after an early breakfast and took with him the greater part of
the men with a view also to kill buffaloe should there be any in that
quarter. after geting some distance in the plains he divided the party
and sent them in different directions and himself and two others struck
the Missouri at the entrance of medicine river and continued down it to
the great Cataract, from whence he returned through the plains to camp
where he arrived late in the evening. the hunters also returned having
killed 3 buffaloe 2 Antelopes and a deer. he informed me that the
immence herds of buffaloe which we had seen for some time past in this
neighbourhood have almost entirely disappeared and he beleives are gone
down the river.

The day being warm and fair about 12 OCk. the boat was sufficiently dry
to receive a coat of the composition which I accordingly applyed. this
adds very much to her appearance whether it will be effectual or not.
it gives her hull the appearance of being formed of one solid piece.
after the first coat had cooled I gave her a second which I think has
made it sufficiently thick. The mountains which ly before us from the
South, to the N. W. still continue covered with snow. one hunter also
passed the river to hunt this morning in the evening he returned having
killed a Buck and a male Antelope. The party who were down with Capt.
Clark also killed a small fox which they brought with them. it was a
female appeared to give suck, otherwise it is so much like the comm
small fox of this country commonly called the kit fox that I should
have taken it for a young one of that species; however on closer
examination it did apear to differ somewhat; it's colour was of a
lighter brown, it's years proportionably larger, and the tale not so
large or the hair not so long which formed it. they are very delicately
formed, exceedingly fleet, and not as large as the common domestic cat.
their tallons appear longer than any species of fox I ever saw and seem
therefore prepared more amply by nature for the purpose of burrowing.
there is sufficient difference for discrimination between it and the
kit fox, and to satisfy me perfectly that it is a distinct species. the
men also brought me a living ground squirrel which is something larger
than those of the U States or those of that kind which are also common
here. this is a much hadsomer anamal. like the other it's principal
colour is a redish brown but is marked longitudinally with a much
greater number of black or dark bron stripes; the spaces between which
is marked by ranges of pure white circular spots, about the size of a
brister blue shot. these colours imbrace the head neck back and sides;
the tail is flat, or the long hair projecting horizontally from two
sides of it only gives it that appearance. the belly and breast are of
much lighter brown or nearly white. this is an inhabitant of the open
plain altogether, wher it burrows and resides; nor is it like the other
found among clifts of rocks or in the woodlands. their burrows
sometimes like those of the mole run horizontally near the surface of
the ground for a considerable distance, but those in which they reside
or take refuge strike much deeper in the earth.- Slight rain this
afternoon. musquetoes troublesome as usual.

[Clark, July 8, 1805]
July 8th Monday 1805
A worm morning flying Clouds I deturmin take the width of the river at
the falls & the Medison river and to take the greater part of the men
which Can be Speared to Kill Buffalow for their Skins as well as meat,
devided the party & Sent them in different directions to hunt &
proceeded my Self to the mouth of Medison river measured it and found
it to be 137 yards wide, in the narrowest part of the Missouri
imediately above Medison river the Missouri is 300 yards wide, below
and a little above the falls 1440 yards wide with the direction of the
upper great fall 580 yards wide, at the great Spring 270 yards wide, at
the handsom falls of 47 ft. 8 I. the river is 473 yards wide, at the
lower great falls the river is confined within 280 yards, below the
falls the water occupies 93 yards only- after takeing the wedth of the
river at those Sundery placies I returned thro the plains in a direct
line to Camp. Some rain this evening after a verry hot day.- the
mountains which are in view to the South & N W. are Covered with Snow.
those nearer us and forma 3/4 Circle around us is not Covered with Snow
at this time. The hunters killed 3 buffalow, two antelopes, & a Deer to
day- the emence herds of buffalow which was near us a fiew days ago,
has proceeded on down the river, we Can See but a fiew Bulls in the
plains

[Lewis, July 9, 1805]
Tuesday July 9th 1805.
The morning was fair and pleant. the Islands seem crouded with
blackbirds; the young brude is now completely feathered and flying in
common with the others. we corked the canoes and put them in the water
and also launched the boat, she lay like a perfect cork on the water.
five men would carry her with the greatest ease. I now directed seats
to be fixed in her and oars to be fitted. the men loaded the canoes in
readiness to depart. just at this moment a violent wind commenced and
blew so hard that we were obliged to unload the canoes again; a part of
the baggage in several of them got wet before it could be taken out.
the wind continued violent untill late in the evening, by which time we
discovered that a greater part of the composition had seperated from
the skins and left the seams of the boat exposed to the water and she
leaked in such manner that she would not answer. I need not add that
this circumstance mortifyed me not a little; and to prevent her leaking
without pich was impossible with us, and to obtain this article was
equally impossible, therefore the evil was irraparable I now found that
the section formed of the buffaloe hides on which some hair had been
left, answered much the best purpose; this leaked but little and the
parts which were well covered with hair about 1/8th of an inch in
length retained the composition perfectly and remained sound and dry.
from these circumstances I am preswaided, that had I formed her with
buffaloe skins singed not quite as close as I had done those I
employed, that she would have answered even with this composition. but
to make any further experiments in our present situation seemed to me
madness; the buffaloe had principally dserted us, and the season was
now advancing fast. I therefore relinquished all further hope of my
favorite boat and ordered her to be sunk in the water, that the skins
might become soft in order the better to take her in peices tomorrow
and deposite the iron fraim at this place as it could probably be of no
further service to us. had I only singed my Elk skins in stead of
shaving them I beleive the composition would have remained and the boat
have answered; at least untill we could have reached the pine country
which must be in advance of us from the pine which is brought down by
the water and which is probably at no great distance where we might
have supplyed ourselves with the necessary pich or gum. but it was now
too late to introduce a remidy and I bid a dieu to my boat, and her
expected services.- The next difficulty which presented itself was how
we should convey the stores and baggage which we had purposed carrying
in the boat. both Capt. Clark and myself recollected having heard the
hunters mention that the bottoms of the river some few miles above us
were much better timbered than below and that some of the trees were
large. the idea therefore suggested itself of building two other canoes
sufficiently large to carry the surplus baggage. on enquiry of the
hunters it seemed to be the general opinion that trees sufficiently a
large for this purpose might be obtained in a bottom on the opposite
side about 8 miles distant by land and reather more than double that
distance by water; accordingly Capt. Clark determined to set out early
in the morning with ten of the best workmen and proceede by land to
that place while the others would in the mean time be employed by
myself in taking the Boat in peices and depositing her, together with
the articles which we had previously determined to deposit at this
place, and also in trasporting all the baggage up the river to that
point in the six small canoes. this plan being settled between us
orders were accordingly given to the party, and the ten men who were to
accompany Capt. Clark had ground and prepared their axes and adds this
evening in order to prepare for an early departure in the morning. we
have on this as well as on many former occasions found a small
grindstone which I brought with me from Harper's ferry extreemly
convenient to us. if we find trees at the place mentioned sufficiently
large for our purposes it will be extreemly fortunate; for we have not
seen one for many miles below the entrance of musselshell River to this
place, which would have answered.-

[Clark, July 9, 1805]
July 9th Tuesday 1805
a clear worm morning wind from the S W. Lanced the Leather boat, and
found that it leaked a little; Corked Lanced & loaded the Canoes,
hurried our truk wheels, & made a Carsh for a Skin & a fiew papers I
intend to leave here on trial found the leather boat would not answer
without the addition of Tar which we had none of, haveing Substituted
Cole & Tallow in its place to Stop the Seams &c. which would not answer
as it Seperated from the Skins when exposed to the water and left the
Skins naked & Seams exposed to the water this falire of our favourate
boat was a great disapointment to us, we haveing more baggage than our
Canoes would Carry. Concluded to build Canoes for to Carry them; no
timber near our Camp. I deturmined to proceed on up the river to a
bottom in which our hunters reported was large Trees &c.

[Lewis, July 10, 1805]
Wednesday July 10th 1805.
Capt. Clark set out with his party early this morning and passed over
to the opposite side. after which I dispatched Sergt. Ordway with 4
Canoes and 8 men to take up a load of baggage as far as Capt. Clark's
camp and return for the remainder of our plunder. with six others I now
set to work on my boat, which had been previously drawn out of the
water before the men departed, and in two hours had her fraim in
readiness to be deposited. had a cash dug and deposited the Fraim of
the boat, some papers and a few other trivial articles of but little
importance. the wind blew very hard the greater part of the day. I also
had the truck wheels buried in the pit which had been made to hold the
tar. having nothing further to do I amused myself in fishing and caught
a few small fish; they were of the species of white chub mentioned
below the falls, tho they are small and few in number. I had thought on
my first arrival here that there were no fish in this part of the
river. Capt. Clark proceeded up the river 8 miles by land (distance by
water 231/4) and found 2 trees of Cottonwood and cut them down; one
proved to be hollow and split in falling at the upper part and was
somewhat windshaken at bottom; the other proved to be much windshaken.
he surched the bottom for better but could not find any he therefore
determined to make canoes of those which he had fallen; and to contract
their length in such manner as to clear the craks and the worst of the
windsken parts making up the deficiency by allowing them to be as wide
as the trees would permit. they were much at a loss for wood to make
axhandles. the Chokecherry is the best we can procure for this purpose
and of that wood they made and broke thir 13 handles in the course of
this part of a day. had the eyes of our axes been round they would have
answered this country much better. the musquetoes were very troublesome
to them as well as ourselves today. Sergt. Ordway proceeded up the
river about 5 miles when the wind became so violent that he was obliged
to ly by untill late in the evening when he again set out with the
canoes and arrived within 3 miles of Capt. Clark's Camp where he halted
for the night. about five miles above whitebear camp there are two
Islands in the river covered with Cottonwood box alder and some sweet
willow also the undergrowth like that of the islands at this place.-

[Clark, July 10, 1805]
July 10th Wednesday 1805
a fair windey day wind hard the most of the day from the S. W.rained
modderately all last night (by Showers) we dispatched Serjt. Ordway
with 4 Canoes loaded & 8 men by water to assend as high as I Should
have found timber for Canoes & formed a Camp;-. I Set out with Sergt.
Pryor four Choppers two Involids & one man to hunt, Crossed to the Std.
Side and proceeded on up the river 8 miles by land (distance by water
231/4 ms.) and found two Trees which I thought would make Canoes, had
them fallen, one of them proved to be hollow & Split at one End & verry
much win Shaken at the other, the other much win Shaken, we Serched the
bottoms for better trees and made a trial of Several which proved to be
more indifferent. I deturmined to make Canoes out of the two first
trees we had fallen, to Contract thir length so as to clear the hollow
& winshakes, & ad to the width as much as the tree would allow. The
Musquitors emencely noumerous & troublesom, Killed two deer & a goat.
The Canoes did not arrive as I expected, owing to the hard wind which
blew a head in maney places. we ar much at a loss for wood to make ax
hilthes,13 hath been made & broken in this piece of a day by the four
Choppers, no other wood but Cotton Box elder Choke Cherry and red arrow
wood. we Substitute the Cherry in place of Hickory for ax hilthes ram
rods, &c. &c.

[Lewis, July 11, 1805]
Thursday July 11th 1805.
We had now nothing to do but wait for the canoes; as they had not
returned I sent out some of the small party with me to hunt; in the
evening they returned with a good quantity of the flesh of a fat
buffaloe which they had killed. the canoes not arrived this evening. I
saw several very large grey Eagles today they are a half as large again
as the common bald Eagle of this country. I do not think the bald Eagle
here qute so large as those of the U States; the grey Eagle is
infinitely larger and is no doubt a distinct species. this evening a
little before the sun set I heared two other discharges of this
unaccounable artillery of the Rocky Mountains proceeding from the same
quarter that I had before heard it. I now recollected the Minnetares
making mention of the nois which they had frequently heard in the Rocky
Mountains like thunder; and which they said the mountains made; but I
paid no attention to the information supposing it either false or the
fantom of a supersticious immagination. I have also been informed by
the engages that the Panis and Ricaras give the same account of the
Black mountains which lye West of them. this phenomenon the philosophy
of the engages readily accounts for; they state it to be the bursting
of the rich mines of silver which these mountains contain.

This morning Capt. Clark dispatched Bratton to meet the canoes which
were detained by the wind to get a couple of axes. he obtained the axes
and returned in about two hours. this man has been unable to work for
several days in consequence of a whitlow on one of his fingers; a
complaint which has been very common among the men. one of the canoes
arrived at Capt. Clarks camp about 10 A.M. this he had unloaded and set
a few miles up the river for a buffaloe which had been killed, the
party sent killed another in thir rout and brought in the flesh and
skins of both they were in good order; his hunters had also killed two
deer and an Antelope yesterday. the three other canoes did not arrive
untill late in the evening in consequence of the wind and the fear of
weting their loads which consisted of articles much more liable to be
injured by moisture than those which composed the load of that which
arrived in the morning. Capt. C. had the canoes unloaded and ordered
them to float down in the course of the night to my camp, but the wind
proved so high after night that they were obliged to put too about 8
miles above and remain untill morning. Capt. C. kept the party with him
busily engaged at the canoes. his hunters killed and brought in three
very fat deer this evening.

[Clark, July 11, 1805]
July 11th Thursday 1805
a fair windey morning wind S. W. I dispatch W Bratten (who cannot work
he haveing a turner rising on his finger) to meat the Canoes & bring
from them two axes, which is necessary for the work at the perogues or
Canoes, and is indespenceable he returned in about two hours & informed
that one Canoe was within three miles, about 1 oClock the Canoe which
Bratten left arrived haveing killed a Buffalow on the river above our
Camp, at which place the bend of the river below & that above is about
1 mile apart, I dispatched Serjt. Pryor with 3 men in the Canoe to get
the meat they killed another buffalow near the one killed and brought
the meat of both down. at Sunset the 3 remaining Canoes arrived
unloaded & returned imeadeately with orders to flote down to Camp at
the portage to night for the purpose of takeing up the remaining
baggage. Musquitors verry troublesom, and in addition to their torments
we have a Small Knat, which is as disagreeable, our hunter killed 3
Deer to day one of them verry fat. all the men with me engaged about
the Canoes hunting &c. &.

[Lewis, July 12, 1805]
Friday July 12th 1805.
The canoes not having arrived and the wind still high I dispatched
Sergt. Gass with three men to join Capt. Clark and assist in completing
the canoes retaining only a few who in addition to those in the canoes
that I expect every moment, will be sufficient to man the six canoes
and take up all the baggage we have here at one load. I feel
excessively anxious to be moving on. the canoes were detained by the
wind untill 2 P.M. when they set out and arrived at this place so late
that I thought it best to detain them untill morning. Bratton came down
today for a cople of axes which I sent by him; he returned immediately.
Sergt. Gass and party joined Capt. Clark at 10 A.M. Capt. C. kept all
the men with him busily engaged some in drying meat, others in hunting,
and as many as could be employed about the canoes. Segt. Pryor got his
sholder dislocated yesterday, it was replaced immediately and is likely
to do him but little injury; it is painfull to him today. the hunters
with Capt. C. killed three deer and two otter today. the otter are now
plenty since the water has become sufficiently clear for them to take
fish. the blue crested fisher, or as they are sometimes called the
Kingfisher, is an inhabitant of this part of the country; this bird is
very rare on the Missouri; I have not seen more than three or four of
those birds during my voyage from the entrance of the Missouri to the
mouth of Maria's river and those few were reather the inhabitants of
streams of clerer water which discharged themselves into the Missouri
than of that river, as they were seen about the entrances of such
streams. Musquetoes extreemly troublesome to me today nor is a large
black knat less troublesome, which dose not sting, but attacks the eye
in swarms and compells us to brush them off or have our eyes filled
with them. I made the men dry the ballance of the freshe meet which we
had abot the camp amounting to about 200 lbs.

[Clark, July 12, 1805]
July 12th Friday 1805
a fair windey morning wind from the S. W. all hands at work at Day
light Some at the Canoes, & others drying meat for our voyage-
Dispatched W. Brattin to the lower Camp for two axes which are
necessary to carry on our work at this place &. Serjt. Pryors Sholder
was put out of place yesterday Carrying Meat and is painfull to day.
wind hard all day dispatched 2 hunters, they returnd in the evening
with three Deer & 2 orters. four men arrived from the lower Camp by
land to assist at this place in building the Canoes &c. musquitors &
knats verry troublesom all day. a fiew wild pigions about our Camp.

[Lewis, July 13, 1805]
Saturday July 13th 1805.
This morning being calm and Clear I had the remainder of our baggage
embarked in the six small canoes and maned them with two men each. I
now bid a cheerfull adue to my camp and passed over to the opposite
shore. Baptiest La Page one of the men whom I had reserved to man the
canoes being sick I sent Charbono in his stead by water and the sick
man and Indian woman accompanyed me by land. from the head of the white
bear Islands I passed in a S. W. direction and struck the Missouri at 3
miles and continued up it to Capt. Clark's camp where I arrived about 9
A.M. and found them busily engaged with their canoes Meat &c. in my way
I passed a very extraordinary Indian lodge, or at least the fraim of
one; it was formed of sixteen large cottonwood poles each about fifty
feet long and at their larger end which rested on the ground as thick
as a man's body; these were arranged in a circular manner at bottom and
equally distributed except the omission of one on the East side which I
suppose was the entrance to the lodge; the upper part of the poles are
united in a common point above and secured with large wyths of willow
brush. in the center of this fabric there was the remains of a large
fire; and about the place the marks of about 80 leather lodges. I know
not what was the intention or design of such a lodge but certain I am
that it was not designed for a dwelling of anyone family. it was 216
feet in circumpherence at the base. it was most probably designed for
some great feast, or a council house on some great national concern. I
never saw a similar one nor do the nations lower down the Missouri
construct such. The canoes and party with Sergt. Ordway poceeded up the
river about 5 miles when the wind became so violent that two of the
canoes shiped a considerable quanty of water and they were compelled to
put too take out the baggage to dry and clense the canoes of the water.
about 5 P.M. the wind abated and they came on about 8 miles further and
encamped. I saw a number of turtledoves and some pigeons today. of the
latter I shot one; they are the same common to the United States, or
the wild pigeon as they are called. nothing remarkable in the
appearance of the country; the timber entirely confined to the river
and the country back on either side as far as the eye can reach
entirely destitute of trees or brush. the timber is larger and more
abundant in the bottom in which we now are than I have seen it on the
Missouri for many hundred miles. the current of the river is still
extreemly gentle. The hunters killed three buffaloe today which were in
good order. the flesh was brought in dryed the skins wer also streached
for covering our baggage. we eat an emensity of meat; it requires 4
deer, an Elk and a deer, or one buffaloe, to supply us plentifully 24
hours. meat now forms our food prinsipally as we reserve our flour
parched meal and corn as much as possible for the rocky mountains which
we are shortly to enter, and where from the indhan account game is not
very abundant. I preserved specemines of several small plants to day
which I have never before seen. The Musquetoes and knats are more
troublesome here if possible than they were at the White bear Islands.
I sent a man to the canoes for my musquetoe bier which I had neglected
to bring with me, as it is impossible to sleep a moment without being
defended against the attacks of these most tormenting of all insects;
the man returned with it a little after dark.

[Clark, July 13, 1805]
July 13th Saturday 1805.
a fair Calm Morning, verry Cool before day- we were visited by a
Buffalow Bull who came within a fiew Steps of one of the Canoes the men
were at work. Capt. Lewis one man &c. arrived over Land at 9 oClock,
the wind rose and blew hard from the S. E. the greater part of the day
both Canoes finished all to Corking & fixing ores &c. &c. The Hunters
killed 3 Buffalow the most of all the meat I had dried for to make
Pemitigon. The Musquetors & Knats verry troublesom all day & night

[Lewis, July 14, 1805]
Sunday July 14th 1805.
This morning was calm fair and warm; the Musquetoes of course
troublesome. all hands that could work were employed about the canoes.
which we completed and launched this evening. the one was 25 feet and
the other 33 feet in length and about 3 feet wide. we have now the
seats and oars to make and fit &c. I walked out today and ascended the
bluffs which are high rockey and steep; I continued my rout about 31/2
when I gained a conspicuous eminence about 2 mes. distant from the
river a little below the entrance of Fort Mountain Creek. from this
place I had a commanding view of the country and took the bearings of
the following places. (viz)

To the point at which the Missouri first enters the Rocky Mountains
S. 28° W.
25
To the termineation of the 1st Chain of Rocky Mountains; northwardly,
being that through which the Missouri first passes
N. 73° W
80
To the extremity or tirmineation of 2cd Chain of the Rocky Mountains
N. 65 W.
150
To the most distant point of a third and continued chain of  the same
mts
N. 50°W.
200
The direction of the 2cd Do. from S 45 E. to N. 45 W.


To Fort Mountain
S. 75° W.
8

The country in most parts very level and in others swelling with gentle
rises and decents, or in other wirds what I have heretofore designated
a wavy country destitute of timber except along the water-courses. On
my return to camp found Sergt. Ordway had arrived with all the canoes
about noon and had unloaded them every preperation except the entire
completion of the oars poles &c is made for our departure tomorrow. the
grass and weeds in this bottom are about 2 feet high; which is a much
greater hight than we have seen them elsewhere this season. here I
found the sand rush and nittles in small quantities. the grass in the
plains is not more than 3 inches high. grasshoppers innumerable in the
plains and the small birds before noticed together with the brown
Curlooe still continue nomerous in every part of the plains.

had a slight shower at 4 P.M. this evening.

[Clark, July 14, 1805]
July 14th Sunday 1805
a fine morning Calm and worm musquetors & Knats verry troublesom. The
Canoes arrive at 12 oClock & unloade to Dry &c. finished & Lanced the 2
Canoes, Some rain this afternoon. all prepareing to Set out on tomorrow.

[Lewis, July 15, 1805]
Monday July 15th 1805.
We arrose very early this morning, assigned the canoes their loads and
had it put on board. we now found our vessels eight in number all
heavily laden, notwithstanding our several deposits; tho it is true we
have now a considerable stock of dryed meat and grease. we find it
extreemly difficult to keep the baggage of many of our men within
reasonable bounds; they will be adding bulky articles of but little use
or value to them. At 10 A.M. we once more saw ourselves fairly under
way much to my joy and I beleive that of every individual who compose
the party. I walked on shore and killed 2 Elk near one of which the
party halted and dined. we took the skins marrow bones and a part of
the flesh of these Elk. in order to lighten the burthen of the canoes I
continued my walk all the evening and took our only invalledes Potts an
LaPage with me. we passed the river near where we dined and just above
the entrance of a beautifull river 80 yards wide which falls in on the
Lard. side which in honour of Mr. Robert Smith the Secretary of the
Navy we called Smith's River. this stream meanders through a most
lovely valley to the S. E. for about 25 miles when it enters the Rocky
mountains and is concealed from our view. many herds of buffaloe were
feeding in this valley. we again crossed the river to the Stard. side
and passed through a plain and struck the river at a Northwardly bend
where there was timber here we waited untill the canoes arrived by
which time it was so late that we concluded to encamp for the night.
here Drewyer wouded a deer which ran into the river my dog pursued
caught it drowned it and brought it to shore at our camp. we have now
passed Fort Mountain on our right it appears to be about ten miles
distant. this mountain has a singular appearance it is situated in a
level plain, it's sides stand nearly at right angles with each other
and are each about a mile in extent. these are formed of a yellow clay
only without the mixture of rock or stone of any size and rise
perpendicularly to the hight of 300 feet. the top appears to be a level
plain and from the eminence on which I was yesterday I could see that
it was covered with a similar cost of grass with the plain on which it
stands. the surface appears also to possess a tolerable fertile mole of
2 feet thick. and is to all appearance inaccessible. from it's figure
we gave it the name of fort mountain. those mounds before mentioned
near the falls have much the same appearance but are none of them as
large as this one. the prickly pear is now in full blume and forms one
of the beauties as well as the greatest pests of the plains. the
sunflower is also in blume and is abundant. this plant is common to
every part of the Missouri from it's entrance to this place. the
lambsquarter, wild coucumber, sand rush and narrow dock are also common
here. Drewyer killed another deer and an Otter today. we find it
inconvenient to take all the short meanders of the river which has now
become cooked and much narrower than below, we therefore take it's
general course and lay down the small bends by the eye on our daily
traverse or chart. the river is from too to 150 yds. wide. more timber
on the river than below the falls for a great distance. on the banks of
the river there are many large banks of sand much elivated above the
plains on which they ly and appear as if they had been collected in the
course of time from the river by the almost incessant S. W. winds; they
always appear on the sides of the river opposite to those winds.

The couses and distances from the White bear islands to the camp at
which we made the canoes as taken by Sergt. Ordway.-

[Clark, July 15, 1805]
July 15th Monday 1805
rained all the last night I was wet all night this morning wind hard
from the S. W. we Set out at 10 oClock and proceeded on verry well
passed a river on the Lard Side about 80 yards wide which we Call after
the Secy of the Navey Smiths River the river verry Crooked bottoms
extensive rich and Passes thro a butifull vally between 2 mts. Conts.
high grass, our Canoes being So Small Several of the men Capt. Lewis &
my Self Compelled to walked on Shore & Cross the bends to keep up with
the Canoes- a round mountain on our right abt. 10 miles appears
inaxcessable we Call fort mountain. The Prickley pear in bloom but fiew
other flowers. Sun flowr are common, also lambs quarter & Nettles. Capt
Lew Killed 2 Elk & the hunters killed 2 Deer & a Ortter, we Camped on
the Stard Side at which place I Saw many beaver, the timber on the edge
of the river more Common than below the falls- as I am compelled to
walk on Shore find it verry dificuelt to take the Courses of the river,
as it is verry Crooked more So than below

[Lewis, July 16, 1805]
Tuesday July 16th 1805.
We had a heavy dew last night sen one man back this morning for an ax
that he had carelessly left last evening some miles below, and set out
at an early hour. early this morning we passed about 40 little booths
formed of willow bushes to shelter them from the sun; they appeared to
have been deserted about 10 days; we supposed that they were snake
Indians. they appeared to have a number of horses with them-. this
appearance gives me much hope of meeting with these people shortly.
Drewyer killed a buffaloe this morning near the river and we halted and
breakfasted on it. here for the first time I ate of the small guts of
the buffaloe cooked over a blazing fire in the Indian stile without any
preperation of washing or other clensing and found them very good.-
After breakfast I determined to leave Capt. C. and party, and go on to
the point where the river enters the Rocky Mountains and make the
necessary observations against their arrival; accordingly I set out
with the two invalleds Potts and LaPage and Drewyer; I passed through a
very handsome level plain on the Stard. side of the river, the country
equally level and beautiful) on the opposite side; at the distance of 8
mes. passed a small stream on which I observed a considerable quantity
of aspin. a little before 12 I halted on the river at a Stard. bend and
well timbered bottom about 41/2 miles below the mountains and made the
following observation.

after this observation we pursued our rout through a high roling plain
to a rappid immediately at the foot of the mountain where the Missouri
first enters them. the current of the missouri below these rappids is
strong for several miles, tho just above there is scarcely any current,
the river very narrow and deep abot 70 yds. wide only and seems to be
closely hemned in by the mountains on both sides, the bottoms only a
few yards in width. an Indian road enters the mountain at the same
place with the river on the Stard side and continues along it's border
under the steep clifts these mountains appear to be only about 800 feet
above the river and are formed almost entirely of a hard black
grannite. with a few dwarf pine and cedar scattered on them. at this
place there is a large rock of 400 feet high wich stands immediately in
the gap which the missouri makes on it's passage from the mountains; it
is insulated from the neighbouring mountains by a handsome little plain
which surrounds it base on 3 sides and the Missouri washes it's base on
the other, leaving it on the Lard. as it decends. this rock I called
the tower. it may be ascended with some difficulty nearly to it's
summit, and from it there is a most pleasing view of the country we are
now about to leave. from it I saw this evening immence herds of
buffaloe in the plains below. near this place we killed a fat elk on
which we both dined and suped. the Musquetoes are extreemly troublesome
this evening and I had left my bier, of course suffered considerably,
and promised in my wrath that I never will be guily of a similar peice
of negligence while on this voyage.

[Clark, July 16, 1805]
July 16th Tuesday 1805
a fair morning after a verry cold night, heavy dew, dispatched one man
back for an ax left a fiew miles below, and Set out early Killed a
Buffalow on which we Brackfast Capt Lewis & 3 men went on to the
mountain to take a meridian altitude, passed about 40 Small Camps,
which appeared to be abandoned about 10 or 12 days, Suppose they were
Snake Indians, a fiew miles above I Saw the poles Standing in thir
position of a verry large lodge of 60 feet Diamater, & the appearance
of a number of Leather Lodges about, this Sign was old & appeared to
have been last fall great number of buffalow the river is not So wide
as below from 100 to 150 yards wide & Deep Crouded with Islands &
Crooked Some Scattering timber on its edge Such as Cotton wood Cotton
willow, willow and box elder, the Srubs are arrow wod, red wood, Choke
Cherry, red berries, Goose beries, Sarvis burey, red & yellow Currents
a Spcie of Shomake &c.

I camped on the head of a Small Island near the Stard. Shore at the
Rockey Mountains this Range of mountains appears to run N W & S E and
is about 800 feet higher than the Water in the river faced with a hard
black rock the current of the River from the Medison river to the
mountain is gentle bottoms low and extensive, and its General Course is
S. 10° W. about 30 miles on a direct line

[Lewis, July 17, 1805]
Wednesday July 17th 1805.
The sunflower is in bloom and abundant in the river bottoms. The
Indians of the Missouri particularly those who do not cultivate maze
make great uce of the seed of this plant for bread, or use it in
thickening their scope. they most commonly first parch the seed and
then pound them between two smooth stones until) they reduce it to a
fine meal. to this they sometimes mearly add a portion of water and
drink it in that state, or add a sufficient quantity of marrow grease
to reduce it to the consistency of common dough and eate it in that
manner. the last composition I think much best and have eat it in that
state heartily and think it a pallateable dish. there is but little of
the broad leafed cottonwood above the falls, much the greater portion
being of the narrow leafed kind. there are a great abundance of red
yellow perple & black currants, and service berries now ripe and in
great perfection. I find these fruits very pleasent particularly the
yellow currant which I think vastly preferable to those of our gardens.
the shrub which produces this fruit rises to the hight of 6 or 8 feet;
the stem simple branching and erect. they grow closly ascociated in
cops either in the oppen or timbered lands near the watercouses. the
leaf is petiolate of a pale green and resembles in it's form that of
the red currant common to our gardens. the perianth of the
fructification is one leaved, five cleft, abreviated and tubular, the
corolla is monopetallous funnel-shaped; very long, superior, withering
and of a fine orrange colour. five stamens and one pistillum; of the
first, the fillaments are capillare, inserted into the corolla, equal,
and converging; the anther ovate, biffid and incumbent. with rispect to
the second the germ is roundish, smoth, inferior pedicelled and small;
the style, long, and thicker than the stamens, simple, cylindrical,
smooth, and erect, withering and remains with the corolla untill the
fruit is ripe. stigma simple obtuse and withering.- the fruit is a
berry about the size and much the shape of the red currant of our
gardins, like them growing in clusters supported by a compound
footstalk, but the peduncles which support the several berries are
longer in this species and the berries are more scattered. it is quite
as transparent as the red current of our gardens, not so ascid, & more
agreeably flavored. the other species differ not at all in appearance
from the yellow except in the colour and flavor of their berries. I am
not confident as to the colour of the corolla, but all those which I
observed while in blume as we came up the Missouri were yellow but they
might possibly have been all of the yellow kind and that the perple red
and black currants here may have corollas of different tints from that
of the yellow currant.- The survice berry differs somewhat from that of
the U States the bushes are small sometimes not more than 2 feet high
and scarcely ever exceed 8 and are proportionably small in their stems,
growing very thickly ascosiated in clumps. the fruit is the same form
but for the most part larger more lucious and of so deep a perple that
on first sight you would think them black.- there are two species of
goosbirris here allso but neither of them yet ripe. the choke cherries
also abundant and not yet ripe. there is Box alder, red willow and a
species of sumac here also. there is a large pine tree situated on a
small island at the head of these rappids above our camp; it being the
first we have seen for a long distance near the river I called the
island pine island. This range of the rocky mountains runs from S E to
N. W.- at 8 A.M. this morning Capt. Clark arrived with the party. we
took breakfast here, after which I had the box which contained my
instruments taken by land arround tower rock to the river above the
rappid; the canoes ascended with some difficulty but without loss or
injury, with their loads.

After making those observations we proceed, and as the canoes were
still heavy loaded all persons not employed in navigating the canoes
walled on shore. the river clifts were so steep and frequently
projecting into the river with their perpendicular points in such
manner that we could not pass them by land, we wer therefore compelled
to pass and repass the river very frequently in the couse of the
evening. the bottoms are narrow the river also narrow deep and but
little current. river from 70 to 100 yds. wide. but little timber on
the river aspin constitutes a part of that little. see more pine than
usual on the mountains tho still but thinly scattered. we saw some
mountain rams or bighorned anamals this evening, and no other game
whatever and indeed there is but little appearance of any. in some
places both banks of the river are formed for a short distance of
nearly perpendicular rocks of a dark black grannite of great hight; the
river has the appearance of having cut it's passage in the course of
time through this solid rock. we ascended about 6 miles this evening
from the entrance of the mountain and encamped on the Stard. side where
we found as much wood as made our fires. musquetoes still troublesome
knats not as much so.- Capt. C. now informed me that after I left him
yesterday, he saw the poles of a large lodge in praire on the Stard.
side of the river which was 60 feet in diameter and appeared to have
been built last fall; there were the remains of about 80 leather lodges
near the place of the same apparent date. This large lodge was of the
same construction of that mentioned above the white bear Islands. the
party came on very well and encamped on the lower point of an island
near the Stard. shore on that evening. this morning they had set out
early and proceeded without obstruction untill they reached the rappid
where I was encamped.

[Clark, July 17, 1805]
July 17th Wednesday 1805
Set out early this morning and Crossed the rapid at the Island Cald
pine rapid with Some dificuelty, at this rapid I came up with Capt
Lewis & party took a Medn. altitude & we took Some Luner Observations
&c. and proceeded on, the emence high Precipies oblige all the party to
pass & repass the river from one point to another the river confined in
maney places in a verry narrow Chanel from 70 to 120 yards wide bottoms
narrow without timber and maney places the mountain approach on both
Sides, we observe great deel of Scattering pine on the mountains, Some
aspin, Spruce & fur trees took a meridian altd. which gave for
Lattitude 46° 42' 14" 7/10 N we proceeded on verry well about 8 miles &
Camped on the Stard Side The river crooked bottoms narrow, Clifts high
and Steep, I assended a Spur of the Mountain which I found to be highe
& dificuelt of axcess, Containig Pitch Pine & Covered with grass
Scercely any game to be Seen The yellow Current now ripe also the
fussey red Choke Cheries getting ripe Purple Current are also ripe. Saw
Several Ibex or mountain rams to day

[Lewis, July 18, 1805]
Thursday July 18th 1805.
Set out early this morning. previous to our departure saw a large herd
of the Bighorned anamals on the immencely high and nearly perpendicular
clift opposite to us; on the fase of this clift they walked about and
hounded from rock to rock with apparent unconcern where it appared to
me that no quadruped could have stood, and from which had they made one
false step they must have been precipitated at least a 500 feet. this
anamal appears to frequent such precepices and clifts where in fact
they are perfectly secure from the pursuit of the wolf, bear, or even
man himself.- at the distance of 21/2 miles we passed the entrance of a
considerable river on the Stard. side; about 80 yds. wide being nearly
as wide as the Missouri at that place. it's current is rapid and water
extreamly transparent; the bed is formed of small smooth stones of flat
rounded or other figures. it's bottoms are narrow but possess as much
timber as the Missouri. the country is mountainous and broken through
which it passes. it appears as if it might be navigated but to what
extent must be conjectural. this handsome bold and clear stream we
named in honour of the Secretary of war calling it Dearborn's river.-
as we were anxious now to meet with the Sosonees or snake Indians as
soon as possible in order to obtain information relative to the
geography of the country and also if necessary, some horses we thought
it better for one of us either Capt. C. or myself to take a small party
& proceed on up the river, some distance before the canoes, in order to
discover them, should they be on the river before the daily discharge
of our guns, which was necessary in procuring subsistence for the
party, should allarm and cause them to retreat to the mountains and
conceal themselves, supposing us to be their enemies who visit them
usually by the way of this river. accordingly Capt. Clark set out this
morning after breakfast with Joseph Fields, Pots and his servant York.
we proceeded on tolerably well; the current stonger than yesterday we
employ the cord and oars principally tho sometimes the setting pole. in
the evening we passed a large creek about 30 yds. wide which
disembogues on the Stard. side; it discharges a bold current of water
it's banks low and bed frormed of stones altogether; this stream we
called Ordway's creek after Sergt. John Ordway. I have observed for
several days a species of flax growing in the river bottoms the leaf
stem and pericarp of which resembles the common flax cultivated in the
U States. the stem rises to the hight of about 21/2 or 3 feet high; as
many as 8 or ten of which proceede from the same root. the root appears
to be perennial. the bark of the stem is thick strong and appears as if
it would make excellent Hax. the seed are not yet ripe but I hope to
have an opportunity of collecting some of them after they are so if it
should on experiment prove to yeald good flax and at the same time
admit of being cut without injuring the perennial root it will be a
most valuable plant, and I think there is the greatest probability that
it will do so, for notwithstanding the seed have not yet arrived at
maturity it is puting up suckers or young shoots from the same root and
would seem therefore that those which are fully grown and which are in
the proper stage of vegitation to produce the best fax are not longer
essencial to the preservation or support of the root. the river
somewhat wider than yesterday and the mountains more distant from the
river and not so high; the bottoms are but narrow and little or no
timber near the river. some pine on the mountains which seems
principally confined to their uper region. we killed one Elk this
morning and found part of the flesh and the skin of a deer this evening
which had been kited and left by Capt. Clark. we saw several herds of
the Bighorn but they were all out of our reach on inacessable clifts.-
we encamped on the Lard. side in a small grove of narrow leafed
cottonwood there is not any of the broad leafed cottonwood on the river
since it has entered the mountains. Capt Clark ascended the river on
the Stard. side. in the early part of the day after he left me the
hills were so steep that he gained but little off us; in the evening he
passed over a mountain by which means he cut off many miles of the
river's circuitous rout; the Indian road which he pursued over this
mountain is wide and appears as if it had been cut down or dug in many
places; he passed two streams of water, the branches of Ordway's creek,
on which he saw a number of beaver dams succeeding each other in close
order and extending as far up those streams as he could discover them
in their couse towards the mountains. he also saw many bighorn anamals
on the clifts of the mountains. not far beyond the mountain which he
passed in the evening he encamped on a small stream of runing water.
having travelled about 20 m. the water of those rivulets which make
down from these mountains is extreemly cold pure and fine. the soil
near the river is of a good quality and produces a luxuriant growth of
grass and weeds; among the last the sunflower holds a distinguished
place. the aspin is small but grows very commonly on the river and
small streams which make down from the Mouts.

I also observed another species of flax today which is not so large as
the first, sildome obtaining a greater hight than 9 Inches or a foot
the stem and leaf resemble the other species but the stem is rarely
branched, bearing a single monopetallous bellshaped blue flower which
is suspended with it's limb downwards,

[Clark, July 18, 1805]
July 18th Tursday 1805
a fine morning passed a Considerable river which falls in on the Stard
Side and nearly as wide as the Missouri we call Dearbournes river after
the Sety. of war. we thought it prudent for a partey to go a head for
fear our fireing Should allarm the Indians and cause them to leave the
river and take to the mountains for Safty from their enemes who visit
them thro this rout. I deturmined to go a head with a Small partey a
few days and find the Snake Indians if possible after brackfast I took
J. Fields Potts & my Servent proceeded on. the Country So Hilley that
we gained but little of the Canoes untill in the evening I passed over
a mountain on an Indian rode by which rout I cut off Several miles of
the Meanderings of the River, the roade which passes this mountain is
wide and appears to have been dug in maney places, we Camped on a Small
run of Clear Cold water, musquitors verry troublesom the forepart of
the evening I Saw great maney Ibex. we Crossed two Streams of running
water on those Streams I saw Several Beaver dams. ordway Creek the
Countrey is Mountanious & rockey except the valey &c. which is Covered
with earth of a good quallity without timber, The timber which is
principally pitch pine is Confined to the mountains, the Small runs &
Creeks which have water running in them Contain Cotton-Willow, Willow,
& aspin. trees all Small I Saw maney fine Springs & Streams of running
water which Sink & rise alternately in the Valies the water of those
Streams are fine, those Streams which run off into the river are darned
up by the beaver from near ther mouthes up as high as I could See up
them

[Lewis, July 19, 1805]
Friday July 19th 1805
The Musquetoes are very troublesome to us as usual. this morning we set
out early and proceeded on very well tho the water appears to encrease
in volocity as we advance. the current has been strong all day and
obstructed with some rapids, tho these are but little broken by rocks
and are perfectly safe. the river deep and from 100 to 150 yds. wide. I
walked along shore today and killed an Antelope. whever we get a view
of the lofty summits of the mountains the snow presents itself, altho
we are almost suffocated in this confined vally with heat. the pine
cedar and balsum fir grow on the mountains in irregular assemleages or
spots mostly high up on their sides and summits. this evening we
entered much the most remarkable clifts that we have yet seen. these
clifts rise from the waters edge on either side perpendicularly to the
hight of 1200 feet. every object here wears a dark and gloomy aspect.
the towering and projecting rocks in many places seem ready to tumble
on us. the river appears to have forced it's way through this immence
body of solid rock for the distance of 53/4 miles and where it makes
it's exit below has thown on either side vast collumns of rocks
mountains high. the river appears to have woarn a passage just the
width of it's channel or 150 yds. it is deep from side to side nor is
ther in the 1st 3 miles of this distance a spot except one of a few
yards in extent on which a man could rest the soal of his foot. several
fine springs burst out at the waters edge from the interstices of the
rocks. it happens fortunately that altho the current is strong it is
not so much so but what it may be overcome with the oars for there is
hear no possibility of using either the cord or Setting pole. it was
late in the evening before I entered this place and was obliged to
continue my rout untill sometime after dark before I found a place
sufficiently large to encamp my small party; at length such an one
occurred on the lard. side where we found plenty of lightwood and
pichpine. this rock is a black grannite below and appears to be of a
much lighter colour above and from the fragments I take it to be flint
of a yelloish brown and light creemcolourd yellow.- from the singular
appearance of this place I called it the gates of the rocky mountains.
the mountains higher today than yesterday, saw some Bighorns and a few
Antelopes also beaver and Otter; the latter are now very plenty one of
the men killed one of them today with a setting pole. musquetoes less
troublesome than usual. we had a thundershower today about 1 P.M. which
continued about an hour and was attended with som hail. we have seen no
buffaloe since we entered the mounts. this morning early Capt. Clark
pursued his rout, saw early in the day the remains of several Indians
camps formed of willow brush which appeared to have been inhabited some
time this spring. saw where the natives had pealed the bark off the
pine trees about this same season. this the indian woman with us
informs that they do to obtain the sap and soft part of the wood and
bark for food. at 11 A.M. Capt. C. feell in with a gang of Elk of which
he killed 2. and not being able to obtain as much wood as would make a
fire substituded the dung of the buffaloe and cooked a part of their
meat on which they breakfasted and again pursueed their rout, which lay
along an old indian road. this evening they passed a hansome valley
watered by a large creek which extends itself with it's valley into the
mountain to a considerable distance. the latter part of the evening
their rout lay over a hilly and mountanous country covered with the
sharp fragments of flint which cut and bruised their feet excessively;
nor wer the prickly pear of the leveler part of the rout much less
painfull; they have now become so abundant in the open uplands that it
is impossible to avoid them and their thorns are so keen and stif that
they pearce a double thickness of dressed deers skin with ease. Capt.
C. informed me that he extracted 17 of these bryers from his feet this
evening after he encamped by the light of the fire. I have guarded or
reather fortifyed my feet against them by soaling my mockersons with
the hide of the buffaloe in parchment. he encamped on the river much
fortiegud having passed two mountains in the course of the day and
travelled about 30 miles.-

[Clark, July 19, 1805]
July 19th Fryday 1805
a find morning I proceeded on in an Indian path river verry crooked
passed over two mountains Saw Several Indian Camps which they have left
this Spring. Saw trees Peeled & found poles &c. at 11 oC I Saw a gange
of Elk as we had no provision Concluded to kill Some Killd two and
dined being oblige to Substitute dry buffalow dung in place of wood,
this evening passed over a Cream Coloured flint which roled down from
the Clifts into the bottoms, the Clifts Contain flint a dark grey Stone
& a redish brown intermixed and no one Clift is Solid rock, all the
rocks of everry description is in Small pices appears to have been
broken by Some Convulsion- passed a butifull Creek on the Std. Side
this eveng which meanders thro a butifull Vallie of great extent, I
call after Sgt Pryor the countrey on the Lard Side a high mountain Saw
Several Small rapids to day the river Keep its width and appear to be
deep, my feet is verry much brused & cut walking over the flint, &
constantly Stuck full Prickley pear thorns, I puled out 17 by the light
of the fire to night We camped on the river Same (Lard) Side Musqutors
verry troublesom.

[Lewis, July 20, 1805]
Saturday 20 h 1805.
Set out early this morning as usual, currant strong, we therefore
employ the toe rope when ever the banks permit the use of it; the water
is reather deep for the seting pole in most places. at 6 A.M. the hills
retreated from the river and the valley became wider than we have seen
it since we entered the mountains. some scattering timber on the river
and in the valley. consisting of the narrowleafed Cottonwood aspin &
pine. vas numbers of the several species of currants goosberries and
service berries; of each of these I preserved some seeds. I found a
black currant which I thought preferable in flavor to the yellow. this
currant is really a charming fruit and I am confident would be prefered
at our markets to any currant now cultivated in the U States. we killed
an Elk this morning which was very acceptable to us. through the valley
which we entered early in the morning a large creek flows from the
mountains and discharges itself into the river behind an island on
Stard. side about 15 yds. wide this we called Potts's Creek after John
Potts one of our party. about 10 A.M. we saw the smoke arrose as if the
country had been set on fire up the valley of this creek about 7 ms.
distant we were at a loss to determine whether it had been set on fire
by the natives as a signall among themselves on discovering us, as is
their custom or whether it had been set on fire by Capt. C. and party
accedentally. the first however proved to be the fact, they had
unperceived by us discovered Capt. Clark's party or mine, and had set
the plain on fire to allarm the more distant natives and fled
themselves further into the interior of the mountains. this evening we
found the skin of an Elk and part of the flesh of the anamal which
Capt. C. had left near the river at the upper side of the valley where
he assended the mountain with a note informing me of his transactions
and that he should pass the mounts which lay just above us and wate our
arrival at some convenient place on the river. the other elk which
Capt. C. had killed we could not find. about 2 in the evening we had
passed through a range of low mountains and the country bacame more
open again, tho still broken and untimbered and the bottoms not very
extensive. we encamped on the Lard. side near a spring on a high bank
the prickly pears are so abundant that we could scarcely find room to
lye. just above our camp the river is again closed in by the Mouts. on
both sides. I saw a black woodpecker today about the size of the lark
woodpecker as black as a crow. I indevoured to get a shoot at it but
could not. it is a distinct species of woodpecker; it has a long tail
and flys a good deel like the jay bird.

This morning Capt. Clark set out early and proceeded on through a
valley leaving the river about six miles to his left; he fell in with
an old Indian road which he pursued untill it struck the river about 18
miles from his camp of the last evening just above the entrance of a
large creek which we call white paint Creek. the party were so much
fortiegued with their march and their feet cut with the flint and
perced with the prickly pears untill they had become so painfull that
he proceeded but little further before he determined to encamp on the
river and wait my arrival.- Capt. C. saw a smoke today up the valley of
Pryor's creek which was no doubt caused by the natives likewise. he
left signals or signs on his rout in order to inform the indians should
they pursue his trale that we were not their enemies, but white men and
their friends.- cloth &c

[Clark, July 20, 1805]
July 20th Satturday 1805
a fine morning we proceded on thro a valley leaveing the river about 6
miles to our left and fell into an Indian roade which took us to the
river above the mo. of a Creek 18 miles The Misquetors verry troublesom
my man York nearly tired out, the bottoms of my feet blistered. I
observe a Smoke rise to our right up the Valley of the last Creek about
12 miles distant, The Cause of this Smoke I can't account for certainly
tho think it probable that the Indians have heard the Shooting of the
Partey below and Set the Praries or Valey on fire to allarm their
Camps; Supposeing our party to be a war party comeing against them, I
left Signs to Shew the Indians if they Should come on our trail that we
were not their enemeys. Camped on the river, the feet of the men with
me So Stuck with Prickley pear & cut with the Stones that they were
Scerseley able to march at a Slow gate this after noon

[Lewis, July 21, 1805]
Sunday July 21st 1805.
Set out early this morning and passed a bad rappid where the river
enters the mountain about 1 m. from our camp of last evening the Clifts
high and covered with fragments of broken rocks. the current strong; we
employed the toe rope principally, and also the pole as the river is
not now so deep but reather wider and much more rapid our progress was
therefore slow and laborious. we saw three swans this morning, which
like the geese have not yet recovered the feathers of the wing and
could not fly we killed two of them the third escaped by diving and
passed down with the current; they had no young ones with them
therefore presume they do not breed in this country these are the first
we have seen on the river for a great distance. we daily see great
numbers of gees with their young which are perfectly feathered except
the wings which are deficient in both young and old. my dog caught
several today, as he frequently dose. the young ones are very fine, but
the old gees are poor and unfit for uce. saw several of the large brown
or sandhill Crain today with their young. the young Crain is as large
as a turkey and cannot fly they are of a bright red bey colour or that
of the common deer at this season. this bird feeds on grass prinsipally
and is found in the river bottoms. the grass near the river is lofty
and green that of the hill sides and high open grounds is perfectly dry
and appears to be scorched by the heat of the sun. the country was
rough mountainous & much as that of yesterday untill towards evening
when the river entered a beautifull and extensive plain country of
about 10 or 12 miles wide which extended upwards further that the eye
could reach this valley is bounded by two nearly parallel ranges of
high mountains which have their summits partially covered with snow.
below the snowey region pine succeeds and reaches down their sides in
some parts to the plain but much the greater portion of their surfaces
is uncovered with timber and expose either a barren sterile soil
covered with dry parched grass or black and rugged rocks. the river
immediately on entering this valley assumes a different aspect and
character, it spreads to a mile and upwards in width crouded with
Islands, some of them large, is shallow enough for the use of the
seting pole in almost every part and still more rappid than before;
it's bottom is smooth stones and some large rocks as it has been since
we have entered the mountains. the grass in these extensive bottoms is
green and fine, about 18 inches or 2 feet high. the land is a black
rich loam and appears very fertile. we encamped in this beatiful valley
on the Lard. side the party complain of being much fatiegued with this
days travel. we killed one deer today.- This morning we passed a bold
creek 28 yds. wide which falls in on Stard. side. it has a handsome and
an extensive valley. this we called Pryor's Creek after Sergt. (John)
Pryor one of our party. I also saw two fesants today of a dark brown
colour much larger than the phesant of the U States.

this morning Capt. Clark having determined to hunt and wait my arrival
somewhere about his preset station was fearfull that some indians might
still be on the river above him sufficiently near to hear the report of
his guns and therefore proceeded up, the river about three miles and
not finding any indians nor discovering any fresh appearance of them
returned about four miles below and fixed his camp near the river;
after refreshing themselves with a few hours rest they set out in
different directions to hunt. Capt C. killed a buck and Fields a buck
and doe. he caught a young curlooe which was nearly feathered. the
musquetoes were equally as troublesome to them as to ourselves this
evening; tho some hours after dark the air becomes so cold that these
insects disappear. the men are all fortunately supplyed with musquetoe
biers otherwise it would be impossible for them to exist under the
fatiegues which they daily encounter without their natural rest which
they could not obtain for those tormenting insects if divested of their
biers. timber still extreemly scant on the river but there is more in
this valley than we have seen since we entered the mountains; the
creeks which fall into the river are better supplyed with this article
than the river itself.-

we saw a number of trout today since the river has become more shallow;
also caught a fish of a white colour on the belly and sides and of a
bluish cast on the back which had been accedentally wounded by a
setting pole. it had a long pointed mouth which opened somewhat like
the shad.

[Clark, July 21, 1805]
July 21st Sunday 1805
a fine morning our feet So brused and Cut that I deturmined to delay
for the Canoes, & if possible kill Some meat by the time they arrived,
all the Creeks which fall into the Missouri on the Std. Side Since
entering the Mountains have extencive Valies of open Plain. the river
bottoms Contain nothing larger than a Srub untill above the last Creek
the Creeks & runs have timber on them generally, the hills or mountains
are in Some places thickly covered with pine & Cedar &c. &c. I
proceeded on about 3 miles this morning finding no fresh Indian Sign
returned down the river four miles and Camped, turned out to hunt for
Some meat, which if we are Suckessfull will be a Seasonable Supply for
the partey assending. emence quantities of Sarvice buries, yellow, red,
Purple & black Currents ripe and Superior to any I ever tasted
particularly the yellow & purple kind. Choke Cheries are Plenty; Some
Goose buries- The wild rose Continue the Willow more abundant no Cotton
wood of the Common kind Small birds are plenty, Some Deer, Elk, Goats,
and Ibex; no buffalow in the Mountains.

Those mountains are high and a great perportion of them rocky Vallies
fertile I observe on the highest pinicals of Some of the mountains to
the West Snow lying in Spots Some Still further North are covered with
Snow and cant be Seen from this point The Winds in those mountains are
not Settled generally with the river, to day the wind blow hard from
the West at the Camp. The Missouri Continus its width the Current
Strong and Crouded with little Islands and Cose graveley bars; but
little fine Sand the Chanel generally a Corse gravel or Soft mud.
Musquetors & Knats verry troublesom. I killed a Buck, and J. Fields
killed a Buck and Doe this evening. Cought a young Curlough.

[Lewis, July 22, 1805]
Monday July 22cd 1805.
We set out early as usual. The river being divided into such a number
of channels by both large and small Island that I found it impossible
to lay it down correctly following one channel only in a canoe and
therefore walked on shore took the general courses of the river and
from the rising grounds took a view of the Islands and it's different
channels which I laid don in conformity thereto on my chart. there
being but little timber to obstruct my view I could see it's various
meanders very satisfactorily. I passed though a large Island which I
found a beautifull level and fertile plain about 10 feet above the
surface of the water and never overflown. on this Island I met with
great quantities of a smal onion about the size of a musquit ball and
some even larger; they were white crisp and well flavored I geathered
about half a bushel of them before the canoes arrived. I halted the
party for breakfast and the men also geathered considerable quantities
of those onions. it's seed had just arrived to maturity and I gathered
a good quantity of it. This appears to be a valuable plant inasmuch as
it produces a large quantity to the squar foot and bears with ease the
rigor of this climate, and withall I think it as pleasantly flavored as
any species of that root I ever tasted. I called this beatifull and
fertile island after this plant Onion Island. here I passed over to the
stard. shore where the country was higher and ascended the river to the
entrance of a large creek which discharges itself into the Missouri on
the Stard. side. it is composed of three pretty considerable creeks
which unite in a beautifull and extensive vally a few miles before it
discharges itself into the river. while wateing for the canoes to
arrive I killed an otter which sunk to the bottom on being shot, a
circumstance unusual with that anamal. the water was about 8 feet deep
yet so clear that I could see it at the bottom; I swam in and obtained
it by diving. I halted the party here for dinner; the canoes had taken
different channels through these islands and it was sometime before
they all came up. I placed my thermometer in a good shade as was my
custom about 4 P.M. and after dinner set out without it and had
proceeded near a mile before I recollected it I sent Sergt. Ordway back
for it, he found it and brought it on. the murcury stood at 80 a. 0
this is the warmest day except one which we have experienced this
summer. The Indian woman recognizes the country and assures us that
this is the river on which her relations live, and that the three forks
are at no great distance. this peice of information has cheered the
sperits of the party who now begin to console themselves with the
anticipation of shortly seeing the head of the missouri yet unknown to
the civilized world. the large creek which we passed on Stard. 15 yds.
we call white Earth Creek from the circumstance of the natives
procuring a white paint on this crek.- Saw many gees, crams, and small
birds common to the plains, also a few phesants and a species of small
curlooe or plover of a brown colour which I first met with near the
entrance of Smith's river but they are so shy and watchfull there is no
possibility of geting a shoot at them it is a different kind from any
heretofore discribed and is about the size of the yellow leged plover
or jack Curlooe. both species of the willow that of the broad leaf and
narrow leaf still continue, the sweet willow is very scarce. the rose
bush, small honesuckle, the pulpy leafed thorn, southernwood, sage Box
alder narrow leafed cottonwood, red wod, a species of sumac are all
found in abundance as well as the red and black goosberries, service
berries, choke cherries and the currants of four distinct colours of
black, yellow, red and perple. the cherries are not yet ripe. the bear
appear to feed much on the currants. late this evening we arrived at
Capt. Carks camp on the stard. side of the river; we took them on board
with the meat they had collected and proceeded a short distance and
encamped on an Island Capt. Clark's party had killed a deer and an Elk
today and ourselves one deer and an Antelope only. altho Capt C. was
much fatiegued his feet yet blistered and soar he insisted on pursuing
his rout in the morning nor weould he consent willingly to my releiving
him at that time by taking a tour of the same kind. finding him anxious
I readily consented to remain with the canoes; he ordered Frazier and
Jo. & Reubin Filds to hold themselves in readiness to accompany him in
the morning. Sharbono was anxious to accompany him and was accordingly
permitted. the musquetoes and knats more than usually troublesome to us
this evening.-

[Clark, July 22, 1805]
July 22d Monday 1805
a fine morning wind from the S. E. the last night verry cold, my
blanket being Small I lay on the grass & Covered with it. I opened the
bruses & blisters of my feet which caused them to be painfull
dispatched all the men to hunt in the bottom for Deer, deturmined my
Self to lay by & nurs my feet. haveing nothing to eat but venison and
Currents, I find my Self much weaker than when I left the Canoes and
more inclined to rest & repose to day. These men were not Suckcessfull
in hunting killed only one Deer Capt Lewis & the Party arvd. at 4
oClock & we all proceeded on a Short distance and Camped on an Island
the Musquitors verry troublesom this evening G Drewyer not knowing the
place we Camped Continued on up the river. I deturmined to proceed on
in pursute of the Snake Indians on tomorrow and directed Jo Rubin
Fields Frasure to get ready to accompany me. Shabono, our interpreter
requested to go, which was granted &c. In my absence the hunters had
killed Some Deer & a Elk, one fusee found &c. &c.

[Lewis, July 23, 1805]
Tuesday July 23rd 1805.
Set out early as usual; Capt. Clark left us with his little party of 4
men and continued his rout on the Stard. side of the river. about 10
OCk. A M. we came up with Drewyer who had seperated from us yesterday
evening and lay out all night not being able to find where we had
encamped. he had killed 5 deer which we took on board and continued our
rout. the river is still divided by a great number of islands, it
channels sometimes seperating to the distance of 3 miles; the current
very rapid with a number of riffles; the bed gravel and smooth stones;
the banks low and of rich loam in the bottoms; some low bluffs of
yellow and red clay with a hard red slate stone intermixed. the bottoms
are wide and but scantily timbered; the underbrush very thick
consisting of the narrow & broad leafed willow rose and Currant bushes
principally. high plains succeeds the river bottoms and extend back on
either side to the base of the mountains which are from 8 to 12 miles
assunder, high, rocky, some small pine and Cedar on them and ly
parallel with the river. passed a large creek on Lard. side 20 yds.
wide which after meandering through a beautifull and extensive bottom
for several miles nearly parallel with the river discharges itself
opposite to a large cluster of islands which from their number I called
the 10 islands and the creek Whitehous's Creek, after Josph. Whitehouse
one of the party. saw a great abundance of the common thistles; also a
number of the wild onions of which we collected a further supply. there
is a species of garlic also which grows on the high lands with a flat
leaf now green and in bloe but is strong tough and disagreeable. found
some seed of the wild flax ripe which I preserved; this plant grows in
great abundance in these bottoms. I halted rearther early for dinner
today than usual in order to dry some articles which had gotten wet in
several of the canoes. I ordered the canoes to hoist their small flags
in order that should the indians see us they might discover that we
were not Indians, nor their enemies. we made great uce of our seting
poles and cords the uce of both which the river and banks favored. most
of our small sockets were lost, and the stones were so smooth that the
points of their poles sliped in such manner that it increased the
labour of navigating the canoes very considerably, I recollected a
parsel of giggs which I had brought on, and made the men each atatch
one of these to the lower ends of their poles with strong wire, which
answered the desired purpose. we saw Antelopes Crain gees ducks beaver
and Otter. we took up four deer which Capt. Clark & party had killed
and left near the river. he pursued his rout untill late in the evening
and encamped on the bank of the river 25 ms. above our encampment of
the last evening; he followed an old indian road which lyes along the
river on the stard side Capt. saw a number of Antelopes, and one herd
of Elk. also much sign of the indians but all of ancient date. I saw
the bull rush and Cattail flag today.

I saw a black snake today about two feet long the Belly of which was as
black as any other part or as jet itself. it had 128 scuta on the
belley 63 on the tail.

[Clark, July 23, 1805]
July 23rd Tuesday 1805
a fair morning wind from the South. I Set out by land at 6 miles
overtook G Drewyer who had killed a Deer. we killed in the Same bottom
4 deer & a antelope & left them on the river bank for the Canoes
proceeded on an Indian roade through a wider Vallie which the Missouri
Passes about 25 miles & Camped on the bank of the river, High mountains
on either Side of the Vallie Containing Scattering Pine & Cedar Some
Small Cotton willow willow &c. on the Islands & bank of the river I Saw
no fresh Sign of Indians to day Great number of antelopes Some Deer & a
large Gangue of Elk

[Lewis, July 24, 1805]
Wednesday July 24th 1805.
Set out at sunrise; the current very strong; passed a remarkable bluff
of a crimson coloured earth on Stard. intermixed with Stratas of black
and brick red slate. the valley through which the river passed today is
much as that of yesterday nor is there any difference in the appearance
of the mountains, they still continue high and seem to rise in some
places like an amphatheater one rang above another as they receede from
the river untill the most distant and lofty have their tops clad with
snow. the adjacent mountains commonly rise so high as to conceal the
more distant and lofty mountains from our view. I fear every day that
we shall meet with some considerable falls or obstruction in the river
notwithstanding the information of the Indian woman to the contrary who
assures us that the river continues much as we see it. I can scarcely
form an idea of a river runing to great extent through such a rough
mountainous country without having it's stream intercepted by some
difficult and gangerous rappids or falls. we daily pass a great number
of small rappids or riffles which decend one to or 3 feet in 150 yards
but they are rarely incommoded with fixed or standing rocks and altho
strong rappid water are nevertheless quite practicable & by no means
dangerous. we saw many beaver and some otter today; the former dam up
the small channels of the river between the islands and compell the
river in these parts to make other channels; which as soon as it has
effected that which was stoped by the beaver becomes dry and is filled
up with mud sand gravel and drift wood. the beaver is then compelled to
seek another spot for his habitation wher he again erects his dam. thus
the river in many places among the clusters of islands is constantly
changing the direction of such sluices as the beaver are capable of
stoping or of 20 yds. in width. this anamal in that way I beleive to be
very instrumental in adding to the number of islands with which we find
the river crouded. we killed one deer today and found a goat or
Antelope which had been left by Capt. Clark. we saw a large bear but
could not get a shoot at him. we also saw a great number of Crams &
Antelopes, some gees and a few red-headed ducks the small bird of the
plains and curloos still abundant. we observed a great number of snakes
about the water of a brown uniform colour, some black, and others
speckled on the abdomen and striped with black and brownish yellow on
the back and sides. the first of these is the largest being about 4
feet long, the second is of that kind mentioned yesterday, and the last
is much like the garter snake of our country and about it's size. none
of these species are poisonous I examined their teeth and fund them
innosent. they all appear to be fond of the water, to which they fly
for shelter immediately on being pursued.- we saw much sign of Elk but
met with none of them. from the appearance of bones and excrement of
old date the buffaloe sometimes straggle into this valley; but there is
no fresh sighn of them and I begin think that our harrvest of white
puddings is at an end, at least untill our return to the buffaloe
country. our trio of pests still invade and obstruct us on all
occasions, these are the Musquetoes eye knats and prickley pears, equal
to any three curses that ever poor Egypt laiboured under, except the
Mahometant yoke. the men complain of being much fortiegued, their
labour is excessively great. I occasionly encourage them by assisting
in the labour of navigating the canoes, and have learned to push a
tolerable good pole in their fraize. This morning Capt. Clark set out
early and pursued the Indian road whih took him up a creek some miles
abot 10 A.M. he discovered a horse about six miles distant on his left,
he changed his rout towards the horse, on approaching him he found the
horse in fine order but so wild he could not get within less than
several hundred paces of him. he still saw much indian sign but none of
recent date. from this horse he directed his course obliquely to the
river where on his arrival he killed a deer and dined. in this wide
valley where he met with the horse he passed five handsome streams, one
of which only had timber another some willows and much stoped by the
beaver. after dinner he continued his rout along the river upwards and
encamped having traveled about 30 mes.

[Clark, July 24, 1805]
July 24th Wednesday 1805
a fine day wind from the N W. I proceeded on up a Creek on the
direction of the Indian road at 10 oClock discovered a horse 6 miles to
my left towards the river as I approached the horse found him fat and
verry wild we could not get near him, we changed our Direction to the
river for water haveing previously Crossed 5 handsom Streams in one
Vallie one only had any timber on it one other Willows only & a number
of beaver Dams. when I Struck the river turned down to kill a Deer
which we dined on & proceeded on up the river a fiew miles an Campd. on
the river. the river much like it was yesterday. the mountains on
either Side appear like the hills had fallen half down & turned Side
upwards the bottoms narrow and no timber a fiew bushes only.

[Lewis, July 25, 1805]
Thursday July 25th 1805.
Set out at an early hour and proceeded on tolerably well the water
still strong and some riffles as yesterday. the country continues much
the same as the two preceeding days. in the forenoon we saw a large
brown bear on an island but he retreated immediately to the main shore
and ran off before we could get in reach of him. they appear to be more
shy here than on the Missouri below the mountains. we saw some
antelopes of which we killed one. these anamals appear now to have
collected again is small herds several females with their young and one
or two males compose the herd usually. some males are yet soletary or
two perhaps together scattered over the plains which they seen
invariably to prefer to the woodlands. if they happen accedentaly in
the woodlands and are allarmed they run immediately to the plains,
seeming to plaise a just confidence in their superior fleetness and
bottom. we killed a couple of young gees which are very abundant and
fine; but as they are but small game to subsist a party on of our
strength I have forbid the men shooting at them as it waists a
considerable quantity of amunition and delays our progress. we passed
Capt. Clark's encampment of the 23rd inst. the face of the country &
anamal and vegatable productions were the same as yesterday, untill
late in the evening, when the valley appeared to termineate and the
river was again hemned in on both sides with high caiggy and rocky
clifts. soon after entering these hills or low mountains we passed a
number of fine bold springs which burst out underneath the Lard. clifts
near the edge of the water; they wer very cold and freestone water. we
passed a large Crk. today in the plain country, 25 yds. wide, which
discharges itself on the Stard. side; it is composed of five streams
which unite in the plain at no great distance from the river and have
their souces in the Mts. this stream we called Gass's Creek. after
Sergt. Patric Gass one of our party.- two rapids near the large spring
we passed this evening were the worst we have seen since that we passed
on entering the rocky Mountain; they were obstructed with sharp pointed
rocks, ranges of which extended quite across the river. the clifts are
formed of a lighter coloured stone than those below I obseve some
limestone also in the bed of the river which seem to have been brought
down by the current as they are generally small and woarn smooth.- This
morning Capt. Clark set out early and at the distance of a few miles
arrived at the three forks of the Missouri, here he found the plains
recently birnt on the stard. side, and the track of a horse which
appeared to have passed only about four or five days. after taking
breakfast of some meat which they had brought with them, examined the
rivers, and written me a note informing me of his intended rout, he
continued on up the North fork, which though not larger than the middle
fork, boar more to the West, and of course more in the direction we
were anxious to pursue. he ascended this stream about 25 miles on
Stard. side, and encamped, much fatiegued, his feet blistered and
wounded with the prickley pear thorns. Charbono gave out, one of his
ankles failed him and he was unable to proceede any further.- I
observed that the rocks which form the clifts on this part of the river
appear as if they had been undermined by the river and by their weight
had seperated from the parent hill and tumbled on their sides, the
stratas of rock of which they are composed lying with their edges up;
others not seperated seem obliquely depressed on the side next the
river as if they had sunk down to fill the cavity which had been formed
by the washing and wearing of the river. I have observed a red as well
as a yellow species of goosberry which grows on the rocky Clifts in
open places of a swetish pine like flavor, first observed in the
neighbourhood of the falls; at least the yellow species was first
observed there. the red differs from it in no particular except it's
colour and size being somewhat larger; it is a very indifferent fruit,
but as they form a variety of the native fruits of this country I
preserved some of their seeds. musquetoes and knats troublesome as
usual.

[Clark, July 25, 1805]
July 25th Thursday 1805
a fine morning we proceeded on a fiew miles to the three forks of the
Missouri those three forks are nearly of a Size, the North fork appears
to have the most water and must be Considered as the one best
calculated for us to assend middle fork is quit as large about 90 yds.
wide. The South fork is about 70 yds wide & falls in about 400 yards
below the midle fork. those forks appear to be verry rapid & Contain
Some timber in their bottoms which is verry extincive,- on the North
Side the Indians have latterly Set the Praries on fire, the Cause I
can't account for. I Saw one horse track going up the river about four
or 5 days past. after Brackfast (which we made on the ribs of a Buck
killed yesterday), I wrote a note informing Capt Lewis the rout I
intended to take, and proeeded on up the main North fork thro a vallie,
the day verry hot about 6 or 8 miles up the North fork a Small rapid
river falls in on the Lard Side which affords a great Deel of water and
appears to head in the Snow mountains to the S W. this little river
falls into the Missouri by three mouthes, haveing Seperated after it
arrives in the river Bottoms, and Contains as also all the water
courses in this quarter emence number of Beaver & orter maney thousand
enhabit the river & Creeks near the 3 forks (Pholosiphie's River)- We
Campd on the Same Side we assended Starboard 20 miles on a direct line
up the N. fork. Shabono our intrepreter nearly tired one of his ankles
falling him- The bottoms are extencive and tolerable land Covered with
tall grass & prickley pears The hills & mountains are high Steep &
rockey. The river verry much divided by Islands Some Elk Bear & Deer
and Some Small timber on the Islands. Great quantities of Currents,
red, black, yellow, Purple, also Mountain Currents which grow on the
Sides of Clifts; inferior in taste to the others haveing Sweet pineish
flaver and are red & yellow, Choke Cheries, Boin roche, and the red
buries also abound- musquitors verry trouble Som untill the mountain
breeze Sprung up which was a little after night.

[Lewis, July 26, 1805]
Friday July 26th 1805.
Set out early this morning as usual current strong with frequent
riffles; employ the cord and seting poles. the oars scarcely ever being
used except to pass the river in order to take advantage of the shore
and cur-rent. at the distance of 33/4 m. passed the entrance of a large
Creek 15 yds. wide which discharges itself on Lard. near the center of
a Lard. bend it is a bold runing stream this we called Howard's Creek
after Thomas P. Howard one of our party. at the distance of one mile
further we passed the entrance of a small run which falls in just above
a rocky clift on Lard. here the hills or reather mountains again recede
from the river and the valley again widens to the extent of several
miles with wide and fertile bottom lands. covered with grass and in
many places a fine terf of greenswoard. the high lands are thin meagre
soil covered with dry low sedge and a species of grass also dry the
seeds of which are armed with a long twisted hard beard at the upper
extremity while the lower point is a sharp subulate firm point beset at
it's base with little stiff bristles standing with their points in a
contrary direction to the subulate point to which they answer as a barb
and serve also to pres it forward when onece entered a small distance.
these barbed seed penetrate our mockersons and leather legings and give
us great pain untill they are removed. my poor dog suffers with them
excessively, he is constantly hinting and scratching himself as if in a
rack of pain. the prickly pear also grow here as abundantly as usual.
there is another species of the prickly pear of a globular form,
composed of an assemblage of little conic leaves springing from a
common root to which their small points are attached as a common center
and the base of the cone forms the apex of the leaf which is garnished
with a circular range of sharp thorns quite as stif and more keen than
the more common species with the flat leaf, like the Cockeneal plant.
on entering this open valley I saw the snowclad tops of distant
mountains before us. the timber and mountains much as heretofore. saw a
number of beaver today and some otter, killed one of the former, also 4
deer; found a deer's skin which had been left by Capt. C. with a note
informing me of his having met with a horse but had seen no fresh
appearance of the Indians. the river in the valley is from 2 to 250
yds. wide and crouded with Islands, in some places it is 3/4 of a mile
wide including islands. were it passed the hills it was from 150 to 200
yds. the banks are still low but never overflow. one of the men brought
me an indian bow which he found, it was made of cedar and about 2 F. 9
Inh. in length. it had nothing remarkable in it's form being much such
as is used by the Mandans Minetares &c. This morning Capt. Clark left
Sharbono and Joseph Fields at the camp of last evening and proceeded up
the river about 12 miles to the top of a mountain from whence he had an
extensive view of the valley of the river upwards and of a large creek
which flowed into it on Std. side. not meeting with any fresh
appearance of Indians he determined to return and examine the middle
fork of the missouri and meet me by the time he expected me to arrive
at the forks. he returned down the mountain by the way of an old Indian
road which led through a deep hollow of the mountain facing the south
the day being warm and the road unshaded by timber he suffered
excessively with heat and the want of water, at length he arrived at a
very cold spring, at which he took the precaution of weting his feet
head and hands before drank but notwithstanding this precaution he soon
felt the effects of the water. he felt himself very unwell shortly
after but continued his march rejoined Sharbono and Fields where the
party eat of a fawn which Jo. Fields had killed in their absence Capt.
C. was so unwell that he had no inclination to eat. after a short
respite he resumed his march pass the North fork at a large island;
here Charbono was very near being swept away by the current and cannot
swim, Capt. C however risqued him and saved his life. Capt. C.
continued his march to a small river which falls into the North fork
some miles above the junction of the 3 forks it being the distance of
about four miles from his camp of last evening here finding himself
still more unwell he determined to encamp. they killed two brown or
Grisley bear this evening on the island where they passed the N. fork
of the Missouri. this stream is much divided by islands and it's
current rapid and much as that of the missouri where we are and is
navigable.-

[Clark, July 26, 1805]
July 26th Friday 1805
I deturmined to leave Shabono & one man who had Sore feet to rest &
proceed on with the other two to the top of a mountain 12 miles distant
west and from thence view the river & vallies a head, we with great
dificuelty & much fatigue reached the top at 11 oClock from the top of
this mountain I could see the Course of the North fork about 10 miles
meandering through a Vallie but Could discover no Indians or Sign which
was fresh. I could also See Some distance up the Small River below, and
also the middle fork after Satisfying my Self returned to the two men
by an old Indian parth, on this parth & in the Mountain we Came to a
Spring of excessive Cold water, which we drank reather freely of as we
were almost famished; not with Standing the precautions of wetting my
face, hands, & feet, I Soon felt the effects of the water. We Contind.
thro a Deep Vallie without a Tree to Shade us Scorching with heat to
the men who had killed a pore Deer, I was fatigued my feet with Several
blisters & Stuck with prickley pears. I eate but verry little
deturmined to Cross to the middle fork and examine that. we Crossed the
Missouri which was divided by a verry large Island, the first Part was
knee deep, the other waste deep & verry rapid- I felt my Self verry
unwell & took up Camp on the little river 3 miles above its mouth &
near the place it falls into the bottom a fiew Drops of rain this
evening

we killed 2 bear which was imediately in our way. both pore emence
number of Beaver and orter in this little river which forks in the
bottom

[Lewis, July 27, 1805]
Saturday July 27th 1805.
We set out at an early hour and proceeded on but slowly the current
still so rapid that the men are in a continual state of their utmost
exertion to get on, and they begin to weaken fast from this continual
state of violent exertion. at the distance of 13/4 miles the river was
again closely hemned in by high Clifts of a solid limestone rock which
appear to have tumbled or sunk in the same manner of those discribed
yesterday. the limestone appears to be of an excellent quality of deep
blue colour when fractured and of a light led colour where exposed to
the weather. it appears to be of a very fine grain the fracture like
that of marble. we saw a great number of the bighorn on those Clifts.
at the distance of 33/4 ms. further we arrived at 9 A.M. at the
junction of the S. E. fork of the Missouri and the country opens
suddonly to extensive and beatifull plains and meadows which appear to
be surrounded in every direction with distant and lofty mountains;
supposing this to be the three forks of the Missouri I halted the party
on the Lard. shore for breakfast and walked up the S. E. fork about 1/2
a mile and ascended the point of a high limestone clift from whence I
commanded a most perfect view of the neighbouring country. From this
point I could see the S. E. fork about 7 miles. it is rapid and about
70 yards wide. throughout the distance I saw it, it passes through a
smoth extensive green meadow of fine grass in it's course meandering in
several streams the largest of which passes near the Lard. hills, of
which, the one I stand on is the extremity in this direction. a high
wide and extensive plain succeeds the meadow and extends back several
miles from the river on the Stard. sade and with the range of mountains
up the Lard. side of the middle fork. a large spring arrises in this
meadow about 1/4 of a mile from the S. E. fork into which it discharges
itself on the Stard. side about 400 paces above me. from E to S.
between the S. E. and middle forks a distant range of lofty mountains
rose their snow-clad tops above the irregular and broken mountains
which lie adjacent to this beautifull spot. the extreme point to which
I could see the S. E. fork boar S. 65° E. distant 7 ms. as before
observed. between the middle and S. E. forks near their junctions with
the S. W. fork there is a handsom site for a fortification it consists
of a limestone rock of an oblong form; it's sides perpendicular and
about 25 ft high except at the extremity towards the middle fork where
it ascends gradually and like the top is covered with a fine terf of
greenswoard. the top is level and contains about 2 Acres. the rock
rises from the level plain as if it had been designed for some such
purpose. the extream point to which I can see the bottom and meandering
of the Middle fork bears S. 15 E distant about 14 miles. here it turns
to the right around a point of a high plain and disappears to my view.
it's bottoms are several miles in width and like that of the S. E. fork
form one smoth and beautifull green meadow. it is also divided into
several streams. betwen this and the S. W. fork there is an extensive
plain which appears to extend up both those rivers many miles and back
to the mountains. the extreme point to which I can see the S. W. fork
bears S. 30 W. distant about 12 miles. this stream passes through a
similar country with the other two and is more divided and serpentine
in it's course than either of the others; it also possesses abundanly
more timber in it's bottoms. the timber here consists of the
narrowleafed cottonwood almost entirely. but little box alder or sweet
willow the underbrush thick and as heretofore discribed in the quarter
of the missouri. a range of high mountains at a considerable distance
appear to reach from South to West and are partially covered with snow
the country to the right of the S. W. fork like that to the left of the
S. E. fork is high broken and mountainous as is that also down the
missouri behind us, through which, these three rivers after assembling
their united force at this point seem to have forced a passage these
bottom lands tho not more than 8 or 9 feet above the water seem never
to overflow. after making a draught of the connection and meanders of
these streams I decended the hill and returned to the party, took
breakfast and ascended the S. W. fork 13/4 miles and encamped at a
Lard. bend in a handsome level smooth plain just below a bayou, having
passed the entrance of the middle fork at 1/2 a mile. here I encamped
to wait the return of Capt. Clark and to give the men a little rest
which seemed absolutely necessary to them. at the junction of the S. W.
and Middle forks I found a note which had been left by Capt. Clark
informing me of his intended rout, and that he would rejoin me at this
place provided he did not fall in with any fresh sighn of Indians, in
which case he intended to pursue untill he over took them calculating
on my taking the S. W. fork, which I most certainly prefer as it's
direction is much more promising than any other. beleiving this to be
an essential point in the geography of this western part of the
Continent I determined to remain at all events untill I obtained the
necessary data for fixing it's latitude Longitude &c. after fixing my
camp I had the canoes all unloaded and the baggage stoed away and
securely covered on shore, and then permitted several men to hunt. I
walked down to the middle fork and examined and compared it with the S.
W. fork but could not satisfy myself which was the largest stream of
the two, in fact they appeared as if they had been cast in the same
mould there being no difference in character or size, therefore to call
either of these streams the Missouri would be giving it a preference
wich it's size dose not warrant as it is not larger then the other.
they are each 90 yds. wide. in these meadows I saw a number of the
duckanmallad with their young which are now nearly grown. Currants of
every species as well as goosberries are found here in great abundance
and perfection. a large black goosberry which grows to the hight of
five or six feet is also found here. this is the growth of the bottom
lands and is found also near the little rivulets which make down from
the hills and mountains it puts up many stems from the same root, some
of which are partialy branched and all reclining. the berry is
attatched seperately by a long peduncle to the stem from which they
hang pendant underneath. the berry is of an ovate form smooth as large
as the common garden goosberry when arrived at maturity and is as black
as jet, tho the pulp is of a cimson colour. this fruit is extreemly
asced. the leaf resembles the common goosberry in form but is reather
larger and somewhat proportioned to the superior size of it's stem when
compared with the common goosberry. the stem is covered with very sharp
thorns or bryers. below the tree forks as we passed this morning I
observed many collections of the mud nests of the small martin
attatched to the smooth face of the limestone rocks sheltered by
projections of the same rock above. Our hunters returned this evening
with 6 deer 3 Otter and a musk rat. they informed me that they had seen
great numbers of Antelopes, and much sign of beaver Otter deer Elk, &c.
at 3 P.M. Capt Clark arrived very sick with a high fever on him and
much fatiegued and exhausted. he informed me that he was very sick all
last night had a high fever and frequent chills & constant aking pains
in all his mustles. this morning notwithstanding his indisposition he
pursued his intended rout to the middle fork about 8 miles and finding
no recent sign of Indians rested about an hour and came down the middle
fork to this place. Capt. C. thought himself somewhat bilious and had
not had a passage for several days; I prevailed on him to take a doze
of Rushes pills, which I have always found sovereign in such cases and
to bath his feet in warm water and rest himself. Capt. C's
indisposition was a further inducement for my remaining here a couple
of days; I therefore informed the men of my intention, and they put
their deer skins in the water in order to prepare them for dressing
tomorrow. we begin to feel considerable anxiety with rispect to the
Snake Indians. if we do not find them or some other nation who have
horses I fear the successfull issue of our voyage will be very
doubtfull or at all events much more difficult in it's accomplishment.
we are now several hundred miles within the bosom of this wild and
mountanous country, where game may rationally be expected shortly to
become scarce and subsistence precarious without any information with
rispect to the country not knowing how far these mountains continue, or
wher to direct our course to pass them to advantage or intersept a
navigable branch of the Columbia, or even were we on such an one the
probability is that we should not find any timber within these
mountains large enough for canoes if we judge from the portion of them
through which we have passed. however I still hope for the best, and
intend taking a tramp myself in a few days to find these yellow
gentlemen if possible. my two principal consolations are that from our
present position it is impossible that the S. W. fork can head with the
waters of any other river but the Columbia, and that if any Indians can
subsist in the form of a nation in these mountains with the means they
have of acquiring food we can also subsist. Capt. C. informed me that
there is a part of this bottom on the West side of the Middle fork near
the plain, which appears to overflow occasionally and is stony.

[Clark, July 27, 1805]
July 27th Saturday 1805
I was verry unwell all last night with a high fever & akeing in all my
bones. my fever &c. continus, deturmind to prosue my intended rout to
the middle fork, accordingly Set out in great pain across a Prarie 8
miles to the Middle this fork is nearly as large as the North fork &
appears to be more rapid, we examined and found no fresh Sign of
Indians, and after resting about an hour, proceeded down to the
junction thro a wide bottom which appears to be overflown every year, &
maney parts Stoney this river has Several Islands and number of beaver
& orter, but little timber. we could See no fresh Sign of Indians just
above the Point I found Capt Lewis encamped haveing arrived about 2
oClock. Several Deer killed this evening. I continue to be verry unwell
fever verry high; take 5 of rushes pills & bathe my feet & legs in hot
water

[Lewis, July 28, 1805]
Sunday July 28th 1805.
My friend Capt. Clark was very sick all last night but feels himself
somwhat better this morning since his medicine has opperated. I
dispatched two men early this morning up the S. E. Fork to examine the
river; and permitted sundry others to hunt in the neighbourhood of this
place. Both Capt. C. and myself corrisponded in opinon with rispect to
the impropriety of calling either of these streams the Missouri and
accordingly agreed to name them after the President of the United
States and the Secretaries of the Treasury and state having previously
named one river in honour of the Secretaries of War and Navy. In
pursuance of this resolution we called the S. W. fork, that which we
meant to ascend, Jefferson's River in honor of Thomas Jefferson. the
Middle fork we called Madison's River in honor of James Madison, and
the S. E. Fork we called Gallitin's River in honor of Albert Gallitin.
the two first are 90 yards wide and the last is 70 yards. all of them
run with great valocity and thow out large bodies of water. Gallitin's
River is reather more rapid than either of the others, is not quite as
deep but from all appearances may be navigated to a considerable
distance. Capt. C. who came down Madison's river yesterday and has also
seen Jefferson's some distance thinks Madison's reather the most rapid,
but it is not as much so by any means as Gallitin's. the beds of all
these streams are formed of smooth pebble and gravel, and their waters
perfectly transparent; in short they are three noble streams. there is
timber enough here to support an establishment, provided it be erected
with brick or stone either of which would be much cheaper than wood as
all the materials for such a work are immediately at the spot. there
are several small sand-bars along the shores at no great distance of
very pure sand and the earth appears as if it would make good brick. I
had all our baggage spread out to dry this morning; and the day proving
warm, I had a small bower or booth erected for the comfort of Capt. C.
our leather lodge when exposed to the sun is excessively hot. I observe
large quantities of the sand rush in these bottoms which grow in many
places as high as a man's breast and stand as thick as the stalks of
wheat usually do. this affords one of the best winter pastures on earth
for horses or cows, and of course will be much in favour of an
establishment should it ever be thought necessary to fix one at this
place. the grass is also luxouriant and would afford a fine swarth of
hay at this time in parsels of many acres together. all those who are
not hunting altho much fatiegued are busily engaged in dressing their
skins, making mockersons leggings &c to make themselves comfortable.
the Musquetoes are more than usually troublesome, the knats are not as
much so. in the evening about 4 O'Ck the wind blew hard from South West
and after some little time brought on a Cloud attended with thunder and
Lightning from which we had a fine refreshing shower which cooled the
air considerably; the showers continued with short intervals untill
after dark. in the evening the hunters all returned they had killed 8
deer and 2 Elk. some of the deer wer in excellent order. those whome I
had sent up Gallitin's river reported that after it passed the point to
which I had seen it yesterday that it turned more to the East to a
considerable distance or as far as they could discover the opening of
the Mountains formed by it's valley which was many miles. the bottoms
were tolerably wide but not as much so as at or near it's mouth. it's
current is rappid and the stream much divided with islands but is
sufficiently deep for canoe navigation. Our present camp is precisely
on the spot that the Snake Indians were encamped at the time the
Minnetares of the Knife R. first came in sight of them five years
since. from hence they retreated about three miles up Jeffersons river
and concealed themselves in the woods, the Minnetares pursued, attacked
them, killed 4 men 4 women a number of boys, and mad prisoners of all
the females and four boys, Sah-cah-gar-we-ah or Indian woman was one of
the female prisoners taken at that time; tho I cannot discover that she
shews any immotion of sorrow in recollecting this event, or of joy in
being again restored to her native country; if she has enough to eat
and a few trinkets to wear I beleive she would be perfectly content
anywhere.

[Clark, July 28, 1805]
July 28th Sunday 1805
I was verry unwell all night, Something better this morning, a very
worm day untill 4 oClock when the wind rose & blew hard from the S W.
and was Cloudy, The Thermometr. Stood at 90° above 0 in the evening a
heavy thunder Shower from the S W. which continud at intervales untill
after dark, Several deer killed to day men all employed dressing Skins
for Clothes & Mockersons, two men went up the East fork & reports that
it is nearly the Size of the N. fork, verry rapid & has maney Islands.
Our present Camp is the prosise Spot the Snake Indians were Camped at
the time the Minetarries came in Sight, attacked & killed 4 men 4 women
& a number of boys, & made prisoners of all. the females & 4 boys.

[Lewis, July 29, 1805]
Monday July 29th 1805.
This morning some of the hunters turned out and returned in a few hours
with four fat bucks, the venison is now very fine we have killed no
mule deer since we lay here, they are all of the longtailed red deer
which appear quite as large as those of the United States. the hunters
brought in a living young sandhill crane it has nearly obtained it's
growth but cannot fly; they had pursued it and caught it in the
meadows. it's colour is precisely that of the red deer. we see a number
of the old or full grown crams of this species feeding in these
meadows. this young animal is very ferce and strikes a severe blow with
his beak; after amusing myself with it I had it set at liberty and it
moved off apparently much pleased with being releived from his
captivity. the men have been busily engaged all day in dising skins and
making them into various garments all are leather dressers and taylors.
we see a great abundance of fish in the stream some of which we take to
be trout but they will not bite at any bate we can offer them. the King
fisher is common on the river since we have left the falls of the
Missouri. we have not seen the summer duck since we left that place,
nor do I beleive that it is an inhabitant of the Rocky mountains. the
Duckanmallard were first seen with their young on the 20th inst. and I
forgot to note it; they are now abundant with their young but do not
breed in the missouri below the mountains. the grasshopers and crickets
are abundant in the plains as are also the small birds frequently
mentioned. there is also in these plains a large ant with a redish
brown body and legs, and a black head and abdomen; they construct
little perimids of small gravel in a conic shape, about 10 or 12 inches
high without a mixture of sticks and with but little earth. Capt. Clark
is much better today, is perfectly clear of fever but still very
languid and complains of a general soarness in all his limbs. I
prevailed on him to take the barks which he has done and eate tolerably
freely of our good venison.

[Clark, July 29, 1805]
July 29 Monday 1805
A fair morning wind from the North I feel my Self something better to
day, made some Celestial observations took two Merdn. altitudes which
gave for Latd. 45° 22' 34" N men all dressing Skins &c.

[Lewis, July 30, 1805]
Tuesday July 30th 1805.
Capt. Clark being much better this morning and having completed my
observations we reloaded our canoes and set out, ascending Jeffersons
river. Sharbono, his woman two invalleds and myself walked through the
bottom on the Lard. side of the river about 41/2 miles when we again
struck it at the place the woman informed us that she was taken
prisoner. here we halted untill Capt. Clark arrived which was not
untill after one P.M. the water being strong and the river extreemly
crooked. we dined and again proceeded on; as the river now passed
through the woods the invalleds got on board together with Sharbono and
the Indian woman; I passed the river and continued my walk on the
Stard. side. saw a vast number of beaver in many large dams which they
had maid in various bayoes of the river which are distributed to the
distance of three or four miles on this side of the river over an
extensive bottom of timbered and meadow lands intermixed. in order to
avoid these bayoes and beaver dams which I found difficult to pass I
directed my course to the high plain to the right which I gained after
some time with much difficulty and waiding many beaver dams to my waist
in mud and water. I would willingly have joined the canoes but the
brush were so thick, the river crooked and bottoms intercepted in such
manner by the beaver dams, that I found it uceless to attempt to find
them, and therefore proceeded on up the river in order to intersept it
where it came near the plain and woult be more collected into one
channel. at length about sunset I arrived at the river only about six
miles from my calculation on a direct line from the place I had left
the canoes but I thought they were still below me. I found the river
was divided where I reached it by an Island and was therefore fearfull
that they might pass without my seeing them, and went down to the lower
point of the large island; here I discovered a small Island, close
under the shore on which I was; I passed the narrow channel to the
small island and examined the gravly bar along the edge of the river
for the tracks of the men, knowing from the appearance of the river at
this place that if they had passed they would have used the cord on the
side where I was. I saw no tracks and was then fully convinced that
they were below me. I fired my gun and hallooed but counld hear nothing
of them. by this time it was getting nearly dark and a duck lit on the
shore in about 40 steps of me and I killed it; having now secured my
supper I looked our for a suitable place to amuse myself in combating
the musquetoes for the ballance of the evening. I found a parsel of
drift wood at the head of the little Island on which I was and
immediately set it on fire and collected some willow brush to lye on. I
cooked my duck which I found very good and after eating it layed down
and should have had a comfortable nights lodge but for the musquetoes
which infested me all night. late at night I was awakened by the nois
of some animal runing over the stoney bar on which I lay but did not
see it; from the weight with which it ran I supposed it to be either an
Elk or a brown bear. the latter are very abundant in this
neighbourhood. the night was cool but I felt very little inconvenience
from it as I had a large fire all night. Capt. Clark had proceeded on
after I seperated from him and encamped on a islad. only about 2 miles
below me but did not hear the report of my gun nor of my hooping.-I saw
some deer and antelopes.

[Clark, July 30, 1805]
July 30th Monday 1805
We Set out 8 oClock and proceeded on 131/2 miles up the N. fork the
river verry rapid & Sholey the Channel entirely Corse gravel many
Islands and a number of Chanels in different directions thro the bottom
&c. passed the place the Squar interpretress was taken, one man with
his Sholder Strained, 2 with Turners, we Camped on the Std. Side the
evening Cool. Capt Lewis who walkd on Shore did not join me this evening

[Lewis, July 31, 1805]
Wednesday July 31st 1805.
This morning I waited at my camp very impatiently for the arrival of
Capt. Clark and party; I observed by my watch that it was 7 A.M. and
they had not come in sight. I now became very uneasy and determined to
wait until 8 and if they did not arrive by that time to proceed on up
the river taking it as a fact that they had passed my camp some miles
last evening. just as I set out to pursue my plan I discovered Charbono
walking up shore some distance below me and waited untill arrived I now
learnt that the canoes were behind, they arrived shortly after. their
detention had been caused by the rapidity of the water and the
circuitous rout of the river. they halted and breakfasted after which
we all set out again and I continued my walk on the Stard. shore the
river now becomes more collected the islands tho numerous ar generally
small. the river continues rapid and is from 90 to 120 yd. wide has a
considerable quantity of timber in it's bottoms. towards evening the
bottoms became much narrower and the timber much more scant. high hills
set in close on the Lard. and the plain high waivy or reather broken on
the Stard. and approach the river closely for a shot distance vally
above 11/2 M wd. About one mile above Capt. Clark's encampment of the
last evening the principall entrance of a considerable river discharges
itself into Jefferson's river. this stream is a little upwards of 30
yd. wide discharges a large quantity of very clear water it's bed like
that of Jefferson's river is pebble and gravel. it takes it's rise in
the snowclad mountains between Jefferson's and Madison's Rivers to the
S. W. and discharges itself into the former by seven mouths it has some
timber in it's bottoms and vas numbers of beaver and Otter. this stream
we call River Philosophy. the rock of the clifts this evening is a hard
black grannite like that of the clifts of most parts of the river below
the limestone clifts at the 3 forks of the Missouri this evening just
before we encamped Drewyer discovered a brown bear enter a small cops
of bushes on the Lard. side; we surrounded the place an surched the
brush but he had escaped in some manner unperceived but how we could
not discover. nothing killed today and our fresh meat is out. when we
have a plenty of fresh meat I find it impossible to make the men take
any care of it, or use it with the least frugallity. tho I expect that
necessity will shortly teach them this art. the mountiains on both
sides of the river at no great distance are very lofty. we have a lame
crew just now, two with turners or bad boils on various parts of them,
one with a bad stone bruise, one with his arm accedently dislocated but
fortunately well replaced, and a fifth has streigned his back by
sliping and falling backwards on the gunwall of the canoe. the latter
is Sergt. Gass. it gives him great pain to work in the canoe in his
present situation, but he thinks he can walk with convenience, I
therefore scelected him as one of the party to accompany me tomorrow,
being determined to go in quest of the Snake Indians. I also directed
Drewyer and Charbono to hold themselves in readiness. Charbono thinks
that his ankle is sufficiently recovered to stand the march but I
entertain my doubts of the fact; he is very anxious to accompany me and
I therefore indulge him. There is some pine on the hills on both sides
of the river opposite to our encampment which is on the Lard. side upon
a small island just above a run. the bull rush & Cat-tail flag grow in
great abundance in the moist parts of the bottoms the dryer situations
are covered with fine grass, tanzy, thistles, onions and flax. the
bottom land fertile and of a black rich loam. the uplands poor sterile
and of a light yellow clay with a mixture of small smooth pebble and
gravel, poducing prickley pears, sedge and the bearded grass in great
abundance; this grass is now so dry that it would birn like tinder.- we
saw one bighorn today a few antelopes and deer.-

[Clark, July 31, 1805]
July 31st Tuesday 1805
a fair Morning Capt Lewis out all night, we arrived at his Camp to
brackfast, he was without a blanket, & he killed a Duck whiche Suped on
&c. the river as yesterday Sholey & rapid, passed the lower mouth of a
Small river on the Lard. in the morning & the upper mouth a ____ Miles
above, this little river is the one I camped on the 26th & heads in the
Snow mountains to the S W. proceeded on verry well and Camped on a
Small Island a little above the place I Camped the 25th instant at the
mouth of a run on the Lard Side, the bottoms from the Mouth of the
river extend to 21/2 Miles & enter a Short & high hill which is about 1
mile thro and, the river then passes thro a 2d value of about 11/2
Miles wide, Some Islands. below this Knobe the river is Crouded with
Islands, we are out of fresh meet, & nothing killed to day The
Mountains on either Side is high & rough we have two men with toumers
and unable to work.

Capt Lewis deturmin to proceed on with three men in Serch of the Snake
Indians, tomorrow

[Lewis, August 1, 1805]
August 1st 1805
At half after 8 A.M. we halted for breakfast and as had been previously
agreed on between Capt. Clark and myself I set out with 3 men in quest
of the Snake Indians. the men I took were the two Interpreters Drewyer
and Sharbono and Sergt. Gass who by an accedental fall had so disabled
himself that it was with much pain he could work in the canoes tho he
could march with convenience. the rout we took lay over a rough high
range of mountains on the North side of the river. the rive entered
these mountains a few miles above where we left it. Capt Clark
recommended this rout to me from a belief that the river as soon as it
past the mountains boar to the N. of W. he having a few days before
ascended these mountains to a position from which he discovered a large
valley passing betwen the mountains and which boar to the N. West. this
however poved to be the inlet of a large creek which discharged itself
into the river just above this range of mountans, the river bearing to
the S. W. we were therefore thrown several miles out of our rout. as
soon as we discovered our mistake we directed our course to the river
which we at length gained about 2 P.M. much exhausted by the heat of
the day the roughnes of the road and the want of water. the mountains
are extreemly bare of timber and our rout lay through the steep valleys
exposed to the heat of the sun without shade and scarcely a breath of
air; and to add to my fatiegue in this walk of about 11 miles I had
taken a doze of glauber salts in the morning in consequence of a slight
desentary with which I had been afflicted for several days; being
weakened by the disorder and the opperation of the medecine I found
myself almost exhausted before we reached the river. I felt my sperits
much revived on our near approach to the river at the sight of a herd
of Elk of which Drewyer and myself killed two. we then hurried to the
river and allayed our thirst. I ordered two of the men to skin the Elk
and bring the meat to the river while myself and the other prepared a
fire and cooked some of the meat for our dinner. we made a comfortable
meal of the Elk and left the ballance of the meat on the bank of the
river the party with Capt. Clark. this supply was no doubt very
acceptable to them as they had had no fresh meat for near two days
except one beaver Game being very scarce and shy. we had seen a few
deer and some goats but had not been fortunate enough to kill any of
them. after dinner we resumed our march and encamped about 6 m. above
on the Stard side of the river.

[Lewis, August 1, 1805]
Thursday August 1st 1805.
This morning we set out early and proceeded on tolerably well untill 8
OCT. by which time we had arrived within a few miles of a mountain
through which the river passes. we halted on the Stard. side and took
breakfast. after which or at 1/2 after 8 A.M. as had been previously
concerted betwen Capt. Clark and myself I set out with three men in
surch of the Snake Indians or Sosonees. our rout lay over a high range
of mountains on the North side of the river. Capt C. recommended this
rout to me no doubt from a beleif that the river as soon as it passed
this chain of mountains boar to the N. of W. he having on the 26th ult.
ascended these mountains to a position from whence he discoved a large
valley passing between the mountains which boar to the N. W. and
presumed that the river passed in that direction; this however proved
to be the passage of a large creek which discharged itself into the
river just above this range of mountains, the river bearing to the S.
W. we were therefore thrown several miles out of our rout. as soon as
we discovered our error we directed our course to the river which we at
length gained about 2 P.M. much exhausted by the heat of the day, the
roughness of the road and the want of water. the mountains are
extreemly bare of timber, and our rout lay through the steep and narrow
hollows of the mountains exposed to the intese heat of the midday sun
without shade or scarcely a breath of air to add to my fatiegue in this
walk of about 11 miles, I had taken a doze of glauber salts in the
morning in consequence of a slight disentary with which I had been
afflicted for several days. being weakened by the disorder and the
operation of the medicine I found myself almost exhausted before we
reached the river. I felt my sperits much revived on our near approach
to the river at the sight of a herd of Elk, of which Drewyer and myself
soon killed a couple. we then hurryed to the river and allayed our
thirst. I ordered two of the men to skin the Elk and bring the meat to
the river, while myself and the other prepared a fire and cooked some
of the meat for our dinner. we made a comfortable meal on the Elk, and
left the ballance of the meat and skins on the bank of the river for
Capt. Clark and party. this supply will no doubt be acceptable to them,
as they had had no fresh meat when I left them for almost 2 days except
one beaver; game being very scarce and shy above the forks. we had seen
a few deer and antelopes but had not been fortunate enough to kill any
of them. as I passed these mountains I saw a flock of the black or dark
brown phesants; the young phesant is almost grown we killed one of
them. this bird is fully a third larger than the common phesant of the
Atlantic states. it's form is much the same. it is booted nearly to the
toes and the male has not the tufts of long black feathers on the sides
of the neck which are so conspicuous in those of the Atlantic. their
colour is a uniform dark brown with a small mixture of yellow or
yelloish brown specks on some of the feathers particularly those of the
tail, tho the extremities of these are perfectly black for about one
inch. the eye is nearly black, the iris has a small dash of yellowish
brown. the feathers of the tail are reather longer than that of our
phesant or pattridge as they are Called in the Eastern States; are the
same in number or eighteen and all nearly of the same length, those in
the intermediate part being somewhat longest. the flesh of this bird is
white and agreeably flavored. I also saw near the top of the mountain
among some scattering pine a blue bird about the size of the common
robbin. it's action and form is somewhat that of the jay bird and never
rests long in any one position but constantly flying or hoping from
sprey to sprey. I shot at one of them but missed it. their note is loud
and frequently repeated both flying and when at rest and is char ah',
char'ah, char ah', as nearly as letters can express it. after dinner we
resumed our march and my pack felt much lighter than it had done about
2 hours before. we traveled about six miles further and encamped on the
stard. bank of the river, making a distance of 17 miles for this day.
the Musquetoes were troublesome but I had taken the precaution of
bringing my bier.

Shortly after I left Capt. Clark this morning he proceed on and passed
through the mountains; they formed tremendious clifts of ragged and
nearly perpendicular rocks; the lower .part of this rock is of the
black grannite before mentioned and the upper part a light coloured
freestone. these clifts continue for 9 miles and approach the river
very closely on either side. he found the current verry strong. Capt.
C. killed a big horn on these clifts which himself and party dined on.
after passing this range of mountains he entered this beautifull valley
in which we also were it is from 6 to 8 miles wide. the river is
crooked and crouded with islands, it's bottoms wide fertile and covered
with fine grass from 9 inches to 2 feet high and possesses but a scant
proportion of timber, which consists almost entirely of a few narrow
leafed cottonwood trees distributed along the verge of the river. in
the evening Capt. C. found the Elk I had left him and ascended a short
distance above to the entrance of a large creek which falls in on
Stard. and encamped opposite to it on the Lard. side. he sent out the
two Fieldses to hunt this evening and they killed 5 deer, which with
the Elk again gave them a plentifull store of fresh provisions. this
large creek we called Field's Creek after Reubin Fields one our party.
on the river about the mountains wich Capt. C. passed today he saw some
large cedar trees and some juniper also just at the upper side of the
mountain there is a bad rappid here the toe line of our canoe broke in
the shoot of the rapids and swung on the rocks and had very nearly
overset. a small distance above this rapid a large bold Creek falls in
on Lard. side which we called Frazier's Creek after Robt. Frazier. They
saw a large brown bear feeding on currants but could not get a shoot at
him.

[Clark, August 1, 1805]
August 1st Wednesday 1805
A fine day Capt. Lewis left me at 8 oClock just below the place I
entered a verrey high mountain which jutted its tremedious Clifts on
either Side for 9 Miles, the rocks ragide Some verry dark & other part
verry light rock the light rocks is Sand Stone. The water Swift & very
Sholey. I killed a Ibix on which the whole party Dined, after passing
through the Mountain we entered a wide extesive vallie of from 4 to 8
Miles wide verry leavell a Creek falls in at the Commencement of this
Vallie on the Lard Side, the river widens & spreds into Small Chanels.
We encamped on the Lard Side opposit a large Creek I sent out Jo. & R
fields to hunt this evening they killed 5 Deer, I saw a large Bear
eateing Currents this evining The river so rapid that the greatest
exertion is required by all to get the boats on wind S W Murckery at
sun rise 50° Ab. 0

[Lewis, August 2, 1805]
August 2nd 1805.
We resumed our march this morning at sunrise the weather was fair and
wind from N. W. finding that the river still boar to the south I
determined to pass it if possible to shorten our rout this we effected
about five miles above our camp of last evening by wading it. found the
current very rappid about 90 yards wide and waist deep this is the
first time that I ever dared to make the attempt to wade the river, tho
there are many places between this and the three forks where I presume
it migh be attempted with equal success. the valley though which our
rout of this day lay and through which the river winds it's meandering
course is a beatifull level plain with but little timber and that on
the verge of the river. the land is tolerably fertile, consisting of a
black or dark yellow loam, and covered with grass from 9 Inches to 2
feet high. the plain ascends gradually on either side of the river to
the bases of two ranges of mountains which ly parrallel to the river
and which terminate the width of the vally. the tops of these mountains
were yet partially covered with snow while we in the valley. were
suffocated nearly with the intense heat of the midday sun. the nights
are so could that two blankets are not more than sufficient covering.
we found a great courants, two kinds of which were red, others yellow
deep purple and black, also black goosburies and service buries now
ripe and in full perfection, we feasted suptuously on our wild fruit
particularly the yellow courant and the deep purple servicebury which I
found to be excellent the courrant grows very much like the red currant
common to the gardens in the atlantic states tho the leaf is somewhat
different and the growth taller. the service burry grows on a smaller
bush and differs from ours only in colour and the superior excellence
of it's flavor and size, it is of a deep purple. this day we saw an
abundance of deer and goats or antelopes and a great number of the
tracks of Elk; of the former we killed two. we continued our rout along
this valley which is from six to eight Miles wide untill sun set when
we encamped for the night on the river bank having traveled about 24
miles. I feel myself perfectly recovered of my indisposition and do not
doubt being able to pursue my march with equal comfort in the morning.

[Lewis, August 2, 1805]
Friday August 2cd 1805.
We resumed our march this morning at sunrise; the day was fair and wind
from N. W. finding that the river still boar to the South I determined
to pass it if possible in order to shorten our rout; this we effected
by wading the river about 5 miles above our encampment of the last
evening. we found the current very rapid waist deep and about 90 yd.
wide bottom smooth pebble with a small mixture of coarse gravel. this
is the first time that I ever dared to wade the river, tho there are
many places between this and the forks where I presume it might be
attempted with equal success. The vally allong which we passed today,
and through which the river winds it's meandering course is from 6 to 8
miles wide and consists of a beatifull level plain with but little
timber and that confined to the verge of the river; the land is
tolerably fertile, and is either black or a dark yellow loam, covered
with grass from 9 inches to 2 feet high. the plain ascends gradually on
either side of the river to the bases of two ranges of high mountains,
which lye parallel to the river and prescribe the limits of the plains.
the tops of these mountains are yet covered partially with snow, while
we in the valley are nearly suffocated with the intense heat of the
midday sun; the nights are so cold that two blankets are not more than
sufficient covering. soon after passing the river this morning Sergt.
Gass lost my tommahawk in the thick brush and we were unable to find
it, I regret the loss of this usefull implement, however accedents will
happen in the best families, and I consoled myself with the
recollection that it was not the only one we had with us. the bones of
the buffaloe and their excrement of an old date are to be met with in
every part of this valley but we have long since lost all hope of
meeting with that animal in these mountains. we met with great
quantities of currants today, two species of which were red, others
yellow, deep perple and black; also black goosberries and
serviceberries now ripe and in great perfection. we feasted sumptuously
on our wild fruits, particularly the yellow currant and the deep perple
serviceberries, which I found to be excellent. the serviceberry grows
on a small bush and differs from ours only in colour size and superior
excellence of it's flavour. it is somewhat larger than ours. on our way
we saw an abundance of deer Antelopes, of the former we killed 2. we
also saw many tracks of the Elk and bear. no recent appearance of
Indians. the Indians in this part of the country appear to construct
their lodges with the willow boughs and brush; they are small of a
conic figure and have a small aperture on one side through which they
enter. we continued our rout up this valley on the Lard. side of the
river untill sunset, at which time we encamped on the Lard. bank of the
river having traveled 24 miles. we had brought with us a good stock of
venison of which we eat a hearty supper. I feel myself perfectly
recovered of my indisposition, and do not doubt being able to pursue my
rout tomorrow with the same comfort I have done today.- we saw some
very large beaver dams today in the bottoms of the river several of
which wer five feet high and overflowed several acres of land; these
dams are formed of willow brush mud and gravel and are so closely
interwoven that they resist the water perfectly. the base of this work
is thick and rises nearly perpendicularly on the lower side while the
upper side or that within the dam is gently sloped. the brush appear to
be laid in no regular order yet acquires a strength by the irregularity
with which they are placed by the beaver that it would puzzle the
engenuity of man to give them.

Capt. Clark continued his rout early this morning. the rapidity of the
current was such that his progress was slow, in short it required the
utmost exertion of the men to get on, nor could they resist this
current by any other means than that of the cord and pole. in the
course of the day they passed some villages of burrowing squirrels, saw
a number of beaver dams and the inhabitants of them, many young ducks
both of the Duckanmallard and the redheaded fishing duck, gees, several
rattle snakes, black woodpeckers, and a large gang of Elk; they found
the river much crouded with island both large and small and passed a
small creek on Stard. side which we called birth Creek. Capt. Clark
discovers a tumor rising on the inner side of his ankle this evening
which was painfull to him. they incamped in a level bottom on the Lard.
side.-

[Clark, August 2, 1805]
August 2nd Friday 1805
a fine day Set out early the river has much the Same kind of banks
Chanel Current &c. as it had in the last vallie, I walked out this
morning on Shore & Saw Several rattle Snakes in the plain, the wind
from the S W we proceeded on with great dificuelty from the rapidity of
the current & rapids, abt. 15 miles and Encamped on the Lard Side, saw
a large Gangue of Elk at Sunset to the S W. passed a Small Creek on the
Stard Side and maney large and Small Islands. Saw a number of young
Ducks as we have also Seen everry Day, Some geese I saw Black
woodpeckers- I have either got my foot bitten by Some poisonous insect
or a turner is riseing on the inner bone of my ankle which is painfull

[Lewis, August 3, 1805]
August the 3rd 1805.
Set out this morning at sunrise and continued our rout through the
valley on the Lard. side of the river. at eleven A.M. Drewyer killed a
doe and we halted and took breakfast. the mountains continue high on
either side of the valley, and are but skantily supplyed with timber;
small pine appears to be the prevalent growth. there is no timber in
the valley except a small quantity of the narrow leafed cottonwood on
the verge of the river. the underwood consists of the narrowleafed or
small willow, honeysuckle rosebushes, courant, goosbury and service
bury bushes allso a small quantity of a species of dwarf burch the leaf
of which, oval, deep green, finely indented and very small. we encamped
this evening after sunset having traveled by estimate 23 miles. from
the width and appearance of the valley at this place I concieved that
the river forked not far above me and therefore resolved the next
morning to examine the adjacent country more minutely.

[Lewis, August 3, 1805]
Saturday August 3rd 1805.
Set out early this morning, or before sunrise; still continued our
march through the level valley on the lard. side of the river. the
valley much as yesterday only reather wider; I think it 12 Miles wide,
tho the plains near the mountains rise higher and are more broken with
some scattering pine near the mountain. in the leaveler parts of the
plain and river bottoms which are very extensive there is no timber
except a scant proportion of cottonwood neat the river. the under wood
consists of the narrow leafed or small willow, the small honeysuckle,
rosebushes, currant, serviceberry, and goosbery bushes; also a small
species of berth in but small quantities the leaf which is oval finely,
indented, small and of a deep green colour. the stem is simple
ascending and branching, and seldom rises higher than 10 or 12 feet.
the Mountains continue high on either side of the valley, and are but
scantily supplyed with timber; small pine apears to be the prevalent
growth; it is of the pith kind, with a short leaf. at 11 A.M. Drewyer
killed a doe and we halted about 2 hours and breakfasted, and then
continued our rout untill night without halting, when we arrived at the
river in a level bottom which appeared to spread to greater extent than
usual. from the appearance of the timber I supposed that the river
forked above us and resolved to examine this part of the river minutely
tomorrow. this evening we passed through a high plain for about 8 miles
covered with prickley pears and bearded grass, tho we found this even
better walking than the wide bottoms of the river, which we passed in
the evening; these altho apparently level, from some cause which I know
not, were formed into meriads of deep holes as if rooted up by hogs
these the grass covered so thick that it was impossible to walk without
the risk of falling down at every step. some parts of these bottoms
also possess excellent terf or peat, I beleive of many feet deep. the
mineral salts also frequently mentioned on the Missouri we saw this
evening in these uneven bottoms. we saw many deer, Antelopes ducks,
gees, some beaver and great appearance of their work. also a small bird
and the Curlooe as usual. we encamped on the river bank on Lard. side
having traveled by estimate 23 Miles. The fish of this part of the
river are trout and a species of scale fish of a white colour and a
remarkable small long mouth which one of our men inform us are the same
with the species called in the Eastern states bottlenose. the snowey
region of the mountains and for some distance below has no timber or
herbage of any kind; the timber is confined to the lower and middle
regions. Capt. Clark set out this morning as usual. he walked on shore
a small distance this morning and killed a deer. in the course of his
walk he saw a track which he supposed to be that of an Indian from the
circumstance of the large toes turning inward. he pursued the track and
found that the person had ascended a point of a hill from which his
camp of the last evening was visible; this circumstance also confirmed
the beleif of it's being an Indian who had thus discovered them and ran
off. they found the river as usual much crouded with islands, the
currant more rapid & much more shallow than usual. in many places they
were obliged to double man the canoes and drag them over the stone and
gravel. this morning they passed a small creek on Stard. at the
entrance of which Reubin Fields killed a large Panther. we called the
creek after that animal Panther Creek. they also passed a handsome
little stream on Lard. which is form of several large springs which
rise in the bottoms and along the base of the mountains with some
little rivulets from the melting snows. the beaver have formed many
large dams on this stream. they saw some deer Antelopes and the common
birds of the country. in the evening they passed a very bad rappid
where the bed of the river is formed entrely of solid rock and encamped
on an island just above. the Panther which Fields killed measured seven
and 1/2 feet from the nose to the extremity of the tail. it is precisely
 the same animal common to the western part of our country. the men wer
compelled to be a great proportion of their time in the water today;
they have had a severe days labour and are much fortiegued.

[Clark, August 3, 1805]
August 3rd Saturday1805
a fine morning wind from the N E I walked on Shore & killed a Deer in
my walk I saw a fresh track which I took to be an Indian from the Shape
of the foot as the toes turned in, I think it probable that this Indian
Spied our fires and Came to a Situation to view us from the top of a
Small knob on the Lard Side. the river more rapid and Sholey than
yesterday one R. F. man killed a large Panthor on the Shore we are
oblige to haul over the Canoes Sholey in maney places where the Islands
are noumerous and bottom Sholey, in the evening the river more rapid
and Sholey we encamped on an Island avove a part of the river which
passed thro a rockey bed enclosed on both sides with thick willow
current & red buries &c &c passed a bold Stream which heads in the
mountains to our right and the drean of the minting Snow in the Montn.
on that side ar in View- at 4 oClock passed a bold Stream which falls
from a mountn in three Channels to our left, the Greater portion of the
Snow on this mountain is melted, but little remaining near us Some Deer
Elk & antelopes & Bear in the bottoms. but fiew trees and they Small
the Mountains on our left Contain pine those on our right but verry
partially Supplied and what pine & cedar it has is on the Lower region,
no wood being near the Snow. great numbers of Beaver Otter &c. Some
fish trout & and bottle nose. Birds as usial. Geese young Ducks &
Curlows

[Lewis, August 4, 1805]
August 4th 1805.
Set out very early this morning and steered S. E. by E. about 4 Miles
when we passed a bould runing creek about 12 yards wide the water could
and remarkably clear, we then changed our course to S. E. passing
obliquely across a valley which boar nearly E leaving the valley which
we had pursued for the 2 precedeing days. at the distance of 3 miles we
passed a handsome little river which passes through this valley; it is
about 30 yards wide affords a considerable quantity of water and I
believe it may be navigated some miles. I then changed my rout to S. W.
passed a high plain which lyes between the vallies and returned to the
S. valley, in passing which I fell in with a river about 45 yards wide
which I waideg and then continued my rout down to it's junction with
the river just mentioned, and from thence to the entrance of the creek
which falls in about 2 miles below; still continuing my rout down this
stream about three miles further and about 2 M. below our encampment of
the last evening this river forms a junction with a river 50 yards wide
which comes from the N. W. and falling into the S. valley runs
parrallel with the middle fork about 12 miles. this is a bould rappid &
clear stream it's bed so broken and obstructed by gravel bars and
Islands that it appeared to me impossible to navigate it with safety.
the middle fork is gentle and possesses about 2/3ds as much water as
this rappid stream, it's cours so far as I can observe it is about S.
W. and it appears to be navigable; its water is much warmer than that
of the rappid fork and somewhat turbid, from which I concluded that it
had it's source at a greater distance in the mountains and passed
through an opener country than the other. under this impression I wrote
a note to Capt. Clark recommending his taking the middle fork provided
he should arrive at this place before my return which I expect will be
the day after tomorrow. the note I left on a pole at the forks of the
river and having refreshed ourselves and eat heartily of some venison
we killed this morning I continued my rout up the Stard side of the N.
W. fork, determining to pursue it untill 12 OC. the next day and then
pass over to the middle fork and return to their junction or untill I
met Capt. Clark. we encamped this evening near the point where the
river leaves the valley and enters the mountains, having traveled about
20 miles.-

[Lewis, August 4, 1805]
Sunday August 4th 1805.
Set out very early this morning and Steered S. E. by E. 4 M. when we
pased a bold runing Creek 12 yds. wide, the water of which was clear
and very cold. it appears to be formed by four dranes from the snowey
mountains to our left. after passing this creek we changed our
direction to S. E. passing obliquely across a valley which boar E
leaving the valley we had pursued for the two peceeding days. at the
distance of 3 Ms. we passed a handsome little river which meanders
through this valley; it is about 30 yds wide, affords a considerable
quantity of water and appears as if it might be navigated some miles.
the currant is not rapid nor the water very clear; the banks are low
and the bed formed of stone and gravel. I now changed my rout to S. W.
passed a high plain which lies betwen the valleies and returned to the
South valley, in passing which I fell in with a river about 45 yds.
wide gravley bottom gentle currant waist deep and water of a whitish
blue tinge. this stream we waded and continued our rout down it to the
entrance of the river just mentioned about 3/4 of a mile. still
continuing down we passed the entrance of the creek about 2 miles lower
down; and at the distance of three miles further arrived at it's
junction with a river 50 yds. wide which Comes from the S. W. and
falling into the South valley runs parallel with the middle fork about
12 miles before it forms a junction. I now found that our encampment of
the last evening was about 11/2 miles above the entrance of this large
river on Stard. this is a bold rappid and Clear Stream, it's bed so
much broken and obstructed by gravley bars and it's waters so much
subdivided by Islands that it appears to me utterly impossible to
navigate it with safety. the middle fork is gentle and possesses about
2/3rds as much water as this stream. it's course so far as I can
observe it is about S. W., and from the opening of the valley I beleive
it still bears more to the West above it may be safely navigated. it's
water is much warmer then the rapid fork and it's water more turbid;
from which I conjecture that it has it's sources at a greater distance
in the mountains and passes through an opener country than the other.
under this impression I wrote a note to Capt Clark, recommending his
taking the middle fork povided he should arrive at this place before my
return, which I expect will be the day after tomorrow. this note I left
on a pole at the forks of the river, and having refreshed ourselves and
eat heartily of some venison which we killed this morning we continued
our rout up the rapid fork on the Stard side, resolving to pursue this
stream untill noon tomorrow and then pass over to the middle fork and
come down it to their junction or untill I meet Capt Clark. I have seen
no recent Indian sign in the course of my rout as yet. Charbono
complains much of his leg, and is the cause of considerable detention
to us. we encamped on the river bank near the place at which it leaves
the valley and enters the mountain having traveled about 23 miles. we
saw some Antelopes deer Grains, gees, and ducks of the two species
common to this country. the summer duck has ceased to appear, nor do I
beleive it is an inhabitant of this part of the country. the timber &c
is as heretofore tho there is more in this valley on the rapid fork
than we have seen in the same extent on the river since we entered this
valley. the Indians appear on some parts of the river to have distroyed
a great proportion of the little timber which there is by seting fire
to the bottoms. This morning Capt. Clark set out at sunrise, and sent
two hunters ahead to kill some meat. at 8 A.M. he arrived at my camp of
the 2ed inst. where he breakfasted; here he found a note which I had
left for him at that place informing him of the occurences of my rout
&c. the river continued to be crouded with Islands, rapid and shoaly.
these shoals or riffles succeeded each other every 3 or four hundred
yards; at those places they are obliged to drag the canoes over the
stone there not being water enough to float them, and betwen the riffles
 the current is so strong that they are compelled to have cecourse to
the cord; and being unable to walk on the shore for the brush wade in
the river along the shore and hawl them by the cord; this has increased
the pain and labour extreemly; their feet soon get tender and soar by
wading and walking over the stones. these are also so slipry that they
frequently get severe falls. being constantly wet soon makes them feble
also. their hunters killed 2 deer today and some gees and ducks wer
killed by those who navigated the canoes. they saw deer antelopes
Grains beaver Otter &c. Capt. Clark's ancle became so painfull to him
that he was unable to walk.- This evening they encamped on the Stard.
side in a bottom of cottonwood timber all much fatiegued.

[Clark, August 4, 1805]
August 4th Sunday 1805
a fine morning cool proceeded on verry early and Brackfast at the Camp
Capt Lewis left yesterday morning, at this Camp he left a note
informing that he discovered no fresh Sign of Indians &c. The river
continued to be crouded with Islands Sholey rapid & clear, I could not
walk on Shore to day as my ankle was Sore from a turner on that part.
the method we are compelled to take to get on is fatigueing & laborious
in the extreen, haul the Canoes over the rapids, which Suckceed each
other every two or three hundred yards and between the water rapid
oblige to towe & walke on Stones the whole day except when we have
poleing men wet all day Sore feet &c. &c Murcury at Sun rise 49 a. 0,

[Lewis, August 5, 1805]
Monday August 5th 1805
As Charbono complained of being unable to march far today I ordered him
and Sergt. Gass to pass the rappid river near our camp and proceed at
their leasure through the level bottom to a point of high timber about
seven miles distant on the middle fork which was in view; I gave them
my pack that of Drewyer and the meat which we had, directing them to
remain at that place untill we joined them. I took Drewyer with me and
continued my rout up the stard. side of the river about 4 miles and
then waded it; found it so rapid and shallow that it was impossible to
navigate it. continued up it on the Lard. side about 11/2 miles further
when the mountains put in close on both sides and arrose to great
hight, partially covered with snow. from hence the course of the river
was to the East of North. I took the advantage of a high projecting
spur of the mountain which with some difficulty we ascended to it's
summit in about half an hour. from this eminance I had a pleasing view
of the valley through which I had passed many miles below and the
continuation of the middle fork through the valley equally wide above
me to the distance of about 20 miles when that also appeared to enter
the mountains and disappeared to my view; however the mountains which
termineate the valley in this direction appeared much lower than those
up either of the other forks. on the rapid fork they appeared still to
rise the one range towering above another as far as I could perceive
them. the middle fork as I suspected dose bear considerably to the West
of South and the gap formed by it in the mountains after the valley
terminates is in the same direction. under these circumstances I did
not hesitate in beleiving the middle fork the most proper for us to
ascend. about South from me, the middle fork approached within about 5
miles. I resolved to pass across the plains to it and return to Gass
and Charbono, accordingly we set out and decended the mountain among
some steep and difficult precipices of rocks. here Drewyer missed his
step and had a very dangerous fall, he sprained one of his fingers and
hirt his leg very much. in fifteen or 20 minutes he was able to proceed
and we continued our rout to the river where we had desighned to
interscept it. I quenched my thirst and rested a few minutes examined
the river and found it still very navi-gable. an old indian road very
large and plain leads up this fork, but I could see no tracks except
those of horses which appeared to have passed early in the spring. as
the river mad a great bend to the South East we again ascended the high
plain and steered our course as streight as we could to the point where
I had directed Gass and Sharbono to remain. we passed the plain
regained the bottom and struck the river about 3 miles above them; by
this time it was perfectly dark & we hooped but could hear no tidings
of them. we had struck the river at the point of timber to which I had
directed them, but having mistaken a point of woods lower down, had
halted short of the place. we continued our rout after dark down the
bottom through thick brush of the pulppy leafed thorn and prickly pears
for about 2 hours when we arrived at their camp. they had a small
quantity of meat left which Drewyer and myself eat it being the first
we had taisted today. we had traveled about 25 miles. I soon laid down
and slept very soundly untill morning. I saw no deer today nor any game
except a few Antelopes which were very shy. the soil of the plains is a
light yellow clay very meager and intermixed with a large proportion of
gravel, producing nothing except the twisted or bearded grass, sedge
and prickly pears. the dryer parts of the bottoms are also much more
indifferent in point of soil to those below and are covered with the
southernwood pulpy leafed thorn and prickley pears with but little
grass. the moist parts are fertile and covered with fine grass and sand
rushes.

This morning Capt. Clark set out at sunrise and dispatched Joseph &
Reubin Fields to hunt. they killed two deer on one of which the party
breakfasted. the river today they found streighter and more rapid even
than yesterday, and the labour and difficulty of the navigation was
proportionably increased, they therefore proceeded but slowly and with
great pain as the men had become very languid from working in the water
and many of their feet swolen and so painfull that they could scarcely
walk. at 4 P.M. they arrived at the confluence of the two rivers where
I had left the note. this note had unfortunately been placed on a green
pole which the beaver had cut and carried off together with the note;
the possibility of such an occurrence never one occurred to me when I
placed it on the green pole. this accedent deprived Capt. Clark of any
information with ripect to the country and supposing that the rapid
fork was most in the direction which it was proper we should pursue, or
West, he took that stream and asscended it with much difficulty about a
mile and encamped on an island that had been lately overflown and was
yet damp; they were therefore compelled to make beds of brush to keep
themselves out of the mud. in ascending this stream for about a quarter
of a mile it scattered in such a maner that they were obliged to cut a
passage through the willow brush which leant over the little channels
and united their tops. Capt. Clarks ankle is extreemly painfull to him
this evening; the tumor has not yet mature, he has a slight fever.- The
men were so much fortiegued today that they wished much that navigation
was at an end that they might go by land.-

[Clark, August 5, 1805]
August 5th Monday 1805
a Cold Clear morning the wind from the S. E. the river Streight & much
more rapid than yesterday, I Sent out Jo. & R. Fields to kill Some meat
they killed 2 Deer & we brackfast on one of them and proceeded on with
great dificuelety from the rapidity of the Current, and numerable
rapids we had to encounter, at 4 oClock P M Murcury 49 ab. 0, passed
the mouth of principal fork which falls in on the Lard. Side, this fork
is about the Size of the Stard. one less water reather not so rapid,
its Course as far as can be Seen is S. E & appear to pass through
between two mountains, the N W. fork being the one most in our course
i. e. S 25 W. as far as I can See, deturmind me to take this fork as
the principal and the one most proper the S E fork is of a Greenish
Colour & contains but little timber. The S W fok contains more timber
than is below for Some distance, we assended this fork about one mile
and Encamped on an Island which had been laterly overflown & was wet we
raised our bead on bushes, we passed a part of the river above the
forks which was divided and Scattered thro the willows in Such a manner
as to render it dificuelt to pass through for a 1/4 of a mile, we wer
oblige to Cut our way thro the willows- Men much fatigued from their
excessive labours in hauling the Canoes over the rapids &c. verry weak
being in the water all day. my foot verry painfull

Assended the N W Fork 9 miles on a Course S. 30° W. to a Bluff on the
Stard. Side passed Several Bayous & Islands

[Lewis, August 6, 1805]
Tuesday August 6th 1805.
We set out this morning very early on our return to the forks. having
nothing to eat I set Drewyer to the woodlands to my left in order to
kill a deer, sent Sergt. Gass to the right with orders to keep
sufficiently near to discover Capt. C. and the party should they be on
their way up that stream, and with Sharbono I directed my course to the
main forks through the bottom directing the others to meet us there.
about five miles above the forks I head the hooping of the party to my
left and changed my rout towards them; on my arrival found that they
had taken the rapid fork and learnt from Capt. Clark that he had not
found the note which I had left for him at that place and the reasons
which had induced him to ascend this stream. it was easeist & more in
our direction, and apd. to contain as much water he had hoever
previously to my comeing up with him, met Drewyer who informed him of
the state of the two rivers and was on his return. one of their canoes
had just overset and all the baggage wet, the medecine box among other
articles and several articles lost a shot pouch and horn with all the
implements for one rifle lost and never recovered. I walked down to the
point where I waited their return. on their arrival found that two
other canoes had filled with water and wet their cargoes completely.
Whitehouse had been thrown out of one of the canoes as she swing in a
rapid current and the canoe had rubed him and pressed him to the bottom
as she passed over him and had the water been 2 inches shallower must
inevitably have crushed him to death. our parched meal, corn, Indian
preasents, and a great part of our most valuable stores were wet and
much damaged on this ocasion. to examine, dry and arrange our stores
was the first object; we therefore passed over to the lard. side
opposite to the entrance of the rapid fork where there was a large
gravly bar that answered our purposes; wood was also convenient and
plenty. here we fixed our camp, and unloaded all our canoes and opened
and exposed to dry such articles as had been wet. a part of the load of
each canoe consisted of the leaden canestirs of powder which were not
in least injured, tho some of them had remained upwards of an hour
under water. about 20 lbs. of powder which we had in a tight Keg or at
least one which we thought sufficiently so got wet and intirely
spoiled. this would have been the case with the other had it not have
been for the expedient which I had fallen on of securing the powder by
means of the lead having the latter formed into canesters which were
filled with the necessary proportion of poder to discharge the lead
when used, and those canesters well secured with corks and wax. in this
country the air is so pure and dry that any vessel however well
seasoned the timber may be will give way or shrink unless it is kept
full of some liquid. we found that three deer skins which we had left
at a considerable hight on a tree were taken off which we supposed had
been done by a panther. we sent out some men to hunt this evening, they
killed 3 deer and four Elk which gave us a plentifull supply of meat
once more. Shannon had been dispatched up the rapid fork this morning
to hunt, by Capt Clark before he met with Drewyer or learnt his mistake
in the rivers. when he returned he sent Drewyer in surch of him, but he
rejoined us this evening and reported that he had been several miles up
the river and could find nothing of him. we had the trumpet sounded and
fired several guns but he did not join us this evening. I am fearful he
is lost again. this is the same man who was seperated from us 15 days
as we came up the Missouri and subsisted 9 days of that time on grapes
only. Whitehouse is in much pain this evening with the injury one of
his legs sustained from the canoe today at the time it upset and swing
over him. Capt Clarks ankle is also very painfull to him.- we should
have given the party a days rest some where near this place had not
this accedent happened, as I had determined to take some observations
to fix the Latitude and longitude of these forks. our merchandize
medecine &c are not sufficiently dry this evening we covered them
securely for the evening. Capt Clark had ascended the river about 9
miles from this place on a course of S 30° W. before he met with Drewyer.

we beleive that the N. W. or rapid fork is the dane of the melting
snows of the mountains, and that it is not as long as the middle fork
and dose not at all seasons of the year supply any thing like as much
water as the other and that about this season it rises to it's greatest
hight. this last appears from the apparent bed of the river which is
now overflown and the water in many plases spreads through old channels
which have their bottoms covered with grass that has grown this season
and is such as appears on the parts of the bottom not innundated. we
therefore determined that the middle fork was that which ought of right
to bear the name we had given to the lower portion or River Jefferson
and called the bold rapid an clear stream Wisdom, and the more mild and
placid one which flows in from the S. E. Philanthrophy, in
commemoration of two of those cardinal virtues, which have so eminently
marked that deservedly selibrated character through life.

[Clark, August 6, 1805]
August 6th Tuesday 1805
a Clear morning Cool wind from the S W we proceeded on with much
dificuelty and fatigue over rapids & Stones; river about 40 or 50 yards
wide much divided by Islands and narrow Bayoos to a low bluff on the
Stard Side & Brackfast, dureing the time of Brackfast Drewyer Came to
me from Capt. Lewis and informed me that they had explored both forks
for 30 or 40 miles & that the one we were assending was impractiabl
much further up & turned imediately to the north, The middle fork he
reported was jintle and after a Short distanc turned to the S. W. and
that all the Indian roades leades up the middle fork. this report
deturmind me to take the middle fork, accordingly Droped down to the
forks where I met with Capt Lewis & party, Capt Lewis had left a Letter
on a pole in the forks informing me what he had discovered & the course
of the rivers &c. this lettr was Cut down by the beaver as it was on a
green pole & Carried off. Three Skins which was left on a tree was
taken off by the Panthers or wolvers. In decending to the Point one
Canoe Struck & turned on a rapid & Sunk, and wet every thing which was
in her, this misfortune obliged us to halt at the forks and dry those
articles, one other Canoe nearly turning over, filled half full of
water & wet our medison & Some Goods Corn &c. Several hunters out to
day & killed a young Elk, Antilope, & 3 Deer, one man Shannon did not
return to night- This evening Cool my anckle much wors than it has
been- this evening a Violent wind from the N. W accompanied with rain
which lasted half an hour wind N. W

[Lewis, August 7, 1805]
Wednesday August 7th 1805.
The morning being fair we spread our stores to dry at an early hour.
Dispatched Reubin Fields in surch of Shannon. our stores were now so
much exhausted that we found we could proceed with one canoe less. we
therefore drew out one of them into a thicket of brush and secured her
in such manner that the water could not take her off should the river
rise to the hight where she is. The creek which falls in above us we
called turf creek from the cercustance of it's bottoms being composed
of excellent turf. my air gun was out of order and her sights had been
removed by some accedent I put her in order and regulated her. she shot
again as well as she ever did. The clouds last night prevented my
taking any lunar observations this day I took Equal Altitudes of the 0
with Sextant.

At one oclock all our baggage was dry we therefore packed it up
reloaded the canoes and the party proceeded with Capt. Clark up
Jefferson's river. I remained with Sergt. Gass to complete the
observation of equal altitudes and joined them in the evening at their
camp on the Lard. side just above the entrance of turf creek. we had a
shower of rain wich continued about 40 minutes attended with thunder
and lightning. this shower wet me perfectly before I reached the camp.
the clouds continued during the night in such manner that I was unable
to obtain any lunar observations. This evening Drewyer brought in a
deer which he had killed. we have not heard any thing from Shannon yet,
we expect that he has pursued Wisdom river upwards for som distance
probably killed some heavy animal and is waiting our arrival. the large
biteing fly or hare fly as they sometimes called are very troublesome
to us. I observe two kinds of them a large black species and a small
brown species with a green head. the musquetoes are not as troublesome
as they were below, but are still in considerable quantities. the eye
knats have disappeared. the green or blowing flies are still in swarms.

r the courses from the entrance of Wisdom river to the forks of
Jefferson's river are taken directly to the objects mentioned and the
distance set down is that by land on a direct line between the points;
the estimated distances by water is also added in the body of the
remarks on each course.

[Clark, August 7, 1805]
August 7th Wednesday 1805
a fine morning put out our Stores &c. to dry & took equal altitudes
with the Sextant,- as our Store were a little exorsted and one Canoe
became unnecessary deturmind to leave one. we Hauled her up in the
bushes on the lower Side of the main fork & fastened her So that the
water could not flote her off. The Countrey in this quarter is as
follows i, e a Vallie of 5 or 6 miles wide Inclosed between two high
Mountains, the bottom rich Some Small timber on the Islands & bushes on
the edges of the river Some Bogs & verry good turf in different places
in the vallie, Some scattering Pine & ceder on the mountains in places,
other Parts nacked except grass and Stone The Lattitude of the Mouth of
Wisdom River is 45° 2' 21.6" North, we proceeded up the Main Middle or S.
E. fork, passed a Camped on the Lard. Side above the mouth of a bold
running Stream 12 yards wide, which we call turf Creek from the number
of bogs & quanty of turf in its waters. this Creek runs thro a open
Plain for Several miles, takeing its rise in a high mountain to the N
E. The river Jefferson above Wisdom is gentle Crooked and about 40
yards wide, Containing but little timber, Some few Cotton willow Willow
& Birch, and the Srubs common to the countrey and before mentioned at 5
oClock a thunder Storm from the N. W. accompanied with rain which
lasted about 40 minits.- despatched R Fields to hunt Shannon, who was
out huntg. on Wisdom river at the time I returned down that Stream, and
has made on up the river expecting us to follow him up that river one
Deer killed this evening. all those Streams Contain emence number of
Beaver orter Muskrats &c.

[Lewis, August 8, 1805]
Thursday August 8th 1805.
We had a heavy dew this morning. as one canoe had been left we had now
more hads to spear for the chase; game being scarce it requires more
hunters to supply us. we therefore dispatched four this morning. we set
out at sunrise and continued our rout up the river which we find much
more gentle and deep than below the entrance of Wisdom river it is from
35 to 45 yards wide very crooked many short bends constituteing large
and general bends; insomuch that altho we travel briskly and a
considerable distance yet it takes us only a few miles on our general
course or rout. there is but very little timber on this fork
principally the under brush frequently mentioned. I observe a
considerable quantity of the buffaloe clover in the bottoms. the
sunflower, flax, green swoard, thistle and several species of the rye
grass some of which rise to the hight of 3 or 4 feet. there is a grass
also with a soft smooth leaf that bears it's seeds very much like the
timothy but it dose not grow very luxouriant or appear as if it would
answer so well as the common timothy for meadows. I preserved some of
it's seeds which are now ripe, thinking perhaps it might answer better
if cultivated, at all events is at least worth the experi-ment. it
rises about 3 feet high. on a direct line about 2 miles above our
encampment of this morning we passed the entrance of Philanthrophy
River which discharges itself by 2 channels a small distance assunder.
this river from it's size and S. Eastwardly course no doubt heads with
Madisons river in the snowey mountains visible in that direction. at
Noon Reubin Fields arrived and reported that he had been up Wisdom
river some miles above where it entered the mountain and could find
nothing of Shannon, he had killed a deer and an Antelope. great
quantity of beaver Otter and musk-rats in these rivers. two of the
hunters we sent out this morning returned at noon had killed each a
deer and an Antelope. we use the seting poles today almost altogether.
we encamped on the Lard sides where there was but little timber were
obliged to use willow brush for fuel; the rosebushes and bryers were
very thick. the hunters brought in another deer this evening. to tumor
on Capt. Clarks ankle has discharged a considerable quantity of matter
but is still much swolen and inflamed and gives him considerable pain.
saw a number of Gees ducks and some Crains today. the former begin to
fly.

the evening again proved cloudy much to my mortification and prevented
my making any lunar observations. the Indian woman recognized the point
of a high plain to our right which she informed us was not very distant
from the summer retreat of her nation on a river beyond the mountains
which runs to the west. this hill she says her nation calls the
beaver's head from a conceived remblance of it's figure to the head of
that animal. she assures us that we shall either find her people on
this river or on the river immediately west of it's source; which from
it's present size cannot be very distant. as it is now all important
with us to meet with those people as soon as possible, I determined to
proceed tomorrow with a small party to the source of the principal
stream of this river and pass the mountains to the Columbia; and down
that river untill I found the Indians; in short it is my resolusion to
find them or some others, who have horses if it should cause me a trip
of one month. for without horses we shall be obliged to leave a great
part of our stores, of which, it appears to me that we have a stock
already sufficiently small for the length of the voyage before us.

[Clark, August 8, 1805]
August 8th Thursday 1805
We proceeded on early wind from the S W. The Thermometer at 52 a 0 at
Sunrise at 5 miles by water & 41/2 on a derect line from the forks we
passed a River on the Lard Side 30 yards wide and navagable for Some
distance takeing its rise in the Mountains Easterly & with the waters
of Madisons River, passes thro an extensive vallie open & furtill &c.
this river we call Philanthophy- above this river (which has but little
timber) Jeffersons R is crooked with Short bends a fiew Islands and
maney gravelly Sholes, no large timber, Small willow Birch & Srubs &c.
Encamped on the Lard Side, R Fields joined us this eveng. & informes
that he could not find Shannon my foot yet verry Swore

[Lewis, August 9, 1805]
Friday August 9th 1805.
The morning was fair and fine; we set out at an early hour and
proceeded on very well. some parts of the river more rapid than
yesterday. I walked on shore across the land to a point which I
presumed they would reach by 8 A.M. our usual time of halting. by this
means I acquired leasure to accomplish some wrightings which I
conceived from the nature of my instructions necessary lest any
accedent should befall me on the long and reather hazardous rout I was
now about to take. the party did not arrive and I returned about a mile
and met them, here they halted and we breakefasted; I had killed two
fine gees on my return. while we halted here Shannon arrived, and
informed us that having missed the party the day on which he set out he
had returned the next morning to the place from whence he had set out
or furst left them and not finding that he had supposed that they wer
above him; that he then set out and marched one day up wisdom river, by
which time he was convinced that they were not above him as the river
could not be navigated; he then returned to the forks and had pursued
us up this river. he brought the skins of three deer which he had
killed which he said were in good order. he had lived very plentifully
this trip but looked a good deel worried with his march. he informed us
that Wisdom river still kept it's course obliquely down the Jefferson's
river as far as he was up it. immediately after breakfast I slung my
pack and set out accompanyed by Drewyer Shields and McNeal who had been
previously directed to hold themselves in readiness for this service. I
directed my course across the bottom to the Stard. plain led left the
beaver's head about 2 miles to my left and interscepted the river about
8 miles from the point at which I had left it; I then waded it and
continued my rout to the point where I could observe that it entered
the mountain, but not being able to reach that place, changed my
direction to the river which I struck some miles below the mountain and
encamped for the evening having traveled 16 M. we passed a handsom
little stream formed by some large spring which rise in this wide
bottom on the Lard. side of the river. we killed two Antelopes on our
way and brought with us as much meat as was necessary for our suppers
and breakfast the next morning. we found this bottom fertile and
covered with taller grass than usual. the river very crooked much
divided by islands, shallow rocky in many plases and very rapid;
insomuch that I have my doubts whether the canoes could get on or not,
or if they do it must be with great labour.- Capt. Clark proceeded
after I left him as usual, found the current of the river increasing in
rapidity towards evening. his hunters killed 2 antelopes only. in the
evening it clouded up and we experienced a slight rain attended with
some thunder and lightning. the musquetoes very troublesome this
evening. there are some soft bogs in these vallies covered with turf.
the earth of which this mud is composed is white or bluish white and
appears to be argillacious.

[Clark, August 9, 1805]
August 9th Friday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N. E we proceeded on verry well rapid
places more noumerous than below, Shannon the man whome we lost on
Wisdom River Joined us, haveing returned to the forks & prosued us up
after prosueing Wisdom River one day

Capt Lewis and 3 men Set out after brackft. to examine the river above,
find a portage if possible, also the Snake Indians. I Should have taken
this trip had I have been able to march, from the rageing fury of a
turner on my anckle musle, in the evening Clouded up and a fiew drops
of rain Encamped on the Lard Side near a low bluff, the river to day as
yesterday. the three hunters Could kill only two antelopes to day, game
of every kind Scerce

[Lewis, August 10, 1805]
Saturday August 10th 1805.
We set out very early this morning and continued our rout through the
wide bottom on the Lard. side of the river after passing a large creek
at about 5 miles we fel in with a plain Indian road which led towards
the point that the river entered the mountain we therefore pursued the
road I sent Drewyer to the wright to kill a deer which we saw feeding
and halted on the river under an immencely high perpendicular clift of
rocks where it entered the mountain here we kindled a fire and waited
for Drewyer. he arrived in about an hour and a half or at noon with
three deer skins and the flesh of one of the best of them, we cooked
and eat a haisty meal and departed, returning a shot distance to the
Indian road which led us the best way over the mountains, which are not
very high but ar ruggid and approach the river closely on both sides
just below these mountains I saw several bald Eagles and two large
white headed fishinghawks boath these birds were the same common to our
country.

from the number of rattle snakes about the Clifts at which we halted we
called them the rattle snake clifts. this serpent is the same before
discribed with oval spots of yellowish brown. the river below the
mountains is rapid rocky, very crooked, much divided by islands and
withal shallow. after it enters the mountains it's bends are not so
circuetous and it's general course more direct, but it is equally
shallow les divided more rocky and rapid. we continued our rout along
the Indian road which led us sometimes over the hills and again in the
narrow bottoms of the river till at the distance of fifteen Ms. from
the rattle snake Clifts we arrived in a hadsome open and leavel vally
where the river divided itself nearly into two equal branches; here I
halted and examined those streams and readily discovered from their
size that it would be vain to attempt the navigation of either any
further. here also the road forked one leading up the vally of each of
these streams. I therefore sent Drewer on one and Shields on the other
to examine these roads for a short distance and to return and compare
their information with respect to the size and apparent plainness of
the roads as I was now determined to pursue that which appeared to have
been the most traveled this spring. in the mean time I wrote a note to
Capt. Clark informing him of the occurrences which had taken place,
recommending it to him to halt at this place untill my return and
informing him of the rout I had taken which from the information of the
men on their return seemed to be in favour of the S W or Left hand fork
which is reather the smallest. accordingly I put up my note on a dry
willow pole at the forks, and set out up the S. E. fork, after
proceeding about 11/2 miles I discovered that the road became so blind
that it could not be that which we had followed to the forks of
Jefferson's river, neither could I find the tracks of the horses which
had passed early in the spring along the other; I therefore determined
to return and examine the other myself, which I did, and found that the
same horses had passed up the West fork which was reather largest, and
more in the direction that I wished to pursue; I therefore did not
hesitate about changing my rout but determined to take the western
road. I now wrote a second note to Capt C. informing him of this change
and sent Drewyer to put it with the other at the forks and waited
untill he returned. there is scarcely any timber on the river above the
R. Snake Clifts, nor is there anything larger than willow brush in
sight of these forks. immediately in the level plain between the forks
and about 1/2 a mile distance from them stands a high rocky mountain,
the base of which is surrounded by the level plain; it has a singular
appearance. the mountains do not appear very high in any direction tho
the tops of some of them are partially covered with snow. this
convinces me that we have ascended to a great hight since we have
entered the rocky Mountains, yet the ascent has been so gradual along
the vallies that it was scarcely perceptable by land. I do not beleive
that the world can furnish an example of a river runing to the extent
which the Missouri and Jefferson's rivers do through such a mountainous
country and at the same time so navigable as they are. if the Columbia
furnishes us such another example, a communication across the continent
by water will be practicable and safe. but this I can scarcely hope
from a knowledge of its having in it comparitively short course to the
ocean the same number of feet to decend which the Missouri and
Mississippi have from this point to the Gulph of Mexico.

The valley of the west fork through which we passed for four miles boar
a little to N of West and was about 1 mile wide hemned in on either
side by rough mountain and steep Clifts of rock at 41/2 miles this
stream enters a beatifull and extensive plain about ten miles long and
from 5 to six in width. this plain is surrounded on all sides by a
country of roling or high wavy plains through which several little
rivulets extend their wide vallies quite to the Mountains which
surround the whole in an apparent Circular manner; forming one of the
handsomest coves I ever saw, of about 16 or 18 miles in diameter. just
after entering this cove the river bends to the N. W. and runs close
under the Stard. hills. here we killed a deer and encamped on the
Stard.,side and made our fire of dry willow brush, the only fuel which
the country produces. there are not more than three or four cottonwood
trees in this extensive cove and they are but small. the uplands are
covered with prickly pears and twisted or bearded grass and are but
poor; some parts of the bottom lands are covered with grass and
tolerably fertile; but much the greater proportion is covered with
prickly pears sedge twisted grass the pulpy leafed thorn southernwood
wild sage &c and like the uplands is very inferior in point of soil. we
traveled by estimate 30 Ms. today, that is 10 to the Rattle snake
Clift, 15 to the forks of Jefferson's river and 5 to our camp in the
cove. at the apparent extremity of the bottom above us two
perpendicular clifts of considerable hight stand on either side of the
river and appers at this distance like a gate, it is about 10 M. due
West.

Capt Clark set out at sunrise this morning and pursued his rout; found
the river not rapid but shallow also very crooked. they were obliged to
drag the canoes over many riffles in the course of the day. they passed
the point which the natives call the beaver's head. it is a steep rocky
clift of 150 feet high near the Stard. side of the river, opposite to
it at the distance of 300 yards is a low clift of about 50 feet which
is the extremity of a spur of the mountains about 4 miles distant on
Lard. at 4 P.M. they experienced a heavy shower of rain attended with
hail thunder and Lightning which continued about an hour. the men
defended themselves from the hail by means of the willow bushes but all
the party got perfectly wet. after the shower was over they pursued
their march and encamped on the stard side only one deer killed by
their hunters today. tho they took up another by the way which had been
killed three days before by Jos. Fields and hung up near the river.

[Clark, August 10, 1805]
August 10th Satturday 1805
Some rain this morning at Sun rise and Cloudy we proceeded on passed a
remarkable Clift point on the Stard. Side about 150 feet high, this
Clift the Indians Call the Beavers head, opposit at 300 yards is a low
clift of 50 feet which is a Spur from the Mountain on the Lard. about 4
miles, the river verry Crooked, at 4 oClock a hard rain from the S W
accompanied with hail Continued half an hour, all wet, the men
Sheltered themselves from the hail with bushes We Encamped on the Stard
Side near a Bluff, only one Deer killed to day, the one killed Jo
Fields 3 Days past & hung up we made use of river narrow, & Sholey but
not rapid.

[Lewis, August 11, 1805]
Sunday August 11th 1805.
We set out very early this morning; but the track which we had pursued
last evening soon disappeared. I therefore resolved to proceed to the
narrow pass on the creek about 10 miles West in hopes that I should
again find the Indian road at the place, accordingly I passed the river
which was about 12 yards wide and bared in several places entirely
across by beaver dams and proceeded through the level plain directly to
the pass. I now sent Drewyer to keep near the creek to my right and
Shields to my left, with orders to surch for the road which if they
found they were to notify me by placing a hat in the muzzle of their
gun. I kept McNeal with me; after having marched in this order for
about five miles I discovered an Indian on horse back about two miles
distant coming down the plain toward us. with my glass I discovered
from his dress that he was of a different nation from any that we had
yet seen, and was satisfyed of his being a Sosone; his arms were a bow
and quiver of arrows, and was mounted on an eligant horse without a
saddle, and a small string which was attatched to the underjaw of the
horse which answered as a bridle. I was overjoyed at the sight of this
stranger and had no doubt of obtaining a friendly introduction to his
nation provided I could get near enough to him to convince him of our
being whitemen. I therefore proceeded towards him at my usual pace.
when I had arrived within about a mile he mad a halt which I did also
and unloosing my blanket from my pack, I mad him the signal of
friendship known to the Indians of the Rocky mountains and those of the
Missouri, which is by holding the mantle or robe in your hands at two
corners and then throwing up in the air higher than the head bringing
it to the earth as if in the act of spreading it, thus repeating three
times. this signal of the robe has arrisen from a custom among all
those nations of spreading a robe or skin for ther gests to set on when
they are visited. this signal had not the desired effect, he still kept
his position and seemed to view Drewyer an Shields who were now
comiming in sight on either hand with an air of suspicion, I wold
willingly have made them halt but they were too far distant to hear me
and I feared to make any signal to them least it should increase the
suspicion in the mind of the Indian of our having some unfriendly
design upon him. I therefore haistened to take out of my sack some
beads a looking glas and a few trinkets which I had brought with me for
this purpose and leaving my gun and pouch with McNeal advanced unarmed
towards him. he remained in the same stedfast poisture untill I arrived
in about 200 paces of him when he turn his hose about and began to move
off slowly from me; I now called to him in as loud a voice as I could
command repeating the word tab-ba-bone, which in their language
signifyes white man. but loking over his sholder he still kept his eye
on Drewyer and Sheilds who wer still advancing neither of them haveing
segacity enough to recollect the impropriety of advancing when they saw
me thus in parley with the Indian. I now made a signal to these men to
halt, Drewyer obeyed but Shields who afterwards told me that he did not
obseve the signal still kept on the Indian halted again and turned his
horse about as if to wait for me, and I beleive he would have remained
untill I came up whith him had it not been for Shields who still
pressed forward. whe I arrived within about 150 paces I again
repepeated the word tab-ba-bone and held up the trinkits in my hands
and striped up my shirt sieve to give him an opportunity of seeing the
colour of my skin and advanced leasure towards him but he did not
remain untill I got nearer than about 100 paces when he suddonly turned
his hose about, gave him the whip leaped the creek and disapeared in
the willow brush in an instant and with him vanished all my hopes of
obtaining horses for the preasent. I now felt quite as much
mortification and disappointment as I had pleasure and expectation at
the first sight of this indian. I fet soarly chargrined at the conduct
of the men particularly Sheilds to whom I principally attributed this
failure in obtaining an introduction to the natives. I now called the
men to me and could not forbare abraiding them a little for their want
of attention and imprudence on this occasion. they had neglected to
bring my spye-glass which in haist I had droped in the plain with the
blanket where I made the signal before mentioned. I sent Drewyer and
Shields back to surche it, they soon found it and rejoined me. we now
set out on the track of the horse hoping by that means to be lead to an
indian camp, the trail of inhabitants of which should they abscond we
should probably be enabled to pursue to the body of the nation to which
they would most probably fly for safety. this rout led us across a
large Island framed by nearly an equal division of the creek in this
bottom; after passing to the open ground on the N. side of the creek we
observed that the track made out toward the high hills about 3 m.
distant in that direction. I thought it probable that their camp might
probably be among those hills & that they would reconnoiter us from the
tops of them, and that if we advanced haistily towards them that they
would become allarmed and probably run off; I therefore halted in an
elivated situation near the creek had a fire kindled of willow brush
cooked and took breakfast. during this leasure I prepared a small
assortment of trinkits consisting of some mockkerson awls a few strans
of several kinds of beads some paint a looking glass &c which I
attatched to the end of a pole and planted it near our fire in order
that should the Indians return in surch of us they might from this
token discover that we were friendly and white persons. before we had
finised our meal a heavy shower of rain came on with some hail wich
continued abot 20 minutes and wet us to the skin, after this shower we
pursued the track of the horse but as the rain had raised the grass
which he had trodden down it was with difficulty that we could follow
it. we pursued it however about 4 miles it turning up the valley to the
left under the foot of the hills. we pas several places where the
Indians appeared to have been diging roots today and saw the fresh
tracks of 8 or ten horses but they had been wandering about in such a
confused manner that we not only lost the track of the hose which we
had been pursuing but could make nothing of them. in the head of this
valley we passed a large bog covered with tall grass and moss in which
were a great number of springs of cold pure water, we now turned a
little to the left along the foot of the high hills and arrived at a
small branch on which we encamped for the night, having traveled in
different directions about 20 Miles and about 10 from the camp of last
evening on a direct line. after meeting with the Indian today I fixed a
small flag of the U'S. to a pole which I made McNeal carry. and planted
in the ground where we halted or encamped.

This morning Capt Clark dispatched several hunters a head; the morning
being rainy and wet did not set out untill after an early breakfast. he
passed a large Island which he called the 3000 mile Island from the
circumstance of it's being that distance from the entrance of the
Missouri by water. a considerable proportion of the bottom on Lard.
side is a bog covered with tall grass and many parts would afford fine
turf; the bottom is about 8 Ms. wide and the plains which succeed it on
either side extend about the same distance to the base of the
mountains. they passed a number of small Islands and bayous on both
sides which cut and intersect the bottoms in various directions. found
the river shallow and rapid, insomuch that the men wer compelled to be
in the water a considerable proportion of the day in drageing the
canoes over the shoals and riffles. they saw a number of geese ducks
beaver & otter, also some deer and antelopes. the men killed a beaver
with a seting pole and tommahawked several Otter. the hunters killed 3
deer and an Antelope. Capt. C. observed some bunches of privy near the
river. there are but few trees in this botom and those small narrow
leafed Cottonwood. the principal growth is willow with the narrow leaf
and Currant bushes. they encamped this evening on the upper point of a
large Island near the Stard. shore.-

[Clark, August 11, 1805]
August 11th Sunday 1805.
a Shower of rain this morning at Sun rise, Cloudy all the morning wind
from the S W passed a large Island which I call the 3000 mile Island as
it is Situated that distance from the mouth of the Missouri by water, a
number of Small Bayoes running in different directions thro the Bottom,
which is about 5 miles wide, then rises to an ellivated plain on each
Side which extends as far. passed Several Small Islands and a number of
Bayoes on each Side and Encamped on the upper point of a large Island,
our hunters killed three Deer, one antilope, and Tomahawked Several
Orter to day killed one Beaver with a Setting pole. I observed Some
bunches of Privey on the banks

[Lewis, August 12, 1805]
Monday August 12th 1805
This morning I sent Drewyer out as soon as it was light, to try and
discover what rout the Indians had taken. he followed the track of the
horse we had pursued yesterday to the mountain wher it had ascended,
and returned to me in about an hour and a half. I now determined to
pursue the base of the mountains which form this cove to the S. W. in
the expectation of finding some Indian road which lead over the
Mountains, accordingly I sent Drewyer to my right and Shields to my
left with orders to look out for a road or the fresh tracks of horses
either of which we should first meet with I had determined to pursue.
at the distance of about 4 miles we passed 4 small rivulets near each
other on which we saw som resent bowers or small conic lodges formed
with willow brush. near them the indians had geathered a number of
roots from the manner in which they had toarn up the ground; but I
could not discover the root which they seemed to be in surch of. I saw
several large hawks that were nearly black near this place we fell in
with a large and plain Indian road which came into the cove from the N.
E. and led along the foot of the mountains to the S. W. oliquely
approaching the main stream which we had left yesterday. this road we
now pursued to the S. W. at 5 miles it passed a stout stream which is a
principal fork of the man stream and falls into it just above the
narrow pass between the two clifts before mentioned and which we now
saw below us. here we halted and breakfasted on the last of our
venison, having yet a small peice of pork in reseve. after eating we
continued our rout through the low bottom of the main stream along the
foot of the mountains on our right the valley for 5 mes. further in a
S. W. direction was from 2 to 3 miles wide the main stream now after
discarding two stream on the left in this valley turns abruptly to the
West through a narrow bottom betwen the mountains. the road was still
plain, I therefore did not dispair of shortly finding a passage over
the mountains and of taisting the waters of the great Columbia this
evening. we saw an animal which we took to be of the fox kind as large
or reather larger than the small wolf of the plains. it's colours were
a curious mixture of black, redis-brown and yellow. Drewyer shot at him
about 130 yards and knocked him dow bet he recovered and got out of our
reach. it is certainly a different animal from any that we have yet
seen. we also saw several of the heath cock with a long pointed tail
and an uniform dark brown colour but could not kill one of them. they
are much larger than the common dunghill fowls, and in their habits and
manner of flying resemble the growse or prarie hen. at the distance of
4 miles further the road took us to the most distant fountain of the
waters of the mighty Missouri in surch of which we have spent so many
toilsome days and wristless nights. thus far I had accomplished one of
those great objects on which my mind has been unalterably fixed for
many years, judge then of the pleasure I felt in allying my thirst with
this pure and ice cold water which issues from the base of a low
mountain or hill of a gentle ascent for 1/2 a mile. the mountains are
high on either hand leave this gap at the head of this rivulet through
which the road passes. here I halted a few minutes and rested myself.
two miles below McNeal had exultingly stood with a foot on each side of
this little rivulet and thanked his god that he had lived to bestride
the mighty & heretofore deemed endless Missouri. after refreshing
ourselves we proceeded on to the top of the dividing ridge from which I
discovered immence ranges of high mountains still to the West of us
with their tops partially covered with snow. I now decended the
mountain about 3/4 of a mile which I found much steeper than on the
opposite side, to a handsome bold running Creek of cold Clear water.
here I first tasted the water of the great Columbia river. after a
short halt of a few minutes we continued our march along the Indian
road which lead us over steep hills and deep hollows to a spring on the
side of a mountain where we found a sufficient quantity of dry willow
brush for fuel, here we encamped for the night having traveled about 20
Miles. as we had killed nothing during the day we now boiled and eat
the remainder of our pork, having yet a little flour and parched meal.
at the creek on this side of the mountain I observed a species of deep
perple currant lower in its growth, the stem more branched and leaf
doubly as large as that of the Missouri. the leaf is covered on it's
under disk with a hairy pubersence. the fruit is of the ordinary size
and shape of the currant and is supported in the usual manner, but is
ascid & very inferior in point of flavor.

this morning Capt. Clark set out early. found the river shoally, rapid
shallow, and extreemly difficult. the men in the water almost all day.
they are geting weak soar and much fortiegued; they complained of the
fortiegue to which the navigation subjected them and wished to go by
land Capt. C. engouraged them and passifyed them. one of the canoes was
very near overseting in a rapid today. they proceeded but slowly. at
noon they had a thunderstorm which continued about half an hour. their
hunters killed 3 deer and a fawn. they encamped in a smoth plain near a
few cottonwood trees on the Lard. side.-

[Clark, August 12, 1805]
August 12th Monday 1805
We Set out early (Wind N E) proceeded on passed Several large Islands
and three Small ones, the river much more Sholey than below which
obliges us to haul the Canoes over those Sholes which Suckceed each
other at Short intervales emencely laborious men much fatigued and
weakened by being continualy in the water drawing the Canoes over the
Sholes encamped on the Lard Side men complain verry much of the emence
labour they are obliged to undergo & wish much to leave the river. I
passify them. the weather Cool, and nothing to eate but venison, the
hunters killed three Deer to day

[Lewis, August 13, 1805]
Tuesday August 13th 1805.
We set out very early on the Indian road which still led us through an
open broken country in a westerly direction. a deep valley appeared to
our left at the base of a high range of mountains which extended from
S. E. to N. W. having their sides better clad with pine timber than we
had been accustomed to see the mountains and their tops were also
partially covered with snow. at the distance of five miles the road
after leading us down a long decending valley for 2 Ms. brought us to a
large creek about 10 yds. wide; this we passed and on rising the hill
beyond it had a view of a handsome little valley to our left of about a
mile in width through which from the appearance of the timber I
conjectured that a river passed. I saw near the creek some bushes of
the white maple, the shumate of the small species with the winged rib,
and a species of honeysuckle much in it's growth and leaf like the
small honeysuckle of the Missouri only reather larger and bears a
globular berry as large as a garden pea and as white as wax. this berry
is formed of a thin smooth pellicle which envellopes a soft white
musilagenous substance in which there are several small brown seed
irregularly scattered or intermixed without any sell or perceptable
membranous covering.- we had proceeded about four miles through a wavy
plain parallel to the valley or river bottom when at the distance of
about a mile we saw two women, a man and some dogs on an eminence
immediately before us. they appeared to vew us with attention and two
of them after a few minutes set down as if to wait our arrival we
continued our usual pace towards them. when we had arrived within half
a mile of them I directed the party to halt and leaving my pack and
rifle I took the flag which I unfurled and avanced singly towards them
the women soon disappeared behind the hill, the man continued untill I
arrived within a hundred yards of him and then likewise absconded. tho
I frequently repeated the word tab-ba-bone sufficiently loud for him to
have heard it. I now haistened to the top of the hill where they had
stood but could see nothing of them. the dogs were less shye than their
masters they came about me pretty close I therefore thought of tying a
handkerchief about one of their necks with some beads and other
trinkets and then let them loose to surch their fugitive owners
thinking by this means to convince them of our pacific disposition
towards them but the dogs would not suffer me to take hold of them;
they also soon disappeared. I now made a signal fror the men to come
on, they joined me and we pursued the back tarck of these Indians which
lead us along the same road which we had been traveling. the road was
dusty and appeared to have been much traveled lately both by men and
horses. these praries are very poor the soil is of a light yellow clay,
intermixed with small smooth gravel, and produces little else but
prickly pears, and bearded grass about 3 inches high. the prickley pear
are of three species that with a broad leaf common to the missouri;
that of a globular form also common to the upper part of the Missouri
and more especially after it enters the Rocky Mountains, also a 3rd
peculiar to this country. it consists of small circular thick leaves
with a much greater number of thorns. these thorns are stronger and
appear to be barbed. the leaves grow from the margins of each other as
in the broad leafed pear of the missouri, but are so slightly attatched
that when the thorn touches your mockerson it adhears and brings with
it the leaf covered in every direction with many others. this is much
the most troublesome plant of the three. we had not continued our rout
more than a mile when we were so fortunate as to meet with three female
savages. the short and steep ravines which we passed concealed us from
each other untill we arrived within 30 paces. a young woman immediately
took to flight, an Elderly woman and a girl of about 12 years old
remained. I instantly laid by my gun and advanced towards them. they
appeared much allarmed but saw that we were to near for them to escape
by flight they therefore seated themselves on the ground, holding down
their heads as if reconciled to die which the expected no doubt would
be their fate; I took the elderly woman by the hand and raised her up
repeated the word tab-babone and strip up my shirt sieve to sew her my
skin; to prove to her the truth of the ascertion that I was a white man
for my face and hads which have been constantly exposed to the sun were
quite as dark as their own. they appeared instantly reconciled, and the
men coming up I gave these women some beads a few mockerson awls some
pewter looking-glasses and a little paint. I directed Drewyer to
request the old woman to recall the young woman who had run off to some
distance by this time fearing she might allarm the camp before we
approached and might so exasperate the natives that they would perhaps
attack us without enquiring who we were. the old woman did as she was
requested and the fugitive soon returned almost out of breath. I
bestoed an equvolent portion of trinket on her with the others. I now
painted their tawny cheeks with some vermillion which with this nation
is emblematic of peace. after they had become composed I informed them
by signs that I wished them to conduct us to their camp that we wer
anxious to become acquainted with the chiefs and warriors of their
nation. they readily obeyed and we set out, still pursuing the road
down the river. we had marched about 2 miles when we met a party of
about 60 warriors mounted on excellent horses who came in nearly full
speed, when they arrived I advanced towards them with the flag leaving
my gun with the party about 50 paces behid me. the chief and two others
who were a little in advance of the main body spoke to the women, and
they informed them who we were and exultingly shewed the presents which
had been given them these men then advanced and embraced me very
affectionately in their way which is by puting their left arm over you
wright sholder clasping your back, while they apply their left cheek to
yours and frequently vociforate the word ah-hi'-e, &h-hi'-e that is, I
am much pleased, I am much rejoiced. bothe parties now advanced and we
wer all carresed and besmeared with their grease and paint till I was
heartily tired of the national hug. I now had the pipe lit and gave
them smoke; they seated themselves in a circle around us and pulled of
their mockersons before they would receive or smoke the pipe. this is a
custom among them as I afterwards learned indicative of a sacred
obligation of sincerity in their profession of friendship given by the
act of receiving and smoking the pipe of a stranger. or which is as
much as to say that they wish they may always go bearfoot if they are
not sincere; a pretty heavy penalty if they are to march through the
plains of their country. after smoking a few pipes with them I
distributed some trifles among them, with which they seemed much
pleased particularly with the blue beads and vermillion. I now informed
the chief that the object of our visit was a friendly one, that after
we should reach his camp I would undertake to explain to him fully
those objects, who we wer, from whence we had come and wither we were
going; that in the mean time I did not care how soon we were in motion,
as the sun was very warm and no water at hand. they now put on their
mockersons, and the principal chief Ca-me-ah-wait made a short speach
to the warriors. I gave him the flag which I informed him was an emblem
of peace among whitemen and now that it had been received by him it was
to be respected as the bond of union between us. I desired him to march
on, which did and we followed him; the dragoons moved on in squadron in
our rear. after we had marched about a mile in this order he halted
them ang gave a second harang; after which six or eight of the young
men road forward to their encampment and no further regularity was
observed in the order of march. I afterwards understood that the
Indians we had first seen this morning had returned and allarmed the
camp; these men had come out armed cap a pe for action expecting to
meet with their enemies the Minnetares of Fort de Prarie whome they
Call Rah'-kees. they were armed with bows arrow and Shield except three
whom I observed with small pieces such as the N. W. Company furnish the
natives with which they had obtained from the Rocky Mountain Indians on
the yellow stone river with whom they are at peace. on our arrival at
their encampmen on the river in a handsome level and fertile bottom at
the distance of 4 Ms. from where we had first met them they introduced
us to a londge made of willow brush and an old leather lodge which had
been prepared for our reception by the young men which the chief had
dispatched for that purpose. Here we were seated on green boughs and
the skins of Antelopes. one of the warriors then pulled up the grass in
the center of the lodge forming a smal circle of about 2 feet in
diameter the chief next produced his pipe and native tobacco and began
a long cerimony of the pipe when we were requested to take of our
mockersons, the Chief having previously taken off his as well as all
the warriors present. this we complyed with; the Chief then lit his
pipe at the fire kindled in this little magic circle, and standing on
the oposite side of the circle uttered a speach of several minutes in
length at the conclusion of which he pointed the stem to the four
cardinal points of the heavens first begining at the East and ending
with the North. he now presented the pipe to me as if desirous that I
should smoke, but when I reached my hand to receive it, he drew it back
and repeated the same cremony three times, after which he pointed the
stern first to the heavens then to the center of the magic circle
smoked himself with three whifs and held the pipe untill I took as many
as I thought proper; he then held it to each of the white persons and
then gave it to be consumed by his warriors. this pipe was made of a
dense simitransparent green stone very highly polished about 21/2
inches long and of an oval figure, the bowl being in the same direction
with the stem. a small piece of birned clay is placed in the bottom of
the bowl to seperate the tobacco from the end of the stem and is of an
irregularly rounded figure not fitting the tube purfectly close in
order that the smoke may pass. this is the form of the pipe. their
tobacco is of the same kind of that used by the Minnetares Mandans and
Ricares of the Missouri. the Shoshonees do not cultivate this plant,
but obtain it from the Rocky mountain Indians and some of the bands of
their own nation who live further south. I now explained to them the
objects of our journey &c. all the women and children of the camp were
shortly collected about the lodge to indulge themselves with looking at
us, we being the first white persons they had ever seen. after the
cerimony of the pipe was over I distributed the remainder of the small
articles I had brought with me among the women and children. by this
time it was late in the evening and we had not taisted any food since
the evening before. the Chief informed us that they had nothing but
berries to eat and gave us some cakes of serviceberries and Choke
cherries which had been dryed in the sun; of these I made a hearty
meal, and then walked to the river, which I found about 40 yards wide
very rapid clear and about 3 feet deep. the banks low and abrupt as
those of the upper part of the Missouri, and the bed formed of loose
stones and gravel. Cameahwait informed me that this stream discharged
itself into another doubly as large at the distance of half a days
march which came from the S. W. but he added on further enquiry that
there was but little more timber below the junction of those rivers
than I saw here, and that the river was confined between inacessable
mountains, was very rapid and rocky insomuch that it was impossible for
us to pass either by land or water down this river to the great lake
where the white men lived as he had been informed. this was unwelcome
information but I still hoped that this account had been exagerated
with a view to detain us among them. as to timber I could discover not
any that would answer the purpose of constructing canoes or in short
more than was bearly necessary for fuel consisting of the narrow leafed
cottonwood and willow, also the red willow Choke Cherry service berry
and a few currant bushes such as were common on the Missouri. these
people had been attacked by the Minetares of Fort de prarie this spring
and about 20 of them killed and taken prisoners. on this occasion they
lost a great part of their horses and all their lodges except that
which they had erected for our accomodation; they were now living in
lodges of a conic figure made of willow brush. I still observe a great
number of horses feeding in every direction around their camp and
therefore entertain but little doubt but we shall be enable to furnish
ourselves with an adiquate number to transport our stores even if we
are compelled to travel by land over these mountains. on my return to
my lodge an indian called me in to his bower and gave me a small morsel
of the flesh of an antelope boiled, and a peice of a fresh salmon
roasted; both which I eat with a very good relish. this was the first
salmon I had seen and perfectly convinced me that we were on the waters
of the Pacific Ocean. the course of this river is a little to the North
of west as far as I can discover it; and is bounded on each side by a
range of high Mountains. tho those on the E. side are lowest and more
distant from the river.

This evening the Indians entertained us with their dancing nearly all
night. at 12 O'Ck. I grew sleepy and retired to rest leaving the men to
amuse themselves with the Indians. I observe no essential difference
between the music and manner of dancing among this nation and those of
the Missouri. I was several times awoke in the course of the night by
their yells but was too much fortiegued to be deprived of a tolerable
sound night's repose.

This morning Capt Clark set out early having previously dispatched some
hunters ahead. it was cool and cloudy all the forepart of the day. at 8
A.M. they had a slight rain. they passed a number of shoals over which
they were obliged to drag the canoes; the men in the water 3/4ths of
the day, they passed a bold runing stream 7 yds. wide on the Lard. side
just below a high point of Limestone rocks. this stream we call
McNeal's Creek after Hugh McNeal one of our party. this creek heads in
the Mountains to the East and forms a handsome valley for some miles
between the mountains. from the top of this limestone Clift above the
creek The beaver's head boar N 24° E. 12 Ms. the course of Wisdom river
or that which the opening of it's valley makes through the mountains is
N. 25 W. to the gap through which Jefferson's river enters the
mountains above is S 18° W 10 M. they killed one deer only today. saw a
number of Otter some beaver Antelopes ducks gees and Grains. they
caught a number of fine trout as they have every day since I left them.
they encamped on Lrd. in a smooth level prarie near a few cottonwood
trees, but were obliged to make use of the dry willow brush for fuel.

[Clark, August 13, 1805]
August 13th Tuesday 1805
a verry Cool morning the Thermometer Stood at 52 a 0 all the fore part
of the day. Cloudy at 8 oClock a mist of rain we proceeded on passed
inumerable Sholes obliged to haul the boat 3/4 of the Day over the
Shole water. passed the mouth of a bold running Stream 7 yards wide on
the Lard Side below a high Point of Limestone rocks on the Stard Side
this Creek heads in the mountains to the easte and forms a Vallie
between two mountains. Call this stream McNeal Creek From the top of
this rock the Point of the Beaver head hill bears N. 24° E 12 ms.

The Course of the Wisdom river is- N. 25 W

The gap at the place the river passes thro a mountain in advance is- S.
18° W. 10 ms.

proceeded on and Encamped on the Lard side no wood except dry willows
and them Small, one Deer killed to day. The river obliges the men to
undergo great fatigue and labour in hauling the Canoes over the Sholes
in the Cold water naked.

[Lewis, August 14, 1805]
Wednesday August 14th
In order to give Capt. Clark time to reach the forks of Jefferson's
river I concluded to spend this day at the Shoshone Camp and obtain
what information I could with rispect to the country. as we had nothing
but a little flour and parched meal to eat except the berries with
which the Indians furnished us I directed Drewyer and Shields to hunt a
few hours and try to kill something, the Indians furnished them with
horses and most of their young men also turned out to hunt. the game
which they principally hunt is the Antelope which they pursue on
horseback and shoot with their arrows. this animal is so extreemly
fleet and dureable that a single horse has no possible chance to
overtake them or run them down. the Indians are therefore obliged to
have recorce to strategem when they discover a herd of the Antelope
they seperate and scatter themselves to the distance of five or six
miles in different directions arround them generally scelecting some
commanding eminence for a stand; some one or two now pursue the herd at
full speed over the hills values gullies and the sides of precipices
that are tremendious to view. thus after runing them from five to six
or seven miles the fresh horses that were in waiting head them and
drive them back persuing them as far or perhaps further quite to the
other extreem of the hunters who now in turn pursue on their fresh
horses thus worrying the poor animal down and finally killing them with
their arrows. forty or fifty hunters will be engaged for half a day in
this manner and perhaps not kill more than two or three Antelopes. they
have but few Elk or black tailed deer, and the common red deer they
cannot take as they secrete themselves in the brush when pursued, and
they have only the bow and arrow wich is a very slender dependence for
killing any game except such as they can run down with their horses. I
was very much entertained with a view of this indian chase; it was
after a herd of about 10 Antelope and about 20 hunters. it lasted about
2 hours and considerable part of the chase in view from my tent. about
1 A.M. the hunters returned had not killed a single Antelope, and their
horses foaming with sweat. my hunters returned soon after and had been
equally unsuccessfull. I now directed McNeal to make me a little paist
with the flour and added some berries to it which I found very
pallateable.

The means I had of communicating with these people was by way of
Drewyer who understood perfectly the common language of jesticulation
or signs which seems to be universally understood by all the Nations we
have yet seen. it is true that this language is imperfect and liable to
error but is much less so than would be expected. the strong parts of
the ideas are seldom mistaken.

I now prevailed on the Chief to instruct me with rispect to the
geography of his country. this he undertook very cheerfully, by
delienating the rivers on the ground. but I soon found that his
information fell far short of my expectation or wishes. he drew the
river on which we now are to which he placed two branches just above
us, which he shewed me from the openings of the mountains were in view;
he next made it discharge itself into a large river which flowed from
the S. W. about ten miles below us, then continued this joint stream in
the same direction of this valley or N. W. for one days march and then
enclined it to the West for 2 more days march, here he placed a number
of beeps of sand on each side which he informed me represented the vast
mountains of rock eternally covered with snow through which the river
passed. that the perpendicular and even juting rocks so closely hemned
in the river that there was no possibilyte of passing along the shore;
that the bed of the river was obstructed by sharp pointed rocks and the
rapidity of the stream such that the whole surface of the river was
beat into perfect foam as far as the eye could reach. that the
mountains were also inaccessible to man or horse. he said that this
being the state of the country in that direction that himself nor none
of his nation had ever been further down the river than these
mountains. I then enquired the state of the country on either side of
the river but he could not inform me. he said there was an old man of
his nation a days march below who could probably give me some
information of the country to the N. W. and refered me to an old man
then present for that to the S. W.- the Chief further informed me that
he had understood from the persed nosed Indians who inhabit this river
below the rocky mountains that it ran a great way toward the seting sun
and finally lost itself in a great lake of water which was illy
taisted, and where the white men lived. I next commenced my enquiries
of the old man to whom I had been refered for information relative the
country S W. of us. this he depicted with horrors and obstructions
scarcely inferior to that just mentioned. he informed me that the band
of this nation to which he belonged resided at the distance of 20 days
march from hence not far from the white people with whom they traded
for horses mules cloth metal beads and the shells which they woar as
orniment being those of a species of perl oister. that the course to
his relations was a little to the West of South. that in order to get
to his relations the first seven days we should be obliged to climb
over steep and rocky mountains where we could find no game to kill nor
anything but roots such as a ferce and warlike nation lived on whom he
called the broken mockersons or mockersons with holes, and said
inhabited those mountains and lived like the bear of other countries
among the rocks and fed on roots or the flesh of such horses as they
could take or steel from those who passed through their country. that
in passing this country the feet of our horses would be so much wounded
with the stones many of them would give out. the next part of the rout
was about 10 days through a dry and parched sandy desert in which no
food at this season for either man or horse, and in which we must
suffer if not perish for the want of water. that the sun had now dryed
up the little pools of water which exist through this desert plain in
the spring season and had also scorched all the grass. that no animal
inhabited this plain on which we could hope to subsist. that about the
center of this plain a large river passed from S. E. to N. W. which was
navigable but afforded neither Salmon nor timber. that beyond this
plain thee or four days march his relations lived in a country
tolerable fertile and partially covered with timber on another large
river which ran in the same direction of the former. that this last
discharged itself into a large river on which many numerous nations
lived with whom his relations were at war but whether this last
discharged itself into the great lake or not he did not know. that from
his relations it was yet a great distance to the great or stinking lake
as they call the Ocean. that the way which such of his nation as had
been to the Stinking lake traveled was up the river on which they lived
and over to that on which the white people lived which last they knew
discharged itself into the Ocean, and that this was the way which he
would advise me to travel if I was determined to proceed to the Ocean
but would advise me to put off the journey untill the next spring when
he would conduct me. I thanked him for his information and advise and
gave him a knife with which he appeared to be much gratifyed. from this
narative I was convinced that the streams of which he had spoken as
runing through the plains and that on which his relations lived were
southern branches of the Columbia, heading with the rivers Apostles and
Collorado, and that the rout he had pointed out was to the Vermillion
Sea or gulph of Callifornia. I therefore told him that this rout was
more to the South than I wished to travel, and requested to know if
there was no rout on the left of this river on which we now are, by
means of which, I could intercept it below the mountains through which
it passes; but he could not inform me of any except that of the barren
plain which he said joined the mountain on that side and through which
it was impossible for us to pass at this season even if we were
fortunate enough to escape from the broken mockerson Indians. I now
asked Cameahwait by what rout the Pierced nosed indians, who he
informed me inhabited this river below the mountains, came over to the
Missouri; this he informed me was to the north, but added that the road
was a very bad one as he had been informed by them and that they had
suffered excessively with hunger on the rout being obliged to subsist
for many days on berries alone as there was no game in that part of the
mountains which were broken rockey and so thickly covered with timber
that they could scarcely pass. however knowing that Indians had passed,
and did pass, at this season on that side of this river to the same
below the mountains, my rout was instantly settled in my own mind,
povided the account of this river should prove true on an investigation
of it, which I was determined should be made before we would undertake
the rout by land in any direction. I felt perfectly satisfyed, that if
the Indians could pass these mountains with their women and Children,
that we could also pass them; and that if the nations on this river
below the mountains were as numerous as they were stated to be that
they must have some means of subsistence which it would be equally in
our power to procure in the same country. they informed me that there
was no buffaloe on the West side of these mountains; that the game
consisted of a few Elk deer and Antelopes, and that the natives
subsisted on fish and roots principally. in this manner I spent the day
smoking with them and acquiring what information I could with respect
to their country. they informed me that they could pass to the
Spaniards by the way of the yellowstone river in 10 days. I can
discover that these people are by no means friendly to the Spaniard
their complaint is, that the Spaniards will not let them have fire arms
and amunition, that they put them off by telling them that if they
suffer them to have guns they will kill each other, thus leaving them
defenceless and an easy prey to their bloodthirsty neighbours to the
East of them, who being in possession of fire arms hunt them up and
murder them without rispect to sex or age and plunder them of their
horses on all occasions. they told me that to avoid their enemies who
were eternally harrassing them that they were obliged to remain in the
interior of these mountains at least two thirds of the year where the
suffered as we then saw great heardships for the want of food sometimes
living for weeks without meat and only a little fish roots and berries.
but this added Cameahwait, with his ferce eyes and lank jaws grown
meager for the want of food, would not be the case if we had guns, we
could then live in the country of buffaloe and eat as our enimies do
and not be compelled to hide ourselves in these mountains and live on
roots and berries as the bear do. we do not fear our enimies when
placed on an equal footing with them. I told them that the Minnetares
Mandans & Recares of the Missouri had promised us to desist from making
war on them & that we would indevour to find the means of making the
Minnetares of fort d Prarie or as they call them Pahkees desist from
waging war against them also. that after our finally returning to our
homes towards the rising sun whitemen would come to them with an
abundance of guns and every other article necessary to their defence
and comfort, and that they would be enabled to supply themselves with
these articles on reasonable terms in exchange for the skins of the
beaver Otter and Ermin so abundant in their country. they expressed
great pleasure at this information and said they had been long anxious
to see the whitemen that traded guns; and that we might rest assured of
their friendship and that they would do whatever we wished them.

I now told Cameahwait that I wished him to speak to his people and
engage them to go with me tomorrow to the forks of Jeffersons river
where our baggage was by this time arrived with another Chief and a
large party of whitemen who would wait my return at that place. that I
wish them to take with them about 30 spare horses to transport our
baggage to this place where we would then remain sometime among them
and trade with them for horses, and finally concert our future plans
for geting on to the ocean and of the traid which would be extended to
them after our return to our homes. he complyed with my request and
made a lengthey harrangue to his village. he returned in about an hour
and a half and informed me that they would be ready to accompany me in
the morning. I promised to reward them for their trouble. Drewyer who
had had a good view of their horses estimated them at 400. most of them
are fine horses. indeed many of them would make a figure on the South
side of James River or the land of fine horses.- I saw several with
Spanish brands on them, and some mules which they informed me that they
had also obtained from the Spaniards. I also saw a bridle bit of
spanish manufactary, and sundry other articles which I have no doubt
were obtained from the same source. notwithstanding the extreem poverty
of those poor people they are very merry they danced again this evening
untill midnight. each warrior keep one ore more horses tyed by a cord
to a stake near his lodge both day and night and are always prepared
for action at a moments warning. they fight on horseback altogether.
lobserve that the large flies are extreemly troublesome to the horses
as well as ourselves.

The morning being cold and the men stif and soar from the exertions of
yesterday Capt. Clark did not set out this morning untill 7 A.M. the
river was so crooked and rapid that they made but little way at one
mile he passed a bold runing stream on Stard. which heads in a mountain
to the North, on which there is snow. this we called track Creek. it is
4 yard wide and 3 feet deep at 7 Ms. passed a stout stream which heads
in some springs under the foot of the mountains on Lard. the river near
the mountain they found one continued rapid, with was extreemly
laborious and difficult to ascend. this evening Charbono struck his
indian Woman for which Capt. C. gave him a severe repremand. Joseph and
Reubin Fields killed 4 deer and an Antelope, Capt. C. killed a buck.
several of the men have lamed themselves by various accedents in
working the canoes through this difficult part of the river, and Capt.
C. was obliged personally to assist them in this labour. they encamped
this evening on Lard. side near the rattlesnake clift

[Clark, August 14, 1805]
August 14th Wednesday 1805.
a Cold morning wind from the S. W. The Thermometer Stood at 51° a 0, at
Sunrise the morning being cold and men Stiff. I deturmind to delay &
take brackfast at the place we Encamped. we Set out at 7 oClock and
proceeded on river verry Crooked and rapid as below Some fiew trees on
the borders near the mountain, passed a bold running Stream at 1 mile
on the Stard. Side which heads in a mountain to the North on which
there is Snow passed a bold running Stream on the Lard. Side which
heads in a Spring undr. a mountain, the river near the mountain is one
continued rapid, which requres great labour to push & haul the Canoes
up. We Encamped on the Lard Side near the place the river passes thro
the mountain. I checked our interpreter for Strikeing his woman at
their Dinner.

The hunters Jo. & R. Fields killed 4 Deer & a antilope, I killed a fat
Buck in the evening, Several men have hurt themselves pushing up the
Canoes. I am oblige to a pole occasionally.

[Lewis, August 15, 1805]
Thursday August 15th 1805.
This morning I arrose very early and as hungary as a wolf. I had eat
nothing yesterday except one scant meal of the flour and berries except
the dryed cakes of berries which did not appear to satisfy my appetite
as they appeared to do those of my Indian friends. I found on enquiry
of McNeal that we had only about two pounds of flour remaining. this I
directed him to divide into two equal parts and to cook the one half
this morning in a kind of pudding with the hurries as he had done
yesterday and reserve the ballance for the evening. on this new
fashoned pudding four of us breakfasted, giving a pretty good allowance
also to the Chief who declared it the best thing he had taisted for a
long time. he took a little of the Hour in his hand, taisted and
examined very scrutinously and asked me if we made it of roots. I
explained to him the manner in which it grew. I hurried the departure
of the Indians. the Chief addressed them several times before they
would move they seemed very reluctant to accompany me. I at length
asked the reason and he told me that some foolish persons among them
had suggested the idea that we were in league with the Pahkees and had
come on in order to decoy them into an ambuscade where their enimies
were waiting to receive them. but that for his part he did not believe
it. I readily perceived that our situation was not entirely free from
danger as the transision from suspicion to the confermation of the fact
would not be very difficult in the minds of these ignorant people who
have been accustomed from their infancy to view every stranger as an
enimy. I told Cameahwait that I was sorry to find that they had put so
little confidence in us, that I knew they were not acquainted with
whitemen and therefore could forgive them. that among whitemen it was
considered disgracefull to lye or entrap an enimy by falsehood. I told
him if they continued to think thus meanly of us that they might rely
on it that no whitemen would ever come to trade with them or bring them
arms and amunition and that if the bulk of his nation still entertained
this opinion I still hoped that there were some among them that were
not affraid to die, that were men and would go with me and convince
themselves of the truth of what I had asscerted. that there was a party
of whitemen waiting my return either at the forks of Jefferson's river
or a little below coining on to that place in canoes loaded with
provisions and merchandize. he told me for his own part he was
determined to go, that he was not affraid to die. I soon found that I
had touched him on the right string; to doubt the bravery of a savage
is at once to put him on his metal. he now mounted his horse and
haranged his village a third time; the perport of which as he
afterwards told me was to inform them that he would go with us and
convince himself of the truth or falsity of what we had told him if he
was sertain he should be killed, that he hoped there were some of them
who heard him were not affraid to die with him and if there was to let
him see them mount their horses and prepare to set out. shortly after
this harange he was joined by six or eight only and with these I smoked
a pipe and directed the men to put on their packs being determined to
set out with them while I had them in the humour at half after 12 we
set out, several of the old women were crying and imploring the great
sperit to protect their warriors as if they were going to inevitable
distruction. we had not proceeded far before our party was augmented by
ten or twelve more, and before we reached the Creek which we had passed
in the morning of the 13th it appeared to me that we had all the men of
the village and a number of women with us. this may serve in some
measure to ilustrate the capricious disposition of those people who
never act but from the impulse of the moment. they were now very
cheerfull and gay, and two hours ago they looked as sirly as so many
imps of satturn. when we arrived at the spring on the side of the
mountain where we had encamped on the 12th the Chief insited on halting
to let the horses graize with which I complyed and gave the Indians
smoke. they are excessively fond of the pipe; but have it not much in
their power to indulge themselves with even their native tobacco as
they do not cultivate it themselves.- after remaining about an hour we
again set out, and by engaging to make compensation to four of them for
their trouble obtained the previlege of riding with an indian myself
and a similar situation for each of my party. I soon found it more
tiresome riding without tirrups than walking and of course chose the
latter making the Indian carry my pack. about sunset we reached the
upper part of the level valley of the Cove which now called Shoshone
Cove. the grass being birned on the North side of the river we passed
over to the south and encamped near some willow brush about 4 miles
above the narrow pass between the hills noticed as I came up this cove
the river was here about six yards wide, and frequently darned up by
the beaver. I had sent Drewyer forward this evening before we halted to
kill some meat but he was unsuccessfull and did not rejoin us untill
after dark I now cooked and among six of us eat the remaining pound of
flour stired in a little boiling water.- Capt. Clark delayed again this
morning untill after breakfast, when he set out and passed between low
and rugged mountains which had a few pine trees distributed over them
the clifts are formed of limestone and a hard black rock intermixed. no
trees on the river, the bottoms narrow river crooked shallow shoally
and rapid. the water is as coald as that of the best springs in our
country. the men as usual suffered excessively with fatiegue and the
coldness of the water to which they were exposed for hours together. at
the distance of 6 miles by water they passed the entrance of a bold
creek on Stard. side 10 yds. wide and 3 f. 3 i. deep which we called
Willard's Creek after Alexander Willard one of our party. at 4 miles by
water from their encampment of las evening passed a bold branch which
tumbled down a steep precipice of rocks from the mountains on the Lard.
Capt Clark was very near being bitten twice today by rattlesnakes, the
Indian woman also narrowly escaped. they caught a number of fine trout.
Capt. Clark killed a buck which was the only game killed today. the
venison has an uncommon bitter taist which is unpleasent. I presume it
proceeds from some article of their food, perhaps the willow on the
leaves of which they feed very much. they encamped this evening on the
Lard. side near a few cottonwood trees about which there were the
remains of several old Indian brush lodges.

[Clark, August 15, 1805]
August 15th Thursday 1805
a Cool windey morning wind from the S W we proceeded on thro a ruged
low mountain water rapid as usial passed a bold running Stream which
falls from the mountain on the Lard. Side at 4 miles, also a bold
running Stream 10 yards wide on the Stard Side 8 feet 3 In. Deep at 6
miles, Willards Creek the bottoms narrow, the Clifs of a Dark brown
Stone Some limestone intermixed- an Indian road passes on the Lard Side
latterly used. Took a Meridian altitude at the Comsnt. of the Mountain
with Octent 65° 47' 0". The Latd. 44° 0' 48 1/10" proceeded on with great
labour & fatigue to the Mouth of a Small run on the Lard. Side

passed Several Spring runs, the men Complain much of their fatigue and
being repetiedly in the water which weakens them much perticularly as
they are obliged to live on pore Deer meet which has a Singular bitter
taste. I have no accounts of Capt Lewis Sence he Set out

In walking on Shore I Saw Several rattle Snakes and narrowly escaped at
two different times, as also the Squar when walking with her husband on
Shore- I killed a Buck nothing else killed to day- This mountn. I call
rattle Snake mountain. not one tree on either Side to day

[Lewis, August 16, 1805]
Friday August 16th 1805.
I sent Drewyer and Shields before this morning in order to kill some
meat as neither the Indians nor ourselves had any thing to eat. I
informed the Ceif of my view in this measure, and requested that he
would keep his young men with us lest by their hooping and noise they
should allarm the game and we should get nothing to eat, but so
strongly were there suspicions exited by this measure that two parties
of discovery immediately set out one on ech side of the valley to watch
the hunters as I beleive to see whether they had not been sent to give
information of their approach to an enemy that they still preswaided
themselves were lying in wait for them. I saw that any further effort
to prevent their going would only add strength to their suspicions and
therefore said no more. after the hunters had been gone about an hour
we set out. we had just passed through the narrows when we saw one of
the spies comeing up the level plain under whip, the chief pawsed a
little and seemed somewhat concerned. I felt a good deel so myself and
began to suspect that by some unfortunate accedent that perhaps some of
there enimies had straggled hither at this unlucky moment; but we were
all agreeably disappointed on the arrival of the young man to learn
that he had come to inform us that one of the whitemen had killed a
deer. in an instant they all gave their horses the whip and I was taken
nearly a mile before I could learn what were the tidings; as I was
without tirrups and an Indian behind me the jostling was disagreeable I
therefore reigned up my horse and forbid the indian to whip him who had
given him the lash at every jum for a mile fearing he should loose a
part of the feast. the fellow was so uneasy that he left me the horse
dismounted and ran on foot at full speed, I am confident a mile. when
they arrived where the deer was which was in view of me they dismounted
and ran in tumbling over each other like a parcel of famished dogs each
seizing and tearing away a part of the intestens which had been
previously thrown out by Drewyer who killed it; the seen was such when
I arrived that had I not have had a pretty keen appetite myself I am
confident I should not have taisted any part of the venison shortly.
each one had a peice of some discription and all eating most
ravenously. some were eating the kidnies the melt and liver and the
blood runing from the corners of their mouths, others were in a similar
situation with the paunch and guts but the exuding substance in this
case from their lips was of a different discription. one of the last
who attacted my attention particularly had been fortunate in his
allotment or reather active in the division, he had provided himself
with about nine feet of the small guts one end of which he was chewing
on while with his hands he was squezzing the contents out at the other.
I really did not untill now think that human nature ever presented
itself in a shape so nearly allyed to the brute creation. I viewed
these poor starved divils with pity and compassion I directed McNeal to
skin the deer and reserved a quarter, the ballance I gave the Chief to
be divided among his people; they devoured the whole of it nearly
without cooking. I now boar obliquely to the left in order to
interscept the creek where there was some brush to make a fire, and
arrived at this stream where Drewyer had killed a second deer; here
nearly the same seene was encored. a fire being kindled we cooked and
eat and gave the ballance of the two deer to the Indians who eat the
whole of them even to the soft parts of the hoofs. Drewyer joined us at
breakfast with a third deer. of this I reserved a quarter and gave the
ballance to the Indians. they all appeared now to have filled
themselves and were in a good humour. this morning early soon after the
hunters set out a considerable part of our escort became allarmed and
returned 28 men and three women only continued with us. after eating
and suffering the horses to graize about 2 hours we renued our march
and towads evening arrived at the lower part of the cove Shields killed
an Antelope on the way a part of which we took and gave the remainder
to the Indians. being now informed of the place at which I expected to
meat Capt C. and the party they insisted on making a halt, which was
complyed with. we now dismounted and the Chief with much cerimony put
tippets about our necks such as they temselves woar I redily perceived
that this was to disguise us and owed it's origine to the same cause
already mentioned. to give them further confidence I put my cocked hat
with feather on the chief and my over shirt being of the Indian form my
hair deshivled and skin well browned with the sun I wanted no further
addition to make me a complete Indian in appearance the men followed my
example and we were son completely metamorphosed. I again repeated to
them the possibility of the party not having arrived at the place which
I expected they were, but assured them they could not be far below,
lest by not finding them at the forks their suspicions might arrise to
such hight as to induce them to return precipitately. we now set out
and rode briskly within sight of the forks making one of the Indians
carry the flag that our own party should know who we were. when we
arrived in sight at the distance of about 2 miles I discovered to my
mortification that the party had not arrived, and the Indians slackened
their pace. I now scarcely new what to do and feared every moment when
they would halt altogether, I now determined to restore their
confidence cost what it might and therefore gave the Chief my gun and
told him that if his enimies were in those bushes before him that he
could defend himself with that gun, that for my own part I was not
affraid to die and if I deceived him he might make what uce of the gun
he thought proper or in other words that he might shoot me. the men
also gave their guns to other indians which seemed to inspire them with
more confidence; they sent their spies before them at some distance and
when I drew near the place I thought of the notes which I had left and
directed Drewyer to go with an Indian man and bring them to me which he
did. the indian seeing him take the notes from the stake on which they
had been plased I now had recource to a stratagem in which I thought
myself justifyed by the occasion, but which I must confess set a little
awkward. it had it's desired effect. after reading the notes which were
the same I had left I told the Chief that when I had left my brother
Chief with the party below where the river entered the mountain that we
both agreed not to bring the canoes higher up than the next forks of
the river above us wherever this might happen, that there he was to
wait my return, should he arrive first, and that in the event of his
not being able to travel as fast as usual from the difficulty of the
water, that he was to send up to the first forks above him and leave a
note informing me where he was, that this note was left here today and
that he informed me that he was just below the mountains and was coming
on slowly up, and added that I should wait here for him, but if they
did not beleive me that I should send a man at any rate to the Chief
and they might also send one of their young men with him, that myself
and two others would remain with them at this place. this plan was
readily adopted and one of the young men offered his services; I
promised him a knife and some beads as a reward for his confidence in
us. most of them seemed satisfyed but there were several that
complained of the Chief's exposing them to danger unnecessarily and
said that we told different stories, in short a few were much
dissatisfyed. I wrote a note to Capt. Clark by the light of some willow
brush and directed Drewyer to set out early being confident that there
was not a moment to spare. the chief and five or six others slept about
my fire and the others hid themselves in various parts of the willow
brush to avoid the enimy whom they were fearfull would attack them in
the course of the night. I now entertained various conjectures myself
with rispect to the cause of Capt. Clarks detention and was even fearful
l that he had found the river so difficult that he had halted below the
Rattlesnake bluffs. I knew that if these people left me that they would
immediately disperse and secrete themselves in the mountains where it
would be impossible to find them or at least in vain to pursue them and
that they would spread the allarm to all other bands within our reach &
of course we should be disappointed in obtaining horses, which would
vastly retard and increase the labour of our voyage and I feared might
so discourage the men as to defeat the expedition altogether. my mind
was in reallity quite as gloomy all this evening as the most affrighted
indian but I affected cheerfullness to keep the Indians so who were
about me. we finally laid down and the Chief placed himself by the side
of my musquetoe bier. I slept but little as might be well expected, my
mind dwelling on the state of the expedition which I have ever held in
equal estimation with my own existence, and the fait of which appeared
at this moment to depend in a great measure upon the caprice of a few
savages who are ever as fickle as the wind. I had mentioned to the
chief several times that we had with us a woman of his nation who had
been taken prisoner by the Minnetares, and that by means of her I hoped
to explain myself more fully than I could do by signs. some of the
party had also told the Indians that we had a man with us who was black
and had short curling hair, this had excited their curiossity very
much. and they seemed quite as anxious to see this monster as they wer
the merchandize which we had to barter for their horses.

at 7 A M. Capt. C. set out after breakfast. he changed the hands in
some of the canoes; they proceeded with more ease than yesterday, yet
they found the river still rapid and shallow insomuch that they were
obliged to drag the large canoes the greater part of the day. the water
excessively cold. in the evening they passed several bad rapids.
considerable quantities of the buffaloe clover grows along the narrow
bottoms through which they passed. there was no timber except a few
scatiring small pine on the hills. willow service berry and currant
bushes were the growth of the river bottoms. they geatherd considerable
quantities of service berries, and caught some trout. one deer was
killed by the hunters who slept out last night. and did not join the
party untill 10 A.M.

Capt. Clark sent the hunters this evening up to the forks of the river
which he discovered from an eminence; they mus have left this place but
a little time before we arrived. this evening they encamped on the
Lard. side only a few miles below us. and were obliged like ourselves
to make use of small willow brush for fuel. the men were much fatigued
and exhausted this evening.

[Clark, August 16, 1805]
August 16th Friday 1805
as this morning was cold and the men fatigued Stiff and Chilled
deturmined me to detain & take brackfast before I Set out. I changed
the hands and Set out at 7 oClock proceeded on Something better than
yesterday for the fore part of the Day passed Several rapids in the
latter part of the day near the hills river passed between 2 hills I
saw a great number of Service berries now ripe. the Yellow Current are
also Common I observe the long leaf Clover in great plenty in the
vallie below this vallie- Some fiew tres on the river no timber on the
hills or mountn. except a fiew Small Pine & Cedar. The Thmtr. Stood at
48° a. 0 at Sunrise wind S W. The hunters joined me at 1 oClock, I
dispatched 2 men to prosue an Indian roade over the hills for a fiew
miles, at the narrows I assended a mountain from the top of which I
could See that the river forked near me the left hand appeared the
largest & bore S. E. the right passed from the West thro an extensive
Vallie, I could See but three Small trees in any Direction from the top
of this mountain. passed an Isld. and Encamped ion the Lard. Side the
only wood was Small willows

[Lewis, August 17, 1805]
Saturday August 17th 1805.
This morning I arrose very early and dispatched Drewyer and the Indian
down the river. sent Shields to hunt. I made McNeal cook the remainder
of our meat which afforded a slight breakfast for ourselves and the
Cheif. Drewyer had been gone about 2 hours when an Indian who had
straggled some little distance down the river returned and reported
that the whitemen were coming, that he had seen them just below. they
all appeared transported with joy, & the chef repeated his fraturnal
hug. I felt quite as much gratifyed at this information as the Indians
appeared to be. Shortly after Capt. Clark arrived with the Interpreter
Charbono, and the Indian woman, who proved to be a sister of the Chif
Cameahwait. the meeting of those people was really affecting,
particularly between Sah cah-gar-we-ah and an Indian woman, who had
been taken prisoner at the same time with her, and who had afterwards
escaped from the Minnetares and rejoined her nation. At noon the Canoes
arrived, and we had the satisfaction once more to find ourselves all
together, with a flattering prospect of being able to obtain as many
horses shortly as would enable us to prosicute our voyage by land
should that by water be deemed unadvisable.

We now formed our camp just below the junction of the forks on the
Lard. side in a level smooth bottom covered with a fine terf of
greenswoard. here we unloaded our canoes and arranged our baggage on
shore; formed a canopy of one of our large sails and planted some
willow brush in the ground to form a shade for the Indians to set under
while we spoke to them, which we thought it best to do this evening.
acordingly about 4 P.M. we called them together and through the medium
of Labuish, Charbono and Sah-cah-gar-weah, we communicated to them
fully the objects which had brought us into this distant part of the
country, in which we took care to make them a conspicuous object of our
own good wishes and the care of our government. we made them sensible
of their dependance on the will of our government for every species of
merchandize as well for their defence & comfort; and apprized them of
the strength of our government and it's friendly dispositions towards
them. we also gave them as a reason why we wished to petrate the
country as far as the ocean to the west of them was to examine and find
out a more direct way to bring merchandize to them. that as no trade
could be carryed on with them before our return to our homes that it
was mutually advantageous to them as well as to ourselves that they
should render us such aids as they had it in their power to furnish in
order to haisten our voyage and of course our return home. that such
were their horses to transport our baggage without which we could not
subsist, and that a pilot to conduct us through the mountains was also
necessary if we could not decend the river by water. but that we did
not ask either their horses or their services without giving a
satisfactory compensation in return. that at present we wished them to
collect as many horses as were necessary to transport our baggage to
their village on the Columbia where we would then trade with them at
our leasure for such horses as they could spare us.- They appeared well
pleased with what had been said. the chief thanked us for friendship
towards himself and nation & declared his wish to serve us in every
rispect; that he was sorry to find that it must yet be some time before
they could be furnished with firearms but said they could live as they
had done heretofore untill we brought them as we had promised. he said
they had not horses enough with them at present to remove our baggage
to their village over the mountain, but that he would return tomorrow
and encourage his people to come over with their horses and that he
would bring his own and assist us. this was complying with all we
wished at present. we next enquired who were chiefs among them.
Cameahwait pointed out two others whom he said were Chiefs we gave him
a medal of the small size with the likeness of Mr. Jefferson the
President of the U States in releif on one side and clasp hands with a
pipe and tomahawk on the other, to the other Chiefs we gave each a
small medal which were struck in the Presidency of George Washing Esqr.
we also gave small medals of the last discription to two young men whom
the 1st Chief informed us wer good young men and much rispected among
them. we gave the 1st Chief an uniform coat shirt a pair of scarlet
legings a carrot of tobacco and some small articles to each of the
others we gave a shirt leging handkerchief a knife some tobacco and a
few small articles we also distributed a good quantity paint mockerson
awls knives beads lookingglasses &c among the other Indians and gave
them a plentifull meal of lyed corn which was the first they had ever
eaten in their lives. they were much pleased with it. every article
about us appeared to excite astonishment in ther minds; the appearance
of the men, their arms, the canoes, our manner of working them, the
back man york and the segacity of my dog were equally objects of
admiration. I also shot my air-gun which was so perfectly
incomprehensible that they immediately denominated it the great
medicine. the idea which the indians mean to convey by this appellation
is something that eminates from or acts immediately by the influence or
power of the great sperit; or that in which the power of god is
manifest by it's incomprehensible power of action. our hunters killed 4
deer and an Antelope this evening of which we also gave the Indians a
good proportion. the cerimony of our council and smoking the pipe was
in conformity of the custom of this nation perfomed bearfoot. on those
occasions points of etiquet are quite as much attended to by the
Indians as among scivilized nations. To keep indians in a good humour
you must not fatiegue them with too much business at one time.
therefore after the council we gave them to eat and amused them a while
by shewing them such articles as we thought would be entertaining to
them, and then renewed our enquiries with rispect to the country. the
information we derived was only a repetition of that they had given me
before and in which they appeared to be so candid that I could not
avoid yealing confidence to what they had said. Capt. Clark and myself
now concerted measures for our future operations, and it was mutually
agreed that he should set out tomorrow morning with eleven men
furnished with axes and other necessary tools for making canoes, their
arms accoutrements and as much of their baggage as they could carry.
also to take the indians Carbono and the indian woman with him; that on
his arrival at the Shoshone camp he was to leave Charbono and the
Indian woman to haisten the return of the Indians with their horses to
this place, and to proceede himself with the eleven men down the
Columbia in order to examine the river and if he found it navigable and
could obtain timber to set about making canoes immediately. In the mean
time I was to bring on the party and baggage to the Shoshone Camp,
calculating that by the time I should reach that place that he would
have sufficiently informed himself with rispect to the state of the
river &c. as to determine us whether to prosicute our journey from
thence by land or water. in the former case we should want all the
horses which we could perchase, the latter only to hire the Indians to
transport our baggage to the place at which we made the canoes. in
order to inform me as early as possible of the state of the river he
was to send back one of the men with the necessary information as soon
as he should satisfy himself on this subject. this plan being settled
we gave orders accordingly and the men prepared for an early march. the
nights are very cold and the sun excessively hot in the day. we have no
fuel here but a few dry willow brush. and from the appearance of
country I am confident we shall not find game here to subsist us many
days. these are additional reasons why I conceive it necessary to get
under way as soon as possible.- this morning Capt. Clark had delayed
untill 7 A.M. before he set out just about which time Drewyer arrived
with the Indian; he left the canoes to come on after him, and
immediately set out and joined me as has been before mentioned.The
sperits of the men were now much elated at the prospect of geting
horses.

[Clark, August 17, 1805]
August 17th Satturday 1805
a fair Cold morning wind S. W. the Thermometer at 42 a. 0 at Sunrise,
We Set out at 7 oClock and proceeded on to the forks I had not
proceeded on one mile before I saw at a distance Several Indians on
horsback Comeing towards me, The Intertrepeter & Squar who were before
me at Some distance danced for the joyful Sight, and She made signs to
me that they were her nation, as I aproached nearer them descovered one
of Capt Lewis party With them dressed in their Dress; the met me with
great Signs of joy, as the Canoes were proceeding on nearly opposit me
I turned those people & joined Capt Lewis who had Camped with 16 of
those Snake Indians at the forks 2 miles in advance. those Indians Sung
all the way to their Camp where the others had provd. a cind of Shade
of Willows Stuck up in a Circle the Three Chiefs with Capt. Lewis met
me with great cordialliaty embraced and took a Seat on a white robe,
the Main Chief imedeately tied to my hair Six Small pieces of Shells
resembling perl which is highly Valued by those people and is prcured
from the nations resideing near the Sea Coast. we then Smoked in their
fassion without Shoes and without much cerimoney and form.

Capt Lewis informed me he found those people on the Columbia River
about 40 miles from the forks at that place there was a large camp of
them, he had purswaded those with him to Come and See that what he said
was the truth, they had been under great apprehension all the way, for
fear of their being deceived. The Great Chief of this nation proved to
be the brother of the Woman with us and is a man of Influence Sence &
easey & reserved manners, appears to possess a great deel of Cincerity.
The Canoes arrived & unloaded- every thing appeared to asstonish those
people. the appearance of the men, their arms, the Canoes, the Clothing
my black Servent. & the Segassity of Capt Lewis's Dog. we Spoke a fiew
words to them in the evening respecting our rout intentions our want of
horses &c. & gave them a fiew presents & medals- we made a number of
inquires of those people about the Columbia River the Countrey game &c.
The account they gave us was verry unfavourable, that the River
abounded in emence falls, one perticularly much higher than the falls
of the Missouri & at the place the mountains Closed So Close that it
was impracticable to pass, & that the ridge Continued on each Side of
perpendicular Clifts inpenetratable, and that no Deer Elk or any game
was to be found in that Countrey, aded to that they informed us that
there was no timber on the river Sufficiently large to make Small
Canoes, This information (if true is alarming) I deturmined to go in
advance and examine the Countrey, See if those dificueltes presented
themselves in the gloomey picture in which they painted them, and if
the river was practiable and I could find timber to build Canoes, those
Ideas & plan appeard to be agreeable to Capt Lewis's Ideas on this
point, and I selected 11 men, directed them to pack up their baggage
Complete themselves with amunition, take each an ax and Such tools as
will be Soutable to build Canoes, and be ready to Set out at 10 oClock
tomorrow morning. Those people greatly pleased our hunters killed three
Deer & an antilope which was eaten in a Short time the Indians being so
harrassed & compelled to move about in those rugid mountains that they
are half Starved liveing at this time on berries & roots which they
geather in the plains. Those people are not begerley but generous, only
one has asked me for anything and he for powder.

This nation Call themselves Cho-shop-ne the Chief is name
Too-et-te-con'l Black Gun is his war name Ka-me-ah-wah- or Come &
Smoke. this Chief gave me the following name and pipe Ka-me-ah-wah.

[Lewis, August 18, 1805]
Sunday August 18th 1805.
This morning while Capt Clark was busily engaged in preparing for his
rout, I exposed some articles to barter with the Indians for horses as
I wished a few at this moment to releive the men who were going with
Capt Clark from the labour of carrying their baggage and also one to
keep here in order to pack the meat to camp which the hunters might
kill. I soon obtained three very good horses for which I gave an
uniform coat, a pair of legings, a few handkerchiefs, three knives and
some other small articles the whole of which did not cost more than
about 20$ in the U States. the Indians seemed quite as well pleased
with their bargin as I was. the men also purchased one for an old
checked shirt a pair of old legings and a knife. two of those I
purchased Capt. C. took on with him. at 10 A.M. Capt. Clark departed
with his detatchment and all the Indians except 2 men and 2 women who
remained with us. Two of the inferior chiefs were a little displeased
at not having received a present equivolent to that given the first
Chief. to releive this difficulty Capt. Clark bestoed a couple of his
old coats on them and I promised that if they wer active in assisting
me over the mountains with horses that I would give them an additional
present; this seemed perfectly to satisfy them and they all set out in
a good humour. Capt. Clark encamped this evening near the narrow pass
between the hills on Jefferson's river in the Shoshone Cove. his
hunters killed one deer which the party with the aid of the Indians
readily consumed in the course of the evening.- after there departure
this morning I had all the stores and baggage of every discription
opened and aired. and began the operation of forming the packages in
proper parsels for the purpose of transporting them on horseback. the
rain in the evening compelled me to desist from my operations. I had
the raw hides put in the water in order to cut them in throngs proper
for lashing the packages and forming the necessary geer for pack
horses, a business which I fortunately had not to learn on this
occasion. Drewyer Killed one deer this evening. a beaver was also
caught by one of the party. I had the net arranged and set this evening
to catch some trout which we could see in great abundance at the bottom
of the river. This day I completed my thirty first year, and conceived
that I had in all human probability now existed about half the period
which I am to remain in this Sublunary world. I reflected that I had as
yet done but little, very little indeed, to further the hapiness of the
human race, or to advance the information of the succeeding generation.
I viewed with regret the many hours I have spent in indolence, and now
soarly feel the want of that information which those hours would have
given me had they been judiciously expended. but since they are past
and cannot be recalled, I dash from me the gloomy thought and resolved
in future, to redouble my exertions and at least indeavour to promote
those two primary objects of human existence, by giving them the aid of
that portion of talents which nature and fortune have bestoed on me; or
in future, to live for mankind, as I have heretofore lived for myself.

[Clark, August 18, 1805]
August 18th Sunday 1805
Purchased of the Indians three horses for which we gave a Chiefs Coat
Some Handkerchiefs a Shirt Legins & a fiew arrow points &c. I gave two
of my coats to two of the under Chiefs who appeared not well Satisfied
that the first Chief was dressed so much finer than themselves. at 10
oClock I Set out accompanied by the Indians except 3 the interpreter
and wife, the fore part of the day worm, at 12 oClock it became hasey
with a mist of rain wind hard from the S. W. and Cold which increased
untill night the rain Seased in about two hours. We proceeded on thro a
wide leavel vallie without wood except willows & Srubs for 15 miles and
Encamped at a place the high lands approach within 200 yards in 2
points the River here only 10 yards wide Several Small Streams
branching out on each Side below. all the Indians proceeded on except
the 3 Chiefs & two young men. my hunters killed two Deer which we eate.
The Course from the forks is West 9 miles N. 60° W. 6 miles. The Laid. of
the forks agreeable to observations is 43° 30' 43" North-

[Lewis, August 19, 1805]
Monday August 19th 1805.
This morning I arrose at dylight. and sent out three hunters. some of
the men who were much in want of legings and mockersons I suffered to
dress some skins. the others I employed in repacking the baggage,
making pack saddles &c. we took up the net this morning but caugt no
fish. one beaver was caught in a trap. the frost which perfectly
whitened the grass this morning had a singular appearance to me at this
season. this evening I made a few of the men construct a sein of willow
brush which we hawled and caught a large number of fine trout and a
kind of mullet about 16 Inhes long which I had not seen before. the
scales are small, the nose is long and obtusely pointed and exceedes
the under jaw. the mouth is not large but opens with foalds at the
sides, the colour of it's back and sides is of a bluish brown and
belley white; it has the faggot bones, from which I have supposed it to
be of the mullet kind. the tongue and pallate are smooth and it has no
teeth. it is by no means as good as the trout. the trout are the same
which I first met with at the falls of the Missouri, they are larger
than the speckled trout of our mountains and equally as well flavored.-
The hunters returned this evening with two deer. from what has been
said of the Shoshones it will be readily perceived that they live in a
wretched stait of poverty. yet notwithstanding their extreem poverty
they are not only cheerfull but even gay, fond of gaudy dress and
amusements; like most other Indians they are great egotists and
frequently boast of heroic acts which they never performed. they are
also fond of games of wrisk. they are frank, communicative, fair in
dealing, generous with the little they possess, extreemly honest, and
by no means beggarly. each individual is his own sovereign master, and
acts from the dictates of his own mind; the authority of the Cheif
being nothing more than mere admonition supported by the influence
which the propiety of his own examplery conduct may have acquired him
in the minds of the individuals who compose the band. the title of
cheif is not hereditary, nor can I learn that there is any cerimony of
instalment, or other epoh in the life of a Cheif from which his title
as such can be dated. in fact every man is a chief, but all have not an
equal influence on the minds of the other members of the community, and
he who happens to enjoy the greatest share of confidence is the
principal Chief. The Shoshonees may be estimated at about 100 warriors,
and about three times that number of woomen and children. they have
more children among them than I expected to have seen among a people
who procure subsistence with such difficulty. there are but few very
old persons, nor did they appear to treat those with much tenderness or
rispect. The man is the sole propryetor of his wives and daughters, and
can barter or dispose of either as he thinks proper. a plurality of
wives is common among them, but these are not generally sisters as with
the Minnetares & Mandans but are purchased of different fathers. The
father frequently disposes of his infant daughters in marriage to men
who are grown or to men who have sons for whom they think proper to
provide wives. the compensation given in such cases usually consists of
horses or mules which the father receives at the time of contract and
converts to his own uce. the girl remains with her parents untill she
is conceived to have obtained the age of puberty which with them is
considered to be about the age of 13 or 14 years. the female at this
age is surrendered to her sovereign lord and husband agreeably to
contract, and with her is frequently restored by the father quite as
much as he received in the first instance in payment for his daughter;
but this is discretionary with the father. Sah-car-gar-we-ah had been
thus disposed of before she was taken by the Minnetares, or had arrived
to the years of puberty. the husband was yet living and with this band.
he was more than double her age and had two other wives. he claimed her
as his wife but said that as she had had a child by another man, who
was Charbono, that he did not want her. They seldom correct their
children particularly the boys who soon become masters of their own
acts. they give as a reason that it cows and breaks the Sperit of the
boy to whip him, and that he never recovers his independence of mind
after he is grown. They treat their women but with little rispect, and
compel them to perform every species of drudgery. they collect the wild
fruits and roots, attend to the horses or assist in that duty cook
dreess the skins and make all their apparal, collect wood and make
their fires, arrange and form their lodges, and when they travel pack
the horses and take charge of all the baggage; in short the man dose
little else except attend his horses hunt and fish. the man considers
himself degraded if he is compelled to walk any distance, and if he is
so unfortunately poor as only to possess two horses he rides the best
himself and leavs the woman or women if he has more than one, to
transport their baggage and children on the other, and to walk if the
horse is unable to carry the additional weight of their persons- the
chastity of their women is not held in high estimation, and the husband
will for a trifle barter the companion of his bead for a night or
longer if he conceives the reward adiquate; tho they are not so
importunate that we should caress their women as the siouxs were and
some of their women appear to be held more sacred than in any nation we
have seen I have requested the men to give them no cause of jealousy by
having connection with their women without their knowledge, which with
them strange as it may seem is considered as disgracefull to the
husband as clandestine connections of a similar kind are among
civilized nations. to prevent this mutual exchange of good officies
altogether I know it impossible to effect, particularly on the part of
our young men whom some months abstinence have made very polite to
those tawney damsels. no evil has yet resulted and I hope will not from
these connections.- notwithstanding the late loss of horses which this
people sustained by the Minnetares the stock of the band may be very
safely estimated at seven hundred of which they are perhaps about 40
coalts and half that number of mules.these people are deminutive in
stature, thick ankles, crooked legs, thick flat feet and in short but
illy formed, at least much more so in general than any nation of
Indians I ever saw. their complexion is much that of the Siouxs or
darker than the Minnetares mandands or Shawnees. generally both men and
women wear their hair in a loos lank flow over the sholders and face;
tho I observed some few men who confined their hair in two equal cues
hanging over each ear and drawnn in front of the body. the cue is
formed with throngs of dressed lather or Otterskin aternately crossing
each other. at present most of them have cut short in the neck in
consequence of the loss of their relations by the Minnetares.
Cameahwait has his cut close all over his head. this constitutes their
cerimony of morning for their deceased relations. the dress of the men
consists of a robe long legings, shirt, tippet and Mockersons, that of
the women is also a robe, chemise, and Mockersons; sometimes they make
use of short legings. the ornements of both men and women are very
similar, and consist of several species of sea shells, blue and white
beads, bras and Iron arm bands, plaited cords of the sweet grass, and
collars of leather ornamented with the quills of the porcupine dyed of
various colours among which I observed the red, yellow, blue, and
black. the ear is purforated in the lower part to receive various
ornaments but the nose is not, nor is the ear lasserated or disvigored
for this purpose as among many nations. the men never mark their skins
by birning, cuting, nor puncturing and introducing a colouring matter
as many nations do. there women sometimes puncture a small circle on
their forehead nose or cheeks and thus introduce a black matter usually
soot and grease which leaves an indelible stane. tho this even is by no
means common. their arms offensive and defensive consist in the bow and
arrows sheild, some lances, and a weapon called by the Cippeways who
formerly used it, the pog-gal'-mag-gon'. in fishing they employ wairs,
gigs, and fishing hooks. the salmon is the principal object of their
pursuit. they snair wolves and foxes. I was anxious to learn whether
these people had the venerial, and made the enquiry through the
intrepreter and his wife; the information was that they sometimes had
it but I could not learn their remedy; they most usually die with it's
effects. this seems a strong proof that these disorders bothe
gonaroehah and Louis venerae are native disorders of America. tho these
people have suffered much by the small pox which is known to be
imported and perhaps those other disorders might have been contracted
from other indian tribes who by a round of communication might have
obtained from the Europeans since it was introduced into that quarter
of the globe. but so much detatched on the other had from all
communication with the whites that I think it most probable that those
disorders are original with them. from the middle of May to the firt of
September these people reside on the waters of the Columbia where they
consider themselves in perfect security from their enimies as they have
not as yet ever found their way to this retreat; during this season the
salmon furnish the principal part of their subsistence and as this
firsh either perishes or returns about the 1st of September they are
compelled at this season in surch of subsistence to resort to the
Missouri, in the vallies of which, there is more game even within the
mountains. here they move slowly down the river in order to collect and
join other bands either of their own nation or the Flatheads, and
having become sufficiently strong as they conceive venture on the
Eastern side of the Rockey mountains into the plains, where the
buffaloe abound. but they never leave the interior of the mountains
while they can obtain a scanty subsistence, and always return as soon
as they have acquired a good stock of dryed meat in the plains; when
this stock is consumed they venture again into the plains; thus
alternately obtaining their food at the risk of their lives and
retiring to the mountains, while they consume it.- These people are now
on the eve of their departure for the Missouri, and inform us that they
expect to be joined at or about the three forks by several bands of
their own nation, and a band of the Flatheads. as I am now two busily
engaged to enter at once into a minute discription of the several
articles which compose their dress, impliments of war hunting fishing
&c I shall pursue them at my leasure in the order they have here
occurred to my mind, and have been mentioned. This morning capt. Clark
continued his rout with his party, the Indians accompanying him as
yesterday; he was obliged to feed them. nothing remarkable happened
during the day. he was met by an Indian with two mules on this side of
the dividing ridge at the foot of the mountain, the Indian had the
politeness to offer Capt. C. one of his mules to ride as he was on
foot, which he accepted and gave the fellow a waistcoat as a reward for
his politeness. in the evening he reached the creek on this side of the
Indian camp and halted for the night. his hunters killed nothing today.
The Indians value their mules very highly. a good mule can not be
obtained for less than three and sometimes four horses, and the most
indifferent are rated at two horses. their mules generally are the
finest I ever saw without any comparison.- today I observed time and
distance of sun's and moon's nearest limbs with sextant sun East.

[Clark, August 19, 1805]
August 19th Monday 1805
A verry Cold morning Frost to be Seen we Set out at 7 oClock and
proceeded on thro a wide leavel Vallie the Chief Shew me the place that
a number of his nation was killed about 1 years past this Vallie
Continues 5 miles & then becoms narrow, the beaver has Darned up the
River in maney places we proceeded on up the main branch with a gradial
assent to the head and passed over a low mountain and Decended a Steep
Decent to a butifull Stream, passed over a Second hill of a verry Steep
assent & thro a hilley Countrey for 8 miles an Encamped on a Small
Stream the Indians with us we wer oblige to feed- one man met one with
a mule & Spanish Saddle to ride, I gave him a wistoat a mule is
considered a of great value among those people we proceeded on over a
verry mountanious Countrey across the head of hollows & Springs

[Lewis, August 20, 1805]
Tuesday August 20th 1805.
This morning I sent out the two hunters and employed the ballance of
the party pretty much as yesterday. I walked down the river about - 3/4
of a mile and scelected a place near the river bank unperceived by the
Indians for a cash, which I set three men to make, and directed the
centinel to discharge his gun if he pereceived any of the Indians going
down in that direction which was to be the signal for the men at work
on the cash to desist and seperate, least these people should discover
our deposit and rob us of the baggage we intend leaving here. by
evening the cash was completed unperceived by the Indians, and all our
packages made up. the Pack-saddles and harries is not yet complete. in
this operation we find ourselves at a loss for nails and boards; for
the first we substitute throngs of raw hide which answer verry well,
and for the last to cut off the blades of our oars and use the plank of
some boxes which have heretofore held other articles and put those
articles into sacks of raw hide which I have had made for the purpose.
by this means I have obtained as many boards as will make 20 saddles
which I suppose will be sufficient for our present exegencies. The
Indians with us behave themselves extreemly well; the women have been
busily engaged all day making and mending the mockersons of our party.
In the evening the hunters returned unsuccessfull. Drewyer went in
search of his trap which a beaver had taken off last night; he found
the beaver dead with the trap to his foot about 2 miles below the place
he had set it. this beaver constituted the whole of the game taken
today. the fur of this animal is as good as I ever saw any, and beleive
that they are never out of season on the upper part of the Missouri and
it's branches within the Mountains. Goodrich caught several douzen fine
trout. today. I made up a small assortment of medicines, together with
the specemines of plants, minerals, seeds &c. which, I have collected
betwen this place and the falls of the Missouri which I shall deposit
here. the robe woarn by the Shoshonees is the same in both sexes and is
loosly thrown about their sholders, and the sides at pleasure either
hanging loose or drawn together with the hands, sometimes if the
weather is cold they confine it with a girdel arround the waist; they
are generally about the size of a 21/2 point blanket for grown persons
and reach as low as the middle of the leg. this robe forms a garment in
the day and constitutes their only covering at night. with these people
the robe is formed most commonly of the skins of Antelope, Bighorn, or
deer, dressed with the hair on, tho they prefer the buffaloe when they
can procure them. I have also observed some robes among them of beaver,
moonax, and small wolves. the summer robes of both sexes are also
frequently made of the Elk's skin dressed without the hair. The shirt
of the men is really a commodious and decent garment. it roomy and
reaches nearly half way the thye, there is no collar, the apperture
being sufficiently large to admit the head and is left square at top,
or most frequently, both before and behind terminate in the tails of
the animals of which they are made and which foald outwards being
frequently left entire or somtimes cut into a fring on the edges and
ornimented with the quills of the Porcupine. the sides of the shirt are
sewed deeply fringed, and ornamented in a similar manner from the
bottom upwards, within six or eight inches of the sieve from whence it
is left open as well as the sieve on it's under side to the elbow
nearly. from the elbow the sieve fits the arm tight as low as the wrist
and is not ornimented with a fringe as the sides and under parts of the
sieve are above the elbow. the sholder straps are wide and on them is
generally displayed the taste of the manufacterer in a variety of
figures wrought with the quills of the porcupine of several colours;
beads when they have them are also displayed on this part. the tail of
the shirt is left in the form which the fore legs and neck give it with
the addition of a slight fringe. the hair is usually left on the tail,
& near the hoofs of the animal; part of the hoof is also retained to
the skin and is split into a fring by way of orniment. these shirts are
generally made of deer's Antelope's, Bighorn's, or Elk's skins dressed
without the hair. the Elk skin is less used for this purpose than
either of the others. their only thread used on this or any other
occasion is the sinews taken from the back and loins of the deer Elk
buffaloe &c. Their legings are most usually formed of the skins of the
Antelope dressed without the hair. in the men they are very long and
full each leging being formed of a skin nearly entire. the legs, tail
and neck are also left on these, and the tail woarn upwards; and the
neck deeply fringed and ornimented with porcupine qulls drags or trails
on the ground behind the heel. the skin is sewn in such manner as to
fit the leg and thye closely; the upper part being left open a
sufficient distance to permit the legs of the skin to be dran
underneath a girdle both before and behind, and the wide part of the
skin to cover the buttock and lap before in such manner that the
breechcloth is unnecessary. they are much more decent in concealing
those parts than any nation on the Missouri the sides of the legings
are also deeply fringed and ornimented. sometimes this part is
ornimented with little fassicles of the hair of an enimy whom they have
slain in battle. The tippet of the Snake Indians is the most eligant
peice of Indian dress I ever saw, the neck or collar of this is formed
of a strip of dressed Otter skin with the fur. it is about four or five
inches wide and is cut out of the back of the skin the nose and eyes
forming one extremity and the tail the other. begining a little behind
the ear of the animal at one edge of this collar and proceeding towards
the tail, they attatch from one to two hundred and fifty little roles
of Ermin skin formed in the following manner. the skin is first dressed
with the fur on it and a narrow strip is cut out of the back of the
skin reaching from the nose and imbracing the tail. this is sewed
arround a small cord of the silk-grass twisted for the purpose and
regularly tapering in such manner as to give it ajust proportion to the
tail which is to form the lower extremity of the stran. thus arranged
they are confined at the upper point in little bundles of two-three, or
more as the disign may be to make them more full; these are then
attatched to the collars as before mentioned, and to conceal the
connection of this part which would otherwise have a course appearance
they attatch a broad fringe of the Ermin skin to the collar overlaying
that part. little bundles of fine fringe of the same materials is
fastened to the extremity of the tails in order to shew their black
extremities to greater advantage. the center of the otterskin collar is
also ornamented with the shells of the perl oister. the collar is
confined arond the neck and the little roles of Ermin skin about the
size of a large quill covers the solders and body nearly to the waist
and has the appearance of a short cloak and is really handsome. these
they esteem very highly, and give or dispose of only on important
occasions. the ermin whic is known to the traiders of the N. W. by the
name of the white weasel is the genuine ermine, and might no doubt be
turned to great advantage by those people if they would encourage the
Indians to take them. they are no doubt extreemly plenty and readily
taken, from the number of these tippets which I have seen among these
people and the great number of skins employed in the construction of
each timppet. scarcely any of them have employed less than one hundred
of these skins in their formation.- This morning Capt. Clark set out at
6 in the morning and soon after arrived near their camp they having
removed about 2 miles higher up the river than the camp at which they
were when I first visited them. the chief requested a halt, which was
complyed with, and a number of the indians came out from the village
and joined them after smoking a few pipes with them they all proceeded
to the village where Capt C. was conducted to a large lodge prepared in
the center of the encampment for himself and party. here they gave him
one salmon and some cakes of dryed berries. he now repeated to them
what had been said to them in council at this place which was repeated
to the village by the Cheif. when he had concluded this address he
requested a guide to accompany him down the river and an elderly man
was pointed out by the Cheif who consented to undertake this task. this
was the old man of whom Cameahwait had spoken as a person well
acquainted with the country to the North of this river. Capt. C.
encouraged the Indians to come over with their horses and assist me
over with the baggage. he distrubuted some presents among the Indians.
about half the men of the village turned out to hunt the antelope but
were unsuccessfull. at 3 P.M. Capt. Clark departed, accompanyed by his
guide and party except one man whom he left with orders to purchase a
horse if possible and overtake him as soon as he could. he left
Charbono and the indian woman to return to my camp with the Indians. he
passed the river about four miles below the Indians, and encamped on a
small branch, eight miles distant. on his way he met a rispectable
looking indian who returned and continued with him all night; this
indian gave them three salmon. Capt. C. killed a cock of the plains or
mountain cock. it was of a dark brown colour with a long and pointed
tail larger than the dunghill fowl and had a fleshey protuberant
substance about the base of the upper chap, something like that of the
turkey tho without the snout.

[Clark, August 20, 1805]
August 20th Tuesday 1805
Set out at half past 6 oClock and proceeded on (met maney parties of
Indians) thro a hilley Countrey to the Camp of the Indians on a branch
of the Columbia River, before we entered this Camp a Serimonious hault
was requested by the Chief and I Smoked with all that Came around for
Several pipes, we then proceeded on to the Camp & I was introduced into
the only Lodge they had which was pitched in the Center for my party
all the other Lodges made of bushes, after a fiew Indian Seremonies I
informed the Indians the object of our journey our good intentions
towards them my consern for their distressed Situation, what we had
done for them in makeing a piece with the Minitarras Mandans Rickara
&c. for them-. and requested them all to take over their horses &
assist Capt Leiwis across &c. also informing them the oject of my
journey down the river and requested a guide to accompany me, all of
which was repeited by the Chief to the whole village.

Those pore people Could only raise a Sammon & a little dried Choke
Cherris for us half the men of the tribe with the Chief turned out to
hunt the antilopes, at 3 oClock after giveing a fiew Small articles as
presents I set out accompanied by an old man as a Guide (I endevered to
procure as much information from thos people as possible without much
Suckcess they being but little acquainted or effecting to be So-) I lef
one man to purchase a horse and overtake me and proceeded on thro a
wide rich bottom on a beaten Roade 8 miles Crossed the river and
encamped on a Small run, this evening passed a number of old lodges,
and met a number of men women children & horses, met a man who appeared
of Some Consideration who turned back with us, he halted a woman & gave
us 3 Small Sammon, this man continued with me all night and partook of
what I had which was a little Pork verry Salt. Those Indians are verry
attentive to Strangers &c. I left our interpreter & his woman to
accompany the Indians to Capt Lewis tomorrow the Day they informed me
they would Set out I killed a Pheasent at the Indian Camp larger than a
dungal fowl with feshey protuberances about the head like a turkey.
Frost last night

[Lewis, August 21, 1805]
Wednesday August 21st 1805.
This morning was very cold. the ice 1/4 of an inch thick on the water
which stood in the vessels exposed to the air. some wet deerskins that
had been spread the grass last evening are stiffly frozen. the ink
feizes in my pen. the bottoms are perfectly covered with frost insomuch
that they appear to be covered with snow. This morning early I
dispatched two hunters to kill some meat if possible before the Indians
arrive; Drewyer I sent with the horse into the cove for that purpose.
The party pursued their several occupations as yesterday. by evening I
had all the baggage, saddles, and harness completely ready for a march.
after dark, I made the men take the baggage to the cash and deposit it.
I beleve we have been unperceived by the Indians in this movement.
notwithstanding the coldness of the last night the day has proved
excessively warm. neither of the hunters returned this evening and I
was obliged to issue pork and corn. The mockersons of both sexes are
usually the same and are made of deer Elk or buffaloe skin dressed
without the hair. sometimes in the winter they make them of buffaloe
skin dressed with the hair on and turn the hair inwards as the Mandans
Minetares and most of the nations do who inhabit the buffaloe country.
the mockerson is formed with one seem on the outer edge of the foot is
cut open at the instep to admit the foot and sewed up behind. in this
rispect they are the same with the Mandans. they sometimes ornament
their mockersons with various figures wrought with the quills of the
Porcupine. some of the dressey young men orniment the tops of their
mockersons with the skins of polecats and trale the tail of that animal
on the ground at their heels as they walk.the robe of the woman is
generally smaller than that of the man but is woarn in the same manner
over the sholders. the Chemise is roomy and comes down below the middle
of the leg the upper part of this garment is formed much like the shirt
of the men except the sholder strap which is never used with the
Chemise. in women who give suck, they are left open at the sides nearly
as low as the waist, in others, close as high as the sleeve. the sleeve
underneath as low as the elbow is open, that part being left very full.
the sides tail and upper part of the sleeves are deeply fringed and
sometimes ornimented in a similar manner with the shirts of the men
with the addition of little patches of red cloth about the tail edged
around with beads. the breast is usually ornament with various figures
of party colours rought with the quills of the Porcupine. it is on this
part of the garment that they appear to exert their greatest ingenuity.
a girdle of dressed leather confines the Chemise around the waist. when
either the man or woman wish to disengage their arm from the sleeve
they draw it out by means of the opening underneath the arm an throw
the sleeve behind the body. the legings of the women reach as high as
the knee and are confined with a garter below. the mockerson covers and
confins it's lower extremity. they are neither fringed nor ornamented.
these legings are made of the skins of the antelope and the Chemise
usually of those of the large deer Bighorn and the smallest elk.- They
seldom wear the beads they possess about their necks at least I have
never seen a grown person of either sex wear them on this part; some
their children are seen with them in this way. the men and women were
them suspen from the ear in little bunches or intermixed with
triangular peices of the shells of the perl oister. the men also were
them attached in a similar manner to the hare of the fore part of the
crown of the head; to which they sometimes make the addition of the
wings and tails of birds. the nose in neither sex is pierced nor do
they wear any ornament in it. they have a variety of small sea shells
of which they form collars woarn indiscriminately by both sexes. these
as well as the shell of the perl oister they value very highly and
inform us that they obtain them from their friends and relations who
live beyond the barren plain towards the Ocean in a S. Westerly
direction. these friends of theirs they say inhabit a good country
abounding with Elk, deer, bear, and Antelope, and possess a much
greater number of horses and mules than they do themselves; or using
their own figure that their horses and mules are as numerous as the
grass of the plains. the warriors or such as esteem themselves brave
men wear collars made of the claws of the brown bear which are also
esteemed of great value and are preserved with great care. these claws
are ornamented with beads about the thick end near which they are
peirced through their sides and strung on a throng of dressed leather
and tyed about the neck commonly with the upper edge of the tallon next
the breast or neck but sometimes are reversed. it is esteemed by them
an act of equal celebrity the killing one of these bear or an enimy,
and with the means they have of killing this animal it must really be a
serious undertaking. the sweet sented grass which grows very abundant
on this river is either twisted or plaited and woarn around the neck in
ether sex, but most commonly by the men. they have a collar also woarn
by either sex. it generally round and about the size of a man's finger;
formed of leather or silk-grass twisted or firmly rolled and covered
with the quills of the porcupine of different colours. the tusks of the
Elk are pierced strung on a throng and woarn as an orniment for the
neck, and is most generally woarn by the women and children. the men
frequently wear the skin of a fox or a broad strip of that of the otter
around the forehead and head in form of a bando. they are also fond of
the feathers of the tail of the beautifull eagle or callumet birds with
which they ornament their own hair and the tails and mains of their
horses. The dress of these people is quite as desent and convenient as
that of any nation of Indians I ever saw.

This morning early Capt. C. resumed his march; at the distance of five
miles he arrived at some brush lodges of the Shoshones inhabited by
about seven families here he halted and was very friendly received by
these people, who gave himself and party as much boiled salmon as they
could eat; they also gave him several dryed salmon and a considerable
quantity of dryed chokecherries. after smoking with them he visited
their fish wear which was abut 200 yds. distant. he found the wear
extended across four channels of the river which was here divided by
three small islands. three of these channels were narrow, and were
stoped by means of trees fallen across, supported by which stakes of
willow were driven down sufficiently near each other to prevent the
salmon from passing. about the center of each a cilindric basket of
eighteen or 20 feet in length terminating in a conic shape at it's
lower extremity, formed of willows, was opposed to a small apperture in
the wear with it's mouth up stream to receive the fish. the main
channel of the water was conducted to this basket, which was so narrow
at it's lower extremity that the fish when once in could not turn
itself about, and were taken out by untying the small ends of the
longitudinal willows, which frormed the hull of the basket. the wear in
the main channel was somewhat differently contrived. there were two
distinct wears formed of poles and willow sticks, quite across the
river, at no great distance from each other. each of these, were
furnished with two baskets; the one wear to take them ascending and the
other in decending. in constructing these wears, poles were first tyed
together in parcels of three near the smaller extremity; these were set
on end, and spread in a triangular form at the base, in such manner,
that two of the three poles ranged in the direction of the intended
work, and the third down the stream. two ranges of horizontal poles
were next lashed with willow bark and wythes to the ranging poles, and
on these willow sticks were placed perpendicularly, reaching from the
bottom of the river to about 3 or four feet above it's surface; and
placed so near each other, as not to permit the passage of the fish,
and even so thick in some parts, as with the help of gravel and stone
to give a direction to the water which they wished.- the baskets were
the same in form of the others. this is the form of the work, and
disposition of the baskets.

After examining the wears Capt. C. returned to the lodges, and shortly
continued his rout and passed the river to the Lard. side a little
distance below the wears. he sent Collins with an Indian down the Lard.
side of the river to the forks 5 me. in surch of Cruzatte who was left
at the upper camp yesterday to purchase a horse and had followed on
today and passed them by another road while they were at the lodges and
had gone on to the forks. while Capt. Clark was at these lodges an
Indian brought him a tomehawk which he said he found in the grass near
the lodge where I had staid at the upper camp when I was first with his
nation the tommahawk was Drewyer's he missed it in the morning before
we had set out and surched for it but it was not to be found I beleive
the young fellow stole it, but if he did it is the only article they
have pilfered and this was now returned. Capt. C. after traveling about
20 miles through the valley with the course of the river nearly N. W.
encamped on the Stard. side in a small bottom under a high Clift of
rocks. on his way one of the party killed a very large Salmon in a
creek which they passed at the distance of 14 ms. he was joined this
evening by Cruzatte and Collins who brought with them five fresh salmon
which had been given them by the Indians at the forks. the forks of
this river is famous as a gig fishery and is much resorted by the
natives.- They killed one deer today. The Guide apeared to be a very
friendly intelligent old man, Capt. C. is much pleased with him.

[Clark, August 21, 1805]
August 21st Wednesday 1805
Frost last night proceeded on with the Indians I met about 5 miles to
there Camp, I entered a lodge and after Smokeing with all who Came
about me I went to See the place those people take the fish, a wear
across the Creek in which there is Stuk baskets Set in different
derections So as to take the fish either decending or assending on my
return to the Camp which was 200 yards only the different lodges (which
is only bushes) brought in to the lodge I was introduced into, Sammon
boiled, and dried Choke Chers. Sufficent for all my party.- one man
brought me a tomahawk which we expected they had Stolen from a man of
Capt Lewis's party, this man informed me he found the tomk in the grass
near the place the man Slept. Crossed the River and went over a point
of high land & Struck it again near a Bluff on the right Side the man I
left to get a horse at the upper Camp missed me & went to the forks
which is about five miles below the last Camp.

I sent one man by the forks with derections to join me to night with
the one now at that place, those two men joined me at my Camp on the
right Side below the 1st Clift with 5 Sammon which the Indians gave
them at the forks, the place they gig fish at this Season. Their method
of takeing fish with a gig or bone is with a long pole, about a foot
from one End is a Strong String attached to the pole, this String is a
little more than a foot long and is tied to the middle of a bone from 4
to 6 inches long, one end Sharp the other with a whole to fasten on the
end of the pole with a beard to the large end, the fasten this bone on
one end & with the other, feel for the fish & turn and Strike them So
hard that the bone passes through and Catches on the opposit Side,
Slips off the End of the pole and holds the Center of the bone Those
Indians are mild in their disposition appear Sincere in their
friendship, punctial, and decided. kind with what they have, to Spare.
They are excessive pore, nothing but horses there Enemies which are
noumerous on account of there horses & Defenceless Situation, have
Deprived them of tents and all the Small Conveniances of life. They
have only a few indifferent Knives, no ax, make use of Elk's horn
Sharpened to Spit ther wood, no clothes except a Short Legins & robes
of different animals, Beaver, Bear, Buffalow, wolf Panthor, Ibex, Sheep
Deer, but most commonly the antilope Skins which they ware loosely
about them- Their ornements are Orter Skin dcurated with See Shells &
the Skins & tales of the white weasel, Sea Shels of different size hung
to their Ears hair and breast of their Shirts, beeds of Shells platted
grass, and Small Strings of otter Skin dressed, they are fond of our
trinkets, and give us those ornements as the most valueable of their
possession. The women are held Sacred and appear to have an equal Shere
in all Conversation, which is not the Case in any othe nation I have
Seen. their boeys & Girls are also admited to Speak except in Councils,
the women doe all the drugery except fishing and takeing care of the
horses, which the men apr. to take upon themselves.- The men ware the
hair loose flowing over ther Sholders & face the women Cut Short,
orniments of the back bones of fish Strung plated grass grains of Corn
Strung Feathers and orniments of Birds Claws of the Bear encurcling
their necks the most Sacred of all the orniments of this nation is the
Sea Shells of various Sizes and Shapes and colours, of the bassterd
perl kind, which they inform us they get from the Indians to the South
on the other Side of a large fork of this river in passing to which
they have to pass thro Sandy & barron open plains without water to
which place they can travel in 15 or 20 days- The men who passed by the
forks informed me that the S W. fork was double the Size of the one I
came down, and I observed that it was a handsom river at my camp I
shall injustice to Capt Lewis who was the first white man ever on this
fork of the Columbia Call this Louis's river. one Deer killed this
morning, and a Sammon in the last Creek 21/2 feet long The Westerley
fork of the Columbia River is double the Size of the Easterley fork &
below those forks the river is about the Size Jeffersons River near its
mouth or 100 yards wide, it is verry rapid & Sholey water Clear but
little timber. This Clift is of a redish brown Colour the rocks which
fall from it is a dark brown flint tinged with that Colour. Some
Gullies of white Sand Stone and Sand fine & as white as Snow. The
mountains on each Side are high, and those on the East ruged & Contain
a fiew Scattering pine, those on the West contain pine on ther tops &
high up the hollows- The bottoms of this is wide & rich from some
distance above the place I struck the East fork they are also wide on
the East Passed a large Creek which fall in on the right Side 6 miles
below the forks a road passes up this Creek & to the Missouri.

[Lewis, August 22, 1805]
Thursday August 22ed 1805
This morning early I sent a couple of men to complete the covering of
the cash which could not be done well last night in the dark, they soon
accomplished their work and returned. late last night Drewyer returned
with a fawn he had killed and a considerable quantity of Indian
plunder. the anecdote with rispect to the latter is perhaps worthy of
relation. he informed me that while hunting in the Cove yesterday about
12 OCk. he came suddonly upon an Indian Camp, at which there were a
young man an Old man a boy and three women, that they seemed but little
supprised at seeing him and he rode up to them and dismounted turning
horse out to graize. these people had just finished their repast on
some roots, he entered into conversation with them by signs, and after
about 20 minutes one of the women spoke to the others of the party and
they all went immediately and collected their horses brought them to
camp and saddled them at this moment he thought he would also set out
and continue his hunt, and accorgingly walked to catch his horse at
some little distance and neglected to take up his gun which, he left at
camp. the Indians perceiving him at the distance of fifty paces
immediately mounted their horses, the young man took the gun and the
whole of them left their baggage and laid whip to their horses
directing their course to the pass of the mountains. finding himself
deprived of his gun he immediately mounted his horse and pursued; after
runing them about 10 miles the horses of two of the women nearly gave
out and the young fellow with the gun from their frequent crys
slackened his pace and being on a very fleet horse road around the
women at a little distance at length Drewer overtook the women and by
signs convinced them that he did not wish to hirt them they then halted
and the young fellow approached still nearer, he asked him for his gun
but the only part of the answer which he could understand was pah kee
which he knew to be the name by which they called their enimies.
watching his opportunity when the fellow was off his guard he suddonly
rode along side of him seized his gun and wrest her out of his hands.
the fellow finding Drewyer too strong for him and discovering that he
must yeald the gun had pesents of mind to open the pan and cast the
priming before he let the gun escape from his hands; now finding
himself devested of the gun he turned his horse about and laid whip
leaving the women to follow him as well as they could. Drewyer now
returned to the place they had left their baggage and brought it with
him to my camp. it consisted of several dressed and undressed skins; a
couple of bags wove with the fingers of the bark of the silk-grass
containing each about a bushel of dryed service berries some checherry
cakes and about a bushel of roots of three different kinds dryed and
prepared for uce which were foalded in as many parchment hides of
buffaloe. some flint and the instrument of bone for manufactureing the
flint into arrow points. some of this flint was as transparent as the
common black glass and much of the same colour easily broken, and
flaked off much like glass leaving a very sharp edge. one speceis of
the roots were fusiform abot six inches long and about the size of a
man's finger at the larger end tapering to a small point. the radicles
larger than in most fusiform roots. the rind was white and thin. the
body or consistence of the root was white mealy and easily reduced by
pounding to a substance resembleing flour which thickens with boiling
water something like flour and is agreeably flavored. this rout is
frequently eaten by the Indians either green or in it's dryed state
without the preparation of boiling. another speceis was much mutilated
but appeared to be fibrous; the parts were brittle, hard of the size of
a small quill, cilindric and as white as snow throughout, except some
small parts of the hard black rind which they had not seperated in the
preperation. this the Indians with me informed were always boiled for
use. I made the exprement, found that they became perfectly soft by
boiling, but had a very bitter taste, which was naucious to my pallate,
and I transfered them to the Indians who had eat them heartily. a third
speceis were about the size of a nutmeg, and of an irregularly rounded
form, something like the smallest of the Jerusalem artichoke, which
they also resemble in every other appearance. they had become very hard
by being dryed these I also boiled agreeably to the instruction of the
Indians and found them very agreeable. they resemble the Jerusalem
Artichoke very much in their flavor and I thought them preferable,
however there is some allowance to be made for the length of time I
have now been without vegitable food to which I was always much
attatched. these are certainly the best root I have yet seen in uce
among the Indians. I asked the Indians to shew me the plant of which
these roots formed a part but they informed me that neither of them
grew near this place. I had set most of the men at work today to dress
the deerskin belonging to those who had gone on command with Capt.
Clark. at 11 A.M. Charbono the Indian Woman, Cameahwait and about 50
men with a number of women and children arrived. they encamped near us.
after they had turned out their horses and arranged their camp I called
the Cheifs and warriors together and addressed them a second time; gave
them some further presents, particularly the second and third Cheifs
who it appeared had agreeably to their promise exerted themselves in my
favour. having no fresh meat and these poor devils half starved I had
previously prepared a good meal for them all of boiled corn and beans
which I gave them as soon as the council was over and I had distributed
the presents. this was thankfully received by them. the Chief wished
that his nation could live in a country where they could provide such
food. I told him that it would not be many years before the whitemen
would put it in the power of his nation to live in the country below
the mountains where they might cultivate corn beans and squashes. he
appeared much pleased with the information. I gave him a few dryed
squashes which we had brought from the Mandans he had them boiled and
declared them to be the best thing he had ever tasted except sugar, a
small lump of which it seems his sister Sah-cah-gar Wea had given him.
late in the evening I made the men form a bush drag, and with it in
about 2 hours they caught 528 very good fish, most of them large trout.
among them I now for the first time saw ten or a douzen of a whte
speceis of trout. they are of a silvery colour except on the back and
head, where they are of a bluish cast. the scales are much larger than
the speckled trout, but in their form position of their fins teeth
mouth &c they are precisely like them they are not generally quite as
large but equally well flavored. I distributed much the greater portion
of the fish among the Indians. I purchased five good horses of them
very reasonably, or at least for about the value of six dollars a peice
in merchandize. the Indians are very orderly and do not croud about our
camp nor attempt to disterb any article they see lying about. they
borrow knives kettles &c from the men and always carefully return them.
Capt. Clark says, "we set out early and passed a small creek at one
mile, also the points of four mountains which were high steep and
rocky. the mountains are so steep that it is almost incredible to
mention that horses had passed them. our road in many places lay over
the sharp fragments of rocks which had fallen from the mountains and
lay in confused heaps for miles together; yet notwithstanding our
horsed traveled barefoot over them as fast as we could and did not
detain us. passed two bold runing streams, and arrived at the entrance
of a small river" where some Indian families resided. they had some
scaffoalds of fish and burries exposed to dry. they were not acquainted
with the circumstance of any whitemen being in their country and were
therefore much allarmed on our approach several of the women and
children fled in the woods for shelter. the guide was behind and the
wood thick in which their lodges were situated we came on them before
they had the least notice of us. those who remained offered us every
thing they had, which was but little; they offered us collars of elks
tusks which their children woar Salmon beries &c. we eat some of their
fish and buries but returned them the other articles they had offered
with a present of some small articles which seemed to add much to their
pacification.

The guide who had by this time arrived explained to them who we were
and our object in visiting them; but still there were some of the women
and Children inconsoleable, they continued to cry during our stay,
which was about an hour. a road passes up this river which my guide
informed me led over the mountains to the Missouri. from this place I
continued my rout along the steep side of a mountain for about 3 miles
and arrived at the river near a small Island on the lower point of
which we encamped in the evening we attempted to gig fish but were
unsuccessfull only obtaining one small salmon. in the course of the day
we had passed several women and children geathering burries who were
very liberal in bestoing us a part of their collections. the river is
very rapid and shoaly; many rocks lie in various derections scattered
throughout it's bed. There are some few small pine scattered through
the bottoms, of which I only saw one which appeared as if it would
answer for a canoe and that was but small. the tops of the mountains on
the Lard. side are covered with pine and some also scattered on the
sides of all the mountains. I saw today a speceis of woodpecker, which
fed on the seeds of the pine. it's beak and tail were white, it's wings
were black, and every other part of a dark brown. it was about the size
of a robin-

[Clark, August 22, 1805]
August 22d Thursday 1805
We Set out early passed a Small Creek on the right at 1 mile and the
points of four mountains verry Steap high & rockey, the assent of three
was So Steap that it is incrediable to describe the rocks in maney
places loose & Sliped from those mountains and is a bed of rugid loose
white and dark brown loose rock for miles. the Indian horses pass over
those Clifts hills Sids & rocks as fast as a man, the three horses with
me do not detain me any on account of those dificuelties, passed two
bold rung. Streams on the right and a Small river at the mouth of Which
Several families of Indians were encamped and had Several Scaffolds of
fish & buries drying we allarmed them verry much as they knew nothing
of a white man being in their Countrey, and at the time we approached
their lodges which was in a thick place of bushes-my guiedes were
behind.- They offered every thing they possessed (which was verry
littl) to us, Some run off and hid in the bushes The first offer of
theirs were Elks tuskes from around their Childrens necks, Sammon &c.
my guide attempted passifyed those people and they Set before me
berres, & fish to eate, I gave a fiew Small articles to those fritened
people which added verry much to their pasification but not entirely as
Some of the women & Childn. Cried dureing my Stay of an hour at this
place, I proceeded on the Side of a verry Steep & rockey mountain for 3
miles and Encamped on the lower pt. of an Island. we attempted to gig
fish without Suckcess. caught but one Small one.The last Creek or Small
river is on the right Side and "a road passes up it & over to the
Missouri" in this day passed Several womin and Children gathering and
drying buries of which they were very kind and gave us a part. the
river rapid and Sholey maney Stones Scattered through it in different
directions. I Saw to day Bird of the wood pecker kind which fed on Pine
burs its Bill and tale white the wings black every other part of a
light brown, and about the Size of a robin. Some fiew Pine Scattered in
the bottoms & Sides of the Mountains (the Top of the Motn. to the left
Covered & inaxcessable) I Saw one which would make a Small Canoe.

[Lewis, August 23, 1805]
Friday August 23rd 1805.
This morning I arrose very early and despatched two hunters on
horseback with orders to extend their hunt to a greater distance up the
S. E. fork than they had done heretofore, in order if possible to
obtain some meet for ourselves as well as the Indians who appeared to
depend on us for food and our store of provision is growing too low to
indulge them with much more corn or flour. I wished to have set out
this morning but the cheef requested that I would wait untill another
party of his nation arrived which he expected today, to this I
consented from necessity, and therefore sent out the hunters as I have
mentioned. I also laid up the canoes this morning in a pond near the
forks; sunk them in the water and weighted them down with stone, after
taking out the plugs of the gage holes in their bottoms; hoping by this
means to guard against both the effects of high water, and that of the
fire which is frequently kindled in these plains by the natives. the
Indians have promised to do them no intentional injury and beleive they
are too lazy at any rate to give themselves the trouble to raise them
from their present situation in order to cut or birn them. I reminded
the chief of the low state of our stores of provision and advised him
to send his young men to hunt, which he immediately recommended to them
and most of them turned out. I wished to have purchased some more
horses of them but they objected against disposing of any more of them
untill we reach their camp beyond the mountains. the Indians pursued a
mule buck near our camp I saw this chase for about 4 miles it was
really entertaining, there were about twelve of them in pursuit of it
on horseback, they finally rode it down and killed it. the all came in
about 1 P.M. having killed 2 mule deer and three goats. this mule buck
was the largest deer of any kind I had ever seen. it was nearly as
large as a doe Elk. I observed that there was but little division or
distribution of the meat they had taken among themselves. some familes
had a large stock and others none. this is not customary among the
nations of Indians with whom I have hitherto been acquainted I asked
Cameahwait the reason why the hunters did not divide the meat among
themselves; he said that meat was so scarce with them that the men who
killed it reserved it for themselves and their own families. my hunters
arrived about 2 in the evening with two mule deer and three common
deer. I distributed three of the deer among those families who appeared
to have nothing to eat. at three P.M. the expected party of Indians
arrived, about 50 men women and Children. I now learnt that most of
them were thus far on their way down the valley towards the buffaloe
country, and observed that there was a good deel of anxiety on the part
of some of those who had promised to assist me over the mountains to
accompany this party, I felt some uneasiness on this subject but as
they still said they would return with me as they had promised I said
nothing to them but resolved to set out in the morning as early as
possible. I dispatched two hunters this evening into the cove to hunt
and leave the meat they might kill on the rout we shall pass tomorrow.

The metal which we found in possession of these people consited of a
few indifferent knives, a few brass kettles some arm bands of iron and
brass, a few buttons, woarn as ornaments in their hair, a spear or two
of a foot in length and some iron and brass arrow points which they
informed me they obtained in exchange for horses from the Crow or Rocky
Mountain Indians on the yellowstone River. the bridlebits and stirrips
they obtained from the Spaniards, tho these were but few. many of them
made use of flint for knives, and with this instrument, skined the
animals they killed, dressed their fish and made their arrows; in short
they used it for every purpose to which the knife is applyed. this
flint is of no regular form, and if they can only obtain a part of it,
an inch or two in length that will cut they are satisfyed, they renew
the edge by fleaking off the flint by means of the point of an Elk's or
deer's horn. with the point of a deer or Elk's horn they also form
their arrow points of the flint, with a quickness and neatness that is
really astonishing. we found no axes nor hatchets among them; what wood
they cut was done either with stone or Elk's horn. the latter they use
always to rive or split their wood. their culinary eutensils exclusive
of the brass kettle before mentioned consist of pots in the form of
ajar made either of earth, or of a white soft stone which becomes black
and very hard by birning, and is found in the hills near the three
forks of the Missouri betwen Madison's and Gallitin's rivers they have
also spoons made of the Buffaloe's horn and those of the Bighorn. Their
bows are made of ceader or pine and have nothing remarkable about them.
the back of the bow is covered with sinues and glue and is about 21/2
feet long. much the shape of those used by the Siouxs Mandans
Minnetares &c. their arrows are more slender generally than those used
by the nations just mentioned but much the same in construction. Their
Sheild is formed of buffaloe hide, perfectly arrow proof, and is a
circle of 2 feet 4 I. or 2 F. 6 I. in diameter. this is frequently
painted with varios figures and ornamented around the edges with
feather and a fringe of dressed leather. they sometimes make bows of
the Elk's horn and those also of the bighorn. those of the Elk's horn
are made of a single peice and covered on the back with glue and sinues
like those made of wood, and are frequently ornamented with a stran
wrought porcupine quills and sinues raped around them for some distance
at both extremities. the bows of the bighorn are formed of small peices
laid flat and cemented with gleue, and rolled with sinews, after which,
they are also covered on the back with sinews and glew, and highly
ornamented as they are much prized. forming the sheild is a cerimony of
great importance among them, this implement would in their minds be
devested of much of its protecting power were it not inspired with
those virtues by their old men and jugglers. their method of preparing
it is thus, an entire skin of a bull buffaloe two years old is first
provided; a feast is next prepared and all the warriors old men and
jugglers invited to partake. a hole is sunk in the ground about the
same in diameter with the intended sheild and about 18 inches deep. a
parcel of stones are now made red hot and thrown into the hole water is
next thrown in and the hot stones cause it to emit a very strong hot
steem, over this they spread the green skin which must not have been
suffered to dry after taken off the beast. the flesh side is laid next
to the groround and as many of the workmen as can reach it take hold on
it's edges and extend it in every direction. as the skin becomes
heated, the hair seperates and is taken of with the fingers, and the
skin continues to contract untill the whoe is drawn within the compas
designed for the shield, it is then taken off and laid on a parchment
hide where they pound it with their heels when barefoot. this operation
of pounding continues for several days or as long as the feast lasts
when it is delivered to the propryeter and declared by the jugglers and
old men to be a sufficient defence against the arrows of their enimies
or even bullets if feast has been a satisfactory one. many of them
beleive implisitly that a ball cannot penitrate their sheilds, in
consequence of certain supernaural powers with which they have been
inspired by their jugglers.- The Poggamoggon is an instrument with a
handle of wood covered with dressed leather about the size of a whip
handle and 22 inches long; a round stone of 2 pounds weight is also
covered with leather and strongly united to the leather of the handle
by a throng of 2 inches long; a loop of leather united to the handle
passes arond the wrist. a very heavy blow may be given with this
instrument. They have also a kind of armor which they form with many
foalds of dressed Atelope's skin, unite with glue and sand. with this
they cover their own bodies and those of their horses. these are
sufficient against the effects of the arrow.- the quiver which contains
their arrows and implements for making fire is formed of various skins.
that of the Otter seems to be prefered. they are but narrow, of a
length sufficent to protect the arrow from the weather, and are woarn
on the back by means of a strap which passes over the left sholder and
under the wright arm.their impliments for making fire is nothing more
than a blunt arrow and a peice of well seasoned soft spongey wood such
as the willow or cottonwood. the point of this arrow they apply to this
dry stick so near one edge of it that the particles of wood which are
seperated from it by the friction of the arrow falls down by it's side
in a little pile. the arrow is held between the palms of the hand with
the fingers extended, and being pressed as much as possible against the
peice is briskly rolled between the palms of the hands backwards and
forwards by pressing the arrow downwards the hands of course in rolling
arrow also decend; they bring them back with a quick motion and repeat
the operation till the dust by the friction takes fire; the peice and
arrow are then removed and some dry grass or Boated wood is added. it
astonished me to see in what little time these people would kindle fire
in this way. in less than a minute they will produce fire.

Capt. Clark set out this morning very early and poroceeded but slowly
in consequence of the difficulty of his road which lay along the steep
side of a mountain over large irregular and broken masses of rocks
which had tumbled from the upper part of the mountain. it was with much
wrisk and pain that the horses could get on. at the distance of four
miles he arrived at the river and the rocks were here so steep and
juted into the river such manner that there was no other alternative
but passing through the river, this he attempted with success tho water
was so deep for a short distance as to swim the horses and was very
rapid; he continued his rout one mile along the edge of the river under
this steep Clift to a little bottom, below which the whole current of
the river beat against the Stard. shore on which he was, and which was
formed of a solid rock perfectly inaccessible to horses. here also the
little track which he had been pursuing, terminated. he therefore
determined to leave the horses and the majority of the party here and
with his guide and three men to continue his rout down the river still
further, in order more fully to satisfy himself as to it's
practicability. accordingly he directed the men to hunt and fish at
this place untill his return. they had not killed anything today but
one goose, and the ballance of the little provision they had brought
with them, as well as the five salmon they had procured yesterday were
consumed last evening; there was of tours no inducement for his halting
any time, at this place; after a few minutes he continued his rout
clambering over immence rocks and along the sides of lofty precepices
on the border of the river to the distance of 12 miles, at which place
a large creek discharged itself on the Norh side 12 yds. wide and deep.
a short distance above the entrance of this creek there is a narrow
bottom which is the first that he had found on the river from that in
which he left the horses and party. a plain indian road led up this
creek which the guide informed him led to a large river that ran to the
North, and was frequented by another nation who occasionally visited
this river for the purpose of taking fish. at this place he saw some
late appearance of Indians having been encamped and the tracks of a
number of horses. Capt. C. halted here about 2 hours, caught some small
fish, on which, with the addition of some berries, they dined. the
river from the place at which he left the party to his present station
was one continued rapid, in which there were five shoals neither of
which could be passed with loaded canoes nor even run with empty ones.
at those several places therefore it would be necessary to unload and
transport the baggage for a considerable distance over steep and almost
inacassable rocks where there was no possibility of employing horses
for the releif of the men; the canoes would next have to be let down by
cords and even with this precaution Capt. C. conceived there would be
much wriske of both canoes and men. at one of those shoals the lofty
perpendicular rocks which from the bases of the mountains approach the
river so nearly on each side, as to prevent the possibility of a
portage, or passage for the canoes without expending much labour in
removing rocks and cuting away the earth in some places. to surmount
These difficulties, precautions must be observed which in their
execution must necessarily consume much time and provision, neither of
which we can command. the season is now far advanced to remain in these
mountains as the Indians inform us we shall shortly have snow; the
salmon have so far declined that they are themselves haistening from
the country and not an animal of any discription is to be seen in this
difficult part of the river larger than a pheasant or a squirrel and
they not abundant; add to this that our stock of provision is now so
low that it would not support us more than ten days. the bends of the
river are short and the currant beats from side to side against the
rocks with great violence. the river is about 100 yds. wide and so deep
that it cannot be foarded but in a few places, and the rocks approach
the river so near in most places that there is no possibility of
passing between them and the water; a passage therefore with horses
along the river is also impracticable. The sides of these mountains
present generally one barren surface of confused and broken masses of
stone. above these are white or brown and towards the base of a grey
colour and so hard that when struck with a steel, yeald fire like
flint. those he had just past were scarcely releived by the appearance
of a tree; but those below the entrance of the creek were better
covered with timber, and there were also some tall pine near the river.
The sides of the mountains are very steep, and the torrents of water
which roll down their sides at certain seasons appear to carry with
them vast quantities of the loose stone into the river. after dinner
Capt. C. continued his rout down the river and at 1/2 a mile pased
another creek not so large as that just mentioned, or about 5 yards
wide. here his guide informed him that by ascending this creek some
distance they would have a better road and would cut off a considerable
bend which the river made to the south; accordingly he pursued a well
beaten Indian track which led up this creek about six miles, then
leaving the creek on the wright he passed over a ridge, and at the
distance of a mile arrived at the river where it passes through a well
timbered bottom of about eighty acres of land; they passed this bottom
and asscended a steep and elivated point of a mountain, from whence the
guide shewed him the brake of the river through the mountains for about
20 miles further. this view was terminated by one of the most lofty
mountains, Capt. C. informed me, he had ever seen which was perfectly
covered with snow. the river directed it's course immediately to this
stupendous mountain at the bace of which the gude informe him those
difficulties of which himself and nation had spoken, commenced. that
after the river reached this mountain it continued it's rout to the
North for many miles between high and perpendicular rocks, roling
foaming and beating against innumerable rocks which crouded it's
channel; that then it penetrated the mountain through a narrow gap
leaving a perpendicular rock on either side as high as the top of the
mountain which he beheld. that the river here making a bend they could
not see through the mountain, and as it was impossible to decend the
river or clamber over that vast mountain covered with eternal snow,
neither himself nor any of his nation had ever been lower in this
direction, than in view of the place at which the river entered this
mountain; that if Capt. C. wished him to do so, he would conduct him to
that place, where he thought they could probably arrive by the next
evening. Capt. C. being now perfictly satisfyed as to the
impractability of this rout either by land or water, informed the old
man, that he was convinced of the varacity of his assertions and would
now return to the village from whence they had set out where he
expected to meet myself and party. they now returned to the upper part
of the last creek he had passed, and encamped. it was an hour after
dark before he reached this place. a small river falls into this fork
of the Columbia just above the high mountain through which it passes on
the south side.

[Clark, August 23, 1805]
August 23rd Friday 1805
We Set out early proceed on with great dificuelty as the rocks were So
Sharp large and unsettled and the hill sides Steep that the horses
could with the greatest risque and dificulty get on, no provisions as
the 5 Sammons given us yesterday by the Indians were eaten last night,
one goose killed this morning; at 4 miles we came to a place the horses
Could not pass without going into the river, we passed one mile to a
verry bad riffle the water Confined in a narrow Channel & beeting
against the left Shore, as we have no parth further and the Mounts. jut
So close as to prevent the possibiley of horses proceeding down, I
deturmined to delay the party here and with my guide and three men
proceed on down to examine if the river continued bad or was
practiable. I Set out with three men directing those left to hunt and
fish until my return. I proceeded on Somtims in a Small wolf parth & at
other times Climeing over the rocks for 12 miles to a large Creek on
the right Side above the mouth of this Creek for a Short distance is a
narrow bottom & the first, below the place I left my partey, a road
passes down this Creek which I understoode passed to the water of a
River which run to Th North & was the ground of another nation, Some
fresh Sign about this Creek of horse and Camps. I delayd 2 hours to
fish, Cought Some Small fish on which we dined.

The River from the place I left my party to this Creek is almost one
continued rapid, five verry Considerable rapids the passage of either
with Canoes is entirely impossable, as the water is Confined betwen
hugh Rocks & the Current beeting from one against another for Some
distance below &c. &c. at one of those rapids the mountains Close So
Clost as to prevent a possibility of a portage with great labour in
Cutting down the Side of the hill removeing large rocks &c. &c. all the
others may be passed by takeing every thing over Slipery rocks, and the
Smaller ones Passed by letting down the Canoes empty with Cords, as
running them would certainly be productive of the loss of Some Canoes,
those dificuelties and necessary precautions would delay us an emince
time in which provisions would he necessary. (we have but little and
nothing to be precured in this quarter except Choke Cheres & red haws
not an animal of any kind to be seen and only the track of a Bear)
below this Creek the lofty Pine is thick in the bottom hill Sides on
the mountains & up the runs. The river has much the resemblance of that
above bends Shorter and no passing, after a few miles between the river
& the mountains & the Current So Strong that is dangerous crossing the
river, and to proceed down it would rendr it necessarey to Cross almost
at every bend This river is about 100 yards wide and can be forded but
in a few places. below my guide and maney other Indians tell me that
the Mountains Close and is a perpendicular Clift on each Side, and
Continues for a great distance and that the water runs with great
violence from one rock to the other on each Side foaming & roreing thro
rocks in every direction, So as to render the passage of any thing
impossible. those rapids which I had Seen he said was Small & trifleing
in comparrison to the rocks & rapids below, at no great distance & The
Hills or mountains were not like those I had Seen but like the Side of
a tree Streight up- Those Mountains which I had passed were Steep
Contain a white, a brown, & low down a Grey hard stone which would make
fire, those Stone were of different Sises all Sharp and are continuly
Slipping down, and in maney places one bed of those Stones inclined
from the river bottom to the top of the mountains, The Torrents of
water which come down aftr a rain carries with it emence numbers of
those Stone into the river about 1/2 a mile below the last mentioned
Creek another Creek falls in, my guide informed me that our rout was up
this Creek by which rout we would Save a considerable bend of the river
to the South. we proceeded on a well beeten Indian parth up this Creak
about 6 miles and passed over a ridge 1 mile to the river in a Small
vally through which we passed and assended a Spur of the Mountain from
which place my guide Shew me the river for about 20 miles lower &
pointed out the dificulty we returned to the last Creek & camped about
one hour after dark.

There my guide Shewed me a road from the N Which Came into the one I
was in which he Said went to a large river which run to the north on
which was a Nation he called Tushapass, he made a map of it

[Lewis, August 24, 1805]
Saturday August 24th 1805.
As the Indians who were on their way down the Missouri had a number of
spare hoses with them I thought it probable that I could obtain some of
them and therefore desired the Cheif to speak to them and inform me
whether they would trade. they gave no positive answer but requested to
see the goods which I was willing to give in exchange. I now produced
some battle axes which I had made at Fort Mandan with which they were
much pleased. knives also seemed in great demand among them. I soon
purchased three horses and a mule. for each horse I gave an ax a knife
handkercheif and a little paint; & for the mule the addition of a knife
a shirt handkercheif and a pair of legings; at this price which was
quite double that given for the horses, the fellow who sold him made a
merit of having bestoed me one of his mules. I consider this mule a
great acquisition. These Indians soon told me that they had no more
horses for sale and I directed the party to prepare to set out. I had
now nine horses and a mule, and two which I had hired made twelve these
I had loaded and the Indian women took the ballance of the baggage. I
had given the Interpreter some articles with which to purchase a horse
for the woman which he had obtained. at twelve Oclock we set out and
passed the river below the forks, directing our rout towards the cove
along the track formerly mentioned. most of the horses were heavily
laden, and it appears to me that it will require at least 25 horses to
convey our baggage along such roads as I expect we shall be obliged to
pass in the mountains. I had now the inexpressible satisfaction to find
myself once more under way with all my baggage and party. an Indian had
the politeness to offer me one of his horses to ride which I accepted
with cheerfullness as it enabled me to attend better to the march of
the party. I had reached the lower part of the cove when an Indian rode
up and informed me that one of my men was very sick and unable to come
on. I directed the party to halt at a small run which falls into the
creek on Lard. at the lower part of the Cove and rode back about 2
Miles where I found Wiser very ill with a fit of the cholic. I sent
Sergt. Ordway who had remained with him for some water and gave him a
doze of the essence of Peppermint and laudinum which in the course of
half an hour so far recovered him that he was enabled to ride my horse
and I proceeded on foot and rejoined the party. the sun was yet an hour
high but the Indians who had for some time impatiently waited my return
at length unloaded and turned out their horses and my party had
followed there ex-ample. as it was so late and the Indians had prepared
their camp for the night I thought it best to acquiess and determined
also to remain. we had traveled only about six miles. after we encamped
we had a slight shower of rain. Goodrich who is our principal fisherman
caught several fine trout. Drewyer came to us late in the evening and
had not killed anything. I gave the Indians who were absolutely engaged
in transporting the baggage, a little corn as they had nothing to eat.
I told Cameahwait that my stock of provision was too small to indulge
all his people with provision and recommended it to him to advise such
as were not assisting us with our baggage to go on to their camp to
morrow and wait our arrival; which he did accordingly. Cameahwait
literally translated is one who never walks. he told me that his nation
had also given him another name by which he was signalized as a warrior
which was Too-et'-te-con'-e or black gun. these people have many names
in the course of their lives, particularly if they become distinguished
characters. for it seems that every important event by which they
happen to distinguish themselves intitles them to claim another name
which is generally scelected by themselves and confirmed by the nation.
those distinguishing acts are the killing and scalping an enemy, the
killing a white bear, leading a party to war who happen to be
successfull either in destroying their enemies or robing them of their
horses, or individually stealing the horses of an enemy. these are
considered acts of equal heroism among them, and that of killing an
enemy without scalping him is considered of no importance; in fact the
whole honour seems to be founded in the act of scalping, for if a man
happens to slay a dozen of his enemies in action and others get the
scalps or first lay their hand on the dead person the honor is lost to
him who killed them and devolves on those who scalp or first touch
them. Among the Shoshones, as well as all the Indians of America,
bravery is esteemed the primary virtue; nor can any one become eminent
among them who has not at some period of his life given proofs of his
possessing this virtue. with them there can be no preferment without
some warelike achievement, and so completely interwoven is this
principle with the earliest Elements of thought that it will in my
opinion prove a serious obstruction to the restoration of a general
peace among the nations of the Missouri. while at Fort Mandan I was one
day addressing some cheifs of the Minetares wo visited us and pointing
out to them the advantages of a state of peace with their neighbours
over that of war in which they were engaged. the Chiefs who had already
geathered their havest of larals, and having forceably felt in many
instances some of those inconveniences attending a state of war which I
pointed out, readily agreed with me in opinon. a young fellow under the
full impression of the Idea I have just suggested asked me if they were
in a state of peace with all their neighhours what the nation would do
for Cheifs?, and added that the cheifs were now oald and must shortly
die and that the nation could not exist without cheifs. taking as
granted that there could be no other mode devised for making Cheifs but
that which custom had established through the medium of warlike
acievements.

The few guns which the Shoshones have are reserved for war almost
exclusively and the bow and arrows are used in hunting. I have seen a
few skins among these people which have almost every appearance of the
common sheep. they inform me that they finde this animals on the high
mountains to the West and S. W. of them. it is about the size of the
common sheep, the wool is reather shorter and more intermixed with long
hairs particularly on the upper part of the neck. these skins have been
so much woarn that I could not form a just Idea of the animal or it's
colour. the Indians however inform me that it is white and that it's
horns are lunated comprest twisted and bent backward as those of the
common sheep. the texture of the skin appears to be that of the sheep.
I am now perfectly convinced that the sheep as well as the Bighorn
exist in these mountains.

The usual caparison of the Shoshone horse is a halter and saddle. the
1st consists either of a round plated or twisted cord of six or seven
strands of buffaloe's hair, or a throng of raw hide made pliant by
pounding and rubing. these cords of bufaloe's hair are about the size
of a man's finger and remarkably strong. this is the kind of halter
which is prefered by them. the halter of whatever it may be composed is
always of great length and is never taken from the neck of the horse
which they commonly use at any time. it is first attatched at one end
about the neck of the horse with a knot that will not slip, it is then
brought down to his under jaw and being passed through the mouth
imbaces the under jaw and tonge in a simple noose formed by crossing
the rope inderneath the jaw of the horse. this when mounted he draws up
on the near side of the horse's neck and holds in the left hand,
suffering it to trail at a great distance behind him sometimes the
halter is attatched so far from the end that while the shorter end
serves him to govern his horse, the other trails on the grond as before
mentioned. they put their horses to their full speed with those cords
trailing on the ground. when they turn out the horse to graze the noose
is mearly loosed from his mouth. the saddle is made of wood and covered
with raw hide which holds the parts very firmly together. it is made
like the pack saddles in uce among the French and Spaniards. it
consists of two flat thin boards which fit the sides of the horses
back, and are held frirm by two peices which are united to them behind
and before on the outer side and which rise to a considerable hight
terminating sometimes in flat horizontal points extending outwards, and
alwas in an accute angle or short bend underneath the upper part of
these peices. a peice of buffaloe's skin with the hair on, is usually
put underneath the saddle; and very seldom any covering on the saddle.
stirrups when used are made of wood and covered with leather. these are
generally used by the elderly men and women; the young men scarcely
ever use anything more than a small pad of dressed leather stuffed with
hair, which is confined with a leather thong passing arond the body of
the horse in the manner of a girth. they frequently paint their
favorite horses, and cut their ears in various shapes. they also
decorate their mains and tails, which they never draw or trim, with the
feathers of birds, and sometimes suspend at the breast of the horse the
finest ornaments they possess. the Spanish bridle is prefered by them
when they can obtain them, but they never dispence with the cord about
the neck of the horse, which serves them to take him with more ease
when he is runing at large. They are excellent horsemen and extreemly
expert in casting the cord about the neck of a horse. the horses that
have been habituated to be taken with the cord in this way, however
wild they may appear at first, surrender the moment they feel the cord
about their necks.- There are no horses in this quarter which can with
propriety be termed wild. there are some few which have been left by
the indians at large for so great a length of time that they have
become shye, but they all shew marks of having been in possession of
man. such is that one which Capt. Clark saw just below the three forks
of the Missouri, and one other which I saw on the Missouri below the
entrance of the Mussle shell river.- Capt. Clark set out very early
this morning on his return, he traveled down the creek to it's entrance
by the same Indian track he had ascended it; at the river he marked his
name on a pine tree, then ascended to the bottom above the second
creek, and brekfasted on burries, which occupyed them about one hour.
he now retraced his former track and joined the party where he had left
them at 4 P.M. on his way Capt. C. fell from a rock and injured one of
his legs very much. the party during his absence had killed a few
pheasants and caught a few small fish on which together with haws and
Serviceburies they had subsisted. they had also killed one cock of the
Mountains Capt. Clark now wrote me a discription of the river and
country, and stated our prospects by this rout as they have been
heretofore mentioned and dispatched Colter on horseback with orders to
loose no time reaching me. he set out late with the party continued his
rout about two miles and encamped. Capt Clark had seen some trees which
would make small canoes but all of them some distance below the Indian
Caps which he passed at the entrance of fish Creek.

[Clark, August 24, 1805]
August 24th Satturday 1805
Set out verry early this morning on my return passed down the Creek at
the mouth marked my name on a pine Tree, proceed on to the bottom above
the Creek & Brackfast on buries & delayed 1 hour, then proceed on up
the river by the Same rout we decended to the place I left my party
where we arrived at 4 oClock, (I Sliped & bruised my leg verry much on
a rock) the party had killed Several phesents and Cought a fiew Small
fish on which they had Subsisted in my absence. also a heath hen, near
the Size of a Small turkey.

I wrote a letter to Capt Lewis informing him of the prospects before us
and information recved of my guide which I thought favourable &c. &
Stating two plans one of which for us to pursue &c. and despatched one
man & horse and directed the party to get ready to march back, every
man appeared disheartened from the prospects of the river, and nothing
to eate, I Set out late and Camped 2 miles above, nothing to eate but
Choke Cherries & red haws which act in different ways So as to make us
Sick, dew verry heavy, my beding wet in passing around a rock the
horses were obliged to go deep into the water.

The plan I stated to Capt Lewis if he agrees with me we shall adopt is
to procure as many horses (one for each man) if possible and to hire my
present guide who I sent on to him to interegate thro the Intprtr. and
proceed on by land to Some navagable part of the Columbia River, or to
the Ocean, depending on what provisions we can procure by the gun aded
to the Small Stock we have on hand depending on our horses as the last
resort.

a second plan to divide the party one part to attempt this deficuet
river with what provisions we had, and the remaindr to pass by Land on
hose back Depending on our gun &c for Provisions &c. and come together
occasionally on the river.

the 1s of which I would be most pleased with &c.

I saw Several trees which would make Small Canoes and by putting 2
together would make a Siseable one, all below the last Indian Camp
Several miles

[Lewis, August 25, 1805]
Sunday August 25th 1805.
This morning loaded our horses and set out a little after sunrise; a
few only of the Indians unengaged in assisting us went on as I had
yesterday proposed to the Cheif. the others flanked us on each side and
started some Antelope which they pursued for several hours but killed
none of them. we proceeded within 2 Ms. of the narrow pass or seven
miles from our camp of last evening and halted for dinner. Our hunters
joined us at noon with three deer the greater part of which I gave the
indians. sometime after we had halted, Charbono mentioned to me with
apparent unconcern that he expected to meet all the Indians from the
camp on the Columbia tomorrow on their way to the Missouri. allarmed at
this information I asked why he expected to meet them. he then informed
me that the 1st Cheif had dispatched some of his young men this morning
to this camp requesting the Indians to meet them tomorrow and that
himself and those with him would go on with them down the Missouri, and
consequently leave me and my baggage on the mountain or thereabouts. I
was out of patience with the folly of Charbono who had not sufficient
sagacity to see the consequencies which would inevitably flow from such
a movement of the indians, and altho he had been in possession of this
information since early in the morning when it had been communicated to
him by his Indian woman yet he never mentioned it untill the after
noon. I could not forbear speaking to him with some degree of asperity
on this occasion. I saw that there was no time to be lost in having
those orders countermanded, or that we should not in all probability
obtain any more horses or even get my baggage to the waters of the
Columbia. I therefore Called the three Cheifs together and having
smoked a pipe with them, I asked them if they were men of their words,
and whether I could depent on the promises they had made me; they
readily answered in the affermative; I then asked them if they had not
promised to assist me with my baggage to their camp on the other side
of the mountains, or to the place at which Capt. Clark might build the
canoes, should I wish it. they acknowledged that they had. I then asked
them why they had requested their people on the other side of the
mountain to meet them tomorrow on the mountain where there would be no
possibility of our remaining together for the purpose of trading for
their horses as they had also promised. that if they had not promised
to have given me their assistance in transporting my baggage to the
waters on the other side of the mountain that I should not have
attempted to pass the mountains but would have returned down the river
and that in that case they would never have seen anymore white men in
their country. that if they wished the white men to be their friends
and to assist them against their enemies by furnishing them with arms
and keeping their enemies from attacking them that they must never
promis us anything which they did not mean to perform. that when I had
first seen them they had doubted what I told them about the arrival of
the party of whitemen in canoes, that they had been convinced that what
I told them on that occasion was true, why then would they doubt what I
said on any other point. I told them that they had witnessed my
liberality in dividing the meat which my hunters killed with them; and
that I should continue to give such of them as assisted me a part of
whatever we had ourselves to eat. and finally concluded by telling them
if they intended to keep the promisses they had made me to dispatch one
of their young men immediately with orders to their people to remain
where they were untill our arrival. the two inferior cheifs said that
they wished to assist me and be as good as their word, and that they
had not sent for their people, that it was the first Chief who had done
so, and they did not approve of the measure. Cameahwait remained silent
for some time, at length he told me that he knew he had done wrong but
that he had been induced to that measure from seeing all his people
hungary, but as he had promised to give me his assistance he would not
in future be worse than his word. I then desired him to send
immediately and countermand his orders; acordingly a young man was sent
for this purpose and I gave him a handkerchief to engage him in my
interest. this matter being arranged to my satisfaction I called all
the women and men together who had been assisting me in the
transportation of the baggage and gave them a billet for each horse
which they had imployed in that service and informed them when we
arrived at the plaice where we should finally halt on the river I would
take the billet back and give them merchandize for it. every one
appeared now satisfyed and when I ordered the horses loaded for our
departure the Indians were more than usually allert. we continued our
march untill late in the evening and encamped at the upper part of the
cove where the creek enters the mountains; here our hunters joined us
with another deer which they had killed, this I gave to the women and
Children, and for my own part remained supperless. I observed
considerable quantities of wild onions in the bottom lands of this
cove. I also saw several large hares and many of the cock of the plains.

Capt. Clark set out early this morning and continued his rout to the
indian camp at the entrance of fish Creek; here he halted about an
hour; the indians gave himself and party some boiled salmon and
hurries. these people appeared extreemly hospitable tho poor and dirty
in the extreem. he still pursued the track up the river by which he had
decended and in the evening arrived at the bluff on the river where he
had encamped on the 21st Inst. it was late in the evening before he
reached this place. they formed their camp, and Capt. C. sent them in
different directions to hunt and fish. some little time after they
halted a party of Indians passed by on their way down the river,
consisting of a man a woman and several boys; from these people the
guide obtained 2 salmon which together with some small fish they caught
and a beaver which Shannon killed furnished them with a plentifull
supper. the pine grows pretty abundantly high up on the sides of the
mountains on the opposite side of the river. one of the hunters saw a
large herd of Elk on the opposite side of the river in the edge of the
timbered land.- Winsor was taken very sick today and detained Capt C.
very much on his march. three hunters whom he had sent on before him
this morning joined him in the evening having killed nothing; they saw
only one deer.

The course and the distances, of Capt. Clark's rout down this branch of
the Columbia below this bluff, commencing opposite to an Island, are as
follow.

This morning while passing through the Shoshone cove Frazier fired his
musquet at some ducks in a little pond at the distance of about 60
yards from me; the ball rebounded from the water and pased within a
very few feet of me. near the upper part of this cove the Shoshonees
suffered a very severe defeat by the Minnetares about six years since.
this part of the cove on the N. E. side of the Creek has lately been
birned by the Indians as a signal on some occasion.

[Clark, August 25, 1805]
August 25th Sunday 1805
Set out verry early and halted one hour at the Indian Camp, they were
kind gave us all a little boiled Sarnmon & dried buries to eate, abt.
half as much as I could eate, those people are kind with what they have
but excessive pore & Durtey.- we proceeded on over the mountains we had
before passed to the Bluff we Encamped at on the 21s instant where we
arrived late and turned out to hunt & fish, Cought Several Small fish,
a party of Squars & one man with Several boys going down to guathe
berries below, my guide got two Sammon from this party (which made
about half a Supper for the party), after Dark Shannon came in with a
beaver which the Party suped on Sumptiously- one man verry Sick to day
which detained us verry much I had three hunters out all day, they saw
one Deer, killed nothing. one of the Party Saw 9 Elk on a Mountain to
our right assending, amongst the Pine timber which is thick on that side

[Lewis, August 26, 1805]
Monday August 26th 1805.
This morning was excessively cold; there was ice on the vessels of
water which stood exposed to the air nearly a quarter of an inch thick.
we collected our horses and set out at sunrise. we soon arrived at the
extreem source of the Missouri; here I halted a few minutes, the men
drank of the water and consoled themselves with the idea of having at
length arrived at this long wished for point. from hence we proceeded
to a fine spring on the side of the mountain where I had lain the
evening before I first arrived at the Shoshone Camp. here I halted to
dine and graize our horses, there being fine green grass on that part
of the hillside which was moistened by the water of the spring while
the grass on the other parts was perfectly dry and parched with the
sun. I directed a pint of corn to be given each Indian who was engaged
in transporting our baggage and about the same quantity to each of the
men which they parched pounded and made into supe. one of the women who
had been assisting in the transportation of the baggage halted at a
little run about a mile behind us, and sent on the two pack horses
which she had been conducting by one of her female friends. I enquired
of Cameahwait the cause of her detention, and was informed by him in an
unconcerned manner that she had halted to bring fourth a child and
would soon overtake us; in about an hour the woman arrived with her
newborn babe and passed us on her way to the camp apparently as well as
she ever was. It appears to me that the facility and ease with which
the women of the aborigines of North America bring fourth their
children is reather a gift of nature than depending as some have
supposed on the habitude of carrying heavy burthens on their backs
while in a state of pregnancy. if a pure and dry air, an elivated and
cold country is unfavourable to childbirth, we might expect every
difficult incident to that operation of nature in this part of the
continent; again as the snake Indians possess an abundance of horses,
their women are seldom compelled like those in other parts of the
continent to carry burthens on their backs, yet they have their
children with equal convenience, and it is a rare occurrence for any of
them to experience difficulty in childbirth. I have been several times
informed by those who were conversent with the fact, that the indian
women who are pregnant by whitemen experience more difficulty in
childbirth than when pregnant by an Indian. if this be true it would go
far in suport of the opinion I have advanced.

the tops of the high and irregular mountains which present themselves
to our view on the opposite side of this branch of the Columbia are yet
perfectly covered with snow; the air which proceeds from those
mountains has an agreeable coolness and renders these parched and South
hillsides much more supportable at this time of the day it being now
about noon. I observe the indian women collecting the root of a speceis
of fennel which grows in the moist grounds and feeding their poor
starved children; it is really distressing to witness the situation of
those poor wretches. the radix of this plant is of the knob kind, of a
long ovate form terminating in a single radicle, the whole bing about 3
or four inches in length and the thickest part about the size of a
man's little finger. it is white firm and crisp in it's present state,
when dryed and pounded it makes a fine white meal; the flavor of this
root is not unlike that of annisseed but not so pungent; the stem rises
to the hight of 3 or four feet is jointed smooth and cilindric; from r
to 4 of those knobed roots are attatched to the base of this stem. the
leaf is sheathing sessile, & pultipartite, the divisions long and
narrow; the whole is of a deep green. it is now in blame; the flowers
are numerous, small, petals white, and are of the umbellaferous kind.
several small peduncles put forth from the main stock one at each joint
above the sheathing leaf. it has no root leaves. the root of the
present year declines when the seeds have been matured and the
succeeding spring other roots of a similar kind put fourth from the
little knot which unites the roots and stem and grow and decline with
the stem as before mentioned. The sunflower is very abundant near the
watercourses the seeds of this plant are now rip and the natives
collect them in considerable quantities and reduce them to meal by
pounding and rubing them between smooth stones. this meal is a favorite
food their manner of using it has been beforementiond. after dinner we
continued our rout towards the village. on our near approach we were
met by a number of young men on horseback. Cameahwait requested that we
would discharge our guns when we arrived in sight of the Village,
accordingly when I arrived on an eminence above the village in the
plain I drew up the party at open order in a single rank and gave them
a runing fire discharging two rounds. they appeared much gratifyed with
this exhibition. we then proceeded to the village or encampment of
brush lodges 32 in number. we were conducted to a large lodge which had
been prepared for me in the center of their encampmerit which was
situated in a beautifull level smooth and extensive bottom near the
river about 3 miles above the place I had first found them encamped.
here we arrived at 6 in the evening arranged our baggage near my tent
and placed those of the men on either side of the baggage facing
outwards. I found Colter here who had just arrived with a letter from
Capt. Clark in which Capt. C. had given me an account of his
peregrination and the description of the river and country as before
detailed from this view of the subject I found it a folly to think of
attemping to decend this river in canoes and therefore to commence the
purchase of horses in the morning from the indians in order to carry
into execution the design we had formed of passing the rocky Mountains.
I now informed Cameahwait of my intended expedition overland to the
great river which lay in the plains beyond the mountains and told him
that I wished to purchase 20 horses of himself and his people to convey
our baggage. he observed that the Minnetares had stolen a great number
of their horses this spring but hoped his people would spear me the
number I wished. I also asked a guide, he observed that he had no doubt
but the old man who was with Capt. C. would accompany us if we wished
him and that he was better informed of the country than any of them.
matters being thus far arranged I directed the fiddle to be played and
the party danced very merily much to the amusement and gratification of
the natives, though I must confess that the state of my own mind at
this moment did not well accord with the prevailing mirth as I somewhat
feared that the caprice of the indians might suddenly induce them to
withhold their horses from us without which my hopes of prosicuting my
voyage to advantage was lost; however I determined to keep the indians
in a good humour if possible, and to loose no time in obtaining the
necessary number of horses. I directed the hunters to turn out early in
the morning and indeavor to obtain some meat. I had nothing but a
little parched corn to eat this evening.

This morning Capt. C. and party

[Clark, August 26, 1805]
August 26th Monday 1805
a fine morning Despatched three men a head to hunt, our horses missing
Sent out my guide and four men to hunt them, which detained me untill 9
oClock a.m. at which time I Set out and proceeded on by the way of the
forks to the Indian Camps at the first were not one mouthfull to eate
untill night as our hunters could kill nothing and I could See & catch
no fish except a few Small ones. The Indians gave us 2 Sammon boiled
which I gave to the men, one of my men Shot a Sammon in the river about
Sunset those fish gave us a Supper. all the Camp flocked about me
untill I went to Sleep- and I beleve if they had a Sufficency to eate
themselves and any to Spare they would be liberal of it I derected the
men to mend their Mockessons to night and turn out in the morning early
to hunt Deer fish birds &c. &c. Saw great numbers of the large Black
grass hopper. Some bars which were verry wild, but few Birds. a number
of ground Lizards; Some fiew Pigions

[Clark, August 27, 1805]
August 27th Tuesday 1805
Some frost this morning every Man except one, out hunting, a young man
Came from the upper Village & informed me that Capt Lewis would join me
abt. 12 oClock to day. one man killed a Small Sammon, and the Indians
gave me another which afforded us a Sleight brackfast. Those Pore
people are here depending on what fish They Can Catch, without anything
else to depend on; and appere Contented, my party hourly Complaining of
their retched Situation and doubts of Starveing in a Countrey where no
game of any kind except a fiew fish can be found, an Indian brough in
to the Camp 5 Sammon, two of which I purchased which afforded us a
Supper.

[Clark, August 28, 1805]
August 28th Wednesday 1805
a frost this morning. The Inds. Cought out of their traps Several
Sammon and gave us two, I purchased two others which we made last us to
day. Several a Camp of about 40 Indians came from the West fork and
passed up to day, nothing killed by my party with every exertion in all
places where game probably might be found. I dispatched one man to the
upper camps to enquire if Cap. Lewis was comeing &c. he returned after
night with a letter from Capt. Lewis informing me of his Situation at
the upper Village, and had precured 22 horses for our rout through by
land on the plan which I had preposed in which he agreed with me in;
and requsted me to ride up and get the horses the Indian informed him
they had reserved for me &c. I purchased Some fish roe of those pore
but kind people with whome I am Encamped for which I gave three Small
fish hooks, the use of which they readily proseved, one Indian out all
day & killed only one Sammon with his gig; my hunters killed nothing, I
had three pack Saddles made to day for our horses which I expected Capt
Lewis would purchase &c. Those Sammon which I live on at present are
pleasent eateing, not with standing they weaken me verry fast and my
flesh I find is declineing

[Clark, August 29, 1805]
August 29th Thursday 1805
a Cold morning Some frost. the Wind from the South, I left our baggage
in possession of 2 men and proceeded on up to join Capt Lewis at the
upper Village of Snake Indians where I arrived at 1 oClock found him
much engaged in Counceling and attempting to purchase a fiew more
horses. I Spoke to the Indians on various Subjects endeavoring to
impress on theire minds the advantaje it would be to them for to Sell
us horses and expedite the our journey the nearest and best way
possibly that we might return as Soon as possible and winter with them
at Some place where there was plenty of buffalow,- our wish is to get a
horse for each man to Carry our baggage and for Some of the men to ride
occasionally, The horses are handsom and much acustomed to be changed
as to their Parsture; we cannot Calculate on their carrying large loads
& feed on the Grass which we may Calculate on finding in the Mountain
Thro which we may expect to pass on our rout made Some Selestial
observations, the Lard. of this Part the Columbia River is ____ North.
Longtd. ____ W

I purchased a horse for which I gave my Pistol 100 Balls Powder & a
Knife. our hunters Killed 2 Deer near their Camp to day. 2 yesterday &
3 The Day before, this meet was a great treat to me as I had eate none
for 8 days past

[Clark, August 30, 1805]
August 30th Friday 1805
a fine Morning, finding that we Could purchase no more horse than we
had for our goods &c. (and those not a Sufficint number for each of our
Party to have one which is our wish) I Gave my Fuzee to one of the men
& Sold his musket for a horse which Completed us to 29 total horses, we
Purchased pack Cords Made Saddles & Set out on our rout down the river
by land guided by my old guide one other who joined him, the old gude's
3 Sons followed him before we Set out our hunters killed three Deer
proceded on 12 miles and encamped on the river South Side- at the time
we Set out from the Indian Camps the greater Part of the Band Set out
over to the waters of the Missouri. we had great attention paid to the
horses, as they were nearly all Sore Backs and Several pore, & young
Those horses are indifferent, maney Sore backs and others not acustomed
to pack, and as we Cannot put large loads on them are Compelled to
purchase as maney as we Can to take our Small propotion of baggage of
the Parties. (& Eate if necessary) Proceeded on 12 miles to day

[Clark, August 31, 1805]
August 31st 1805 Satturday
A fine morning Set out before Sun rise, as we passed the lodges at
which place I had encamped for thre nights and left 2 men, Those 2 men
joined us and we proceeded on in the Same rout I decended the 21st
Instant, halted 3 hours on Sammon Creek to Let our horses graze the
wind hard from the S. W. I met an Indian on horse back who fled with
great Speed to Some lodges below & informed them that the Enemis were
Coming down, armd with guns &c. the inhabitents of the Lodges
indisceved him, we proceeded on the road on which I had decended as far
as the 1st run below & left the road & Proceeded up the Run in a
tolerable road 4 miles & Encamped in Some old lodjes at the place the
road leaves the Creek and assends the high Countrey Six Indians
followed us four of them the Sons of our guide; our hunters killed one
Deer a goose & Prarie fowl. This day warm and Sultrey, Praries or open
Valies on fire in Several places- The Countrey is Set on fire for the
purpose of Collecting the different bands, and a Band of the Flatheads
to go to the Missouri where They intend passing the winter near the
Buffalow Proceeded on 22 miles to Day, 4 miles of which up a run

[Clark, September 1, 1805]
September 1st Sunday 1805
a fine morning Set out early and proceeded on over high ruged hills
passing the heads of the Small runs which fall into the river on our
left to a large Creek which falls into the river 6 miles to our left
and encamped in the bottom, Some rain to day at 12 and in the evening
which obliges us to Continu all night despatched 2 men to the mouth of
the Creek to purchase fish of the Indians at that place, They returned
with Some dried, we giged 4 Sammon & killed one Deer to Day. the
Countrey which we passed to day is well watered & broken Pore Stoney
hilly country except the bottoms of the Creek which is narrow, all the
Indians leave us except our Guide, one man Shot two bear this evining
unfortunately we Could git neither of them

[Clark, September 2, 1805]
September 2nd Monday 1805
a Cloudy Mornin, raind Some last night we Set out early and proceeded
on up the Creek, Crossed a large fork from the right and one from the
left; and at 8 miles left the roade on which we were pursuing and which
leads over to the Missouri; and proceeded up a West fork without a
roade proceded on thro thickets in which we were obliged to Cut a road,
over rockey hill Sides where our horses were in pitial danger of
Slipping to Ther certain distruction & up & Down Steep hills, where
Several horses fell, Some turned over, and others Sliped down Steep
hill Sides, one horse Crippeled & 2 gave out. with the greatest
dificuelty risque &c. we made five miles & Encamped on The left Side of
the Creek in a Small Stoney bottom after night Some time before the
rear Came up, one Load left, about 2 miles back, the horse on which it
was Carried Crippled. Some rain at night

[Clark, September 3, 1805]
September 3rd Tuesday 1805
A Cloudy morning, horses verry Stiff Sent 2 men back with the horse on
which Capt Lewis rode for the load left back last night which detained
us until) 8 oClock at which time we Set out. The Country is timbered
with Pine Generally the bottoms have a variety of Srubs & the fur trees
in Great abundance. hills high & rockey on each Side, in the after part
of the day the high mountains closed the Creek on each Side and obliged
us to take on the Steep Sides of those Mountains, So Steep that the
horses Could Screcly keep from Slipping down, Several Sliped & Injured
themselves verry much, with great dificuelty we made ____ miles &
Encamped on a branh of the Creek we assended after Crossing Several
Steep points & one mountain, but little to eate I killed 5 Pheasents &
The huntes 4 with a little Corn afforded us a kind of Supper, at dusk
it began to Snow at 3 oClock Some rain. The mountains to the East
Covered with Snow. we met with a great misfortune, in haveing our last
Thmometer broken by accident, This day we passed over emence hils and
Some of the worst roade that ever horses passed our horses frequently
fell Snow about 2 inches deep when it began to rain which termonated in
a Sleet our genl. Courses nearly North from the R

[Clark, September 4, 1805]
September 4th Wednesday 1805
a verry cold morning every thing wet and frosed, we detained untill 8
oClock to thaw the covering for the baggage &c. &c. groun covered with
Snow, we assended a mountain & took a Divideing ridge which we kept for
Several Miles & fell on the head of a Creek which appeared to run the
Course we wished to go, I was in front, & Saw Several of the Argalia or
Ibex decended the mountain by verry Steep decent takeing the advantage
of the points and best places to the Creek, where our hunter killed a
Deer which we made use of and prosued our Course down the Creek to the
forks about 5 miles where we met a part of the Flat head nation of 33
Lodges about 80 men 400 Total and at least 500 horses, those people
recved us friendly, threw white robes over our Sholders & Smoked in the
pipes of peace, we Encamped with them & found them friendly but nothing
but berries to eate a part of which they gave us, those Indians are
well dressed with Skin Shirts & robes, they Stout & light complected
more So than Common for Indians, The Chiefs harangued untill late at
night, Smoked our pipe and appeared Satisfied. I was the first white
man who ever wer on the waters of this river.

[Clark, September 5, 1805]
September 5th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy morning we assembled the Chiefs & warriers and Spoke to them
(with much dificuely as what we Said had to pass through Several
languajes before it got in to theirs, which is a gugling kind of
languaje Spoken much thro the fhrought) we informed them who we were,
where we Came from, where bound and for what purpose &c. &c. and
requsted to purchase & exchange a fiew horses with them, in the Course
of the day I purchased 11 horses & exchanged 7 for which we gave a fiew
articles of merchendize. those people possess ellegant horses.- we made
4 Chiefs whome we gave meadels & a few Small articles with Tobacco; the
women brought us a few berries & roots to eate and the Principal Chief
a Dressed Brarow, otter & two Goat & antilope Skins

Those people wore their hair the men Cewed with otter Skin on each Side
falling over the Sholrs forward, the women loose promisquisly over ther
Sholdrs & face long Shirts which Coms to the anckles & tied with a belt
about their waste with a roabe over, the have but fiew ornaments and
what they do were are Similar to the Snake Indians, They Call
themselves Eoote-lash-Schute and consist of 450 Lodges in all and
divided into Several bands on the heads of Columbia river & Missouri,
Some low down the Columbia River

[Clark, September 6, 1805]
September 6th Friday 1805
Some little rain, purchased two fine horses & took a Vocabiliary of the
language litened our loads & packed up, rained contd. Untill 12 oClock
we Set out at 2 oClock at the Same time all the Indians Set out on Ther
way to meet the Snake Indians at the 3 forks of the Missouri. Crossed a
Small river from the right we call ____ Soon after Setting out, also a
Small Creek from the North all three forks Comeing together below our
Camp at which place the Mountains Close on each Side of the river, We
proceeded on N 30 W. Crossed a Mountain and Struck the river Several
miles down, at which place the Indians had Encamped two days before, we
Proceeded on Down the River which is 30 yds. wide Shallow & Stoney.
Crossing it Several times & Encamped in a Small bottom on the right
side. rained this evening nothing to eate but berries, our flour out,
and but little Corn, the hunters killed 2 pheasents only- all our
horses purchased of the oote lash Shutes we Secured well for fear of
their leaveing of us, and watched them all night for fear of their
leaving us or the Indians prosuing & Steeling them.

[Clark, September 7, 1805]
September 7th Satturday 1805
A Cloudy & rainie Day the greater Part of the Day dark & Drisley we
proceedd on down the river thro a Vallie passed Several Small Runs on
the right & 3 creeks on the left The Vallie from 1 to 2 miles wide the
Snow top mountains to our left, open hilley Countrey on the right. Saw
2 horses left by the Indians Those horses were as wild a Elk. One of
our hunters Came up this morning without his horse, in the course of
the night the horse broke loose & Cleared out- we did not make Camp
untill dark, for the want of a good place, one of our hunters did not
join us this evening. he haveing killed an elk packed his horses &
could not overtake us

[Clark, September 8, 1805]
September 8th Sunday 1805
a Cloudy morning Set out early and proceeded on through an open vallie
for 23 miles passed 4 Creeks on the right Some runs on the left, The
bottoms as also the hills Stoney bad land. Some pine on the Creeks and
mountains, an partial on the hills to the right hand Side. two of our
hunters came up with us at 12 oClock with an Elk, & Buck- the wind from
the N. W. & Cold. The foot of the Snow mountains approach the River on
the left Side. Some Snow on The mountain to the right also proceeded on
down the Vallie which is pore Stoney land and encamped on the right
Side of the river a hard rain all the evening we are all Cold and wet.
on this part of the river on the head of Clarks River I observe great
quantities of a peculiar Sort of Prickly peare grow in Clusters ovel &
about the Size of a Pigions egge with Strong Thorns which is So birded
as to draw the Pear from the Cluster after penetrateing our feet.
Drewyer killed a Deer. I killed a prarie fowl we found 2 mears and a
Colt the mears were lame, we ventered to let our late purchase of
horses loose to night

[Lewis, September 9, 1805]
Monday September 9th 1805.
Set out at 7 A M. this morning and proceeded down the Flathead river
leaving it on our left, the country in the valley of this river is
generally a prarie and from five to 6 miles wide the growth is almost
altogether pine principally of the longleafed kind, with some spruce
and a kind of furr resembleing the scotch furr. near the wartercourses
we find a small proportion of the narrow leafed cottonwood some redwood
honeysuckle and rosebushes form the scant proportion of underbrush to
be seen. at 12 we halted on a small branch which falls in to the river
on the E. side, where we breakfasted on a scant proportion of meat
which we had reserved from the hunt of yesterday added to three geese
which one of our hunters killed this morning. two of our hunters have
arrived, one of them brought with him a redheaded woodpecker of the
large kind common to the U States. this is the first of the kind I have
seen since I left the Illinois. just as we were seting out Drewyer
arrived with two deer. we continued our rout down the valley about 4
miles and crossed the river; it is hear a handsome stream about 100
yards wide and affords a considerable quantity of very clear water, the
banks are low and it's bed entirely gravel. the stream appears
navigable, but from the circumstance of their being no sammon in it I
believe that there must be a considerable fall in it below. our guide
could not inform us where this river discharged itself into the
columbia river, he informed us that it continues it's course along the
mountains to the N. as far as he knew it and that not very distant from
where we then were it formed a junction with a stream nearly as large
as itself which took it's rise in the mountains near the Missouri to
the East of us and passed through an extensive valley generally open
prarie which forms an excellent pass to the Missouri. the point of the
Missouri where this Indian pass intersects it, is about 30 miles above
the gates of the rocky mountain, or the place where the valley of the
Missouri first widens into an extensive plain after entering the rockey
mountains. the guide informed us that a man might pass to the missouri
from hence by that rout in four days. we continued our rout down the W.
side of the river about 5 miles further and encamped on a large creek
which falls in on the West as our guide informes that we should leave
the river at this place and the weather appearing settled and fair I
determined to halt the next day rest our horses and take some
scelestial Observations. we called this Creek Travellers rest. it is
about 20 yards wide a fine bould clear runing stream the land through
which we passed is but indifferent a could white gravley soil. we
estimate our journey of this day at 19 M.

[Clark, September 9, 1805]
September 9th Monday 1805
a fair morning Set out early and proceeded on thro a plain as yesterday
down the valley Crossed a large Scattering Creek on which Cotton trees
grew at 11/2 miles, a Small one at 10 miles, both from the right, the
main river at 15 miles & Encamped on a large Creek from the left which
we call Travelers rest Creek. killed 4 deer & 4 Ducks & 3 prarie fowls.
day fair Wind N. W. See Suplement

[Lewis, September 10, 1805]
Tuesday September 10th 1805.
The morning being fair I sent out all the hunters, and directed two of
them to procede down the river as far as it's junction with the Eastern
fork which heads near the missouri, and return this evening. this fork
of the river we determined to name the Valley plain river. I think it
most probable that this river continues it's course along the rocky
Mts. Northwardly as far or perhaps beyond the scources of Medecine
river and then turning to the West falls into the Tacootchetessee. The
Minetares informed us that there was a large river west of, and at no
great distance from the sources of Medecine river, which passed along
the Rocky Mountains from S. to N.this evening one of our hunters
returned accompanyed by three men of the Flathead nation whom he had
met in his excurtion up travellers rest Creek. on first meeting him the
Indians were allarmed and prepared for battle with their bows and
arrows, but he soon relieved their fears by laying down his gun and
advancing towards them. the Indians were mounted on very fine horses of
which the Flatheads have a great abundance; that is, each man in the
nation possesses from 20 to a hundred head. our guide could not speake
the language of these people but soon engaged them in conversation by
signs or jesticulation, the common language of all the Aborigines of
North America, it is one understood by all of them and appears to be
sufficiently copious to convey with a degree of certainty the outlines
of what they wish to communicate. in this manner we learnt from these
people that two men which they supposed to be of the Snake nation had
stolen 23 horses from them and that they were in pursuit of the
theaves. they told us they were in great hast, we gave them some boiled
venison, of which the eat sparingly. the sun was now set, two of them
departed after receiving a few small articles which we gave them, and
the third remained, having agreed to continue with us as a guide, and
to introduce us to his relations whom he informed us were numerous and
resided in the plain below the mountains on the columbia river, from
whence he said the water was good and capable of being navigated to the
sea; that some of his relation were at the sea last fall and saw an old
whiteman who resided there by himself and who had given them some
handkerchiefs such as he saw in our possession.- he said it would
require five sleeps wich is six days travel, to reach his relations.
the Flatheads are a very light coloured people of large stature and
comely form.

[Clark, September 10, 1805]
September 10th Tuesday 1805
A fair morning Concluded to Delay to day and make Some observations, as
at this place the rout which we are to prosue will pass up the
Travelers rest Creek, The day proved fair and we took equal altitudes &
Some Inner observations. The Latd. 46° 48' 28" as the guide report that
no game is to be found on our rout for a long ways, ads an addition to
the cause of our delay to precure Some meat, despatched all our hunters
in different directions, to hunt the Deer which is the only large game
to be found they killed 4 deer a Beaver & 3 Grouse which was divided,
one of the hunters Colter, met with 3 Tushapaw Indians who were in
pursuit of 2 Snake Indians that bade taken from ther Camps on the head
of Kooskooske River 21 horses, Those Indians came with Colter to our
Camp & informed by Signs of their misfortune & the rout to ther
villages &c. &c. one of them Concluded to return with us. we gave them
a ring fish hook & tied a pece of ribin in the hare of each which
appeared to please them verry much, Cap Lewis gave them a Steel & a
little Powder to make fire, after eating 2 of them proceeded on in
pursute of their horses. men all much engaged preparing mockersons &c.
&c. The Countrey about this place is already described in that above.

[Clark, September 11, 1805]
September 11th Wednesday 1805
A fair morning wind from the N W we Set out at 3 oClock and proceeded
on up the Travelers rest Creek, accompanied by the flat head or
Tushapaws Indians about 7 miles below this Creek a large fork comes in
from the right and heads up against the waters of the Missouri below
the Three forks, this river has extensive Vallies of open leavel land,
"and passes in its Whole Course thro a Valie" they call it our Guide
tels us a fine large roade passes up this river to the Missouri- The
loss of 2 of our horses detained us util. 3 oClock. P.M. our Flathead
Indian being restless thought proper to leave us and proceed on alone,
Sent out the hunters to hunt in advance as usial. (we have Selected 4
of the best hunters to go in advance to hunt for the party. This
arrangement has been made long sinc) we Proceeded on up the Creek on
the right Side thro a narrow valie and good road for 7 miles and
Encamped at Some old Indian Lodges, nothing killed this evening hills
on the right high & ruged, the mountains on the left high & Covered
with Snow. The day Verry worm

[Clark, September 12, 1805]
September 12th Thursday 1805
a white frost Set out at 7 oClock & proceeded on up the Creek, passed a
Fork on the right on which I saw near an old Indian encampment a Swet
house Covered wthh earth, at 2 miles assended a high hill & proceeded
through a hilley and thickly timbered Countrey for 9 miles & on the
Right of the Creek, passing Several branches from the right of fine
clear water and Struck at a fork at which place the road forks, one
passing up each fork. The Timber is Short & long leaf Pine Spruce Pine
& fur. The road through this hilley Countrey is verry bad passing over
hills & thro Steep hollows, over falling timber &c. &c. continued on &
passed Some most intolerable road on the Sides of the Steep Stoney
mountains, which might be avoided by keeping up the Creek which is
thickly covered with under groth & falling timber Crossed a mountain 8
miles with out water & encamped on a hill Side on the Creek after
Decending a long Steep mountain, Some of our Party did not git up
untill 10 oClock P M. I mad camp at 8 on this roade & particularly on
this Creek the Indians have pealed a number of Pine for the under bark
which they eate at certain Seasons of the year, I am told in the Spring
they make use of this bark our hunters Killed only one Pheasent this
after noon. Party and horses much fatigued.

[Clark, September 13, 1805]
September 13th Wednesday 1805 a cloudy morning Capt Lewis and one of
our guides lost their horses, Capt Lewis & 4 men detained to hunt the
horses, I proceeded on with the partey up the Creek at 2 miles passed
Several Springs which I observed the Deer Elk &c. had made roads to,
and below one of the Indians had made a whole to bathe, I tasted this
water and found it hot & not bad tasted The last ____ in further
examonation I found this water nearly boiling hot at the places it
Spouted from the rocks (which a hard Corse Grit, and of great size the
rocks on the Side of the Mountain of the Same texture) I put my finger
in the water, at first could not bare it in a Second-as Several roads
led from these Springs in different derections, my Guide took a wrong
road and took us out of our rout 3 miles through intolerable rout,
after falling into the right road I proceeded on thro tolerabl rout for
abt. 4 or 5 miles and halted to let our horses graze as well as waite
for Capt Lewis who has not yet Come up, The pine Countrey falling
timber &c. &c. Continue. This Creek is verry much darned up with the
beaver, but we can See none, dispatched two men back to hunt Capt Lewis
horse, after he came up, and we proceeded over a mountain to the head
of the Creek which we left to our left and at 6 miles from the place I
nooned it, we fell on a Small Creek from the left which Passed through
open glades Some of which 1/2 a mile wide, we proceeded down this Creek
about 2 miles to where the mountains Closed on either Side crossing the
Creek Several times & Encamped.

One Deer & Some Pheasants killed this morning, I shot 4 Pheasents of
the Common Kind except the taile was black. The road over the last
mountain was thick Steep & Stoney as usial, after passing the head of
Travelers rest Creek, the road was verry fine leavel open & firm Some
mountains in view to the S E & S W. Covered with Snow.

[Clark, September 14, 1805]
September 14th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy day in the Valies it rained and hailed, on the top of the
mountains Some Snow fell we Set out early and Crossed a high mountn on
the right of the Creek for 6 miles to the forks of the Glade Creek the
right hand fork which falls in is about the Size of the other, we
Crossed to the left Side at the foks, and Crossd a verry high Steep
mountain for 9 miles to a large fork from the left which appears to
head in the Snow toped mountains Southerley and S. E. we Crossd. Glade
Creek above its mouth, at a place the Tushepaws or Flat head Indians
have made 2 wears across to Catch Sammon and have but latterly left the
place I could see no fish, and the grass entirely eaten out by the
horses, we proceeded on 2 miles & Encamped opposit a Small Island at
the mouth of a branch on the right side of the river which is at this
place 80 yards wide, Swift and Stoney, here we wer compelled to kill a
Colt for our men & Selves to eat for the want of meat & we named the
South fork Colt killed Creek, and this river we Call Flathead River-
The Mountains which we passed today much worst than yesterday the last
excessively bad & Thickly Strowed with falling timber & Pine Spruc fur
Hackmatak & Tamerack, Steep & Stoney our men and horses much fatigued,
The rain ____

[Clark, September 15, 1805]
Wednesday Septr. 15th 1805
We set out early. the morning Cloudy and proceeded on Down the right
Side of River over Steep points rockey & buschey as usial for 4 miles
to an old Indian fishing place, here the road leaves the river to the
left and assends a mountain winding in every direction to get up the
Steep assents & to pass the emence quantity of falling timber which had
falling from dift. causes i e. fire & wind and has deprived the Greater
part of the Southerley Sides of this mountain of its gren timber, 4
miles up the mountain I found a Spring and halted for the rear to come
up and to let our horses rest & feed, about 2 hours the rear of the
party came up much fatigued & horses more So, Several horses Sliped and
roled down Steep hills which hurt them verry much The one which Carried
my desk & Small trunk Turned over & roled down a mountain for 40 yards
& lodged against a tree, broke the Desk the horse escaped and appeared
but little hurt Some others verry much hurt, from this point I observed
a range of high mountains Covered with Snow from S E. to S W with Their
top bald or void of timber. after two hours delay we proceeded on up
the mountain Steep & ruged as usial, more timber near the top, when we
arrived at the top As we Conceved we could find no water and Concluded
to Camp and make use of the Snow we found on the top to cook the remnt.
of our Colt & make our Supe, evening verry Cold and Cloudy. Two of our
horses gave out, pore and too much hurt to proceed on and left in the
rear- nothing killed to day except 2 Phests.

From this mountain I could observe high ruged mountains in every
direction as far as I could See. with the greatest exertion we Could
only make 12 miles up this mountain and encamped on the top of the
mountain near a Bank of old Snow about 3 feet deep lying on the
Northern Side of the mountain and in Small banks on the top & leavel
parts of the mountain, we melted the Snow to drink, and Cook our horse
flesh to eat.

[Clark, September 16, 1805]
Saturday Septr. 16th 1805
began to Snow about 3 hours before Day and Continud all day the Snow in
The morning 4 Inches deep on The old Snow, and by night we found it
from 6 to 8 Inches deep I walked in front to keep the road and found
great dificuelty in keeping it as in maney places the Snow had entirely
filled up the track, and obliged me to hunt Several minits for the
track at 12 oClock we halted on the top of the mountain to worm & dry
our Selves a little as well as to let our horses rest and graze a
little on Some long grass which I observed, (on) The South Steep hills
Side & falling timber Continue to day, and a thickly timbered Countrey
of 8 different kinds of pine, which are So covered with Snow, that in
passing thro them we are continually covered with Snow, I have been wet
and as cold in every part as I ever was in my life, indeed I was at one
time fearfull my feet would freeze in the thin mockersons which I wore,
after a Short delay in the middle of the Day, I took one man and
proceeded on as fast as I could about 6 miles to a Small branch passing
to the right, halted and built fires for the party agains their arrival
which was at Dusk verry cold and much fatigued we Encamped at this
Branch in a thickly timbered bottom which was Scercely large enough for
us to lie leavil, men all wet cold and hungary. Killed a Second Colt
which we all Suped hartily on and thought it fine meat.

I saw 4 Black tail Deer to day before we Set out which came up the
mountain and what is Singular Snaped 7 tims at a large buck. it is
Singular as my gun has a Steel frisen and never Snaped 7 times before
in examining her found the flint loose to describe the road of this day
would be a repitition of yesterday excpt the Snow which made it much
wors to proseed as we had in maney places to derect our Selves by the
appearence of the rubbings of the Packs against the trees which have
limbs quiet low and bending downwards

[Clark, September 17, 1805]
Sunday 17th Septr. 1805
Cloudy morning our horses much Scattered which detained us untill one
oClock P.M. at which time we Set out the falling Snow & Snow from the
trees which kept us wet all the after noon passed over Several high
ruged Knobs and Several dreans & Springs passing to the right, &
passing on the ridge devideing the waters of two Small rivers. road
excessively bad Snow on the Knobs, no Snow in the vallies Killed a fiew
Pheasents which was not Sufficient for our Supper which compelled us to
kill Something. a coalt being the most useless part of our Stock he
fell a Prey to our appetites. The after part of the day fare, we made
only 10 miles to day two horses fell & hurt themselves very much. we
Encamped on the top of a high Knob of the mountain at a run passing to
the left. we proceed on as yesterday, & with dificulty found the road

[Lewis, September 18, 1805]
Wednesday September 18th 1805.
Cap Clark set out this morning to go a head with six hunters. there
being no game in these mountains we concluded it would be better for
one of us to take the hunters and hurry on to the leavel country a head
and there hunt and provide some provision while the other remained with
and brought on the party the latter of these was my part; accordingly I
directed the horses to be gotten up early being determined to force my
march as much as the abilities of our horses would permit. the
negligence of one of the party Willard who had a spare horse not
attending to him and bringing him up last evening was the cause of our
detention this morning untill 1/2 after 8 A M when we set out. I sent
willard back to serch for his horse, and proceeded on with the party at
four in the evening he overtook us without the horse, we marched 18
miles this day and encamped on the side of a steep mountain; we
suffered for water this day passing one rivulet only; we wer fortunate
in finding water in a steep raviene about 1/2 maile from our camp. this
morning we finished the remainder of our last coult. we dined & suped
on a skant proportion of portable soupe, a few canesters of which, a
little bears oil and about 20 lbs. of candles form our stock of
provision, the only recources being our guns & packhorses. the first is
but a poor dependance in our present situation where there is nothing
upon earth exept ourselves and a few small pheasants, small grey
Squirrels, and a blue bird of the vulter kind about the size of a
turtle dove or jay bird. our rout lay along the ridge of a high
mountain course S. 20 W. 18 in. used the snow for cooking.

[Clark, September 18, 1805]
Monday 18th Septr. 1805
a fair morning cold I proceded on in advance with Six hunters to try
and find deer or Something to kill we passed over a countrey Similar to
the one of yesterday more falling timber passed Several runs & Springs
passing to the right from the top of a high part of the mountain at 20
miles I had a view of an emence Plain and leavel Countrey to the S W. &
West at a great distance a high mountain in advance beyond the Plain,
Saw but little Sign of deer and nothing else, much falling timber, made
32 miles and Encamped on a bold running Creek passing to the left which
I call Hungery Creek as at that place we had nothing to eate. I halted
only one hour to day to let our horses feed on Grass and rest

[Lewis, September 19, 1805]
Thursday September 19th 1805.
Set out this morning a little after sun rise and continued our rout
about the same course of yesterday or S. 20 W. for 6 miles when the
ridge terminated and we to our inexpressable joy discovered a large
tract of Prairie country lying to the S. W. and widening as it appeared
to extend to the W. through that plain the Indian informed us that the
Columbia river, in which we were in surch run. this plain appeared to
be about 60 Miles distant, but our guide assured us that we should
reach it's borders tomorrow the appearance of this country, our only
hope for subsistance greately revived the sperits of the party already
reduced and much weakened for the want of food. the country is thickly
covered with a very heavy growth of pine of which I have ennumerated 8
distinct species. after leaving the ridge we asscended and decended
several steep mountains in the distance of 6 miles further when we
struck a Creek about 15 yards wide our course being S. 35 W. we
continued our rout 6 miles along the side of this creek upwards passing
2 of it's branches which flowed in from the N. 1st at the place we
struck the creek and the other 3 miles further. the road was
excessively dangerous along this creek being a narrow rockey path
generally on the side of steep precipice, from which in many places if
ether man or horse were precipitated they would inevitably be dashed in
pieces. Fraziers horse fell from this road in the evening, and roled
with his load near a hundred yards into the Creek. we all expected that
the horse was killed but to our astonishment when the load was taken
off him he arose to his feet & appeared to be but little injured, in 20
minutes he proceeded with his load. this was the most wonderfull escape
I ever witnessed, the hill down which he roled was almost perpendicular
and broken by large irregular and broken rocks. the course of this
Creek upwards due W. we encamped on the Stard. side of it in a little
raviene, having traveled 18 miles over a very bad road. we took a small
quantity of portable soup, and retired to rest much fatiegued. several
of the men are unwell of the disentary. brakings out, or irruptions of
the Skin, have also been common with us for some time.

[Clark, September 19, 1805]
Tuesday 19th Septr. 1805
Set out early proceeded on up the Creek passing through a Small glade
at 6 miles at which place we found a horse. I derected him killed and
hung up for the party after takeing a brackfast off for our Selves
which we thought fine after Brackfast proceed on up the Creek two miles
& left it to our right passed over a mountain, and the heads of branch
of hungary Creek, two high mountains, ridges and through much falling
timber (which caused our road of to day to be double the derect
distance on the Course) Struck a large Creek passing to our left which
I Kept down for 4 miles and left it to our left & passed over a
mountain bad falling timber to a Small Creek passing to our left and
Encamped. I killed 2 Pheasents, but fiew birds Blue jay, Small white
headed hawk, Some Crows & ravins & large hawks. road bad.

[Lewis, September 20, 1805]
Friday September 20th 1805.
This morning my attention was called to a species of bird which I had
never seen before. It was reather larger than a robbin, tho much it's
form and action. the colours were a blueish brown on the back the wings
and tale black, as wass a stripe above the croop 3/4 of an inch wide in
front of the neck, and two others of the same colour passed from it's
eyes back along the sides of the head. the top of the head, neck brest
and belley and butts of the wing were of a fine yellowish brick reed.
it was feeding on the buries of a species of shoemake or ash which
grows common in country & which I first observed on 2d of this month. I
have also observed two birds of a blue colour both of which I believe
to be of the haulk or vulter kind. the one of a blue shining colour
with a very high tuft of feathers on the head a long tale, it feeds on
flesh the beak and feet black. it's note is cha-ah, cha-ah. it is about
the size of a pigeon; and in shape and action resembles the jay bird.-
another bird of very similar genus, the note resembling the mewing of
the cat, with a white head and a light blue colour is also common, as
are a black species of woodpecker about the size of the lark woodpecker
Three species of Pheasants, a large black species, with some white
feathers irregularly scattered on the brest neck and belley a smaller
kind of a dark uniform colour with a red stripe above the eye, and a
brown and yellow species that a good deel resembles the phesant common
to the Atlantic States. we were detained this morning untill ten oclock
in consequence of not being enabled to collect our horses. we had
proceeded about 2 miles when we found the greater part of a horse which
Capt Clark had met with and killed for us. he informed me by note that
he should proceed as fast as possible to the leavel country which lay
to the S. W. of us, which we discovered from the hights of the
mountains on the 19th there he intended to hunt untill our arrival. at
one oclock we halted and made a hearty meal on our horse beef much to
the comfort of our hungry stomachs. here I larnt that one of the
Packhorses with his load was missing and immediately dispatched
Baptiest Lapage who had charge of him, to surch for him. he returned at
;3 OC. without the horse. The load of the horse was of considerable
value consisting of merchandize and all my stock of winter cloathing. I
therefore dispatched two of my best woodsmen in surch of him, and
proceeded with the party. Our rout lay through a thick forrest of large
pine the general course being S. 25 W. and distance about 15 miles. our
road was much obstructed by fallen timber particularly in the evening
we encamped on a ridge where ther was but little grass for our horses,
and at a distance from water. however we obtained as much as served our
culinary purposes and suped on our beef. the soil as you leave the
hights of the mountains becomes gradually more fertile. the land
through which we passed this evening is of an excellent quality tho
very broken, it is a dark grey soil. a grey free stone appearing in
large masses above the earth in many places. saw the hucklebury,
honeysuckle, and alder common to the Atlantic states, also a kind of
honeysuckle which bears a white bury and rises about 4 feet high not
common but to the western side of the rockey mountains. a growth which
resembles the choke cherry bears a black bury with a single stone of a
sweetish taste, it rises to the hight of 8 or 10 feet and grows in
thick clumps. the Arborvita is also common and grows to an immence
size, being from 2 to 6 feet in diameter.

[Clark, September 20, 1805]
Wednesday 20th September 1805
I Set out early and proceeded on through a Countrey as ruged as usial
passed over a low mountain into the forks of a large Creek which I kept
down 2 miles and assended a Steep mountain leaveing the Creek to our
left hand passed the head of Several dreans on a divideing ridge, and
at 12 miles decended the mountain to a leavel pine Countrey proceeded
on through a butifull Countrey for three miles to a Small Plain in
which I found maney Indian lodges, at the distance of 1 mile from the
lodges I met 3 boys, when they Saw me ran and hid themselves searched
found gave them Small pieces of ribin & Sent them forward to the
village a man Came out to meet me with ;great Caution & Conducted us to
a large Spacious Lodge which he told me (by Signs) was the Lodge of his
great Chief who had Set out 3 days previous with all the Warriers of
the nation to war on a South West derection & would return in 15 or 18
days. the fiew men that were left in the Village aged, great numbers of
women geathered around me with much apparent Signs of fear, and apr.
pleased they gave us a Small piece of Buffalow meat, Some dried Salmon
beries & roots in different States, Some round and much like an onion
which they call quamash the Bread or Cake is called Passhe-co Sweet, of
this they make bread & Supe they also gave us the bread made of this
root all of which we eate hartily, I gave them a fiew Small articles as
preasents, and proceeded on with a Chief to his Village 2 miles in the
Same Plain, where we were treated kindly in their way and continued
with them all night Those two Villages consist of about 30 double
lodges, but fiew men a number of women & children; They call themselves
Cho pun-nish or Pierced Noses; " their dialect appears verry different
from the Tushapaws altho origneally the Same people" They are darker
than the Tushapaws Their dress Similar, with more beads white & blue
principally, brass & Copper in different forms, Shells and ware their
haire in the Same way. they are large Portley men Small women & handsom
fetued Emence quantity of the quawmash or Pas-shi-co root gathered & in
piles about the plains, those roots grow much an onion in marshey
places the seed are in triangular Shell on the Stalk. they Sweat them
in the following manner i. e. dig a large hole 3 feet deep Cover the
bottom with Split wood on the top of which they lay Small Stones of
about 3 or 4 Inches thick, a Second layer of Splited wood & Set the
whole on fire which heats the Stones, after the fire is extinguished
they lay grass & mud mixed on the Stones, on that dry grass which
Supports the Pash-Shi-co root a thin Coat of the Same grass is laid on
the top, a Small fire is kept when necessary in the Center of the kite
&c.

I find myself verry unwell all the evening from eateing the fish &
roots too freely. Sent out the hunters they killed nothing Saw Some
Signs of deer.

[Lewis, September 21, 1805]
Saturday September 21st 1805.
We were detained this morning untill 11 OCk. in consequence of not
being able to collect our horses. we then set out and proceeded along
the ridge on which we had encamped, leaving which at 11/2 we passed a
large creek runing to the left just above it's junction with another
which run parrallel with and on the left of our road before we struck
the creek; through the level wide and heavy timbered bottom of this
creek we proceeded about 21/2 miles when bearing to the right we passed
a broken country heavily timbered great quantities of which had fallen
and so obstructed our road that it was almost impracticable to proceed
in many places. though these hills we proceeded about 5 Ms. when we
passed a small creek on which Capt Clark encamped on the 19th passing
this creek we continued our rout 5 Ms thro a similar country when we
struck a large creek at the forks, passed the Northen branch and
continued down it on the West side 1 mile and encamped in a small open
bottom where there was tolerable food for our horses. I directed the
horses to be hubbled to prevent delay in the morning being determined
to make a forced march tomorrow in order to reach if possible the open
country. we killed a few Pheasants, and I killd a prarie woolf which
together with the ballance of our horse beef and some crawfish which we
obtained in the creek enabled us to make one more hearty meal, not
knowing where the next was to be found. the Arborvita increases in
quantity and size. I saw several sticks today large enough to form
eligant perogues of at least 45 feet in length.- I find myself growing
weak for the want of food and most of the men complain of a similar
deficiency and have fallen off very much. the general course of this
day S 30 W 15M.

[Clark, September 21, 1805]
Septr. 21st Saturday 1805
a fine morning Sent out all the hunters early in different directions
to Kill Something and delayed with the Indians to prevent Suspicion &
to acquire as much information as possible. one of them Drew me a Chart
of the river & nations below informed of one falls below which the
white men lived from whome they got white beeds cloth &c. &c. The day
proved warm, 2 Chifs of Bands visited me to day- the hunters all
returned without any thing, I collected a horse load of roots & 3
Sammon & Sent R Fields with one Indian to meet Capt Lewis at 4 oClock
Set out with the other men to the river, passed thro a fine Pine
Country decended a Steep ruged hill verry long to a Small river which
comes from our left and I suppose it to be ____ River passed down the
river 2 miles on a Steep hill side at r r oClock P.M. arrived at a camp
of 5 Squars a boy & 2 Children those people were glad to See us & gave
us drid Sammon one had formerly been taken by the Minitarries of the
north & Seen white men, our guide called the Chief who was fishing on
the other Side of the river, whome I found a Cherfull man of about 65 I
gave him a Medal.

[Clark, September 21, 1805]
Thursday 21st Septr. 1805
A fine morning Sent out all the hunters in different directions to hunt
deer, I myself delayd with the Chief to prevent Suspission and to
Collect by Signs as much information as possible about the river and
Countrey in advance. The Cheif drew me a kind of chart of the river,
and informed me that a greater Cheif than himself was fishing at the
river half a days march from his village called the twisted hare, and
that the river forked a little below his Camp and at a long distance
below & below 2 large forks one from the left & the other from the
right the river passed thro'gh the mountains at which place was a great
fall of the water passing through the rocks, at those falls white
people lived from whome they preceured the white Beeds & Brass &c.
which the womin wore; a Chief of another band visit me to day and
Smoked a pipe, I gave my handkerchief & a Silver Cord with a little
Tobacco to those Chiefs, The hunters all return without any thing, I
purchased as much Provisions as I could with what fiew things I chaned
to have in my Pockets, Such a Salmon Bread roots & berries, & Sent one
man R. Fields with an Indian to meet Capt. Lewis, and at 4 oClock P M.
Set out to the river, met a man at dark on his way from the river to
the village, whome I hired and gave the neck handkerchief of one of the
men, to polit me to the Camp of the twisted hare we did not arrive at
the Camp of the Twisted hare but oppost, untill half past 11 oClock P
M. found at this Camp five Squars & 3 Children. my guide called to the
Chief who was Encamped with 2 others on a Small Island in the river, he
Soon joind me, I found him a Chearfull man with apparant Siencerity, I
gave him a medal &c. and Smoked untill 1 oClock a.m. and went to Sleep.
The Countrey from the mountains to the river hills is a leavel rich
butifull Pine Countrey badly watered, thinly timbered & covered with
grass- The weather verry worm after decending into the low Countrey,-
the river hills are verry high & Steep, Small bottoms to this little
river which is Flat head & is 160 yards wide and Sholey This river is
the one we killed the first Coalt on near a fishing were I am verry
Sick to day and puke which relive me.

[Lewis, September 22, 1805]
Sunday September 22cd 1805.
Notwithstanding my positive directions to hubble the horses last
evening one of the men neglected to comply. he plead ignorance of the
order. this neglect however detained us untill 1/2 after eleven OCk at
which time we renewed our march, our course being about west. we had
proceeded about two and a half miles when we met Reubin Fields one of
oure hunters, whom Capt. Clark had dispatched to meet us with some
dryed fish and roots that he had procured from a band of Indians, whose
lodges were about eight miles in advance. I ordered the party to halt
for the purpose of taking some refreshment. I divided the fish roots
and buries, and was happy to find a sufficiency to satisfy compleatly
all our appetites. Fields also killed a crow after refreshing ourselves
we proceeded to the village due West 71/2 Miles where we arrived at 5
OCk. in the afternoon our rout was through lands heavily timbered, the
larger wood entirely pine. the country except the last 3 miles was
broken and decending the pleasure I now felt in having tryumphed over
the rocky Mountains and decending once more to a level and fertile
country where there was every rational hope of finding a comfortable
subsistence for myself and party can be more readily conceived than
expressed, nor was the flattering prospect of the final success of the
expedition less pleasing. on our approach to the village which
consisted of eighteen lodges most of the women fled to the neighbouring
woods on horseback with their children, a circumstance I did not expect
as Capt. Clark had previously been with them and informed them of our
pacific intentions towards them and also the time at which we should
most probably arrive. the men seemed but little concerned, and several
of them came to meet us at a short distance from their lodges unarmed.

[Clark, September 22, 1805]
September 22nd Sunday 1805
a fine morning, I proceed on down the little river to about 11/2 a mile
& found the Chif in a Canoe Comeing to meet me I got into his Canoe &
Crossed over to his Camp on a Small Island at a rapid Sent out the
hunters leaving one to take care of the baggage, & after eating a part
of a Samn. I Set out on my return to meet Capt. Lewis with the Chief &
his Son at 2 miles met Shields with 3 Deer, I took a Small peice &
Changed for his horse which was fresh & proced on this horse threw me 3
times which hurt me Some. at Dark met Capt Lewis Encamped at the first
Village men much fatigued & reduced, the Supply which I sent by R Flds.
was timely, they all eate hartily of roots & fish, 2 horses lost 1 Days
journey back

[Clark, September 22, 1805]
Friday 22nd Septr. 1805
a verry worm day the hunters Shild killed 3 Deer this morning. I left
them on the Island and Set out with the Chief & his Son on a young
horse for the Village at which place I expected to meet Capt Lewis this
young horse in fright threw himself & me 3 times on the Side of a Steep
hill & hurt my hip much, Cought a Coalt which we found on the roade & I
rode it for Several miles untill we saw the Chiefs horses, he cought
one & we arrived at his Village at Sunset, & himself and myslf walked
up to the 2d Village where I found Capt Lewis & the party Encamped,
much fatigued, & hungery, much rejoiced to find something to eate of
which They appeared to partake plentifully. I cautioned them of the
Consequences of eateing too much &c.

The planes appeared covered with Spectators viewing the White men and
the articles which we had, our party weacke and much reduced in flesh
as well as Strength, The horse I left hung up they receved at a time
they were in great want, and the Supply I Sent by R. Fields proved
timely and gave great encouragement to the party with Captn. Lewis. he
lost 3 horses one of which belonged to our guide. Those Indians Stole
out of R. F. Shot pouch his knife wipers Compas & Steel, which we Could
not precure from them, we attempted to have Some talk with those people
but Could not for the want of an Interpreter thro which we Could
Speake, we were Compelled to converse Altogether by Signs- I got the
Twisted hare to draw the river from his Camp down which he did with
great cherfullness on a white Elk Skin, from the 1s fork which is a few
seven miles below, to the large fork on which the So So ne or Snake
Indians fish, is South 2 Sleeps; to a large river which falls in on the
N W. Side and into which The Clarks river empties itself is 5 Sleeps
from the mouth of that river to the falls is 5 Sleeps at the falls he
places Establishments of white people &c. and informs that great
numbers of Indians reside on all those foks as well as the main river;
one other Indian gave me a like account of the Countrey, Some few drops
of rain this evening. I precured maps of the Country & river with the
Situation of Indians, To come from Several men of note Seperately which
varied verey little.

[Clark, September 23, 1805]
Septr. 23rd Sunday
Traded with the Indians, made 3 Chiefs and gave them meadels & Tobacco
& Handkerchif & knives, and a flag & left a Flag & hand kerches for the
great Chief when he returns from war, in the evening proceeded to the
2d Vilg 2 miles, a hard wind and rain at dark, traded for Some root
Bread & Skins to make Shirts. hot day

[Clark, September 23, 1805]
Saturday 23rd Septr 1805.
We assembled the principal Men as well as the Chiefs and by Signs
informed them where we came from where bound our wish to inculcate
peace and good understanding between all the red people &c. which
appeared to Satisfy them much, we then gave 2 other Medals to other
Chefs of bands, a flag to the twisted hare, left a flag & Handkerchief
to the grand Chief gave, a Shirt to the Twisted hare & a knife &
Handkerchif with a Small pece of Tobacco to each. Finding that those
people gave no provisions to day we deturmined to purchase with our
Small articles of merchindize, accord we purchased all we could, Such
as roots dried, in bread, & in ther raw State, Berris of red Haws &
Fish and in the evening Set out and proceeded on to the 2d Village 2
miles dist. where we also purchased a few articles all amounting to as
much as our weak horses Could Carry to the river Capt. Lewis & 2 men
verry Sick this evening, my hip verry Painfull, the men trade a few old
tin Canisters for dressed Elk Skin to make themselves Shirts, at dark a
hard wind from The S W accompaned with rain which lasted half an hour.
The twisted hare envited Capt Lewis & myself to his lodge which was
nothin more than Pine bushes & bark, and gave us Some broiled dried
Salmon to eate, great numbers about us all night at this village the
women were busily employed in gathering and drying the Pas-she co root
of which they had great quantites dug in piles

[Clark, September 24, 1805]
Septr. 24th Monday 1805
Set out early for the river and proceeded on the Same road I had
prevsly gorn to the Island at which place I had found the Chief &
formed a Camp several 8 or 9 men Sick, Capt Lewis Sick all Complain of
a Lax & heaviness at the Stomack, I gave rushes Pills to Several hot
day maney Indians & thier gangues of horses follow us hot day Hunter
had 5 Deer

[Clark, September 24, 1805]
Sunday 24th Septr. 1805
a fine morning collected our horses despatched J. Colter back to hunt
the horses lost in the mountains & bring up Some Shot left behind, and
at 10 oClock we all Set out for the river and proceeded on by the Same
rout I had previously traveled, and at Sunset We arrived at the Island
on which I found the Twisted hare and formed a Camp on a large Island a
littl below, Capt Lewis Scercely able to ride on a jentle horse which
was furnishd by the Chief, Several men So unwell that they were
Compelled to lie on the Side of the road for Some time others obliged
to be put on horses. I gave rushes Pills to the Sick this evening.
Several Indians follow us.

[Clark, September 25, 1805]
Septr. 25th I with th Chief & 2 young men went down to hunt timber for
Canoes- proceeded on down to the forks 4 miles N 70° W 2 miles S. 75°W 2
miles, halted young men Cought 6 Sammon, the forks nearly the Same
Size, Crossed the South fork & found Timber large Pine in a bottom
Proceeded up the South Side 3 parts of Party Sick Capt Lewis verry Sick
hot day

[Clark, September 25, 1805]
Monday 25th of September 1805
a verry hot day most of the Party Complaining and 2 of our hunters left
here on the 22nd verry Sick they had killed only two Bucks in my
absence. I Set out early with the Chief and 2 young men to hunt Some
trees Calculated to build Canoes, as we had previously deturmined to
proceed on by water, I was furnished with a horse and we proceeded on
down the river Crossed a Creek at 1 mile from the right verry rockey
which I call rock dam Creek & Passed down on the N side of the river to
a fork from the North which is about the Same Size and affords about
the Same quantity of water with the other forks we halted about an
hour, one of the young men took his guilt and killed 6 fine Salmon two
of them were roasted and we eate, two Canoes Came up loaded with the
furnitur & provisions of 2 families, those Canoes are long Stedy and
without much rake I crossed the South fork and proceeded up on the
South Side, the most of the way thro a narrow Pine bottom in which I
Saw fine timber for Canoes one of the Indian Canoes with 2 men with
Poles Set out from the forks at the Same time I did and arrived at our
Camp on the Island within 15 minits of the Same time I did, not
withstanding 3 rapids which they had to draw the Canoe thro in the
distance, when I arrived at Camp found Capt Lewis verry Sick, Several
men also verry Sick, I gave Some Salts & Tarter emetic, we deturmined
to go to where the best timbr was and there form a Camp

[Clark, September 26, 1805]
Septr. 26th Set out early and proceeded down the river to the bottom on
the S Side opposit the forks & formed a Camp had ax handled ground &c.
our axes all too Small, Indians caught Sammon & Sold us, 2 Chiefs &
thir families came & camped near us, Several men bad, Capt Lewis Sick I
gave Pukes Salts &c. to Several, I am a little unwell. hot day

[Clark, September 26, 1805]
Tuesday 26th Septr. 1805
Set out early and proceeded on down the river to a bottom opposit the
forks of the river on the South Side and formed a Camp. Soon after our
arrival a raft Came down the N. fork on which was two men, they came
too, I had the axes distributed and handled and men apotned. ready to
commence building canoes on tomorrow, our axes are Small & badly
Calculated to build Canoes of the large Pine, Capt Lewis Still very
unwell, Several men taken Sick on the way down, I administered Salts
Pils Galip, Tarter emetic &c. I feel unwell this evening, two Chiefs &
their families follow us and encamp near us, they have great numbers of
horses. This day proved verry hot, we purchase fresh Salmon of the
Indians

[Clark, September 27, 1805]
Septr. 27th Thursday 1805
Set all the men able to work abt. building Canoes, Colter returned and
found one horse & the Canister of Shot left in the mountains he also
killed a Deer 1/2 of which he brought hot day- men Sick

[Clark, September 27, 1805]
27th Septr. Wednesday 1805
all the men able to work comened building 5 Canoes, Several taken Sick
at work, our hunters returned Sick without meet. J. Colter returned he
found only one of the lost horses, on his way killed a deer, half of
which he gave the Indians the other proved nourishing to the Sick The
day verry hot, we purchase fresh Salmon of them Several Indians Come up
the river from a Camp Some distance below Capt Lewis very Sick nearly
all the men Sick. our Shoshonee Indian Guide employed himself makeing
flint points for his arrows

[Clark, September 28, 1805]
Septr. 28th Friday Several men Sick all at work which is able, nothing
killed to day. Drewyer Sick maney Indians visit us worm day

[Clark, September 28, 1805]
Thursday 28th Septr. 1805
Our men nearly all Complaining of ther bowels, a heaviness at the
Stomach & Lax, Some of those taken first getting better, a number of
Indians about us gazeing &c. &c. This day proved verry worm and
Sultery, nothing killed men complaining of their diat of fish & roots.
all that is able working at the Canoes, Several Indians leave us to
day, the raft continue on down the river, one old man informed us that
he had been to the White peoples fort at the falls & got white beeds &c
his Story was not beleved as he Could explain nothing.

[Clark, September 29, 1805]
Septr. 29th Satterday Drewyer killed 2 deer Collins 1 der men Conte
Sickly at work all able to work.

[Clark, September 29, 1805]
Sunday 29th Septr. 1805
a Cool morning wind from the S. W. men Sick as usial, all The men that
are able to at work, at the Canoes Drewyer killed 2 Deer Colter killed
1 Deer, the after part of this day worm Cap Lewis very Sick, and most
of the men complaning very much of ther bowels & Stomach

[Clark, September 30, 1805]
Sunday 30th Septr. 1805 Forks
a fine morning our men recruting a little cool, all at work doing
Something except 2 which are verry Sick, Great run of Small duck
passing down the river this morning.

[Clark, September 30, 1805]
Septr. 30th Saturday (Monday) 1805
a fine fair morning a the men recruiting a little, all at work which
are able. Great number of Small Ducks pass down the river this morning.
maney Indians passing up and down the river.

[Clark, October 1, 1805]
October 1st 1805 Tuesday
a cool morning wind from the N. E. I examine & Dry all our article
Cloths &. nothing to eate except Drid fish verry bad diet Capt Lewis
getting much better than for Several days past Several Indians visit us
from the different villages below and on the main fork S. nothing killed

[Clark, October 1, 1805]
October 1st Tuesday 1805
A cool morning wind from the East had Examined and dried all our
clothes and other articles and laid out a Small assortment of Such
articles as those Indians were fond of to trade with them for Some
provisions (they are remarkably fond of Beeds) nothin to eate except a
little dried fish which they men complain of as working of them as as
much as a dost of Salts. Capt Lewis getting much better. Several
Indians visit us from the different tribes below Some from the main
South fork our hunters killed nothing to day worm evening

[Clark, October 2, 1805]
Oct. 2nd 1805 Wednesday
dispatch 2 men & an Indian up to the villages we first Came too to
purchase roots fish &c. nothing to eate but roots. gave a small pice of
Tobacco to the Indians, 3 broachs & 2 rings with my Handkerchif divided
between 5 of them. I walked on the hills to hunt to day, Saw only one
deer, Could kill nothing day excesively hot in the river bottom wind
North, Burning out the holler of our canoes, men Something better
nothing except a Small Prarie wolf Killed to day, our Provisions all
out except what fiew fish we purchase of the Indians with us; we kill a
horse for the men at work to eate &c. &c.

[Clark, October 2, 1805]
October 2nd Wednesday 1805
Despatched 2 men Frasure & S. Guterich back to the village with 1
Indian & 6 horses to purchase dried fish, roots &c. we have nothing to
eate but roots, which give the men violent pains in their bowels after
eating much of them. To the Indians who visited us yesterday I gave
divided my Handkerchief between 5 of them, with a Small piece of
tobacco & a pece of riebin & to the 2 principal men each a ring &
brooch. I walked out with my gun on the hills which is verry Steep &
high could kill nothing. day hot wind N. Hunters killed nothing excep a
Small Prarie wolf. Provisions all out, which Compells us to kill one of
our horses to eate and make Suep for the Sick men.

[Clark, October 3, 1805]
October 3rd Thursday 1805 Canoe Camp
a fair cool morning wind from the East all our men getting well and at
work at the canoes &c.

[Clark, October 3, 1805]
October 3rd Thursday 1805
a fine morning cool wind East all our men getting better in helth, and
at work at the Canoes &. The Indians who visited us from below Set out
on their return early. Several others Came from different directions

[Clark, October 4, 1805]
October 4th 1805 Friday
This morning is a little cool wind from the East. displeased an Indian
by refuseing to let him have a pice of Tobacco. thre Inds. from the S.
fork visit us Frasur and Guterich return from the village with fish
roots &c. which they purchased

[Clark, October 4, 1805]
October 4th Friday 1805
a Cool wind from off the Eastern mountains I displeased an Indian by
refuseing him a pice of Tobacco which he tooke the liberty to take out
of our Sack Three Indians visit us from the Grat River South of us. The
two men Frasure and Guterich return late from the Vllage with Fish
roots &c. which they purchased as our horse is eaten we have nothing to
eate except dried fish & roots which disagree with us verry much. The
after part of this day verry warm. Capt Lewis Still Sick but able to
walk about a little.

[Clark, October 5, 1805]
October 5th Saturday 1805
a Cool morning wind from the East, Collected all our horses, & Branded
them 38 in No. and delivered them to the men who were to take Charge of
them, each of which I gave a Knife & one a wampom Shell gorget, The
Lattd. of this place the mean of 2 observations is 46° 34' 56.3" North.
nothing to eate but dried roots & Dried fish, Capt Lewis & my Self eate
a Supper of roots boiled, which filled us So full of wind, that we were
Scercely able to Breathe all night felt the effects of it. Lanced 2
Canoes to day one proved a little leakey the other a verry good one

[Clark, October 5, 1805]
October 5th Saty 1805
Wind Easterley and Cool, had all our horses 38 in number Collected and
branded Cut off their fore top and delivered them to the 2 brothers and
one Son of one of the Chiefs who intends to accompany us down the river
to each of those men I gave a Knife & Some Small articles &c. they
promised to be attentive to our horses untill we Should return.

Lattitude of this place from the mean of two observations is 46° 34'
56.3" North

Nothing to eate except dried fish & roots. Capt Lewis & myself eate a
Supper of roots boiled, which Swelled us in Such a manner that we were
Scercely able to breath for Several hours- finished and lanced 2 of our
Canoes this evening which proved to be verry good our hunters with
every diligence Could kill nothing. The hills high and ruged and woods
too dry to hunt the deer which is the only game in our neighbourhood.
Several Squars Came with Fish and roots which we purchased of them for
Beeds, which they were fond of- Capt Lewis not So well to day as
yesterday

[Clark, October 6, 1805]
October 6th Sunday 1805
A Col Easterley wind which Spring up in the latter part of the night
and Continues untill about 7 or 8 oClock A.M. had all our Saddles
Collected a whole dug and in the night buried them, also a Canister of
powder and a bag of Balls at the place the Canoe which Shields made was
cut from the body of the tree- The Saddles were buried on the Side of a
bend about 1/2 a mile below- all the Canoes finished this evening ready
to be put into the water. I am taken verry unwell with a paine in the
bowels & Stomach, which is certainly the effects of my diet-which last
all night-.

The winds blow cold from a little before day untill the Suns gets to
Some hight from the Mountans East as they did from the mountans at the
time we lay at the falls of Missouri from the West The river below this
forks is Called Kos kos keel it is Clear rapid with Shoals or Swift
places The open Countrey Commences a fiew miles below This on each side
of the river, on the Lard Side below the 1st Creek. with a few trees
Scattered near the river. passd maney bad rapids, one Canoe that in
which I went in front Sprung a Leak in passing the 3rd rapid

Set out at 3 oClock P M & proceeded on

[Clark, October 7, 1805]
October 7th Monday 1805
I continu verry unwell but obliged to attend every thing all the Canoes
put into the water and loaded, fixed our Canoes as well as possible and
Set out as we were about to Set out we missd. both of the Chiefs who
promised to accompany us; I also missed my Pipe Tomahawk which Could
not be found.

The after part of the day Cloudy proceded on passed 10 rapids which wer
danjerous the Canoe in which I was Struck a rock and Sprung a leak in
the 3rd rapid, we proceeded on 20 miles and Encamped on a Stard point
oppost a run. passed a Creek Small on the Lard. Side at 9 miles, a
Short distanc from the river at 2 feet 4 Inches N. of a dead toped pine
Treee had burid 2 Lead Canisters of Powder

Had the Canoes unloaded examined and mended a Small leake which we
discovered in a thin place in her Side passed Several Camps of Indians
to day our Course and distance Shall be given after I get to the forks.
&c.which the Indians Say is the last of the bad water untill we get to
the great falls 10 day below, where the white people live &c. The
Lodges are of Sticks set in a form of roof of a house & covered with
mats and Straw

[Clark, October 8, 1805]
8th Octr. 1805 Tuesday
a cloudy morning Changed Canoes and buried 2 Lead canisters of Powder 2
foot 4 In. North of a dead toped pine opposit our Camp & opposit the
mouth of a run after repareing leaks in the Canoes Sprung Coming over
the rapids yesterday Set out at 9 oClock

[Clark, October 8, 1805]
October 8th Tuesday 1805
A Cloudy morning loaded our Canoes which was unloaded last night and
Set out at 9 oClock passed 15 rapids four Islands and a Creek on the
Stard Side at 16 miles just below which one canoe in which Serjt. Gass
was Stearing and was nearle turning over, She Sprung a leak or Split
open on one Side and Bottom filled with water & Sunk on the rapid, the
men, Several of which Could not Swim hung on to the Canoe, I had one of
the other Canoes unloaded & with the assistance of our Small Canoe and
one Indian Canoe took out every thing & toed the empty Canoe on Shore,
one man Tompson a little hurt, every thing wet perticularly the greater
part of our Small Stock of merchindize, had every thing opened, and two
Sentinals put over them to keep off the Indians, who are enclined to
theave haveing Stole Several Small articles those people appeared
disposed to give us every assistance in their power dureing our
distress- We passed Several Encampments of Indians on the Islands and
those near the rapids in which places they took the Salmon, at one of
Those Camps we found our two Chiefs who had promised to accompany us,
we took them on board after the Serimony of Smokeing

[Clark, October 9, 1805]
Octo. 9th all day drying our roots good & articles which got wet in the
Canoe last night. our 2 Snake Indian guides left us without our
knowledge, The Indians troublesom Stole my Spoon which they returned.
men merry at night & Singular acts of a Ind. woman

[Clark, October 9, 1805]
October 9th Wednesday 1805
The morning Cool as usial the greater part of the day proved to be
Cloudy, which was unfavourable for drying our things &c. which got wet
yesterday. In examoning our canoe found that by putting Knees & Strong
peces pined to her Sides and bottom &c. She Could be made fit for
Service in by the time the goods dried, Set 4 men to work at her,
Serjt. Pryor & Gass, Jo Fields & Gibson, others to Collect rosin, at 1
oClock She was finished Stronger than ever The wet articles not
Sufficiently dried to pack up obliged us to delay another night dureing
the time one man was tradeing for fish for our voyage, at Dark we were
informed that our old guide & his Son had left us and had been Seen
running up the river Several miles above, we Could not account for the
Cause of his leaveing us at this time, without receiving his pay for
the Services he had rendered us, or letting us know anything of his
intention.

we requested the Chief to Send a horseman after our old guide to come
back and recive his pay &c. which he advised us not to do as his nation
would take his things from him before he passed their camps The Indians
and our party were very mery this after noon a woman faind madness &c.
&c. Singular acts of this woman in giveing in Small potions all She had
& if they were not received She would Scarrify her Self in a horid
manner &c. Capt Lewis recovring fast.

a verry worm day, Indians continue all day on the banks to view us as
low as the forks. Two Indians come up in a Canoe, who means to
accompany us to the Great rapids, Could get no observations, worm night
The water of the South fork is of a bluish green colour

[Clark, October 10, 1805]
October 10th Wednesday Thursday
a fine Morning loaded and Set out at 7 oClock at 21/2 miles passed a
run on the Stard. Side haveing passed 2 Islands and two bad rapids at 3
miles lower passed a Creek on the Lard. with wide Cotton willow bottoms
haveing passed an Island and a rapid an Indian Camp of three Lodgs
below the Creek at 81/2 miles lower we arrived at the heade of a verry
bad riffle at which place we landed near 8 Lodges of Indians on the
Lard Side to view the riffle, haveing passed two Islands & Six rapids
Several of them verry bad-after view'g this riffle two Canoes were
taken over verry well; the third Stuck on a rock which took us an hour
to get her off which was effected without her receving a greater
injurey than a Small Split in her Side which was repared in a Short
time, we purchased fish & dogs of those people, dined and proceeded on-
here we met with an Indian from the falls at which place he Sais he Saw
white people, and expressd an inclination to accompany us, we passd. a
fiew miles above this riffle 2 Lodges and an Indian batheing in a hot
bath made by hot Stones thrown into a pon of water. at this riffle
which we Call ragid rapid took meridian altitude of the Suns upper Limb
with Sextt. 74° 26' 0" Latd. produced ____ North at five miles lower and
Sixty miles below the forks arived at a large Southerly fork which is
the one we were on with the Snake or So-So-nee nation (haveing passed 5
rapids) This South fork or Lewis's River which has two forks which fall
into it on the South the ist Small the upper large and about 2 days
march up imediately parrelal to the first villages we Came to and is
called by those Indians Par-nash-te on this fork a little above its
mouth resides a Chief who as the Indian Say has more horses than he can
Count and further Sayeth that Louises River is navagable about 60 miles
up with maney rapids at which places the Indians have fishing Camps and
Lodjes built of an oblong form with flat ruffs. below the 1st river on
the South Side there is ten established fishing places on the 1st fork
which fall in on the South Side is one fishing place, between that and
the Par nash to River, five fishing places, above two, and one on that
river all of the Cho-pun-nish or Pierced Nose Nation many other Indians
reside high up those rivers The Countrey about the forks is an open
Plain on either Side I can observe at a distance on the lower Stard.
Side a high ridge of Thinly timbered Countrey the water of the South
fork-is a greenish blue, the north as clear as cristial

Imediately in the point is an Indian Cabin & in the South fork a Small
Island, we came to on the Stard. Side below with a view to make some
luner observations the night proved Cloudy and we were disapointed The
Indians Came down all the Couses of this river on each Side on horses
to view us as we were desending,- The man whome we saw at the ruged
rapid and expressed an inclination to accompany us to the great rapids,
came up with his Son in a Small Canoe and procisted in his intentions-
worthey of remark that not one Stick of timber on the river near the
forks and but a fiew trees for a great distance up the River we
decended I think Lewis's River is about 250 yards wide, the Koos koos
ke River about 150 yards wide and the river below the forks about 300
yards wide. a miss understanding took place between Shabono one of our
interpreters, and Jo. & R Fields which appears to have originated in
just- our diet extremely bad haveing nothing but roots and dried fish
to eate, all the Party have greatly the advantage of me, in as much as
they all relish the flesh of the dogs, Several of which we purchased of
the nativs for to add to our Store of fish and roots &c. &c.-

The Cho-pun-nish or Pierced nose Indians are Stout likeley men, handsom
women, and verry dressey in their way, the dress of the men are a white
Buffalow robe or Elk Skin dressed with Beeds which are generally white,
Sea Shells-i e the Mother of Pirl hung to ther hair & on a pice of
otter Skin about their necks hair Cewed in two parsels hanging forward
over their Sholders, feathers, and different Coloured Paints which they
find in their Countrey Generally white, Green & light Blue. Some fiew
were a Shirt of Dressed Skins and long legins, & Mockersons Painted,
which appears to be their winters dress, with a plat of twisted grass
about their necks.

The women dress in a Shirt of Ibex, or Goat Skins which reach quite
down to their anckles with a girdle, their heads are not ornemented,
their Shirts are ornemented with quilled Brass, Small peces of Brass
Cut into different forms, Beeds, Shells & curios bones &c. The men
expose those parts which are generally kept from view by other nations
but the women are more perticular than any other nation which I have
passed in Screting the parts

Their amusements appear but fiew as their Situation requires the utmost
exertion to prcure food they are generally employed in that pursute,
all the Summer & fall fishing for the Salmon, the winter hunting the
deer on Snow Shoes in the plains and takeing care of ther emence
numbers of horses, & in the Spring cross the mountains to the Missouri
to get Buffalow robes and meet &c. at which time they frequent meet
with their enemies & lose their horses & maney of ther people

Ther disorders are but fiew and those fiew of a Scofelous nature. they
make great use of Swetting. The hot and cold baethes, They are verry
Selfish and Stingey of what they have to eate or ware, and they expect
in return Something for everything give as presents or the Survices
which they doe let it be however Small, and fail to make those returns
on their part.

[Clark, October 11, 1805]
October 11th 1805
a cloudy morning wind from the East We Set out early and proceeded on
passed a rapid at two miles, at 6 miles we came too at Some Indian
lodges and took brackfast, we purchased all the fish we could and Seven
dogs of those people for Stores of Provisions down the river. at this
place I saw a curious Swet house under ground, with a Small whole at
top to pass in or throw in the hot Stones, which those in threw on as
much water as to create the temporature of heat they wished- at 9 mile
passed a rapid at 15 miles halted at an Indian Lodge, to purchase
provisions of which we precred some of the Pash-he-quar roots five dogs
and a few fish dried, after takeing Some dinner of dog &c we proceeded
on. Came to and encamped at 2 Indian Lodges at a great place of fishing
here we met an Indian of a nation near the mouth of this river.

we purchased three dogs and a fiew fish of those Indians, we Passed
today nine rapids all of then great fishing places, at different places
on the river saw Indian houses and Slabs & Spilt timber raised from the
ground being the different parts of the houses of the natives when they
reside on this river for the purpose of fishing at this time they are
out in the Plain on each side of the river hunting the antilope as we
are informed by our Chiefs, near each of those houses we observe Grave
yards picketed, or pieces of wood stuck in permiscuesly over the grave
or body which is Covered with earth, The Country on either Side is an
open plain leavel & fertile after assending a Steep assent of about 200
feet not a tree of any kind to be Seen on the river The after part of
the day the wind from the S. W. and hard. The day worm.

[Clark, October 12, 1805]
October 12th 1805 Saturday
a fair cool morning wind from E after purchasing all the drid fish
those people would Spear from their hole in which they wer buried we
Set out at 7 oClock and proceeded on

[Clark, October 12, 1805]
October 12th Saturday 1805
A fair Cool morning wind from the East. after purchaseing every Speces
of the provisions those Indians could Spare we Set out and proceeded on
at three miles passed four Islands Swift water and a bad rapid opposit
to those Islands on the Lard. Side. at 141/2 miles passed the mouth of
a large Creek on the Lard Side opposit a Small Island here the Countrey
assends with a gentle assent to the high plains, and the River is 400
yards wide about 1 mile below the Creek on the Same Side took meridian
altitude which gave 72° 30' 00" Latitude produced ____ North in the
afternoon the wind Shifted to the S. W. and blew hard we passed to day
____ rapids Several of them very bad and came to at the head of one (at
30 miles) on the Stard. Side to view it before we attemptd. to dsend
through it. The Indians had told us was verry bad- we found long and
dangerous about 2 miles in length, and maney turns necessary to Stear
Clare of the rocks, which appeared to be in every direction. The
Indians went through & our Small Canoe followed them, as it was late we
deturmined to camp above untill the morning. we passed Several Stoney
Islands today Country as yesterday open plains, no timber of any kind a
fiew Hack berry bushes & willows excepted, and but few drift trees to
be found So that fire wood is verry Scerce- The hills or assents from
the water is faced with a dark ruged Stone. The wind blew hard this
evening.-

[Clark, October 13, 1805]
October 13th Sunday 1805
rained a little before day, and all the morning, a hard wind from the S
West untill 9 oClock, the rained Seased & wind luled, and Capt Lewis
with two Canoes Set out & passed down the rapid The others Soon
followed and we passed over this bad rapid Safe. We Should make more
portages if the Season was not So far advanced and time precious with us

The wife of Shabono our interpetr we find reconsiles all the Indians,
as to our friendly intentions a woman with a party of men is a token of
peace

[Clark, October 13, 1805]
October 13th Sunday 1805
a windey dark raney morning The rain commenced before day and Continued
moderately until) near 12 oClock- we took all our Canoes through This
rapid without any injurey. a little below passed through another bad
rapid at ____ miles passed the Mo. of a large Creek little river in a
Stard. bend, imediately below a long bad rapid; in which the water is
Confined in a Chanel of about 20 yards between rugid rocks for the
distance of a mile and a half and a rapid rockey Chanel for 2 miles
above. This must be a verry bad place in high water, here is great
fishing place, the timbers of Several houses piled up, and a number of
wholes of fish, and the bottom appears to have been made use of as a
place of deposit for their fish for ages past, here two Indians from
the upper foks over took us and continued on down on horse back, two
others were at this mouth of the Creek- we passed a rapid about 9 mile
lower. at dusk came to on the Std. Side & Encamped. The two Inds. on
horse back Stayed with us. The Countery Thro which we passed to day is
Simlar to that of yesterday open plain no timber passed Several houses
evacuated at established fishing places, wind hard from The S. W. in
the evening and not very cold

[Clark, October 14, 1805]
October 14th Monday 1805
a verry Cool morning wind from the West Set out at 8 oClock proceeded on

at this rapid the Canoe a Stern Steared by drewyer Struck a rock turned
the men got out on a rock the Stern of the Canoe took in water and She
Sunk the men on the rock hel her, a number of articles floated all that
Could be Cought were taken by 2 of the othr Canoes, Great many articles
lost among other things 2 of the mens beding Shot pouches Tomahaws &c.
&c. and every article wet of which we have great Cause to lament as all
our loose Powder two Canisters, all our roots prepared in the Indian
way, and one half of our goods, fortunately the lead canisters which
was in the canoe was tied down, otherwise they must have been lost as
the Canoe turned over we got off the men from the rock toed our canoe
on Shore after takeing out all the Stores &c. we Could & put them out
to dry on the Island on which we found Some wood which was covered with
Stones, this is the Parts of an Indian house, which we used for fire
wood, by the wish of our two Chiefs- Those Chees, one of them was in
the Canoe, Swam in & Saved Some property, The Inds. have buried fish on
this Isld. which we are Cautious not to touch. our Small Canoe & three
Indians in another was out of Sight at the time our missfortune
hapined, and did not join us. wind hard S W.

[Clark, October 14, 1805]
October 14th Monday 1805
a Verry Cold morning wind from the West and Cool untill about 12 oClock
When it Shifted to the S. W. at 21/2 miles passed a remarkable rock
verry large and resembling the hull of a Ship Situated on a Lard point
at Some distance from the assending Countrey passed rapids at 6 and 9
miles. at 12 miles we Came too at the head of a rapid which the Indians
told me was verry bad, we viewed the rapid found it bad in decending
three Stern Canoes Stuk fast for Some time on the head of the rapid and
one Struk a rock in the worst part, fortunately all landed Safe below
the rapid which was nearly 3 miles in length. here we dined, and for
the first time for three weeks past I had a good dinner of Blue wing
Teel, after dinner we Set out and had not proceded on two miles before
our Stern Canoe in passing thro a Short rapid opposit the head of an
Island, run on a Smoth rock and turned broad Side, the men got out on
the rock all except one of our Indian Chiefs who Swam on Shore, The
Canoe filed and Sunk a number of articles floated out, Such as the mens
bedding clothes & Skins, the Lodge &c. &c. the greater part of which
were cought by 2 of the Canoes, whilst a 3rd was unloading & Steming
the Swift Current to the relief of the men on the rock who could with
much dificuelty hold the Canoe. however in about an hour we got the men
an Canoe to Shore with the Loss of Some bedding Tomahaws Shot pouches
Skins Clothes &c &c. all wet we had every articles exposed to the Sun
to dry on the Island, our loss in provisions is verry Considerable all
our roots was in the Canoe that Sunk, and Cannot be dried Sufficint to
Save, our loose powder was also in the Canoe and is all wett This I
think, we Shall saved.- In this Island we found some Split timber the
parts of a house which the Indians had verry Securely covered with
Stone, we also observed a place where the Indians had buried there
fish, we have made it a point at all times not to take any thing
belonging to the Indians even their wood. but at this time we are
Compelled to violate that rule and take a part of the Split timber we
find here bured for fire wood, as no other is to be found in any
direction. our Small Canoe which was a head returned at night with 2
ores which they found floating below. The wind this after noon from the
S. W. as usial and hard way of the forks to the Indian Camps at the
first were not one mouthfull to eate untill night as our hunters could
kill nothing and I could See & catch no fish except a few Small ones.
The Indians gave us 2 Sammon boiled which I gave to the men, one of my
men Shot a Sammon in the river about Sunset those fish gave us a
Supper. all the Camp flocked about me untill I went to Sleep- and I
beleve if they had a Sufficency to eate themselves and any to Spare
they would be liberal of it I detected the men to mend their Mockessons
to night and turn out in the morning early to hunt Deer fish birds &c.
&c. Saw great numbers of the large Black grass hopper. Some bars which
were verry wild, but few Birds. a number of ground Lizards; Some fiew
Pigions plainly See a rainge of mountains which bore S. E. & N. W. the
nearest point south about 60 miles, and becoms high toward the N. W.
The plaines on each Side is wavering. Labiesh killed 2 gees & 2 Ducks
of the large kind. at two oClock we loaded & Set out, our Powder &
Provisions of roots not Sufficently dry. we Shall put them out at the
forks or mouth of this river which is at no great distance, and at
which place we Shall delay to make Some Selestial observations &c.
passed Eleven Island and Seven rapids to day. Several of the rapids
verry bad and dificuelt to pass. The Islands of different Sizes and all
of round Stone and Sand, no timber of any kind in Sight of the river, a
fiew Small willows excepted; in the evening the countrey becomes lower
not exceding 90 or 100 feet above the water and back is a wavering
Plain on each Side, passed thro narrows for 3 miles where the Clifts of
rocks juted to the river on each Side compressing the water of the
river through a narrow chanel; below which it widens into a kind of
bason nearly round without any proceptiable current, at the lower part
of this bason is a bad dificuelt and dangerous rapid to pass, at the
upper part of this rapid we over took the three Indians who had Polited
us thro the rapids from the forks. those people with our 2 Chiefs had
proceeded on to this place where they thought proper to delay for us to
warn us of the difficulties of this rapid. we landed at a parcel of
Split timber, the timber of a house of Indians out hunting the Antilope
in the plains; and raised on Scaffolds to Save them from the Spring
floods. here we were obliged for the first time to take the property of
the Indians without the consent or approbation of the owner. the night
was cold & we made use of a part of those boards and Split logs for
fire wood. Killed two teel this evening. Examined the rapids which we
found more dificuelt to pass than we expected from the Indians
information. a Suckcession of Sholes, appears to reach from bank to
bank for 3 miles which was also intersepted with large rocks Sticking
up in every direction, and the chanel through which we must pass
crooked and narrow. we only made 20 miles today, owing to the detention
in passing rapids &c.

[Clark, October 16, 1805]
Oar. 16th 1805 Wednesday
a cool morning Set out early passed the rapid with all the Canoes
except Sgt. Pryors which run on a rock near the lower part of the rapid
and Stuck fast, by the assistance of the 3 other Canoes She was
unloaded and got off the rock without any further injorey than, the
wetting the greater part of her loading- loaded and proceeded on I
walked around this rapid

We halted a Short time above the Point and Smoked with the Indians, &
examined the Point and best place for our Camp, we Camped on the
Columbia River a little above the point I Saw about 200 men Comeing
down from their villages & were turned back by the Chief, after we
built our fires of what wood we Could Collect, & get from the Indians,
the Chief brought down all his men Singing and dancing as they Came,
formed a ring and danced for Some time around us we gave them a Smoke,
and they returned the village a little above, the Chief & Several delay
untill I went to bead. bought 7 dogs & they gave us Several fresh
Salmon & Som horse dried

[Clark, October 16, 1805]
October 16th Wednesday 1805
A cool morning deturmined to run the rapids, put our Indian guide in
front our Small Canoe next and the other four following each other, the
canoes all passed over Safe except the rear Canoe which run fast on a
rock at the lower part of the Rapids, with the early assistance of the
other Canoes & the Indians, who was extreamly ellert every thing was
taken out and the Canoe got off without any enjorie further than the
articles which it was loaded all wet. at 14 miles passed a bad rapid at
which place we unloaded and made a portage of 3/4 of a mile, haveing
passd. 4 Smaller rapids, three Islands and the parts of a house above,
I Saw Indians & Horses on the South Side below. five Indians came up
the river in great haste, we Smoked with them and gave them a piece of
tobacco to Smoke with their people and Sent them back, they Set out in
a run & continued to go as fast as They Could run as far as we Could
See them. after getting Safely over the rapid and haveing taken Diner
Set out and proceeded on Seven miles to the junction of this river and
the Columbia which joins from the N. W. passd. a rapid two Islands and
a graveley bare, and imediately in the mouth a rapid above an Island.
In every direction from the junction of those rivers the Countrey is
one Continued plain low and rises from the water gradually, except a
range of high Countrey which runs from S. W & N E and is on the opposit
Side about 2 miles distant from the Collumbia and keeping its detection
S W untill it joins a S W. range of mountains.

We halted above the point on the river Kimooenim to Smoke with the
Indians who had collected there in great numbers to view us, here we
met our 2 Chiefs who left us two days ago and proceeded on to this
place to inform those bands of our approach and friendly intentions
towards all nations &c. we also met the 2 men who had passed us Several
days ago on hors back, one of them we observed was a man of great
influence with those Indians, harranged them; after Smokeing with the
Indians who had collected to view us we formed a camp at the point near
which place I Saw a fiew pieces of Drift wood after we had our camp
fixed and fires made, a Chief came from their Camp which was about 1/4
of a mile up the Columbia river at the head of about 200 men Singing
and beeting on their drums Stick and keeping time to the musik, they
formed a half circle around us and Sung for Some time, we gave them all
Smoke, and Spoke to their Chiefs as well as we could by Signs informing
them of our friendly disposition to all nations, and our joy in Seeing
those of our Children around us, Gave the principal chief a large Medal
Shirt and Handkf. a 2nd Chief a Meadel of Small Size, and to the Cheif
who came down from the upper villages a Small Medal & Handkerchief.

The Chiefs then returned with the men to their camp; Soon after we
purchased for our Provisions Seven Dogs, Some fiew of those people made
us presents of fish and Several returned and delayed with us untill
bedtime- The 2 old Chiefs who accompanied us from the head of the river
precured us Some full Such as the Stalks of weed or plant and willow
bushes- one man made me a present of a about 20 lb. of verry fat Dried
horse meat.

Great quantities of a kind of prickley pares, much worst than any I
have before Seen of a tapering form and attach themselves by bunches.

[Clark, October 17, 1805]
October 17th Thursday 1805 Forks of Columbia
This morning after the Luner observations, the old chief came down, and
Several men with dogs to Sell & womin with fish &c. the Dogs we
purchased the fish not good.

I took 2 men and Set out in a Small Canoe with a view to go as high up
the Columbia river as the 1st forks which the Indians made Signs was
but a Short distance, I set out at 2 oClock firs course was N. 83° W 6
miles to the lower point of a Island on the Lard. Side, passed an
Island in the middle of the river at 5 miles, at the head of which is a
rapid not bad at this rapid 3 Lodges of mats on the Lard emenc
quantites of dried fish, then West 4 miles to the Lower point of an
Island on the Stard. Side, 2 lodges of Indians large and built of mats-
passed 3 verry large mat lodges at 2 mile on the Stard Side large
Scaffols of fish drying at every lodge, and piles of Salmon lying. the
Squars engaged prepareing them for the Scaffol- a Squar gave me a dried
Salmon from those lodes on the Island an Indian Showed me the mouth of
the river which falls in below a high hill on the Lard. N. 80° W. 8 miles
from the Island. The river bending Lard.- This river is remarkably
Clear and Crouded with Salmon in maney places, I observe in assending
great numbers of Salmon dead on the Shores, floating on the water and
in the Bottoms which can be seen at the debth of 20 feet. the Cause of
the emence numbers of dead Salmon I can't account for So it is I must
have seen 3 or 400 dead and maney living the Indians, I believe make
use of the fish which is not long dead as, I Struck one nearly dead and
left him floating, Some Indians in a canoe behind took the fish on
board his canoe

The bottoms on the South Side as high as the Tarcouche tesse is from 1
to 2 miles wide, back of the bottoms rises to hilly countrey, the Plain
is low on the North & Easte for a great distance no wood to be Seen in
any direction.

The Tarcouche tesse bears South of West, the Columbia N W above range
of hills on the West Parrelel a range of mountains to the East which
appears to run nearly North & South distance not more than 50 miles- I
returned to the point at Dusk followed by three canoes of Indians 20 in
number- I killed a Fowl of the Pheasent kind as large as a turkey. The
length from his Beeck to the end of its tail 2 feet 6- 3/4 Inches, from
the extremity of its wings across 3 feet 6 Inches. the tail feathers 13
Inches long, feeds on grass hoppers, and the Seed of wild Isoop 6

Those Indians are orderly, badly dressed in the Same fashions of those
above except the women who wore Short Shirts and a flap over them 22
Fishing houses of Mats robes of Deer, Goat & Beaver.

[Clark, October 17, 1805]
October 17th Thursday 1805
A fair morning made the above observations during which time the
principal Chief came down with Several of his principal men and Smoked
with us. Several men and woman offered Dogs and fish to Sell, we
purchased all the dogs we could, the fish being out of Season and
dieing in great numbers in the river, we did not think proper to use
them, Send out Hunters to Shute the Prarie Cock a large fowl which I
have only Seen on this river; Several of which I have killed, they are
the Size of a Small turkey, of the pheasant kind, one I killed on the
water edge to day measured from the Beek to the end of the toe 2 feet 6
& 3/4 Inches; from the extremities of its wings 3 feet 6 inches; the
tale feathers is 13 inches long; they feed on grasshoppers and the Seed
of the wild plant which is also peculiar to this river and the upper
parts of the Missoury somewhat resembling the whins-. Capt. Lewis took
a vocabelary of the Language of those people who call themselves So
hulk, and also one of the language of a nation resideing on a Westerly
fork of the Columbia which mouthes a fiew miles above this place who
Call themselves Chim na pum Some fiew of this nation reside with the So
kulks nation, Their language differ but little from either the Sokulks
or the Cho-pun-nish (or pierced nose) nation which inhabit the
Koskoskia river and Lewis's R below.

I took two men in a Small Canoe and assended the Columbia river 10
miles to an Island near the Stard. Shore on which two large Mat Lodges
of Indians were drying Salmon, (as they informed me by Signs for the
purpose of food and fuel, & I do not think at all improbable that those
people make use of Dried fish as fuel,) The number of dead Salmon on
the Shores & floating in the river is incrediable to Say and at this
Season they have only to collect the fish Split them open and dry them
on their Scaffolds on which they have great numbers, how far they have
to raft their timber they make their Scaffolds of I could not lern; but
there is no timber of any Sort except Small willow bushes in Sight in
any directionfrom this Island the natives showed me the enterance of a
large Westerly fork which they Call Tapetett at about 8 miles distant,
the evening being late I deturmined to return to the forks, at which
place I reached at Dark. from the point up the Columbia River is N. 83°
W. 6 miles to the lower point of an Island near the Lard. Side passed a
Island in the middle of the river at 5 miles at the head of which is a
rapid, not dangerous on the Lard Side opposit to this rapid is a
fishing place 3 Mat Lodges, and great quants. of Salmon on Scaffolds
drying. Saw great numhers of Dead Salmon on the Shores and floating in
the water, great numbers of Indians on the banks viewing me and 18
canoes accompanied me from the point- The Waters of this river is
Clear, and a Salmon may be Seen at the deabth of 15 or 20 feet. West 4
miles to the lower point of a large Island near the Stard. Side at 2
Lodges, passed three large lodges on the Stard Side near which great
number of Salmon was drying on Scaffolds one of those Mat lodges I
entered found it crouded with men women and children and near the
enterance of those houses I saw maney Squars engaged Splitting and
drying Salmon. I was furnished with a mat to Sit on, and one man Set
about prepareing me Something to eate, first he brought in a piece of a
Drift log of pine and with a wedge of the elks horn, and a malet of
Stone curioesly Carved he Split the log into Small pieces and lay'd it
open on the fire on which he put round Stones, a woman handed him a
basket of water and a large Salmon about half Dried, when the Stones
were hot he put them into the basket of water with the fish which was
Soon Suflicently boiled for use. it was then taken out put on a platter
of rushes neetly made, and Set before me they boiled a Salmon for each
of the men with me, dureing those preperations, I Smoked with those
about me who Chose to Smoke which was but fiew, this being a custom
those people are but little accustomed to and only Smok thro form.
after eateing the boiled fish which was delicious, I Set out & halted
or came too on the Island at the two Lodges. Several fish was given to
me, in return for Which I gave Small pieces of ribbond from those
Lodges the natives Showed me the mouth of Tap teel River about 8 miles
above on the west Side this western fork appears to beare nearly West,
The main Columbia river N W.- a range of high land to the S W and
parralal to the river and at the distance of 2 miles on the Lard. Side,
the countrey low on the Stard. Side, and all Coverd. with a weed or
plant about 2 & three feet high and resembles the whins. I can proceive
a range of mountains to the East which appears to bare N. & South
distant about 50 or 60 miles. no wood to be Seen in any derection- On
my return I was followd. by 3 canoes in which there was 20 Indians I
shot a large Prairie Cock Several Grouse, Ducks and fish. on my return
found Great Numbr. of the nativs with Capt Lewis, men all employd in
dressing ther Skins mending their clothes and putting ther arms in the
best order the latter being always a matter of attention with us. The
Dress of those natives differ but little from those on the Koskoskia
and Lewis's rivers, except the women who dress verry different in as
much as those above ware long leather Shirts which highly ornimented
with heeds Shells &c. &c. and those on the main Columbia river only
ware a truss or pece of leather tied around them at their hips and
drawn tite between ther legs and fastened before So as barly to hide
those parts which are So Sacredly hid & Scured by our women. Those
women are more inclined to Copulency than any we have yet Seen, with
low Stature broad faces, heads flatened and the foward compressed so as
to form a Streight line from the nose to the Crown of the head, their
eyes are of a Duskey black, their hair of a corse black without
orniments of any kind braded as above, The orniments of each Sects are
Similar, Such as large blue & white beeds, either pendant from their
ears or encircling their necks, or wrists & arms. they also ware
bracelets of Brass, Copper & horn, and trinkets of Shells, fish bones
and curious feathers. Their garments Consists of a short Shirt of
leather and a roabe of the Skins of Deer or the Antilope but fiew of
them ware Shirts all have Short robes. Those people appears to live in
a State of comparitive happiness; they take a greater Share labor of
the woman, than is common among Savage tribes, and as I am informd.
Content with one wife (as also those on the Ki moo e nim river) Those
people respect the aged with veneration, I observed an old woman in one
of the Lodges which I entered She was entirely blind as I was informed
by Signs, had lived more than 100 winters, She occupied the best
position in the house, and when She Spoke great attention was paid to
what She Said-. Those people as also those of the flat heads which we
had passed on the Koskoske and Lewis's rivers are Subject to Sore eyes,
and maney are blind of one and Some of both eyes. this misfortune must
be owing to the reflections of the Sun &c. on the waters in which they
are continually fishing during the Spring Summer & fall, & the Snows
dureing the, winter Seasons, in this open countrey where the eye has no
rest. I have observed amongst those, as well in all other tribes which
I have passed on these waters who live on fish maney of different
Sectes who have lost their teeth about middle age, Some have their
teeth worn to the gums, perticelar those of the upper jaws, and the
tribes generally have bad teeth the cause of it I cannot account sand
attachd. to the roots &c the method they have of useing the dri'd
Salmon, which is mearly worming it and eating the rine & Scales with
the flesh of the fish, no doubt contributes to it

The Houses or Lodges of the tribes of the main Columbia river is of
large mats made of rushes, Those houses are from 15 to 60 feet in
length generally of an Oblong Squar form, Suported by poles on forks in
the iner Side, Six feet high, the top is covered also with mats
leaveing a Seperation in the whole length of about 12 or 15 inches
wide, left for the purpose of admitting light and for the Smok of the
fire to pass which is made in the middle of the house.- The roughfs are
nearly flat, which proves to me that rains are not common in this open
Countrey

Those people appeare of a mild disposition and friendly disposedThey
have in their huts independant of their nets gigs & fishing tackling
each bows & large quivers of arrows on which they use flint Spikes.
Theire ammusements are Similar to those of the Missouri. they are not
beggerley and receive what is given them with much joy.

I saw but flew horses they appeared make but little use of those
animals principally useing Canoes for their uses of procureing food &c.

[Clark, October 18, 1805]
October 18th Friday 1805
a cold morning faire & wind from S E Several Heath hens or large
Pheasents lit near us & the men killed Six of them.

Took one altitude of the Suns upper Limb 28° 22' 15" at h m s 8 1 24 A.M.

Several Indian Canoes Come down & joind those with us, made a Second
Chief by giveing a meadel & wampom I also gave a String of wampom to
the old Chief who came down with us and informed the Indians of our
views and intentions in a council

Measured the width of the Columbia River, from the Point across to a
Point of view is S 22° W from the Point up the Columa to a Point of view
is N. 84° W. 148 poles, thence across to the 1st point of view is S 281/2
E

Measured the width of Ki moo e nim River, from the Point across to an
object on the opposit side is N. 411/2 E from the Point up the river is
N. 8 E. 82 poles thence accross to the Point of view is N. 79° East

Distance across the Columbia 9603/4 yds water

Distance across the Ki-moo-e nim 575 yds water

Names of this nation above the mouth of the Ki-moo-e-nim is So-Kulk
Perced noses The Names of the nation on the Kimoenim River is
Chopun-nish Piercd noses at the Prarie the name of a nation at the
Second forks of the Tape tele River, or Nocktock fork Chim-na-pum, Some
of which reside with the So kulkc above this-at and a few miles
distance,- 4 men in a Canoe come up from below Stayed a fiew minits and
returned.

Took a meridian altitude 68° 57' 30" the Suns upper Limb. The Lattitudes
produced is 46° 15' 13 9/10" North, Capt Lewis took a vocabillary of the
So kulk or Pierced noses Language and Chim-nd-pum Language whic is in
Some words different but orriginally the Same people The Great Chief
Cuts-Sa.h nim gave me a Sketch of the rivers & Tribes above on the
great river & its waters on which he put great numbers of villages of
his nation & friends, as noted on the Sketch

The fish being very bad those which was offerd to us we had every
reason to believe was taken up on the Shore dead, we thought proper not
to purchase any, we purchased forty dogs for which we gave articles of
little value, Such as beeds, bell, & thimbles, of which they appeard
verry fond, at 4 OClock we Set out down the Great Columbia accompand by
our two old Chiefs, one young man wished to accompany us, but we had no
room for more, & he could be of no Service to us

The Great Chief Continued with us untill our departure.

we Encamped a little below & opsd. the lower point of the Island on the
Lard. Side no wood to be found we were obliged to make use Small drid
willows to Cook- our old Chief informed us that the great Chief of all
the nations about lived at the 9 Lodges above and wished us to land &c.
he Said he would go up and Call him over they went up and did not
return untill late at night, about 20 came down & built a fire above
and Stayed all night. The chief brought a basket of mashed berries.

[Clark, October 18, 1805]
October 18th Friday 1805
This morning Cool and fare wind from the S. E. Six of the large Prarie
cock killed this morning. Several canoes of Indians Came down and
joined those with us, we had a council with those in which we informed
of our friendly intentions towards them and all other of our red
children; of our wish to make a piece between all of our red Children
in this quarter &c. &c. this was conveyed by Signs thro our 2 Chiefs
who accompanied us, and was understood, we made a 2d Chief and gave
Strings of wompom to them all in remembrance of what we Said- four men
in a Canoe came up from a large encampment on an Island in the River
about 8 miles below, they delayed but a fiew minits and returned,
without Speaking a word to us.

The Great Chief and one of the Chim-na pum nation drew me a Sketch of
the Columbia above and the tribes of his nation, living on the bank,
and its waters, and the Tape tett river which falls in 18 miles above
on the westerly side See Sketch below for the number of villages and
nations &c. &c.

We thought it necessary to lay in a Store of Provisions for our voyage,
and the fish being out of Season, we purchased forty dogs for which we
gave articles of little value, Such as bells, thimbles, knitting pins,
brass wire & a few beeds all of which they appeared well Satisfied and
pleased.

every thing being arranged we took in our Two Chiefs, and Set out on
the great Columbia river, haveing left our guide and the two young men
two of them enclined not to proceed on any further, and the 3rd could
be of no Service to us as he did not know the river below

Took our leave of the Chiefs and all those about us and proceeded on
down the great Columbia river passed a large Island at 8 miles about 3
miles in length, a Island on the Stard. Side the upper point of which
is opposit the center of the last mentioned Island and reaches 31/2
miles below the 1st. Island and opposit to this near the middle of the
river nine Lodges are Situated on the upper point at a rapid which is
between the lower point of the 1st Island and upper point of this;
great numbers of Indians appeared to be on this Island, and emence
quantites of fish Scaffold we landed a few minits to view a rapid which
Commenced at the lower point, passd this rapid which was verry bad
between 2 Small Islands two Still Smaller near the Lard. Side, at this
rapid on the Stard. Side is 2 Lodges of Indians Drying fish, at 21/2
miles lower and 141/2 below the point passed an Island Close under the
Stard. Side on which was 2 Lodges of Indians drying fish on Scaffolds
as above at 16 miles from the point the river passesinto the range of
high Countrey at which place the rocks project into the river from the
high clifts which is on the Lard. Side about 2/3 of the way across and
those of the Stard Side about the Same distance, the Countrey rises
here about 200 feet above The water and is bordered with black rugid
rocks, at the Commencement of this high Countrey on Lard Side a Small
riverlet falls in which appears to passed under the high County in its
whole cose Saw a mountain bearing S. W. Conocal form Covered with Snow.
passed 4 Islands, at the upper point of the 3rd is a rapid, on this
Island is two Lodges of Indians, drying fish, on the fourth Island
Close under the Stard. Side is nine large Lodges of Indians Drying fish
on Scaffolds as above at this place we were called to land, as it was
near night and no appearance of wood, we proceeded on about 2 miles
lower to Some willows, at which place we observed a drift log formed a
Camp on the Lard Side under a high hill nearly opposit to five Lodges
of Indians; Soon after we landed, our old Chiefs informed us that the
large camp above "was the Camp of the 1st Chief of all the tribes in
this quarter, and that he had called to us to land and Stay all night
with him, that he had plenty of wood for us &" This would have been
agreeable to us if it had have been understood perticelarly as we were
compelled to Use drid willows for fuel for the purpose of cooking, we
requested the old Chiefs to walk up on the Side we had landed and call
to the Chief to come down and Stay with us all night which they did;
late at night the Chief came down accompanied by 20 men, and formed a
Camp a Short distance above, the chief brought with him a large basket
of mashed berries which he left at our Lodge as a present. I saw on the
main land opposit those Lodges a number of horses feeding, we made 21
miles to day.

[Clark, October 19, 1805]
October 19th Saturday, The Great Chief 2d Chief and a Chief of a band
below Came and Smoked with us we gave a Meadel a String of Wampom &
handkerchef to the Great Chief by name Yel-leppit The 2d Chief we gave
a String of wampom, his name is ____ The 3d who lives below a String of
Wampom his name I did not learn. the Chief requested us to Stay untill
12 we excused our Selves and Set out at 9 oClock

P. Crusat played on the Violin which pleasd and astonished those reches
who are badly Clad, 3/4 with robes not half large enough to cover them,
they are homeley high Cheeks, and but fiew orniments. I Suped on the
Crane which I killed to day.

[Clark, October 19, 1805]
October 19th Saturday 1805
The great chief Yel-lep-pit two other chiefs, and a Chief of Band below
presented themselves to us verry early this morning. we Smoked with
them, enformed them as we had all others above as well as we Could by
Signs of our friendly intentions towards our red children Perticular
those who opened their ears to our Councils. we gave a Medal, a
Handkercheif & a String of Wompom to Yelleppit and a String of wompom
to each of the others. Yelleppit is a bold handsom Indian, with a
dignified countenance about 35 years of age, about 5 feet 8 inches high
and well perpotiond. he requested us to delay untill the Middle of the
day, that his people might Come down and See us, we excused our Selves
and promised to Stay with him one or 2 days on our return which
appeared to Satisfy him; great numbers of Indians Came down in Canoes
to view us before we Set out which was not untill 9 oClock A M. we
proceeded on passed a Island, close under the Lard Side about Six miles
in length opposit to the lower point of which two Isds. are situated on
one of which five Lodges vacent & Saffolds drying fish at the upper
point of this Island Swift water. a Short distance below passed two
Islands; one near the middle of the river on which is Seven lodges of
Indians drying fish, at our approach they hid themselves in their
Lodges and not one was to be seen untill we passed, they then Came out
in greater numbers than is common in Lodges of their Size, it is
probable that, the inhabitants of the 5 Lodges above had in a fright
left their lodges and decended to this place to defend them Selves if
attackted there being a bad rapid opposit the Island thro which we had
to pass prevented our landing on this Island and passifying those
people, about four miles below this fritened Island we arrived at the
head of a verry bad rapid, we came too on the Lard Side to view the
rapid before we would venter to run it, as the Chanel appeared to be
close under the oppd. Shore, and it would be necessary to liten our
canoe, I deturmined to walk down on the Lard Side, with the 2 Chiefs
the interpreter & his woman, and derected the Small canoe to prcede
down on the Lard Side to the foot of the rapid which was about 2 miles
in length I Sent on the Indian Chiefs &c. down and I assended a high
clift about 200 feet above the water from the top of which is a leavel
plain extending up the river and off for a great extent, at this place
the Countrey becoms low on each Side of the river, and affords a
prospect of the river and countrey below for great extent both to the
right and left; from this place I descovered a high mountain of emence
hight covered with Snow, this must be one of the mountains laid down by
Vancouver, as Seen from the mouth of the Columbia River, from the
Course which it bears which is West I take it to be Mt. St. Helens,
destant 156 miles a range of mountains in the Derection crossing, a
conacal mountain S. W. toped with Snow This rapid I observed as I
passed opposit to it to be verry bad interseped with high rock and
Small rockey Islands, here I observed banks of Muscle Shells banked up
in the river in Several places, I Delayed at the foot of the rapid
about 2 hours for the Canoes which I Could See met with much dificuelty
in passing down the rapid on the oposit Side maney places the men were
obliged to get into the water and haul the canoes over Sholes- while
Setting on a rock wateing for Capt Lewis I Shot a Crain which was
flying over of the common kind. I observed a great number of Lodges on
the opposit Side at Some distance below and Several Indians on the
opposit bank passing up to where Capt. Lewis was with the Canoes,
others I Saw on a knob nearly opposit to me at which place they delayed
but a Short time before they returned to their Lodges as fast as they
could run, I was fearfull that those people might not be informed of
us, I deturmined to take the little Canoe which was with me and proceed
with the three men in it to the Lodges, on my aproach not one person
was to be Seen except three men off in the plains, and they Sheared off
as I aproached near the Shore, I landed in front of five Lodges which
was at no great distance from each other, Saw no person the enteranc or
Dores of the Lodges wer Shut with the Same materials of which they were
built a mat, I approached one with a pipe in my hand entered a lodge
which was the nearest to me found 32 persons men, women and a few
children Setting permiscuesly in the Lodg, in the greatest agutation,
Some crying and ringing there hands, others hanging their heads. I gave
my hand to them all and made Signs of my friendly dispotion and offered
the men my pipe to Smok and distributed a fiew Small articles which I
had in my pockets,-this measure passified those distressed people verry
much, I then Sent one man into each lodge and entered a Second myself
the inhabitants of which I found more fritened than those of the first
lodge I destributed Sundrey Small articles amongst them, and Smoked
with the men, I then entered the third 4h & fifth Lodge which I found
Somewhat passified, the three men, Drewer Jo. & R. Fields, haveing
useed everey means in their power to convince them of our friendly
disposition to them, I then Set my Self on a rock and made Signs to the
men to come and Smoke with me not one Come out untill the Canoes
arrived with the 2 Chiefs, one of whom spoke aloud, and as was their
Custom to all we had passed the Indians came out & Set by me and Smoked
They said we came from the clouds &c &c and were not men &c. &c. this
time Capt. Lewis came down with the Canoes rear in which the Indian, as
Soon as they Saw the Squar wife of the interperters they pointed to her
and informed those who continued yet in the Same position I first found
them, they imediately all came out and appeared to assume new life, the
sight of This Indian woman, wife to one of our interprs. confirmed
those people of our friendly intentions, as no woman ever accompanies a
war party of Indians in this quarter- Capt Lewis joined us and we
Smoked with those people in the greatest friendship, dureing which time
one of our Old Chiefs informed them who we were from whence we Came and
where we were going giveing them a friendly account of us, those people
do not Speak prosisely the Same language of those above but understand
them, I Saw Several Horses and persons on hors back in the plains maney
of the men womin and children Came up from the Lodges below; all of
them appeared pleased to See us, we traded some fiew articles for fish
and berries, Dined, and proceeded on passed a Small rapid and 15 Lodges
below the five, and Encamped below an Island Close under the Lard Side,
nearly opposit to 24 Lodges on an Island near the middle of the river,
and the Main Stard Shor Soon after we landed which was at a fiew willow
trees about 100 Indians Came from the different Lodges, and a number of
them brought wood which they gave us, we Smoked with all of them, and
two of our Party Peter Crusat & Gibson played on the violin which
delighted them greatly, we gave to the principal man a String of wompon
treated them kindly for which they appeared greatfull, This Tribe can
raise about 350 men their Dress are Similar to those at the fork except
their robes are Smaller and do not reach lower than the waste and 3/4
of them have Scercely any robes at all, the women have only a Small
pece of a robe which Covers their Sholders neck and reaching down
behind to their wastes, with a tite piece of leather about the waste,
the brests are large and hang down verry low illy Shaped, high Cheeks
flattened heads, & have but fiew orniments, they are all employed in
fishing and drying fish of which they have great quantites on their
Scaffolds, their habits customs &c. I could not lern. I killed a Duck
that with the Crain afforded us a good Supper. the Indians continued
all night at our fires

This day we made 36 miles.

[Clark, October 20, 1805]
October 20th 1805 Sunday
a very cold morning wind S. W. about 100 Indians Came over this morning
to See us, after a Smoke, a brackfast on Dogs flesh we Set out. about
350 men

Killed 2 large speckle guts 4 Duck in Malade Small ducks the flavour of
which much resembles the Canvis back no timber of any kind on the
river, we Saw in the last Lodges acorns of the white oake which the
Inds. inform they precure above the falls The men are badly dressed,
Some have scarlet & blue cloth robes. one has a Salors jacket, The
women have a Short indiferent Shirt, a Short robe of Deer or Goat
Skins, & a Small Skin which they fastend. tite around their bodies &
fastend. between the legs to hide the

[Clark, October 20, 1805]
October 20th Sunday 1805
A cool morning wind S. W. we concluded to delay untill after brackfast
which we were obliged to make on the flesh of dog. after brackfast we
gave all the Indian men Smoke, and we Set out leaveing about 200 of the
nativs at our Encampment; passd. three Indian Lodges on the Lard Side a
little below our Camp which lodges I did not discover last evening,
passed a rapid at Seven miles one at a Short distance below we passed a
verry bad rapid, a chane of rocks makeing from the Stard. Side and
nearly Chokeing the river up entirely with hugh black rocks, an Island
below close under the Stard. Side on which was four Lodges of Indians
drying-fish,- here I Saw a great number of pelicons on the wing, and
black Comerants. at one oClock we landed on the lower point of an
Island at Some Indian Lodges, a large Island on the Stard Side nearly
opposit and a Small one a little below on the Lard Side on those three
Island I counted Seventeen Indian Lodges, those people are in every
respect like those above, prepareing fish for theire winter consumption
here we purchased a fiew indifferent Dried fish & a fiew berries on
which we dined-(On the upper part of this Island we discovered an
Indian vault) our curiosity induced us to examine the methot those
nativs practicd in diposeing the dead, the Vaut was made by broad poads
and pieces of Canoes leaning on a ridge pole which was Suported by 2
forks Set in the ground Six feet in hight in an easterly and westerly
direction and about 60 feet in length, and 12 feet wide, in it I
observed great numbers of humane bones of every description
perticularly in a pile near the Center of the vault, on the East End 21
Scul bomes forming a circle on Mats-; in the Westerley part of the
Vault appeared to be appropriated for those of more resent death, as
many of the bodies of the deceased raped up in leather robes lay on
board covered with mats, &c we observed, independant of the canoes
which Served as a Covering, fishing nets of various kinds, Baskets of
different Sizes, wooden boles, robes Skins, trenchers, and various Kind
of trinkets, in and Suspended on the ends of the pieces forming the
vault; we also Saw the Skeletons of Several Horses at the vault & great
number of bones about it, which Convinced me that those animals were
Sacrefised as well as the above articles to the Deceased.) after diner
we proceeded on to a bad rapid at the lower point of a Small Island on
which four Lodges of Indians were Situated drying fish; here the high
countrey Commences again on the Stard. Side leaveing a vallie of 40
miles in width, from the mustle Shel rapid. examined and passed this
rapid close to the Island at 8 miles lower passed a large Island near
the middle of the river a brook on the Stard. Side and 11 Islds. all in
view of each other below, a riverlit falls in on the Lard. Side behind
a Small Island a Small rapid below. The Star Side is high rugid hills,
the Lard. Side a low plain and not a tree to be Seen in any Direction
except a fiew Small willow bushes which are Scattered partially on the
Sides of the bank

The river to day is about 1/4 of a mile in width; this evening the
Countrey on the Lard. Side rises to the hight of that on the Starboard
Side, and is wavering- we made 42 miles to day; the current much more
uniform than yesterday or the day before. Killed 2 Speckle guls Severl.
ducks of a delicious flavour.

[Clark, October 21, 1805]
October 21st 1805 Monday
a verry Cold morning we Set out early wind from the S W. we Could not
Cook brakfast before we embarked as usial for the want of wood or
Something to burn.-

[Clark, October 21, 1805]
October 21st Monday 1805
A verry cool morning wind from the S. W. we Set out verry early and
proceeded on, last night we could not Collect more dry willows the only
fuel, than was barely Suffient to cook Supper, and not a Sufficency to
cook brackfast this morning, passd. a Small Island at 51/2 miles a
large one 8 miles in the middle of the river, Some rapid water at the
head and Eight Lodges of nativs opposit its Lower point on the Stard.
Side, we came too at those lodges, bought some wood and brackfast.
Those people recived us with great kindness, and examined us with much
attention, their employments custom Dress and appearance Similar to
those above; Speak the Same language, here we Saw two Scarlet and a
blue cloth blanket, also a Salors Jacket the Dress of the men of this
tribe only a Short robe of Deer or Goat Skins, and that of the womn is
a Short piece of Dressed Skin which fall from the neck So as to Cover
the front of the body as low as the waste, a Short robe, which is of
one Deer or antilope Skin, and a Hap, around their waste and Drawn tite
between their legs as before described, their orniments are but fiew,
and worn as those above.

we got from those people a fiew pounded rotes fish and Acorns of the
white oake, those Acorns they make use of as food, and inform us they
precure them of the nativs who live near the falls below which place
they all discribe by the term Timm at 2 miles lower passed a rapid,
large rocks Stringing into the river of large Size opposit to this
rapid on the Stard. Shore is Situated two Lodges of the nativs drying
fish here we halted a fiew minits to examine the rapid before we
entered it which was our constant Custom, and at all that was verry
dangerous put out all who could not Swim to walk around, after passing
this rapid we proceeded on passed anoothe rapid at 5 miles lower down,
above this rapid on five Lodges of Indians fishing &c. above this rapid
maney large rocks on each Side at Some distance from Shore, one mile
passed an Island Close to the Stard. Side, below which is two Lodge of
nativs, a little below is a bad rapid which is bad crouded with hugh
rocks Scattered in every Direction which renders the pasage verry
Difficuelt a little above this rapid on the Lard. Side emence piles of
rocks appears as if Sliped from the Clifts under which they lay, passed
great number of rocks in every direction Scattered in the river 5
Lodges a little below on the Stard. Side, and one lodge on an Island
near the Stard. Shore opposit to which is a verry bad rapid, thro which
we found much dificuelty in passing, the river is Crouded with rocks in
every direction, after Passing this dificult rapid to the mouth of a
Small river on the Larboard Side 40 yards wide descharges but little
water at this time, and appears to take its Sourse in the Open plains
to the S. E. from this place I proceved Some fiew Small pines on the
tops of the high hills and bushes in the hollars. imediately above &
below this little river comences a rapid which is crouded with large
rocks in every direction, the pasage both crooked and dificuelt, we
halted at a Lodge to examine those noumerous Islands of rock which apd.
to extend maney miles below,-. great numbs. of Indians came in Canoes
to View us at this place, after passing this rapid which we
accomplished without loss; winding through between the hugh rocks for
about 2 miles-. (from this rapid the Conocil mountain is S. W. which
the Indians inform me is not far to the left of the great falls; this I
call the Timm or falls mountain it is high and the top is covered with
Snow) imediately below the last rapids there is four Lodges of Indians
on the Stard. Side, proceeded on about two miles lower and landed and
encamped near five Lodges of nativs, drying fish those are the
relations of those at the Great falls, they are pore and have but
little wood which they bring up the river from the falls as they Say,
we purchased a little wood to cook our Dog meat and fish; those people
did not recive us at first with the same cordiality of those above,
they appeare to be the Same nation Speak the Same language with a
little curruption of maney words Dress and fish in the Same way, all of
whome have pierced noses and the men when Dressed ware a long taper'd
piece of Shell or beed put through the nose-this part of the river is
furnished with fine Springs which either rise high up the Sides of the
hills or on the bottom near the river and run into the river. the hills
are high and rugid a fiew scattering trees to be Seen on them either
Small pine or Scrubey white oke.

The probable reason of the Indians residing on the Stard. Side of this
as well as the waters of Lewis's River is their fear of the Snake
Indians who reside, as they nativs Say on a great river to the South,
and are at war with those tribes, one of the Old Chiefs who accompanies
us pointed out a place on the lard. Side where they had a great battle,
not maney years ago, in which maney were killed on both Sides-, one of
our party J. Collins presented us with Some verry good beer made of the
Pashi-co-quar-mash bread, which bread is the remains of what was laid
in as Stores of Provisions, at the first flat heads or Cho-punnish
Nation at the head of the Kosskoske river which by being frequently wet
molded & Sowered &c. we made 33 miles to day.

[Clark, October 22, 1805]
October 22nd Tuesday 1805
a fine morning Calm. we Set out at 9 oClock and on the Course S. 52° W.
10 miles passed lodges & Inds. and rapids as mentioned in the Cours of
yesterday, from the expiration of

Took our Baggage & formed a Camp below the rapids in a cove on the
Stard Side the distance 1200 yards haveing passed at the upper end of
the portage 17 Lodges of Indians, below the rapids & above the Camp 5
large Loges of Indians, great numbers of baskets of Pounded fish on the
rocks Islands & near their Lodges thos are neetly pounded & put in
verry new baskets of about 90 or 100 pounds wight. hire Indians to take
our heavy articles across the portage purchased a Dog for Supper Great
numbers of Indians view us, we with much dificuelty purchd. as much
wood as Cooked our dogs this evening, our men all in helth- The Indians
have their grave yards on an Island in the rapids. The Great Chief of
those Indians is out hunting. no Indians reside on the Lard Side for
fear of the Snake Indians with whome they are at war and who reside on
the large fork on the lard. a little above

[Clark, October 22, 1805]
October 22d Tuesday 1805
A fine morning calm and fare we Set out at 9 oClock passed a verry bad
rapid at the head of an Island close under the Stard. Side, above this
rapid on the Stard Side is Six Lodges of nativs Drying fish, at 9 mls.
passed a bad rapid at the head of a large Island of high, uneaven
rocks, jutting over the water, a Small Island in a Stard. Bend opposit
the upper point, on which I counted 20 parcels of dryed and pounded
fish; on the main Stard Shore opposit to this Island five Lodges of
Indians are Situated Several Indians in Canoes killing fish with gigs,
&c. opposit the center of this Island of rocks which is about 4 miles
long we discovered the enterence of a large river on the Lard. Side
which appeared to Come from the S. E.- we landed at Some distance above
the mouth of this river and Capt. Lewis and my Self Set out to view
this river above its mouth, as our rout was intersepted by a deep
narrow Chanel which runs out of this river into the Columbia a little
below the place we landed, leaveing a high dry rich Island of about 400
yards wide and 800 yards long here we Seperated, I proceeded on to the
river and Struck it at the foot of a verry Considerable rapid, here I
beheld an emence body of water Compressd in a narrow Chanel of about
200 yds in width, fomeing over rocks maney of which presented their
tops above the water, when at this place Capt. Lewis joined me haveing
delayed on the way to examine a root of which the nativs had been
digging great quantities in the bottoms of this River. at about two
miles above this River appears to be confined between two high hils
below which it divided by numbers of large rocks, and Small Islands
covered with a low groth of timber, and has a rapid as far as the
narrows three Small Islands in the mouth of this River, this River
haveing no Indian name that we could find out, except "the River on
which the Snake Indians live," we think it best to leave the nameing of
it untill our return.

we proceeded on pass the mouth of this river at which place it appears
to discharge 1/4 as much water as runs down the Columbia. at two miles
below this River passed Eight Lodges on the Lower point of the Rock
Island aforesaid at those Lodges we saw large logs of wood which must
have been rafted down the To war-ne hi ooks River, below this Island on
the main Stard Shore is 16 Lodges of nativs; here we landed a fiew
minits to Smoke, the lower point of one Island opposit which heads in
the mouth of Towarnehiooks River which I did not observe untill after
passing these lodges about 1/2 a mile lower passed 6 more Lodges on the
Same Side and 6 miles below the upper mouth of Towarnehiooks River the
comencement of the pitch of the Great falls, opposit on the Stard. Side
is 17 Lodges of the nativs we landed and walked down accompanied by an
old man to view the falls, and the best rout for to make a portage
which we Soon discovered was much nearest on the Stard. Side, and the
distance 1200 yards one third of the way on a rock, about 200 yards
over a loose Sand collected in a hollar blown by the winds from the
bottoms below which was disagreeable to pass, as it was Steep and
loose. at the lower part of those rapids we arrived at 5 Large Lodges
of nativs drying and prepareing fish for market, they gave us
Philburts, and berries to eate, we returned droped down to the head of
the rapids and took every article except the Canoes across the portag
where I had formed a camp on ellegable Situation for the protection of
our Stores from Thieft, which we were more fearfull of, than their
arrows. we despatched two men to examine the river on the opposit Side,
and reported that the Canoes could be taken down a narrow Chanel on the
opposit Side after a Short portage at the head of the falls, at which
place the Indians take over their Canoes. Indians assisted us over the
portage with our heavy articles on their horses, the waters is divided
into Several narrow chanels which pass through a hard black rock
forming Islands of rocks at this Stage of the water, on those Islands
of rocks as well as at and about their Lodges I observe great numbers
of Stacks of pounded Salmon neetly preserved in the following manner, i
e after Suffiently Dried it is pounded between two Stones fine, and put
into a speces of basket neetly made of grass and rushes of better than
two feet long and one foot Diamiter, which basket is lined with the
Skin of Salmon Stretched and dried for the purpose, in theis it is
pressed down as hard as is possible, when full they Secure the open
part with the fish Skins across which they fasten tho the loops of the
basket that part very Securely, and then on a Dry Situation they Set
those baskets the Corded part up, their common Custom is to Set 7 as
close as they can Stand and 5 on the top of them, and secure them with
mats which is raped around them and made fast with cords and Covered
also with mats, those 12 baskets of from 90 to 100 w. each form a
Stack. thus preserved those fish may be kept Sound and Sweet Several
years, as those people inform me, Great quantities as they inform us
are Sold to the whites people who visit the mouth of this river as well
as to the nativs below.

on one of those Island I saw Several tooms but did not visit them The
principal Chiefs of the bands resideing about this Place is out hunting
in the mountains to the S. W.- no Indians reside on the S. W.side of
this river for fear (as we were informed) of the Snake Indians, who are
at war with the tribes on this river-- they represent the Snake Indians
as being verry noumerous, and resideing in a great number of villages
on Towarnehiooks River which falls in 6 miles above on the Lard. Side
and is reaches a great ways and is large a little abov its mouth at
which part it is not intersepted with rapids, they inform that one
considerable rapid & maney Small ones in that river, and that the Snake
live on Salmon, and they go to war to their first villages in 12 days,
the Couse they pointed is S. E. or to the S of S. E. we are visited by
great numbers of Indians to Day to view us, we purchased a Dog for
Supper, Some fish and with dificuelty precured as much wood as Cooked
Supper, which we also purchased we made 19 miles to day

[Clark, October 23, 1805]
October 23rd (Saturday) Wednesday 1805
Took the Canoes over the Portage on the Lard. Side with much
dificuelty, description on another Paper one Canoe got loose & cought
by the Indians which we were obliged to pay. our old Chiefs over herd
the Indians from below Say they would try to kill us & informed us of
it, we have all the arm examined and put in order, all th Inds leave us
early, Great numbers of flees on the Lard Side- Shot a Sea Oter which I
did not get, Great Numbers about those rapids we purchased 8 dogs,
Small & fat for our party to eate, the Indians not verry fond of
Selling their good fish, compells us to make use of dogs for food
Exchanged our Small canoe for a large & a very new one built for riding
the waves obsd Merdn. altd. 66° 27' 30" Latd. prodsd. 45° 42' 57 3/10" North

[Clark, October 23, 1805]
October 23d Wednesday 1805
a fine morning, I with the greater part of the men Crossed in the
Canoes to opposit Side above the falls and hauled them across the
portage of 457 yards which is on the Lard. Side and certainly the best
side to pass the canoes I then decended through a narrow chanel of
about 150 yards wide forming a kind of half circle in it course of a
mile to a pitch of 8 feet in which the chanel is divided by 2 large
rocks at this place we were obliged to let the Canoes down by Strong
ropes of Elk Skin which we had for the purpose, one Canoe in passing
this place got loose by the Cords breaking, and was cought by the
Indians below. I accomplished this necessary business and landed Safe
with all the Canoes at our Camp below the falls by 3 oClock P.M. nearly
covered with flees which were So thick amongst the Straw and fish Skins
at the upper part of the portage at which place the nativs had been
Camped not long Since; that every man of the party was obliged to Strip
naked dureing the time of takeing over the canoes, that they might have
an oppertunity of brushing the flees of their legs and bodies- Great
numbers of Sea Otters in the river below the falls, I Shot one in the
narrow chanel to day which I could not get. Great numbers of Indians
visit us both from above and below-- one of the old Chiefs who had
accompanied us from the head of the river, informed us that he herd the
Indians Say that the nation below intended to kill us, we examined all
the arms &c. complete the amunition to 100 rounds. The nativs leave us
earlyer this evening than usial, which gives a Shadow of Confirmation
to the information of our Old Chief, as we are at all times & places on
our guard, are under no greater apprehention than is common.

we purchased 8 Small fat dogs for the party to eate the nativs not
being fond of Selling their good fish, compells us to make use of Dog
meat for food, the flesh of which the most of the party have become
fond of from the habits of useing it for Some time past. The Altitude
of this day 66° 27' 30" gave for Latd. 45° 42' 57 1/10 N.

I observed on the beach near the Indian Lodges two Canoes butifull of
different Shape & Size to what we had Seen above wide in the midde and
tapering to each end, on the bow curious figures were Cut in the wood
&c. Capt. Lewis went up to the Lodges to See those Canoes and exchanged
our Smallest Canoe for one of them by giveing a Hatchet & few trinkets
to the owner who informed that he purchased it of a white man below for
a horse, these Canoes are neeter made than any I have ever Seen and
Calculated to ride the waves, and carry emence burthens, they are dug
thin and are suported by cross pieces of about 1 inch diamuter tied
with Strong bark thro holes in the Sides. our two old Chiefs appeared
verry uneasy this evening.

[Clark, October 24, 1805]
October 24th Thursday 1805
a fine morning the Indians approached us with caution. our 2 old Chiefs
deturmin to return home, Saying they were at war with Indians below and
they would kill them we pursuaded them to Stay 2 nights longer with us,
with a view to make a peace with those Indians below as well as to have
them with us dureing our Delay with this tribe. Capt Lewis went to view
the falls I Set out with the party at 9 oClock a m at 21/2 miles passed
a rock which makes from the Stard Side 4 Lodges above 1 below and
Confined the river in a narrow channel of about 45 yards this continued
for about 1/4 of a mile & widened to about 200 yards, in those narrows
the water was agitated in a most Shocking manner boils Swell & whorl
pools, we passed with great risque It being impossible to make a
portage of the Canoes, about 2 miles lower passed a verry Bad place
between 2 rocks one large & in the middle of the river here our Canoes
took in Some water, I put all the men who Could not Swim on Shore; &
Sent a fiew articles Such as guns & papers, and landed at a village of
20 houses on the Stard Side in a Deep bason where the river ap-prd. to
be blocked up with emence rocks I walked down and examined the pass
found it narrow, and one verry bad place a little in the narrows I
pursued this Chanel which is from 50 to 100 yards wide and Swels and
boils with a most Tremendeous manner; prosued this channel 5 ms &
returned found Capt Lewis & a Chief from below with maney of his men on
a visit to us, one of our Party Pete Crusat played on the violin which
pleased the Savage, the men danced, Great numbers of Sea Orter Pole
Cats about those fishories. the houses of those Indians are 20 feet
Square and Sunk 8 feet under ground & Covered with bark with a Small
door round at top rose about 18 Inches above ground, to keep out the
Snow I saw 107 parcels of fish Stacked, and great quantites in the
houses

[Clark, October 24, 1805]
October 24th Thursday 1805
The morning fare after a beautifull night, the nativs approached us
this morning with great caution. our two old chiefs expressed a desire
to return to their band from this place, Saying "that they Could be of
no further Service to us, as their nation extended no further down the
river than those falls, and as the nation below had expressed hostile
intentions against us, would Certainly kill them; perticularly as They
had been at war with each other;" we requested them to Stay with us two
nights longer, and we would See the nation below and make a peace
between them, they replied they "were anxious to return and See our
horses" we insisted on their Staying with us two nights longer to which
they agreed; our views were to detain those Chiefs with us untill we
Should pass the next falls, which we were told was verry bad, and at no
great distance below, that they might inform us of any designs of the
nativs, and if possible to bring about a peace between them and the
tribes below.

The first pitch of this falls is 20 feet perpendicular, then passing
thro a narrow Chanel for 1 mile to a rapid of about 18 feet fall below
which the water has no perceptable fall but verry rapid See Sketch No.
1. It may be proper here to remark that from Some obstruction below,
the cause of which we have not yet learned, the water in high fluds
(which are in the Spring) rise below these falls nearly to a leavel
with the water above the falls; the marks of which can be plainly
trac'd around the falls. at that Stage of the water the Salmon must
pass up which abounds in Such great numbers above- below those falls
are Salmon trout and great numbers of the heads of a Species of trout
Smaller than the Salmon. those fish they catch out of the Salmon
Season, and are at this time in the act of burrying those which they
had drid for winter food. the mode of buring those fish is in holes of
various Sizes, lined with Straw on which they lay fish Skins in which
they inclose the fish which is laid verry close, and then Covered with
earth of about 12 or 15 inches thick. Capt Lewis and three men crossed
the river and on the opposit Side to view the falls which he had not
yet taken a full view of- At 9 oClock a.m. I Set out with the party and
proceeded on down a rapid Stream of about 400 yards wide at 21/2 miles
the river widened into a large bason to the Stard. Side on which there
is five Lodges of Indians. here a tremendious black rock Presented
itself high and Steep appearing to choke up the river nor could I See
where the water passed further than the Current was drawn with great
velocity to the Lard Side of this rock at which place I heard a great
roreing. I landed at the Lodges and the natives went with me to the top
of this rock which makes from the Stard. Side; from the top of which I
could See the dificuelties we had to pass for Several miles below; at
this place the water of this great river is compressed into a Chanel
between two rocks not exceeding forty five yards wide and continues for
a 1/4 of a mile when it again widens to 200 yards and continues this
width for about 2 miles when it is again intersepted by rocks. This
obstruction in the river accounts for the water in high floods riseing
to Such a hite at the last falls. The whole of the Current of this
great river must at all Stages pass thro this narrow chanel of 45 yards
wide. as the portage of our canoes over this high rock would be
impossible with our Strength, and the only danger in passing thro those
narrows was the whorls and Swills arriseing from the Compression of the
water, and which I thought (as also our principal watermen Peter
Crusat) by good Stearing we could pass down Safe, accordingly I detur
mined to pass through this place notwithstanding the horrid appearance
of this agitated gut Swelling, boiling & whorling in every direction
(which from the top of the rock did not appear as bad as when I was in
it;) however we passed Safe to the astonishment of all the Inds. of the
last Lodges who viewed us from the top of the rock. passed one Lodge
below this rock and halted on the Stard. Side to view a verry bad
place, the Current divided by 2 Islands of rocks the lower of them
large and in the middle of the river, this place being verry bad I Sent
by land all the men who could not Swim and Such articles as was most
valuable to us Such as papers Guns & amunition, and proceeded down with
the Canoes two at a time to a village of 20 wood housies in a Deep bend
to the Stard. Side below which a rugid black rock about 20 feet biter
than the Common high fluds of the river with Several dry Chapels which
appeared to Choke the river up quite across; this I took to be the 2d
falls or the place the nativs above call timm, The nativs of this
village reived me verry kindly, one of whome envited me into his house,
which I found to be large and comodious, and the first wooden houses in
which Indians have lived Since we left those in the vicinty of the
Illinois, they are scattered permiscuisly on a elivated Situation near
a mound of about 30 feet above the Common leavel, which mound has Some
remains of houses and has every appearance of being artificial- those
houses are about the Same Shape Size and form 20 feet wide and 30 feet
long with one Dore raised 18 Inches above ground, they are 291/2 inches
high & 14 wide, forming in a half Circle above those houses were Sunk
into the earth Six feet, the roofs of them was Supported by a ridge
pole resting on three Strong pieces of Split timber thro one of which
the dore was cut that and the walls the top of which was just above
ground Suported a certain number of Spars which are Covered with the
Bark of the white Ceadar, or Arber Vitea; and the whole attached and
Secured by the fibers of the Cedar. the eaves at or near the earth, the
gable ends and Side walls are Secured with Split boards which is
Seported on iner Side with Strong pieces of timber under the eves &c.
to keep those pieces errect & the earth from without pressing in the
boards, Suported by Strong posts at the Corners to which those poles
were attached to give aditional Strength, Small openings were left
above the ground, for the purpose, as I conjectured, of deschargeing
Their arrows at a besiegeing enimey; Light is admited Thro an opening
at top which also Serves for the Smoke to pass through. one half of
those houses is apropriated for the Storeing away Dried & pounded fish
which is the principal food The other part next the dore is the part
occupied by the nativs who have beds raised on either Side, with a fire
place in the center of this Space each house appeared to be occupied by
about three families; that part which is apropriated for fish was
crouded with that article, and a fiew baskets of burries- I dispatched
a Sufficent number of the good Swimers back for the 2 canoes above the
last rapid and with 2 men walked down three miles to examine the river
Over a bed of rocks, which the water at verry high fluds passes over,
on those rocks I Saw Several large Scaffols on which the Indians dry
fish; as this is out of Season the poles on which they dry those fish
are tied up verry Securely in large bundles and put upon the Scaffolds,
I counted 107 Stacks of dried pounded fish in different places on those
rocks which must have contained io,ooo w. of neet fish, The evening
being late I could not examine the river to my Satisfaction, the Chanel
is narrow and compressed for about 2 miles, when it widens into a deep
bason to the Stard. Side, & again contracts into a narrow chanel
divided by a rock I returned through a rockey open countrey infested
with pole-cats to the village where I met with Capt. Lewis the two old
Chiefs who accompanied us & the party & canoes who had all arrived
Safe; the Canoes haveing taken in Some water at the last rapids. here
we formed a Camp near the Village, The principal Chief from the nation
below with Several of his men visited us, and afforded a favourable
oppertunity of bringing about a Piece and good understanding between
this chief and his people and the two Chiefs who accompanied us which
we have the Satisfaction to Say we have accomplished, as we have every
reason to believe and that those two bands or nations are and will be
on the most friendly terms with each other. gave this Great Chief a
Medal and Some other articles, of which he was much pleased, Peter
Crusat played on the violin and the men danced which delighted the
nativs, who Shew every civility towards us. we Smoked with those people
untill late at night, when every one retired to rest.

[Clark, October 25, 1805]
October 25th Friday 1805
A Cold morning, we deturmined to attempt the Chanel after brackfast I
took down all the party below the bad places with a load & one Canoe
passed well, a 2d passed well I had men on the Shore with ropes to
throw in in Case any acidence happened at the Whirl &c- the Inds on the
rocks veiwing us the 3rd Canoe nearly filled with water we got her Safe
to Shore. The last Canoe Came over well which to me was truly
gratifying Set out and had not passed 2 mils before 3 Canoes run
against a rock in the river with great force no damg. met with a 2d
Chief of the nation from hunting, we Smoked with him and his party and
gave a medal of The Small Size & Set out passed great numbers of rocks,
good water and Came to at a high point of rocks below the mouth of a
Creek which falls in on the Lard Side and head up towards the high Snow
mountain to the S W. this Creek is 20 yards wide and has Some beaver
Signs at its mouth river about 1/2 a mile wide and Crouded with Sea
otters, & drum was Seen this evening we took possession of a high Point
of rocks to defend our Selves in Case the threts of those Indians below
Should be put in execution against us. Sent out Some hunters to look if
any Signs of game, one man killed a Small deer & Several others Seen I
killed a goose, and Suped hartily on venison & goose. Camped on the
rock guard under the hill.

[Clark, October 25, 1805]
October 25th Friday 1805
a cool morning Capt Lewis and my Self walked down to See the place the
Indians pointed out as the worst place in passing through the gut,
which we found difficuelt of passing without great danger, but as the
portage was impractiable with our large Canoes, we Concluded to Make a
portage of our most valuable articles and run the canoes thro
accordingly on our return divided the party Some to take over the
Canoes, and others to take our Stores across a portage of a mile to a
place on the Chanel below this bad whorl & Suck, with Some others I had
fixed on the Chanel with roapes to throw out to any who Should
unfortunately meet with difficuelty in passing through; great number of
Indians viewing us from the high rocks under which we had to pass, the
3 firt Canoes passed thro very well, the 4th nearly filled with water,
the last passed through by takeing in a little water, thus Safely below
what I conceved to be the worst part of this Chanel, felt my Self
extreamly gratified and pleased. we loaded the Canoes & Set out, and
had not proceeded, more than two mile before the unfortunate Canoe
which filled crossing the bad place above, run against a rock and was
in great danger of being lost, This Chanel is through a hard rough
black rock, from 50-100 yards wide. Swelling and boiling in a most
tremendious maner Several places on which the Indians inform me they
take the Salmon as fast as they wish; we passed through a deep bason to
the Stard Side of 1 mile below which the River narrows and divided by a
rock The Curent we found quit jentle, here we met with our two old
Chiefs who had been to a village below to Smoke a friendly pipe, and at
this place they met the Cheif & party from the village above on his
return from hunting all of whome were then crossing over their horses,
we landed to Smoke a pipe with this Chief whome we found to be a bold
pleasing looking man of about 50 years of age dressd. in a war jacket a
cap Legins & mockersons. he gave us Some meat of which he had but
little and informed us he in his rout met with a war party of Snake
Indians from the great river of the S. E. which falls in a few miles
above and had a fight. we gave this Chief a Medal, &c. a parting Smoke
with our two faithful friends the Chiefs who accompanied us from the
head of the river, (who had purchased a horse each with 2 robes and
intended to return on horse back) we proceeded on down the water fine,
rocks in every derection for a fiew miles when the river widens and
becoms a butifull jentle Stream of about half a mile wide, Great
numbers of the Sea Orter about those narrows and both below and above.
we Came too, under a high point of rocks on the Lard. Side below a
creek of 20 yards wide and much water, as it was necessary to make Some
Selestial observations we formed our Camp on the top of a high point of
rocks, which forms a kind of fortification in the Point between the
river & Creek, with a boat guard, this Situation we Concieve well
Calculated for defence, and Conveniant to hunt under the foots of the
mountain to the West & S. W. where timber of different kinds grows, and
appears to be handsom Coverts for the Deer, in oke woods, Sent out
hunters to examine for game G. D. Killed a Small Deer & other Saw much
Sign, I killed a goose in the creek which was verry fat- one of the
guard saw a Drum fish to day as he Conceved our Situation well
Calculated to defend our Selves from any designs of the natives, Should
They be enclined to attack us.

This little Creek heads in the range of mountains which run S S W & N W
for a long distance on which is Scattering pine white Oake &c. The
Pinical of the round toped mountain which we Saw a Short distance below
the forks of this river is S. 43° W. of us and abt 37 miles, it is at
this time toped with Snow we called this the falls mountain or Timm
mountain. The face of the Countrey, on both Side of the river above and
about the falls, is Steep ruged and rockey open and contain but a Small
preportion of erbage, no timber a fiew bushes excepted, The nativs at
the upper falls raft their timber down Towarnehooks River & those at
the narrows take theirs up the river to the lower part of the narrows
from this Creek, and Carry it over land 3 miles to their houses &c. at
the mouth of this creek Saw Some beaver Sign, and a Small wolf in a
Snare Set in the willows The Snars of which I saw Several made for to
catch wolves, are made as follows vz: a long pole which will Spring is
made fast with bark to a willow, on the top of this pole a String

[Clark, October 26, 1805]
October 26th 1805 Saturday
a fine morning Sent out Six men to hunt deer & Collect rozin to Pitch
our Canoes, had all our articles put out to dry- Canoes drawed out and
repaired, the injories recved in drawing them over the rocks, every
article wet in the Canoe which nearly Sunk yesterday-

In the evening 2 Chief and 15 men came over in a Single Canoe, those
Chf's proved to be the 2 great Chiefs of the tribes above, one gave me
a dressed Elk Skin, and gave us Som deer meet, and 2 Cakes of white
bread made of white roots, we gave to each Chief a Meadel of the Small
Size a red Silk handkerchief & a knife to the 1st a arm ban & a pin of
Paint & a Comb to his Son a Piece of riben tied to a tin gorget and 2
hams of Venison They deturmined to Stay with us all night, we had a
fire made for them & one man played on the violin which pleased them
much my Servent danced- our hunters killed five Deer, 4 verry large
gray Squirrels, a goose & Pheasent, one man giged a Salmon trout which
we had fried in a little Bears oil which a Chief gave us yesterday and
I think the finest fish I ever tasted, Saw great numbers of white Crams
flying in Different directions verry high. The river has rose nearly 8
Inches to day and has every appearance of a tide, from what Cause I
can't Say- our hunters Saw Elk & bear signs to day in the white oake
woods the Country to the Lard is broken Country thinly timbered with
pine and white oake, a mountain which I must call Timm or falls
Mountain rises verry high and bears to S W the Course it has bore Sinc
we first Saw it. our men danced to night. dried all our wet articles
and repaired our Canoes

The flees my Self and the men got on them in passing thro the plains
the Indians had lately lived in Lodges on the Lard. Side at the falls,
are very troublesom and with every exertion the men Can't get rid of
them, perticilarly as they have no clothes to change those which they
wore Those Indians are at Ware with the Snake Indians on the river
which falls in a few miles above this and have lately had a battle with
them, their loss I cannot lern.

[Clark, October 26, 1805]
October 26th Saturday 1805
A fine morning Sent Six men out to hunt Deer, and Collect rozin to
pitch the Canoes which has become verry leakey, by frequently hauling
them over rocks &c as well Striking rocks frequently in passing down.
all our articles we have exposed to the Sun to Dry; and the Canoes
drawn out and turned up- maney of our Stores entirely Spoiled by being
repeetedly wet; A number of Indians came to the Oposit Side of the
river in the fore part of the day and Shew that they were anxious to
Cross to us, we did not think proper to cross them in our Canoes and
did not Send for them. in the evening two Chiefs and 15 men came over
in a Small Canoe, those two Chiefs proved to be the two Principal
Chiefs of the tribes above at the falls, and above, who was out hunting
at the time we passed their bands; one of those Chiefs made Capt Lewis
and my Self each a Small present of Deer meat, and Small Cakes of white
bread made of roots. we gave to each Chief a Meadel of the Small Size a
red Silk handkerchief, arm band, Knife & a piece of Paint, and
acknowledged them as chiefs; as we thought it necessary at this time to
treat those people verry friendly & ingratiate our Selves with them, to
insure us a kind & friendly reception on our return, we gave Small
presents to Several, and half a Deer to them to eate. we had also a
fire made for those people to Sit around in the middle of our Camp, and
Peter Crusat Played on the violin, which pleased those nativs
exceedingly. the two Chiefs and Several men deturmined to delay all
night (yorked Danced for the Inds) with us all the others returned,
leaving the horses for those who Staied on the opposit Side. our
hunters returned in the evening Killed five Deer, four verry large grey
Squirels and a grouse. one of the guard at the river guiged a Salmon
Trout, which we had fried in a little Bears Oil which the Chief we
passed below the narrows gave us; this I thought one of the most
delicious fish I have ever tasted Great numbers of white Crain flying
in different Directions verry high- The river rose 8 Inches today from
what cause I cannot Say certainly, as the tides cannot effect the river
here as there is a falls below, I conjecture that the rise is owing to
the winds which has Set up the river for 24 hours past. our hunters
inform that the countrey back is broken, Stoney and thinly timbered
with pine and White Oake. They Saw Elk & Bear Sign in the mountains.
Dried all our wet articles and repared our Canoes to day, and the Party
amused themselves at night danceing. The Flees which the party got on
them at the upper & great falls, are very troublesom and dificuelt to
get rid of, perticularly as the men have not a Change of Clothes to put
on, they Strip off their Clothes and kill the flees, dureing which time
they remain neckid.

The nations in the vicinity of this place is at War with the Snake
Indians who they Say are noumerous and live on the river we passed
above the falls on the Same Side on which we have encamped, and the
nearest town is about four days march they pointed nearly S. E. and
informed that they had a battle with those Inds. laterly, their loss I
could not assertain

[Clark, October 27, 1805]
October 27th Sunday 1805
a verry windy night and morning wind from the West and hard, Send out
hunters and they killed 4 deer 1 pheasent and a Squirel the 2 Chiefs
and party Continue with us, we treat them well give them to eate &
Smoke, they were joined by Seven others, from below who Stayed about 3
hours and returned down the river in a pet, Soon after the Chiefs
deturmined to go home we had them put across the river the wind verry
high, we took a vocabelary of the Languages of the 2 nations, the one
liveing at the Falls call themselves E-nee-shur The other resideing at
the levels or narrows in a village on the Std. Side call themselves
E-chee-lute not withstanding those people live only 6 miles apart, but
fiew words of each others language- the language of those above having
great Similarity with those tribes of flat heads we have passed- all
have the Clucking tone anexed which is predomint. above, all flatten
the heads of their female children near the falls, and maney above
follow the Same Custom The language of the Che-luc-it-to-quar a fiew
miles below is different from both in a Small degree. The wind
increased in the evening and blew verry hard from the Same point W. day
fair and Cold- The Creek at which we are Encamped is Called by the
natives-Que-nett Some words with Shabono about his duty- The pinical of
Falls mountain bears S 43° W. about 35 miles

[Clark, October 27, 1805]
October 27th Sunday 1805
Wind hard from the west all the last night and this morning. Some words
with Shabono our interpreter about his duty. Sent out Several hunters
who brought in four Deer, one Grouse & a Squirel. The two Chiefs &
party was joined by Seven others from below in two canoes, we gave them
to eate & Smoke Several of those from below returned down the river in
a bad humer, haveing got into this pet by being prevented doeing as
they wished with our articles which was then exposed to dry- we took a
Vocabelary of the Languages of those two chiefs which are verry
different notwithstanding they are Situated within Six miles of each
other, Those at the great falls Call themselves E-nee-shur and are
understood on the river above. Those at the Great Narrows Call
themselves Eche-lute and is understood below, maney words of those
people are the Same, and Common to all the flat head Bands which we
have passed on the river, all have the clucking tone anexed which is
prodomonate above. all the Bands flatten the heads of the female
Children, and maney of the male children also. Those two Chief leave us
this evening and returned to their bands, the wind verry high & from
the West, day proved fair and Cool.

The nativs Call this Creek near which we are encamped-Que-nett.

[Clark, October 28, 1805]
October 28th Monday 1805
a windey morning loaded our Canoes and Set out at 9 oClock a m 3 Canoes
Came down from the Village above & 2 from that below in one of those
Canoes a Indian wore his hair cued, and had on a round hat. Wind from
West

Those Indians have a musket a Sword, and Several Brass Tea kitties
which they appear to be verry fond of we purchased of those people five
Small dogs, and Some Dried beries & white bread of roots, the wind rose
and we were obliged to lie by about 1 mile below on the Lard. Side
North 1 mile to a rock Island on the Stard. Side. we had not landed
long eer an Indian Canoe Came from below with 3 Indians in it, those
Indians make verry nice Canoes of Pine. Thin with aporns & Carve on the
head imitation of animals & other heads; The Indians above Sacrafise
the property of the Deceased to wit horses Canoes, bowls Basquets of
which they make great use to hold water boil their meet &c. &c. great
many Indians came down from the uppr Village & Sat with us, Smoked,
rained all the evenig & blew hard from the West encamped on the Lard
Side opsd. an Rock in a verry Bad place

[Clark, October 28, 1805]
October 28th Monday 1805
A cool windey morning we loaded our Canoes and Set out at 9 oClock,
a.m. as we were about to Set out 3 canoes from above and 2 from below
came to view us in one of those Canoes I observed an Indian with round
hat jacket & wore his hair cued we proceeded on river inclosed on each
Side in high Clifts of about 90 feet of loose dark coloured rocks at
four miles we landed at a village of 8 houses on the Stard. Side under
Some rugid rocks, Those people call themselves Chil-luckit-tequaw, live
in houses Similar to those described, Speake Somewhat different
language with maney words the Same & understand those in their
neighbourhood Cap Lewis took a vocabilary of this Language I entered
one of the houses in which I Saw a British musket, a cutlass and
Several brass Tea kittles of which they appeared verry fond Saw them
boiling fish in baskets with Stones, I also Saw figures of animals &
men Cut & painted on boards in one Side of the house which they
appeared to prize, but for what purpose I will not venter to Say,-.
here we purchased five Small Dogs, Some dried buries, & white bread
made of roots, the wind rose and we were obliged to lie by all day at 1
mile below on the Lard. Side. we had not been long on Shore before a
Canoe came up with a man woman & 2 children, who had a fiew roots to
Sell, Soon after maney others joined them from above, The wind which is
the cause of our delay, does not retard the motions of those people at
all, as their canoes are calculated to ride the highest waves, they are
built of white cedar or Pine verry light wide in the middle and tapers
at each end, with aperns, and heads of animals carved on the bow, which
is generally raised. Those people make great use of Canoes, both for
transpotation and fishing, they also use of bowls & baskets made of
Grass & Splits to hold water and boil their fish & meat. Maney of the
nativs of the last Village Came down Set and Smoke with us, wind blew
hard accompanied with rain all the evening, our Situation not a verry
good one for an encampment, but Such as it is we are obliged to put up
with, the harbor is a Safe one, we encamped on the Sand wet and
disagreeable one Deer killed this evening, and another wounded near our
Camp.

[Clark, October 29, 1805]
October 29th Tuesday 1805
a Cloudy morning wind Still from th West not hard, we Set out at day
light proceeded on about 5 miles and Came too at a Lodge of a Chief
which we made at the upper village at th falls about his house there is
Six others This chief gave us to eate Sackacommis burries Hasel nuts
fish Pounded, and a kind of Bread made of roots- we gave to the Women
pices of ribon, which they appeared pleased with- those houses are
large 25 feet Sqr and contain abt. 8 men, Say 30 inhabitents-

Those people are friendly gave us to eate fish Beries, nuts bread of
roots & Drid beries and we Call this the friendly Village We purchased
12 dogs of them & 4 Sacks of Pounded fish, and Some fiew Dried Berries
and proceeded on at 4 miles further we landed to Smoke a pipe with the
people of a village of 11 houses we found those people also friendly
Their Village is Situated imediately below the mouth of a River of 60
yards water which falls in on the Stard. Side and heads in the
mountains to the N. & N, E, the Indians inform us that this river is
long and full of falls no Salmon pass up it. They also inform that 10
nations lives on this river by hunting and on buries &c. The Countrey
begin to be thinly timbered with Pine & low white oake verry rocky and
hilley- We purchased at this vilg 4 dogs- at the end of this Course is
3 rocks, in the river and a rock point from the Lard. the middle rock
is large and has a number of graves on it we call it the Sepulchar
Island. The last River we call Caterack River from the number of falls
which the Indians inform is on it The Indians are afraid to hunt or be
on th Lard Side of this Columbia river for fear of the Snake Ind. who
reside on a fork of this river which falls in above the falls a good
Situation for winter quarters if game can be had is just below
Sepulchar rock on the Lard Side, high & pine and oake timber the rocks
ruged above, good hunting Countrey back, as it appears from the river
Indian village opsd. Of 2 Lodgs river 1/2 mile wide at rocks

The robes of those Indians are, of wolf deer Elk, wild cats, Some fox,
& Deer I saw one of the mountain Sheep, th wool thick and long Corse
hair on the back, resembling bristles- those animals live among the
rocks in those mountains below, orter is much valued by those people
they Cew their hair on each Side with it and ware it about the necks
with the tail in front

Came too at 3 miles on this Course at 3 Houses of flatheads and
Encamped on the Stard. Side, a Pond lies back of those people in which
we Saw great numbers of the Small Swan. we Purchased of those people 3
Dogs they gave us High bush cramburies, bread of roots and roots, they
were pleased with musick of th violin.

[Clark, October 29, 1805]
October 29th Tuesday 1805
A cloudy morning wind from the West but not hard, we Set out at day
light, and proceeded on about five miles Came too on the Stard. Side at
a village of 7 houses built in the Same form and materials of those
above, here we found the Chief we had Seen at the long narrows named
____

we entered his lodge and he gave us to eate Pounded fish, bread made of
roots, Filberts nuts, & the berries of Sackecomme. we gave to each
woman of the lodge a brace of Ribon of which they were much pleased.
each of those houses may be calculated to contain 8 men and 30 Soles,
they are hospitable and good humered Speak the Same language of the
inhabitants of the last village, we call this the friendly village. I
observed in the lodge of the Chief Sundery articles which must have
been precured from the white people, Such a Scarlet & blue Cloth Sword
Jacket & hat. I also observed two wide Split boards with images on them
Cut and painted in emitation of a man; I pointed to this image and
asked a man to what use he put them to, he Said Something the only word
I understood was "good," and then Steped to the image and took out his
Bow & quiver to Show me, and Some other of his war emplemints, from
behind it.

The Chief then directed his wife to hand him his medison bag which he
opened and Showed us 14 fingers which he Said was the fingers of his
enemies which he had taken in war, and pointed to S. E. from which
direction I concluded they were Snake Indians; this is the first
Instance I ever knew of the Indians takeing any other trofea of their
exploits off the dead bodies of their Enimies except the Scalp.- The
Chief painted those fingers with Several other articles which was in
his bag red and Securely put them back, haveing first mad a Short
harrang which I Suppose was bragging of what he had done in war. we
purchased 12 Dogs and 4 Sacks of fish, & Some fiew ascid berries, after
brackfast we proceeded on, the mountains are high on each Side,
containing Scattering pine white oake & under groth, hill Sides Steep
and rockey; at 4 miles lower we observed a Small river falling in with
great rapidity on the Stard. Side below which is a village of 11
houses, here we landed to Smoke a pipe with the nativs and examine the
mouth of the river, which I found to be 60 yards wide rapid and deep,
The inhabitants of the village are friendly and Chearfull; those people
inform us also those at the last village that this little river is long
and full of falls, no Salmon pass up it, it runs from N. N. E. that ten
nations live on this river and its waters, on buries, and what game
they Can kill with their Bow & arrows

we purchased 4 dogs and Set out- (this village is the of the Same
nation of the one we last passed) and proceeded on The Countrey on each
side begin to be thicker timbered with Pine and low white Oake; verry
rockey and broken. passed three large rocks in The river the middle
rock is large long and has Several Squar vaults on it. we call this
rockey Island the Sepulchar- The last river we passed we Shall Call the
Cataract River from the number of falls which the Indians say is on it-
passed 2 Lodges of Indians a Short distance below the Sepulchar Island
on the Stard. Side river wide, at 4 mile passed 2 houses on the Stard.
Side, Six miles lower passed 4 houses above the mouth of a Small river
40 yards wide on the Lard. Side a thick timbered bottom above & back of
those houses; those are the first houses which we have Seen on the
South Side of the Columbia River, (and the axess to those dificuelt)
for fear of the approach of their common enemies the Snake Indians,
passed 14 houses on the Std. Side Scattered on the bank- from the mouth
of this little river which we shall Call Labeasche River, the falls
mountain is South and the top is covered with Snow. one mile below pass
the mouth of a large rapid Stream on the Stard. Side, opposit to a
large Sand bar, in this creek the Indians above take their fish, here
we Saw Several canoes, which induced us to call this Canoe Creek it is
28 yards wide, about 4 miles lower and below the Sand bar is a butifull
cascade falling over a rock of about 100 feet, a Short distance lower
passed 4 Indian houses on the Lard. Side in a timbered bottom, a fiew
miles further we came too at 3 houses on Stard. Side, back of which is
a pond in which I Saw Great numbers of Small Swan, Capt. Lewis and I
went into the houses of those people who appeared Somewhat Surprised at
first Their houses are built on the Same Construction of those above,
Speak the Same language and Dress in the Same way, robes of the Skins
of wolves Deer, Elk, wild cat, or Loucirvia & fox, also Saw a mountain
Sheap Skin the wool of which is long, thick, & corse with long corse
hare on the top of the neck and back Something resembling bristles of a
goat, the skin was of white hare, those animals these people inform me
by Signs live in the mountains among the rocks, their horns are Small
and Streight, Orter Skins are highly prised among those people as well
as those on the river above, They Cue their hare which is divided on
each Sholder, and also ware Small Strips about their necks with the
tale hanging down in front.- Those people gave us, High bush cram
berries, bread made of roots, and roots; we purchased three dogs for
the party to eate; we Smoked with the men, all muche pleased with the
violin-. Here the mountains are high on each Side, those to the Lard.
Side has Some Snow on them at this time, more timber than above and of
greater variety.

[Clark, October 30, 1805]
October 30th Wednesday 1805 A Cloudy morning. Some little rain all
night, after eating a Slight brackfast of venison we Set out.

The rocks project into the river in maney places and have the
appearance of haveing fallen from the highe hills those projected rocks
is common & Small Bays below & nitches in the rocks passed 4 Cascades
or Small Streams falling from the mountains on Lard. This part of the
river resembles a pond partly dreaned leaving many Stumps bare both in
& out of the water, current about 1 mil pr. Hour

The bottom above the river is about 3/4 of a mile wide and rich, Some
deer & bear Sign- rained moderately all day we are wet and cold. Saw
Several Specis of wood which I never Saw before, Some resembling Beech
& others Poplar.- Day dark and disagreeable

I with 2 men proceeded down the river 2 miles on an old Indian parth to
view the rapids, which I found impassable for our canoes without a
portage, the roade bad at 1 mile I saw a Town of Houses laterly
abandoned on an elevated Situation opsd. a 2d Shute, returned at dark.
Capt. Lewis and 5 men went to the Town found them kind they gave Beries
& nuts, but he cd. get nothin from them in the way of Information, the
greater part of those people out collecting roots below, rained all the
evining Those people have one gun & maney articles which they have
purchased of the white people their food is principally fish

[Clark, October 30, 1805]
October 30th Wednesday 1805
A cool morning, a moderate rain all the last night, after eating a
partial brackfast of venison we Set out passed Several places where the
rocks projected into the river & have the appearance of haveing
Seperated from the mountains and fallen promiscuisly into the river,
Small nitches are formed in the banks below those projecting rocks
which is comon in this part of the river, Saw 4 Cascades caused by
Small Streams falling from the mountains on the Lard. Side, a
remarkable circumstance in this part of the river is, the Stumps of
pine trees are in maney places are at Some distance in the river, and
gives every appearance of the rivers being darned up below from Some
cause which I am not at this time acquainted with, the Current of the
river is also verry jentle not exceeding 11/2 mile pr. hour and about
3/4 of a mile in width. Some rain, we landed above the mouth of a Small
river on the Stard. Side and Dined J. Shields Killed a Buck & Labiech 3
Ducks, here the river widens to about one mile large Sand bar in the
middle, a Great rock both in and out of the water, large Stones, or
rocks are also permiscuisly Scattered about in the river, this day we
Saw Some fiew of the large Buzzard Capt. Lewis Shot at one, those
Buzzards are much larger than any other of ther Spece or the largest
Eagle white under part of their wings &c. The bottoms above the mouth
of this little river is rich covered with grass & firn & is about 3/4
of a mile wide rich and rises gradually, below the river (which is 60
yards wide above its mouth) the Countery rises with Steep assent. we
call this little river New Timbered river from a Speces of Ash which
grows on its banks of a verry large and different from any we had
before Seen, and a timber resembling the beech in bark but different in
its leaf which is Smaller and the tree smaller. passed maney large
rocks in the river and a large creek on the Stard. Side in the mouth of
which is an Island, passed on the right of 3 Islands near the Stard.
Side, and landed on an Island close under the Stard. Side at the head
of the great Shute, and a little below a village of 8 large houses on a
Deep bend on the Stard. Side, and opposit 2 Small Islands imediately in
the head of the Shute, which Islands are covered with Pine, maney large
rocks also, in the head of the Shute. Ponds back of the houses, and
Countrey low for a Short distance. The day proved Cloudy dark and
disagreeable with Some rain all day which kept us wet. The Countary a
high mountain on each Side thickly Covered with timber, Such as Spruc,
Pine, Cedar, Oake Cotton &c. &c. I took two men and walked down three
miles to examine the Shute and river below proceeded along an old
Indian path, passd. an old village at 1 mile on an ellevated Situation
of this village contained verry large houses built in a different form
from any I had Seen, and laterly abandoned, and the most of the boads
put into a pond of water near the village, as I conceived to drown the
flees, which was emencely noumerous about the houses-. I found by
examonation that we must make a portage of the greater perpotion of our
Stores 21/2 miles, and the Canoes we Could haul over the rocks, I
returned at Dark Capt Lewis and 5 men had just returned from the
village, Cap L. informed me that he found the nativs kind, they gave
him berries, nuts & fish to eate; but he could get nothing from them in
the way of information. The greater part of the inhabitants of this
village being absent down the river Some distance Colecting roots Capt.
L. Saw one gun and Several articles which must have been precured from
the white people. a wet disagreeable evening, the only wood we could
get to burn on this little Island on which we have encamped is the
newly discovered Ash, which makes a tolerable fire. we made fifteen
miles to daye.

[Clark, October 31, 1805]
October 31st Thursday 1805
a cloudey raney morning I proceed down the river to view it more at
leasure, I took Jos. Fields & Peter Crusat and proceeded on down, Send
Crusat back at 2 ms. to examine the rapid near the shore & I proceeded
on down about 10 miles to a very high rock in a bottom on the Stard.
opsd. 2 Islands covered with timber on which I saw Inds. at a distance;
found the river rocky for 6 miles, after which the Current became
uniform- at 1 mile I passed an old deserted village on a Pond on a high
Situation of 8 Houses- at 31/2 miles one house the only remt. of an
antient Village 1/2 a mile lower I saw 8 Vaults for the Dead which was
nearly Square 8 feet Closely Covered with broad boads Curiously
engraved, the bones in Some of those vaults wer 4 feet thick, in others
the Dead was yet layed Side of each other nearly East & west, raped up
& bound Securley in robes, great numbers of trinkets Brass Kittle, Sea
Shells, Iron, Pan Hare &c. &c. was hung about the vaults and great many
wooden gods, or Images of men Cut in wood, Set up round the vaults,
Some of those So old and worn by time that they were nearly worn out of
Shape, and Some of those vaults So old that they were roted entirely to
the ground- notwithstanding they wood is of Pine & _____ or Seder as
also the wooden gods

I can not learn certainly if those people worship those woden emiges,
they have them in conspicuous parts of their houses at 5 miles I passed
4 large houses on the Stard Side a little above the last rapid and
opposit a large Island which is Situated near the Lard. Side- The
enhabitents of those houses had left them closely Shut up, they
appeared to Contn. a great deel of property and Provisions Such as
those people use, I did not disturb any thing about those houses, but
proceed on down below the rapid which I found to be the last, a large
village has at Some period been on the Stard. Side below this rapid The
bottom is high Stoney and about 2 miles wide covered with grass, here C
is the head of a large Island in high water, at this time no water
passes on the Stard. Side I walked thro this Island which I found to be
verry rich, open & covered with Strawberry vines, and has greatly the
appearance of having at Some period been Cultivated, The natives has
dug roots in Some parts of this Isld. which is about 3 miles long & 1
Wide, a Small Island covered with timber opposit the lower point no
water runs on the Stard. Side. of it. below and in the middle of the
river is a large Island Covered with tall trees opposit the Strawberry
Island on its Stard. Side a creek falls in which has no running water
at present, it has the appearanc of throwing out emense torents- I saw
5 Indians in a canoe below- Jo. killed a Sand hill Crane & we returned
by the same rout to camp at the grand Shute where I found Several
Indians, I Smoked. Two canoes loaded with fish for the Trade below Came
down & unloaded the after noon fare

Those Indians Cut off the hands of those they kill & proserve the
fingers.

[Clark, October 31, 1805]
October 31st Thursday 1805
A Cloudy rainey disagreeable morning I proceeded down the river to view
with more attention we had to pass on the river below, the two men with
me Jo. Fields & Peter Crusat proceeded down to examine the rapids the
Great Shute which commenced at the Island on which we encamped Continud
with great rapidity and force thro a narrow chanel much compressd. and
interspersed with large rocks for 1/2 a mile, at a mile lower is a
verry Considerable rapid at which place the waves are remarkably high,
and proceeded on in a old Indian parth 21/2 miles by land thro a thick
wood & hill Side, to the river where the Indians make a portage, from
this place I dispatched Peter Crusat (our principal waterman) back to
follow the river and examine the practibility of the Canoes passing, as
the rapids appeared to continue down below as far as I could See, I
with Jo. Fields proceeded on, at 1/2 a mile below the end of the
portage passed a house where there had been an old town for ages past
as this house was old Decayed and a plat of flees I did not enter it,
about 1/2 a mile below this house in a verry thick part of the woods is
8 vaults which appeared Closely Covered and highly deckerated with
orniments. Those vaults are all nearly the Same Sise and form 8 feet
Square, 5 feet high, Sloped a little So as to convey off the rain made
of Pine or Cedar boards Closely Connected & Scurely Covered with wide
boards, with a Dore left in The East Side which is partially Stoped
with wide boards curiously engraved. In Several of those vaults the
dead bodies wre raped up verry Securely in Skins tied around with cords
of grass & bark, laid on a mat, all east & west and Some of those
vaults had as maney as 4 bodies laying on the Side of each other. the
other Vaults Containing bones only, Some contained bones for the debth
of 4 feet. on the tops and on poles attached to those vaults hung Brass
kitties & frying pans pearced thro their bottoms, baskets, bowls of
wood, Sea Shels, Skins, bits of Cloth, Hair, bags of Trinkets & Small
peices of bone &c and independant of the curious ingraveing and
Paintings on the boards which formed the vaults I observed Several
wooden Images, cut in the figure of men and Set up on the Sides of the
vaults all round. Some of those So old and worn by time, that they were
nearly out of Shape, I also observed the remains of Vaults rotted
entirely into the ground and covered with moss. This must bee the
burrying place for maney ages for the inhabitants of those rapids, the
vaults are of the most lasting timber Pine & Cedar- I cannot Say
certainly that those nativs worship those wooden idols as I have every
reason to believe they do not; as they are Set up in the most
conspicious parts of their houses, and treated more like orniments than
objects of aderation. at 2 miles lower & 5 below our Camp I passed a
village of 4 large houses abandend by the nativs, with their Bores
bared up, I looked into those houses and observed as much property as
is usial in the houses of those people which induced me to conclude
that they wre at no great distance, either hunting or Colecting roots,
to add to their winter Subsistance. from a Short distance below the
vaults the mountain which is but low on the Stard. Side leave the
river, and a leavel Stoney open bottom Suckceeds on the Said Std. Side
for a great Distance down, the mountains high and rugid on the Lard
Side this open bottom is about 2 miles a Short distance below this
village is a bad Stoney rapid and appears to be the last in view I
observed at this lower rapid the remains of a large and antient Village
which I could plainly trace by the Sinks in which they had formed their
houses, as also those in which they had buried their fish- from this
rapid to the lower end of the portage the river is Crouded with rocks
of various Sizes between which the water passes with great velociety
createing in maney places large Waves, an Island which is Situated near
the Lard. Side occupies about half the distance the lower point of
which is at this rapid. immediately below this rapid the high water
passes through a narrow Chanel through the Stard. Bottom forming an
Island of 3 miles Long & one wide, I walked through this Island which I
found to be verry rich land, and had every appearance of haveing been
at Some distant period Cultivated. at this time it is Covered with
grass intersperced with Strawberry vines. I observed Several places on
this Island where the nativs had dug for roots and from its lower point
I observed 5 Indians in a Canoe below the upper point of an Island near
the middle of the river Covered with tall timber, which indued me to
believe that a village was at no great distanc below, I could not See
any rapids below in the extent of my view which was for a long distance
down the river, which from the last rapids widened and had everry
appearance of being effected by the tide,- I deturmind to return to
Camp 10 miles distant, a remarkable high detached rock Stands in a
bottom on the Stard Side near the lower point of this Island on the
Stard. Side about 800 feet high and 400 paces around, we call the
Beaten rock. a Brook falls into the narrow Chanel which forms the
Strawberry Island, which at this time has no running water, but has
every appearance of dischargeing emence torrents &c. &c. Jo. Fields
Shot a Sand hill Crane. I returned by the Same rout on an Indian parth
passing up on the N W. Side of the river to our Camp at the Great
Shute. found Several Indians from the village, I Smoked with them; Soon
after my return two Canoes loaded with fish & Bear grass for the trade
below, came down ,from the village at the mouth of the Catterack River,
they unloaded and turned their Canoes up Side down on the beech, &
camped under a Shelveing rock below our Camp

one of the men Shot a goose above this Great Shute, which was floating
into the Shute when an Indian observed it, plunged into the water &
Swam to the Goose and brought in on Shore, at the head of the Suck, as
this Indian richly earned the goose I Suffered him to keep it which he
about half picked and Spited it up with the guts in it to roste.

This Great Shute or falls is about 1/2 a mile with the water of this
great river Compressed within the Space of 150 paces in which there is
great numbers of both large and Small rocks, water passing with great
velocity forming & boiling in a most horriable manner, with a fall of
about 20 feet, below it widens to about 200 paces and current gentle
for a Short distance. a Short distance above is three Small rockey
Islands, and at the head of those falls, three Small rockey Islands are
Situated Crosswise the river, Several rocks above in the river & 4
large rocks in the head of the Shute; those obstructions together with
the high Stones which are continually brakeing loose from the mountain
on the Stard Side and roleing down into the Shute aded to those which
brake loose from those Islands above and lodge in the Shute, must be
the Cause of the rivers darning up to Such a distance above, where it
Shows Such evidant marks of the Common current of the river being much
lower than at the present day

[Clark, November 1, 1805]
November 1st Friday 1805
a verry cold morning wind from N. E and hard Set all hands packing the
loading over th portage which is below the Grand Shutes and is 940
yards of bad way over rocks & on Slipery hill Sides The Indians who
came down in 2 Canoes last night packed their fish over a portage of
21/2 miles to avoid a 2d Shute. four of them took their canoes over the
1st portage and run the 2d Shute, Great numbers of Sea otters, they are
So Cautious that I with deficuelty got a Shute at one to day, which I
must have killed but Could not get him as he Sunk

We got all our Canoes and baggage below the Great Shute 3 of the canoes
being Leakey from injures recved in hauling them over the rocks,
obliged us to delay to have them repaired a bad rapid just below us
three Indian canoes loaded with pounded fish for the &c. trade down the
river arrived at the upper end of the portage this evening. I Can't
lern whether those Indians trade with white people or Inds. below for
the Beeds & copper, which they are So fond of- They are nearly necked,
prefuring beeds to anything- Those Beeds they trafick with Indians
Still higher up this river for Skins robes &c. &c. The Indians on those
waters do not appear to be Sickly, Sore eyes are Common and maney have
lost their eyes, Some one and, maney both, they have bad teeth, and the
greater perpotion of them have worn their teeth down, maney into the
gums, They are rather Small high Cheeks, women Small and homely, maney
of them had Sweled legs, large about the knees,-owing to the position
in which they Set on their hams, They are nearly necked only a piece of
leather tied about their breech and a Small robe which generally comes
to a little below their wastes and Scercely Sufficely large to cover
arround them when confined- they are all fond of Clothes but more So of
Beeds perticularly blue & white beeds. They are durty in the extreme
both in their Coockery and in their houses.

Those at the last Village raise the beads about five feet from the
earth-under which they Store their Provisions- Their houses is about 33
feet to 50 feet Square, the Bore of which is about 30 Inc. high and 16
Inches wide in this form cut in a wide pine board they have maney
imeges Cut in wood, generally, in the figure of a man- Those people are
high with what they have to Sell, and Say the white people below Give
them great Prices for what they Sell to them. Their nose are all
Pierced, and the wear a white Shell maney of which are 2 Inch long
pushed thro the nose- all the women have flat heads pressed to almost a
point at top The press the female childrens heads between 2 bords when
young-untill they form the Skul as they wish it which is generally
verry flat. This amongst those people is considered as a great mark of
butyand is practised in all the tribes we have passed on this river
more or less. men take more of the drugery off the women than is common
with Indians

[Clark, November 1, 1805]
November 1st Friday 1805
A verry Cool morning wind hard from the N. E. The Indians who arrived
last evining took their Canoes on ther Sholders and Carried them below
the Great Shute, we Set about takeing our Small Canoe and all the
baggage by land 940 yards of bad Slippery and rockey way The Indians we
discoverd took ther loading the whole length of the portage 21/2 miles,
to avoid a Second Shute which appears verry bad to pass, and thro which
they passed with their empty canoes. Great numbers of Sea Otters, they
are So cautious that I with dificuelty got a Shot at one to day, which
I must have killed, but could not get him as he Sunk

we got all our baggage over the Portage of 940 yards, after which we
got the 4 large Canoes over by Slipping them over the rocks on poles
placed across from one rock to another, and at Some places along
partial Streams of the river. in passing those canoes over the rocks
&c. three of them recived injuries which obliged us to delay to have
them repared.

Several Indian Canoes arrived at the head of the portage, Some of the
men accompanied by those from the village came down to Smoke with us,
they appear to Speak the Same language with a little different axcent

I visited the Indian Village found that the Construction of the houses
Similar to those abov described, with this difference only that they
are larger Say from 35 to 50 feet by 30 feet, raised about 5 feet above
the earth, and nearly as much below The Dores in the Same form and Size
cut in the wide post which Supports one end of the ridge pole and which
is carved and painted with different figures & Hieroglyphics Those
people gave me to eate nuts berries & a little dried fish, and Sold me
a hat of ther own taste without a brim, and baskets in which they hold
their water- Their beads are raised about 41/2 feet, under which they
Store away their dried fish, between the part on which they lie and the
back wall they Store away their roots burries nuts and valuable
articles on mats, which are Spread also around the fire place which is
Sunk about one foot lower than the bottom fore of the house, this fire
place is about 8 feet long and Six feet wide Secured with a fraim those
houses are calculated for 4, 5 & 6 families, each familey haveing a
nice painted ladder to assend up to their beads. I Saw in those houses
Several wooden Images all cut in imitation of men, but differently
fasioned and placed in the most conspicious parts of the houses,
probably as an orniment I cannot lern certainly as to the traffick
those Inds. carry on below, if white people or the indians who trade
with the Whites who are either Settled or visit the mouth of this
river. I believe mostly with the latter as their knowledge of the white
people appears to be verry imperfect, and the articles which they
appear to trade mostly i e Pounded fish, Beargrass, and roots; cannot
be an object of comerce with furin merchants- however they git in
return for those articles Blue and white beeds copper Tea Kitties,
brass arm bands, some Scarlet and blue robes and a fiew articles of old
clothes, they prefer beeds to any thing and will part with the last
mouthfull or articles of clothing they have for a fiew of those beeds,
those beeds the trafick with Indians Still higher up this river for
roabs, Skins, cha-pel-el bread, beargrass &c. who in their turn trafick
with those under the rockey mountains for Beargrass, Pashico roots &
robes &c.

The nativs of the waters of the Columbia appear helthy, Some have
turners on different parts of their bodies, and Sore and weak Eyes are
common, maney have lost their Sight entirely great numbers with one eye
out and frequently the other verry weak; This misfortune I must again
asscribe to the water &c. They have bad teeth, which is not common with
indians, maney have worn their teeth down and Some quite into their
gums, this I cannot Satisfactorily account for it, do ascribe it in
some measure to their method of eateing, their food, roots pertiularly,
which they make use of as they are taken out of the earth frequently
nearly covered with Sand, I have not Seen any of their long roots
offered for Sale clear of Sand. They are rether below the Common Size
high cheeks womin Small and homely, and have Swelled legs and thighs,
and their knees remarkably large which I ascribe to the method in which
they Sit on their hams-go nearly necked wareing only a piece of leather
tied about their breast which falls down nearly as low as the waste, a
Small roabe about 3 feet Square, and a piece of leather tied about
their breach, They have all flat heads in this quarter They are tirty
in the extream, both in their person and cooking, ware their hare loose
hanging in every direction. They asc high prices for what they Sell and
Say that the white people below give great prices for every thing &c.

The noses are all pierced and when they are dressed they have a long
tapered piece of white shell or wampum put through the nose, Those
Shells are about 2 inches in length. I observed in maney of the
villeages which I have passed, the heads of the female children in the
press for the purpose of compressing their heads in their infancy into
a certain form, between two boards

[Clark, November 2, 1805]
Novr. 2d Saturday 1805
Meridian altitude 59° 45' 45" made a portage of about 11/2 miles with
half of the Baggage, and run the rapid with the Canoes without much
damage, one Struck a rock & Split a little, and 3 others took in Some
water 7 Squars Came over the portage loaded with Dried fish &
Beargrass, Soon after 4 men Came down in a Canoe after takeing
brackfast, & after taking a meridian altitude we Set out Passed 2 bad
rapids one at 2 & the other at 4 mile below the Isd on Lard. and upper
end of Strawberry Island on the Stard. Side from the Creek end of last
Course

We Labiech killed 14 Geese & a Brant, Collins one Jos. Fields & R 3
those gees are much Smaller than Common, and have white under their
rumps & around the tale, The tide rises here a fiew 9 Inches, I cannot
assertain the prosise hite it rises at the last rapid or at this
placeof Camp.

The Indians we left at the portage passed us this evening one other
Canoe Come up

[Clark, November 2, 1805]
November 2nd Saturday 1805
Examined the rapid below us more pertcelarly the danger appearing too
great to Hazzard our Canoes loaded, dispatched all the men who could
not Swim with loads to the end of the portage below, I also walked to
the end of the portage with the carriers where I delayed untill everry
articles was brought over and canoes arrived Safe. here we brackfast
and took a Meridn. altitude 59°45'45" about the time we were Setting out
7 Squars came over loaded with Dried fish, and bear grass neetly
bundled up, Soon after 4 Indian men came down over the rapid in a large
canoe. passed a rapid at 2 miles & 1 at 4 miles opposit the lower point
of a high Island on the Lard Side, and a little below 4 Houses on the
Stard. Bank, a Small Creek on the Lard Side opposit Straw berry Island,
which heads below the last rapid, opposit the lower point of this
Island passed three Islands covered with tall timber opposit the Beatin
rock Those Islands are nearest the Starboard Side, imediately below on
the Stard. Side passed a village of nine houses, which is Situated
between 2 Small Creeks, and are of the Same construction of those
above; here the river widens to near a mile, and the bottoms are more
extensive and thickly timbered, as also the high mountains on each
Side, with Pine, Spruce pine, Cotton wood, a Species of ash, and alder.
at 17 miles passed a rock near the middle of the river, about 100 feet
high and 80 feet Diamuter, proceed on down a Smoth gentle Stream of
about 2 miles wide, in which the tide has its effect as high as the
Beaten rock or the Last rapids at Strawberry Island,- Saw great numbers
of waterfowl of Different kinds, Such as Swan, Geese, white & grey
brants, ducks of various kinds, Guls, & Pleaver. Labeach killed 14
brantjoseph Fields 3 & Collins one. we encamped under a high projecting
rock on the Lard. Side, here the mountains leave the river on each
Side, which from the great Shute to this place is high and rugid;
thickly Covered with timber principalley of the Pine Species. The
bottoms below appear extensive and thickly Covered with wood. river
here about 21/2 miles wide. Seven Indians in a Canoe on their way down
to trade with the nativs below, encamp with us, those we left at the
portage passed us this evening and proceeded on down The ebb tide rose
here about 9 Inches, the flood tide must rise here much higher- we made
29 miles to day from the Great Shute-

[Clark, November 3, 1805]
November 3rd Sunday 1805
The fog So thick this morning we did not think it prudent to Set out
untill 10 oClock we Set out and proceeded on verry well, accompanied by
our Indian friends- This morning Labich killed 3 Geese flying Collins
killed a Duck- The water rose Inches last night the effects of tide.
The Countrey has a handsom appearance in advance no mountains extensive
bottoms- the water Shallow for a great distance from Shore-. The fog
continued thick untill 12 oClock, we Coasted, and halted at the mouth
of a large river on the Lard Side, This river throws out emence quanty
of Sand and is verry Shallow, th narrowest part 200 yards wide bold
Current, much resembling the river Plat, Several Islands about 1 mile
up and has a Sand bar of 3 miles in extent imedeately in its mouth,
discharging it waters by 2 mouths, and Crowding its Corse Sands So as
to throw the Columbian waters on its Nothern banks, & confdg it to 1/2
ms. in width Passed a Small Prarie on the Stard. Side above, a large
Creek opposit qk Sand River on the Stard. Side, extensive bottoms and
low hilley Countrey on each Side (good wintering Place) a high peaked
mountain Suppose to be Mt. Hood is on the Lard Side S. 85 E. 40 miles
distant from the mouth of quick Sand river.-

[Clark, November 3, 1805]
November 3rd Sunday 1805
The Fog So thick this morning that we could not See a man 50 Steps off,
this fog detained us untill 10 oClock at which time we Set out,
accompanied by our Indian friends who are from a village near the great
falls, previous to our Setting out Collins killed a large Buck, and
Labiech killed 3 Geese flying. I walked on the Sand beech Lard. Side,
opposit the canoes as they passed allong. The under groth rushes, vines
&c. in the bottoms too thick to pass through, at 3 miles I arrived at
the enterance of a river which appeared to Scatter over a Sand bar, the
bottom of which I could See quite across and did not appear to be 4
Inches deep in any part; I attempted to wade this Stream and to my
astonishment found the bottom a quick Sand, and impassable- I called to
the Canoes to put to Shore, I got into the Canoe and landed below the
mouth, & Capt Lewis and my Self walked up this river about 11/2 miles
to examine this river which we found to be a verry Considerable Stream
Dischargeing its waters through 2 Chanels which forms an Island of
about 3 miles in length on the river and 11/2 miles wide, composed of
Corse Sand which is thrown out of this quick Sand river Compressing the
waters of the Columbia and throwing the whole Current of its waters
against its Northern banks, within a Chanel of 1/2 a mile wide, Several
Small Islands 1 mile up this river, This Stream has much the appearance
of the River Plait; roleing its quick Sands into the bottoms with great
velocity after which it is divided into 2 Chanels by a large Sand bar
before mentioned, the narrowest part of this River is 120 yards-on the
Opposit Side of the Columbia a falls in above this Creek on the Same
Side is a Small prarie. extensive low country on each Side thickly
timbered.

The Quick Sand river appears to pass through the low countrey at the
foot of those high range of mountains in a Southerly direction,- The
large Creeks which fall into the Columbia on the Stard. Side rise in
the Same range of mountains to the N. N. E. and pass through Some
ridgey land- A Mountain which we Suppose to be Mt. Hood is S. 85 E
about 47 miles distant from the mouth of quick sand river This mtn. is
Covered with Snow and in the range of mountains which we have passed
through and is of a Conical form but rugid- after takeing dinner at the
mouth of this river we proceeded on passed the head of a Island near
the lard Side back of which on the Same Side and near the head a large
Creek falls in, and nearly opposit & 3 miles below the upper mouth of
quick Sand river is the lower mouth, This Island is 31/2 miles long,
has rocks at the upper point, Some timber on the borders of this Island
in the middle open and ponney. Some rugid rocks in the middle of the
Stream opposit this Island. proceeded in to Center of a large Island in
the middle of the river which we call Dimond Isld. from its appearance,
here we met 15 Indn men in 2 canoes from below, they informed us they
Saw 3 vestles below &c. &c. we landed on the North Side of this Dimond
Island and Encamped, Capt. L walked out with his gun on the Island,
Sent out hunters & fowlers- below quick Sand River the Countrey is low
rich and thickly timbered on each Side of the river, the Islands open &
Some ponds river wide and emence numbers of fowls flying in every
direction Such as Swan, geese, Brants, Cranes, Stalks, white guls,
comerants & plevers &c. also great numbers of Sea Otter in the river- a
Canoe arrived from the village below the last rapid with a man his wife
and 3 children, and a woman whome had been taken prisoner from the
Snake Inds. on Clarks River I Sent the Interpreters wife who is a So So
ne or Snake Indian of the Missouri, to Speake to this Squar, they Could
not understand each other Sufficiently to Converse. This familey and
the Inds. we met from below continued with us Capt Lewis borrowed a
Small Canoe of those Indians & 4 men took her across to a Small lake in
the Isld. Cap L. and 3 men Set out after night in this Canoe in Serch
of the Swans, Brants Ducks &c. &c. which appeared in great numbers in
the Lake, he Killed a Swan and Several Ducks which made our number of
fowls this evening 3 Swan, 8 brant and 5 Ducks, on which we made a
Sumptious Supper. We gave the Indian-who lent the Canoe a brant, and
Some meat to the others. one of those Indians, the man from the village
near the lower Rapids has a gun with a brass barrel & Cock of which he
prises highly- note the mountain we Saw from near the forks proves to
be Mount Hood

[Clark, November 4, 1805]
Novr. 4th Monday 1805 A Cloudy Cool morning, wind West, we Set out at
1/2 past 8 oClock having dispatched 4 men in the Small canoe to hunt

(Those people men & women heads are flat)

We landed at a village 200 men of Flatheads of 25 houses 50 canoes
built of Straw, we were treated verry kindly by them, they gave us
round root near the Size of a hens egg roasted which they call Wap-to
to eate

I walked out on the Stard. Side found the country fine, an open Prarie
for 1 mile back of which the wood land comence riseing back, the timber
on the edge of the Prarie is white oke, back is Spruce pine & other
Species of Pine mixed Some under groth of a wild crab & a Specis of
wood I'm not acquainted, a Specis of maple & Cotton wood grow near this
river, Some low bushes

Indians continue to be with us, Several Canoes Continue with us, The
Indians at the last village have more Cloth and uriopian trinkets than
above I Saw Some Guns, a Sword, maney Powder flasks, Salers jackets,
overalls, hats & Shirts, Copper and Brass trinkets with few Beeds only.
dureing the time I was at Dinner the Indians Stold my tomahawk which I
made use of to Smoke I Serched but Could not find it, a Pond on the
Stard Side, off from the river. Raspberries and ____ are also in the
bottoms- met a large and Small canoe with 12 men from below the men
were dressed with a variety of articles of European manufactory the
large Canoe had emeges on the bow & Stern handsomly Carved in wood &
painted with the figur of a Bear in front & man in a Stern. Saw white
geese with black wings- Saw a Small Crab-apple with all the taste &
flavor of the Common- Those Indians were all armed with Pistols or bows
and arrows ready Sprung war axes &c.

Mount Hellen bears N. 25° E about 80 miles, this is the mountain we Saw
near the foks of this river. it is emensely high and covered with Snow,
riseing in a kind of Cone perhaps the highest pinecal from the common
leavel in america passed a village of 4 hs. on the Stard Side at 2
mils, one at 3 mls.

One deer 2 Ducks & Brant killed

[Clark, November 4, 1805]
November 4th Monday 1805
A cloudy cool morning wind from the West we Set out at 1/2 past 8
oClock, one man Shannon Set out early to walk on the Island to kill
Something, he joined us at the lower point with a Buck. This Island is
6 miles long and near 3 miles wide thinly timbered (Tide rose last
night 18 inches perpndicular at Camp) near the lower point of this
dimond Island is The head of a large Island Seperated from a Small one
by a narrow chanel, and both Situated nearest the Lard Side, those
Islands as also the bottoms are thickly Covered with Pine &c. river
wide, Country low on both Sides; on the Main Lard Shore a Short
distance below the last Island we landed at a village of 25 Houses; 24
of those houses were thached with Straw, and covered with bark, the
other House is built of boards in the form of those above, except that
it is above ground and about 50 feet in length and covered with broad
Split boards This village contains about 200 men of the Skil-loot
nation I counted 52 canoes on the bank in front of this village maney
of them verry large and raised in bow. we recognised the man who over
took us last night, he invited us to a lodge in which he had Some part
and gave us a roundish roots about the Size of a Small Irish potato
which they roasted in the embers until they became Soft, This root they
call Wap-pa-to which the Bulb of the Chinese cultivate in great
quantities called the Sa-git ti folia or common arrow head-. it has an
agreeable taste and answers verry well in place of bread. we purchased
about 4 bushels of this root and divided it to our party, at 7 miles
below this village passed the upper point of a large Island nearest the
Lard Side, a Small Prarie in which there is a pond opposit on the
Stard. here I landed and walked on Shore, about 3 miles a fine open
Prarie for about 1 mile, back of which the countrey rises gradually and
wood land comencies Such as white oake, pine of different kinds, wild
crabs with the taste and flavour of the common crab and Several Species
of undergroth of which I am not acquainted, a few Cottonwood trees &
the Ash of this countrey grow Scattered on the river bank, Saw Some Elk
and Deer Sign and Joined Capt. Lewis at a place he had landed with the
party for Diner. Soon after Several Canoes of Indians from the village
above came down dressed for the purpose as I Supposed of Paying us a
friendly visit, they had Scarlet & blue blankets Salors jackets,
overalls, Shirts and Hats independant of their Usial dress; the most of
them had either war axes Spears or Bows Sprung with quivers of arrows,
Muskets or pistols, and tin flasks to hold their powder; Those fellows
we found assumeing and disagreeable, however we Smoked with them and
treated them with every attention & friendship.

dureing the time we were at dinner those fellows Stold my pipe Tomahawk
which They were Smoking with, I imediately Serched every man and the
canoes, but Could find nothing of my Tomahawk, while Serching for the
Tomahawk one of those Scoundals Stole a Cappoe of one of our
interpreters, which was found Stufed under the root of a treer, near
the place they Sat, we became much displeased with those fellows, which
they discovered and moved off on their return home to their village,
except 2 canoes which had passed on down- we proceeded on met a large &
a Small Canoe from below, with 12 men the large Canoe was ornimented
with Images carved in wood the figures of a Bear in front & a man in
Stern, Painted & fixed verry netely on the of the Canoe, rising to near
the hight of a man two Indians verry finely Dressed & with hats on was
in this canoe passed the lower point of the Island which is nine miles
in length haveing passed 2 Islands on the Stard Side of this large
Island, three Small Islands at its lower point. the Indians make Signs
that a village is Situated back of those Islands on the Lard. Side and
I believe that a Chanel is Still on the Lrd, Side as a Canoe passed in
between the Small Islands, and made Signs that way, probably to
traffick with Some of the nativs liveing on another Chanel, at 3 miles
lower, and 12 Leagues below quick Sand river passed a village of four
large houses on The Lard. Side, near which we had a full view of Mt.
Helien which is perhaps the highest pinical in America from their base
it bears N. 25° E about 90 miles- This is the mountain I Saw from the
Muscle Shell rapid on the 19th of October last Covered with Snow, it
rises Something in the form of a Sugar lofe- about a mile lower passed
a Single house on the Lard. Side, and one on the Stard. Side, passed a
village on each Side and Camped near a house on the Stard. Side we
proceeded on untill one hour after dark with a view to get clear of the
nativs who was constantly about us, and troublesom, finding that we
could not get Shut of those people for one night, we landed and
Encamped on the Stard. Side Soon after 2 canoes Came to us loaded with
Indians, we purchased a fiew roots of them.

This evening we Saw vines much resembling the raspberry which is verry
thick in the bottoms. A range of high hills at about 5 miles on the
Lard Side which runs S. E. & N W. Covered with tall timber the bottoms
below in this range of hills and the river is rich and leavel, Saw
White geese with a part of their wings black. The river here is 11/2
miles wide, and current jentle. opposit to our camp on a Small Sandy
Island the brant & geese make Such a noise that it will be impossible
for me to Sleap. we made 29 miles to day Killed a Deer and Several
brant and ducks. I Saw a Brarow tamed at the 1st village to day The
Indians which we have passd to day of the Scil-loot nation in their
language from those near & about the long narrows of the
Che-luc-it-te-quar or E-chee-lute, their dress differ but little,
except they have more of the articles precured from the white traders,
they all have flatened heads both men and women, live principally on
fish and Wap pa toe roots, they also kill Some fiew Elk and Deer,
dureing the Short time I remained in their village they brought in
three Deer which they had killed with their Bow & arrows. They are
thievishly inclined as we have experienced.

[Clark, November 5, 1805]
Novr. 5th Tuesday 1805
a Cloudy morning Som rain the after part of last night & this morning.
I could not Sleep for the noise kept by the Swans, Geese, white & black
brant, Ducks &c. on a opposit base, & Sand hill Crane, they were
emensely numerous and their noise horrid. We Set out at Sun rise & our
hunters killed 10 Brant 4 of which were white with black wings 2 Ducks,
and a Swan which were divided, we Came too and Encamped on the Lard.
Side under a high ridgey land, the high land come to the river on each
Side. the river about 11/2 mile wide. those high lands rise gradually
from the river & bottoms- we are all wet Cold and disagreeable, rain
Continues & encreases. I killed a Pheasent which is very fat- my feet
and legs cold. I saw 17 Snakes to day on a Island, but little
appearance of Frost at this place.

[Clark, November 5, 1805]
November 5th Tuesday 1805
Rained all the after part of last night, rain continues this morning, I
slept but verry little last night for the noise Kept dureing the whole
of the night by the Swans, Geese, white & Grey Brant Ducks &c. on a
Small Sand Island close under the Lard. Side; they were emensely
noumerous, and their noise horid- we Set out early here the river is
not more than 3/4 of a mile in width, passed a Small Prarie on the
Stard. Side passed 2 houses about 1/2 a mile from each other on the
Lard. Side a Canoe came from the upper house, with 3 men in it mearly
to view us, passed an Isld. Covered with tall trees & green briers
Seperated from the Stard. Shore by a narrow Chanel at 9 miles I
observed on the Chanel which passes on the Stard Side of this Island a
Short distance above its lower point is Situated a large village, the
front of which occupies nearly 1/4 of a mile fronting the Chanel, and
closely Connected, I counted 14 houses in front here the river widens
to about 11/2 miles. Seven canoes of Indians came out from this large
village to view and trade with us, they appeared orderly and well
disposed, they accompanied us a fiew miles and returned back. about
111/2 miles below this village on the Lard Side behind a rockey Sharp
point, we passed a Chanel 1/4 of a mile wide, which I take to be the
one the Indian Canoe entered yesterday from the lower point of Immage
Canoe Island a Some low clifts of rocks below this Chanel, a large
Island Close under the Stard Side opposit, and 2 Small Islands, below,
here we met 2 canoes from below,- below those Islands a range of high
hills form the Stard. Bank of the river, the Shore bold and rockey,
Covered with a thick groth of Pine an extensive low Island, Seperated
from the Lard side by a narrow Chanel, on this Island we Stoped to Dine
I walked out found it open & covered with grass interspersed with Small
ponds, in which was great numbr. of foul, the remains of an old village
on the lower part of this Island, I saw Several deer our hunters killed
on this Island a Swan, 4 white 6 Grey brant & 2 Ducks all of them were
divided, below the lower point of this Island a range of high hills)
which runs S. E. forms the Lard. bank of the river the Shores bold and
rockey & hills Covered with pine, The high hills leave the river on the
Stard. Side a high bottom between the hill & river. We met 4 Canoes of
Indians from below, in which there is 26 Indians, one of those Canoes
is large, and ornimented with Images on the bow & Stern. That in the
Bow the likeness of a Bear, and in Stern the picture of a man- we
landed on the Lard. Side & camped a little below the mouth of a creek
on the Stard. Side a little below the mouth of which is an Old Village
which is now abandaned-; here the river is about one and a half miles
wide, and deep, The high Hills which run in a N W. & S E. derection
form both banks of the river the Shore boald and rockey, the hills rise
gradually & are Covered with a thick groth of pine &c. The valley which
is from above the mouth of Quick Sand River to this place may be
computed at 60 miles wide on a Derect line, & extends a great Distanc
to the right & left rich thickly Covered with tall timber, with a fiew
Small Praries bordering on the river and on the Islands; Some fiew
Standing Ponds & Several Small Streams of running water on either Side
of the river; This is certainly a fertill and a handsom valley, at this
time Crouded with Indians. The day proved Cloudy with rain the greater
part of it, we are all wet cold and disagreeable- I Saw but little
appearance of frost in this valley which we call Wap-pa-loo Columbia
from that root or plants growing Spontaneously in this valley only In
my walk of to Day I saw 17 Striped Snakes I killed a grouse which was
verry fat, and larger than Common. This is the first night which we
have been entirely clear of Indians Since our arrival on the waters of
the Columbia River. We made 32 miles to day by estimation-

[Clark, November 6, 1805]
November 6th Wednesday a cold wet morning. rain Contd. untill ____
oClock we Set out early & proceeded on the Corse of last night &c.

[Clark, November 6, 1805]
November 6th Wednesday 1805
A cool wet raney morning we Set out early at 4 miles pass 2 Lodges of
Indians in a Small bottom on the Lard Side I believe those Indians to
be travelers. opposit is the head of a long narrow Island close under
the Starboard Side, back of this Island two Creeks fall in about 6
miles apart, and appear to head in the high hilley countrey to the N.
E. opposit this long Island is 2 others one Small and about the middle
of the river. the other larger and nearly opposit its lower point, and
opposit a high clift of Black rocks on the Lard. Side at 14 miles: here
the Indians of the 2 Lodges we passed to day came in their canoes with
Sundery articles to Sell, we purchased of them Wap-pa-too roots, Salmon
trout, and I purchased 2 beaver Skins for which I gave 5 Small fish
hooks. here the hills leave the river on the Lard. Side, a butifull
open and extensive bottom in which there is an old Village, one also on
the Stard. Side a little above both of which are abandened by all their
inhabitents except Two Small dogs nearly Starved, and an unreasonable
portion of flees- The Hills and mountains are covered with Sever kinds
of Pine-Arber Vitea or white Cedar, red Loril, alder and Several
Species of under groth, the bottoms have common rushes, nettles, &
grass the Slashey parts have Bull rushes & flags- Some willow on the
waters edge, passed an Island 3 miles long and one mile wide, close
under the Stard. Side below the long narrow Island below which the
Stard Hills are verry from the river bank and Continues high and rugid
on that Side all day, we over took two Canoes of Indians going down to
trade one of the Indians Spoke a fiew words of english and Said that
the principal man who traded with them was Mr. Haley, and that he had a
woman in his Canoe who Mr. Haley was fond of &c. he Showed us a Bow of
Iron and Several other things which he Said Mr. Haley gave him. we came
too to Dine on the long narrow Island found the woods So thick with
under groth that the hunters could not get any distance into the Isld.
the red wood, and Green bryors interwoven, and mixed with pine, alder,
a Specis of Beech, ash &c. we killed nothing to day The Indians leave
us in the evening, river about one mile wide hills high and Steep on
the Std. no place for Several Miles suffcently large and leavil for our
camp we at length Landed at a place which by moveing the Stones we made
a place Sufficently large for the party to lie leavil on the Smaller
Stones Clear of the Tide Cloudy with rain all day we are all wet and
disagreeable, had large fires made on the Stone and dried our bedding
and Kill the flees, which collected in our blankets at every old
village we encamped near I had like to have forgotten a verry
remarkable Knob riseing from the edge of the water to about 80 feet
high, and about 200 paces around at its Base and Situated on the long
narrow Island above and nearly opposit to the 2 Lodges we passed to
day, it is Some distance from the high land & in a low part of the
Island

[Clark, November 7, 1805]
November 7th Thursday 1805
a Cloudy fogey morning, a little rain. Set out at 8 oClock proceeded on

The womens peticoat is about 15 Inches long made of arber vita or the
white Cedar bark wove to a String and hanging down in tossles and tied
So as to cover from their hips as low as the peticoat will reach and
only Covers them when Standing, as in any other position the Tosels
Seperate. Those people Sold us otter Skins for fish hooks of which they
wer fond

We delayed 11/2 hour & Set out the tide being up in & the river So Cut
with Islands we got an Indian to pilot us into the main chanel one of
our Canoes Seperated from us this morning in the fog- great numbers of
water fowls of every descriptn. common to this river

[Clark, November 7, 1805]
November 7th Thursday 1805
A cloudy foggey morning Some rain. we Set out early proceeded under the
Stard Shore under a high rugid hills with Steep assent the Shore boalt
and rockey, the fog So thick we could not See across the river, two
Canos of Indians met and returned with us to their village which is
Situated on the Stard Side behind a cluster of Marshey Islands, on a
narrow chanl. of the river through which we passed to the Village of 4
Houses, they gave us to eate Some fish, and Sold us, fish, Wap pa to
roots three dogs and 2 otter Skins for which we gave fish hooks
principally of which they were verry fond.

Those people call themselves War-ci-a-cum and Speake a language
different from the nativs above with whome they trade for the Wapato
roots of which they make great use of as food. their houses differently
built, raised entirely above ground eaves about 5 feet from the ground
Supported and covered in the same way of those above, dotes about the
Same size but in the Side of the house in one Corner, one fire place
and that near the opposit end; around which they have their beads
raised about 4 feet from the fore which is of earth, under their beads
they Store away baskets of dried fish Berries & wappato, over the fire
they hang the flesh as they take them and which they do not make
immediate use. Their Canoes are of the Same form of those above. The
Dress of the men differ verry little from those above, The womin
altogether different, their robes are Smaller only Covering their
Sholders & falling down to near the hip- and Sometimes when it is Cold
a piec of fur curiously plated and connected So as to meet around the
body from the arms to the hips The garment which occupies the waist and
thence as low as the knee before and mid leg behind, cannot properly be
called a petticoat, in the common acception of the word; it is a Tissue
formed of white Cedar bark bruised or broken into Small Straps, which
are interwoven in their center by means of Several cords of the Same
materials which Serves as well for a girdle as to hold in place the
Straps of bark which forms the tissue, and which Strans, Confined in
the middle, hang with their ends pendulous from the waiste, the whole
being of Suffcent thickness when the female Stands erect to conceal
those parts useally covered from familiar view, but when she stoops or
places herself in any other attitudes this battery of Venus is not
altogether impervious to the penetrating eye of the amorite. This
tissue is Sometims formed of little Strings of the Silk grass twisted
and knoted at their ends &c. Those Indians are low and ill Shaped all
flat heads

after delaying at this village one hour and a half we Set out piloted
by an Indian dressed in a Salors dress, to the main Chanel of the
river, the tide being in we Should have found much dificuelty in
passing into the main Chanel from behind those islands, without a
pilot, a large marshey Island near the middle of the river near which
Several Canoes Came allong Side with Skins, roots fish &c. to Sell, and
had a temporey residence on this Island, here we See great numbers of
water fowls about those marshey Islands; here the high mountanious
Countrey approaches the river on the Lard Side, a high mountn. to the S
W. about 20 miles, the high mountans. Countrey Continue on the Stard
Side, about 14 miles below the last village and 18 miles of this day we
landed at a village of the Same nation. This village is at the foot of
the high hills on the Stard Side back OF 2 Small Islands it contains 7
indifferent houses built in the Same form of those above, here we
purchased a Dog Some fish, wappato roots and I purchased 2 beaver Skins
for the purpose of makeing me a roab, as the robe I have is rotten and
good for nothing. opposit to this Village the high mountaneous Countrey
leave the river on the Lard Side below which the river widens into a
kind of Bay & is Crouded with low Islands Subject to be Covered by the
tides- we proceeded on about 12 miles below the Village under a high
mountaneous Countrey on the Stard. Side. Shore boald and rockey and
Encamped under a high hill on the Stard. Side opposit to a rock
Situated half a mile from the Shore, about 50 feet high and 20 feet
Diamieter, we with dificuelty found a place Clear of the tide and
Sufficiently large to lie on and the only place we could get was on
round Stones on which we lay our mats rain Continud. moderately all day
& Two Indians accompanied us from the last village, they we detected in
Stealing a knife and returned, our Small Canoe which got Seperated in
the fog this morning joined us this evening from a large Island
Situated nearest the Lard Side below the high hills on that Side, the
river being too wide to See either the form Shape or Size of the
Islands on the Lard Side.

Great joy in camp we are in View of the Ocian, this great Pacific
Octean which we been So long anxious to See. and the roreing or noise
made by the waves brakeing on the rockey Shores (as I Suppose) may be
heard distictly

we made 34 miles to day as Computed

[Clark, November 8, 1805]
Novr. 8th Friday 1805 a cloudy morning Some rain and wind we Changed
our Clothes and Set out at 9 oClock proceeded on Close under the Stard.
Side

R. Fields Killed a goose & 2 Canvis back Ducks in this bay after Dinner
we took the advantage of the returning tide & proceeded on to the 2d
point, at which place we found the Swells too high to proceed we landed
and drew our canoes up So as to let the tide leave them. The three
Indians after Selling us 4 fish for which we gave Seven Small fishing
hooks, and a piece of red Cloth. Some fine rain at intervales all this
day. the Swells Continued high all the evening & we are Compelled to
form an Encampment on a Point Scercely room Sufficent for us all to lie
Clear of the tide water. hills high & with a Steep assent, river wide &
at this place too Salt to be used for Drink. we are all wet and
disagreeable, as we have been Continually for Severl. days past, we are
at a loss & cannot find out if any Settlement is near the mouth of this
river.

The Swells were So high and the Canoes roled in Such a manner as to
cause Several to be verry Sick. Reuben fields, Wiser McNeal & the Squar
wer of the number

[Clark, November 8, 1805]
November 8th Friday 1805
A Cloudy morning Some rain, we did not Set out untill 9 oClock, haveing
Changed our Clothing- proceeded on Close under the Stard. Side, the
hills high with Steep assent, Shore boald and rockey Several low
Islands in a Deep bend or Bay to the Lard Side, river about 5 or 7
miles wide. three Indians in a Canoe overtook us, with Salmon to Sell,
passed 2 old villages on the Stard. Side and at 3 miles entered a nitch
of about 6 miles wide and 5 miles deep with Several Creeks makeing into
the Stard Hills, this nitch we found verry Shallow water and Call it
the Shallow nitch we came too at the remains of an old village at the
bottom of this nitch and dined, here we Saw great numbers of fowl, Sent
out 2 men and they killed a Goose and two Canves back Ducks here we
found great numbers of Hees which we treated with the greatest caution
and distance; after Diner the Indians left us and we took the advantage
of a returning tide and proceeded on to the Second point on the Std.
here we found the Swells or waves So high that we thought it imprudent
to proceed; we landed unloaded and drew up our Canoes. Some rain all
day at intervales; we are all wet and disagreeable, as we have been for
Several days past, and our present Situation a verry disagreeable one
in as much; as we have not leavel land Sufficient for an encampment and
for our baggage to lie Cleare of the tide, the High hills jutting in So
Close and Steep that we cannot retreat back, and the water of the river
too Salt to be used, added to this the waves are increasing to Such a
hight that we cannot move from this place, in this Situation we are
compelled to form our Camp between the hite of the Ebb and flood tides,
and rase our baggage on logs- We are not certain as yet if the whites
people who trade with those people or from whome they precure ther
goods are Stationary at the mouth, or visit this quarter at Stated
times for the purpose of trafick &c. I believe the latter to be the
most probable conjucture- The Seas roled and tossed the Canoes in Such
a manner this evening that Several of our party were Sea Sick.

[Clark, November 9, 1805]
Novr. 9th Saturday 1805
The tide of last night obliged us to unload all the Canoes one of which
Sunk before She was unloaded by the high waves or Swells which
accompanied the returning tide, The others we unloaded, and 3 others
was filled with water Soon after by the Swells or high Sees which broke
against the Shore imediately where we lay, rained hard all the fore
part of the day, the tide which rose untill 2 oClock P M to day brought
with it Such emence Swells or waves, added to a hard wind from the
South which Loosened the Drift trees which is verry thick on the
Shores, and tossed them about in Such a manner, as to endanger our
Canoes very much, with every exertion and the Strictest attention by
the party was Scercely Suffient to defend our Canoes from being Crushed
to pieces between those emensely large trees maney of them 200 feet
long and 4 feet through. The tide of this day rose about ____ feet & 15
Inches higher than yesterday this is owing to the wind which Sets in
from the ocian, we are Compelled to move our Camp from the water, as
also the loading every man as wet all the last night and this day as
the rain Could make them which Contind. all day. at 4 oClock the wind
Shifted about to the S. W imediately from the ocian and blew a Storm
for about 2 hours, raised the tide verry high all wet & cold Labiech
killed 4 Ducks very fat & R. Fields Saw Elk Sign.

not withstanding the disagreeable time of the party for Several days
past they are all Chearfull and full of anxiety to See further into the
ocian. the water is too Salt to Drink, we use rain water. The Salt
water has acted on some of the party already as a Pergitive. rain
continus.

[Clark, November 9, 1805]
November 9th Saturday 1805
The tide of last night did not rise Sufficintly high to come into our
camp, but the Canoes which was exposed to the mercy of the waves &c.
which accompanied the returning tide, they all filled, and with great
attention we Saved them untill the tide left them dry- wind Hard from
the South and rained hard all the fore part of the day, at 2 oClock P M
the flood tide came in accompanied with emence waves and heavy winds,
floated the trees and Drift which was on the point on which we Camped
and tosed them about in Such a manner as to endanger the Canoes verry
much, with every exertion and the Strictest attention by every
individual of the party was Scercely Sufficient to Save our Canoes from
being crushed by those monsterous trees maney of them nearly 200 feet
long and from 4 to 7 feet through. our camp entirely under water
dureing the hight of the tide, every man as wet as water could make
them all the last night and to day all day as the rain Continued all
day, at 4 oClock P M the wind Shifted about to the S. W. and blew with
great violence imediately from the Ocian for about two hours,
notwithstanding the disagreeable Situation of our party all wet and
Cold (and one which they have experienced for Several days past) they
are chearfull and anxious to See further into the Ocian, The water of
the river being too Salt to use we are obliged to make use of rain
water- Some of the party not accustomed to Salt water has made too free
a use of it on them it acts as a pergitive.

at this dismal point we must Spend another night as the wind & waves
are too high to proceed.

[Clark, November 10, 1805]
November 10th Sunday 1805 rained verry hard the greater part of the
last night & Continus this morning, the wind has layed and the Swells
are fallen. we loaded our Canoes and proceeded on, passed a Deep Bay on
the Stard. Side I Call ____ The wind rose from the N W. and the Swells
became So high, we were Compelled to return about 2 miles to a place
where we Could unld. our Canoes, which was in a Small Bay on Driftwood,
on which we had also to make our fires to dry our Selves as well as we
could the Shore being either a Clift of Purpendicular rocks or Steep
assents to the hight of 4 or 500 feet, we continued on this drift wood
untill about 3 oClock when the evening appearing favourable we loaded &
Set out in hopes to turn the Point below and get into a better harber,
but finding the waves & Swells continue to rage with great fury below,
we got a Safe place for our Stores & a much beter one for the Canoes to
lie and formed a Campment on Drift logs in the Same little Bay under a
high hill at the enterence of a Small drean which we found verry convt.
on account of its water, as that of the river is Brackish- The logs on
which we lie is all on flote every high tide- The rain Continud all
day- we are all wet, also our beding and many other articles. we are
all employed untill late drying our bedding. nothing to eate but
Pounded fish

[Clark, November 10, 1805]
November 10th Sunday 1805
Rained verry hard the greater part of last night and continues this
morning. the wind has luled and the waves are not high; we loaded our
canoes and proceeded on passed Several Small and deep nitch on the
Stard. Side, we proceeded on about 10 miles Saw great numbers of Sea
Guls, the wind rose from the N. W. and the waves became So high that we
were compelled to return about 2 miles to a place we Could unload our
Canoes, which we did in a Small nitch at the mouth of a Small run on a
pile of drift logs where we Continued untill low water, when the river
appeared calm we loaded and Set out; but was obliged to return finding
the waves too high for our Canoes to ride, we again unloaded the
Canoes, and Stoed the loading on a rock above the tide water, and
formed a camp on the Drift Logs which appeared to be the only Situation
we could find to lie, the hills being either a perpendicular Clift, or
Steep assent, riseing to about 500 feet- our Canoes we Secured as well
as we could- we are all wet the rain haveing continued all day, our
beding and maney other articles, employ our Selves drying our blankets-
nothing to eate but dried fish pounded which we brought from the falls.
we made 10 miles today

[Clark, November 11, 1805]
November 11th Monday 1805
a hard rain all the last night we again get wet the rain continue at
intervals all day. Wind verry high from S W and blew a Storm all day
Sent out Jo. Fields & Collins to hunt. at 12 oClock at a time the wind
was verry high and waves tremendeous five Indians Came down in a Canoe
loaded with fish of Salmon Spes. Called Red Charr, we purchased of
those Indians 13 of these fish, for which we gave, fishing hooks & some
trifling things, we had Seen those Indians at a village behind Some
marshey Islands a few days ago. they are on their way to trade those
fish with white people which they make Signs live below round a point,
those people are badly Clad, one is dressd. in an old Salors Jacket &
Trouses, the others Elk Skin robes. we are truly unfortunate to be
Compelled to lie 4 days nearly in the Same place at a time that our day
are precious to us, The Wind Shifted to ____ the Indians left us and
Crossed the river which is about 5 miles wide through the highest Sees
I ever Saw a Small vestle ride, their Canoe is Small, maney times they
were out of Sight before the were 2 miles off Certain it is they are
the best canoe navigators I ever Saw The tide was 3 hours later to day
than yesterday and rose much higher, the trees we camped on was all on
flote for about 2 hours from 3 untill 5 oClock P M, the great
quantities of rain which has fallen losenes the Stones on the Side of
the hill & the Small ones fall on us, our Situation is truly a
disagreeable one our Canoes in one place at the mercy of the waves our
baggage in another and our Selves & party Scattered on drift trees of
emense Sizes, & are on what dry land they can find in the Crevices of
the rocks & hill Sides

[Clark, November 11, 1805]
November 11th Monday 1805
A hard rain all the last night, dureing the last tide the logs on which
we lay was all on float Sent out Jo Fields to hunt, he Soon returned
and informed us that the hills was So high & Steep, & thick with
undergroth and fallen Timber that he could not get out any distance;
about 12 oClock 5 Indians came down in a canoe, the wind verry high
from the S. W. with most tremendious waves brakeing with great violence
against the Shores, rain falling in torrents, we are all wet as usial
and our Situation is truly a disagreeable one; the great quantites of
rain which has loosened the Stones on the hill Sides, and the Small
Stones fall down upon us, our canoes at one place at the mercy of the
waves, our baggage in another and our Selves and party Scattered on
floating logs and Such dry Spots as can be found on the hill Sides, and
Crivices of the rocks. we purchased of the Indians 13 red chary which
we found to be an excellent fish we have Seen those Indians above and
are of a nation who reside above and on the opposit Side who call
themselves Call-har-ma they are badly clad & illy made, Small and Speak
a language much resembling the last nation, one of those men had on a
Salors Jacket and Pantiloons and made Signs that he got those Clothes
from the white people who lived below the point &c. those people left
us and Crossed the river (which is about 5 miles wide at this place)
through the highest waves I ever Saw a Small vestles ride. Those
Indians are Certainly the best Canoe navigaters I ever Saw. rained all
(lay

[Clark, November 12, 1805]
November 12th Tuesday 1805
a tremendious thunder Storm abt. 3 oClock this morning accompanied by
wind from the S W. and Hail, this Storm of hard Clap's thunder Lighting
and hail untill about 6 oClock at intervals it then became light for a
Short time when the heavens became darkined by a black Cloud from the
S, W, & a hard rain Suckceeded which lasted untill 12 oClock with a
hard wind which raised the Seas tremendiously high braking with great
force and fury against the rocks & trees on which we lie, as our
Situation became Seriously dangerous, we took the advantage of a low
tide & moved our Camp around a point a Short distance to a Small wet
bottom at the mouth of a Small Creek, which we had not observed when we
first Came to this Cove, from its being very thick and obscured by
drift trees & thick bushes, Send out men to hunt they found the woods
So thick with Pine & timber and under Broth that they could not get
through, Saw Some Elk tracks, I walked up this creek & killed 2 Salmon
trout, the men killd. 13 of the Salmon Species, The Pine of fur Specs,
or Spruc Pine grow here to an emense Size & hight maney of them 7 & 8
feet through and upwards of 200 feet high. It would be distressing to a
feeling person to See our Situation at this time all wet and cold with
our bedding &c. also wet, in a Cove Scercely large nough to Contain us,
our Baggage in a Small holler about 1/2 a mile from us, and Canoes at
the mercy of the waves & drift wood, we have Scured them as well as it
is possible by Sinking and wateing them down with Stones to prevent the
emence waves dashing them to pices against the rocks- one got loose
last night & was left on a rock by the tide Some distance below without
recving much damage. fortunately for us our Men are helthy. It was
clear at 12 for a Short time. I observed the Mountains on the opposit
Side was covered with Snowour party has been wet for 8 days and is
truly disagreeable, their robes & leather Clothes are rotten from being
Continually wet, and they are not in a Situation to get others, and we
are not in a Situation to restore them- I observe great numbers of Sea
guls, flying in every derection- Three men Gibson Bratten & Willard
attempted to decend in a Canoe built in the Indian fashion and abt. the
Size of the one the Indians visited us in yesterday, they Could not
proceed, as the waves tossed them about at will, they returned after
proceeding about 1 mile- we got our Selves tolerable Comfortable by
drying our Selves & bedding Cought 3 salmon this evining in a Small
branch above about 1 mile

[Clark, November 12, 1805]
November 12th Tuesday 1805
A Tremendious wind from the S. W. about 3 oClock this morning with
Lightineng and hard claps of Thunder, and Hail which Continued untill 6
oClock a.m. when it became light for a Short time, then the heavens
became Sudenly darkened by a black Cloud from the S. W. and rained with
great violence untill 12 oClock, the waves tremendious brakeing with
great fury against the rocks and trees on which we were encamped. our
Situation is dangerous. we took the advantage of a low tide and moved
our camp around a point to a Small wet bottom at the mouth of a Brook,
which we had not observed when we Came to this cove; from it being
verry thick and obscured by drift trees and thick bushes It would be
distressing to See our Situation, all wet and Colde our bedding also
wet, (and the robes of the party which Compose half the bedding is
rotten and we are not in a Situation to supply their places) in a wet
bottom Scercely large enough to contain us, our baggage half a mile
from us and Canoes at the mercy of the waves, altho Secured as well as
possible, Sunk with emence parcels of Stone to wate them down to
prevent their dashing to pieces against the rocks; one got loose last
night and was left on a rock a Short distance below, without rciving
more daminage than a Split in her bottom- Fortunately for us our men
are healthy. 3 men Gibson Bratten & Willard attempted to go aroud the
point below in our Indian Canoe, much Such a canoe as the Indians
visited us in yesterday, they proceeded to the point from which they
were oblige to return, the waves tossing them about at will I walked up
the branch and giged 3 Salmon trout. the party killed 13 Salmon to day
in a branch about 2 miles above. rain Continued

[Clark, November 13, 1805]
November 13th Wednesday 1805 Some intervales of fair weather last
night, rain and wind Continue this morning, as we are in a Cove & the
Mountains verry high & Pine Spruce verry high & thick Cannot deturmine
the procise course of the winds. I walked to the top of the first part
of the mountain with much fatigue as the distance was about 3 miles
thro intolerable thickets of Small Pine, arrow wood a groth much
resembling arrow wood with briers, growing to 10 & 15 feet high
interlocking with each other & Furn, aded to this difficulty the hill
was So Steep that I was obliged to drawing my Self up in many places by
the bowers, the Countrey Continues thick and hilley as far back a I
could See. Some Elk Sign, rained all day moderately. I am wet &c. &c.
The Hail which fell 2 night past is yet to be Seen on the mountain on
which I was to day. I Saw a Small red Berry which grows on a Stem of
about 6 or 8 Inches from the Ground, in bunches and in great quantity
on the Mountains, the taste insiped. I saw a number of verry large
Spruce Pine one of which I measured 14 feet around and verry tall. My
principal objects in assdg. this mountain was to view the river below,
the weather being So Cloudey & thick that I could not See any distance
down, discovered the wind high from the N. W. and waves high at a Short
distance below our Encampment, (Squar displeased with me for not sin &c
&c. Wap-lo a excellent root which is rosted and tastes like a potato I
Cut my hand despatched 3 men in a Indian canoe (which is calculated to
ride high Swells) down to examine if they can find the Bay at the mouth
& good barbers below for us to proceed in Safty. The fides at every Hud
come in with great Swells & Breake against the rocks & Drift trees with
great fury- the rain Continue all the evening nothing to eate but
Pounded fish which we have as a reserve See Store, and what Pore fish
we can kill up the branch on which we are encamped our canoe and the
three men did not return this evening- if we were to have cold weather
to accompany the rain which we have had for this 6 or 8 days passed we
must eneviatilbly Suffer verry much as Clothes are Scerce with us.

[Clark, November 13, 1805]
November 13th Wednesday 1805
Some intervales of fair weather last night, rain continue this morning.
I walked up the Brook & assended the first Spur of the mountain with
much fatigue, the distance about 3 miles, through an intolerable
thickets of Small pine, a groth much resembling arrow wood on the Stem
of which there is thorns; this groth about 12 or 15 feet high inter
lockd into each other and Scattered over the high fern & fallen timber,
added to this the hills were So Steep that I was compelled to draw my
Self up by the assistance of those bushes- The Timber on those hills
are of the pine Species large and tall maney of them more than 200 feet
high & from 8 to 10 feet through at the Stump those hills & as far back
as I could See, I Saw Some Elk Sign, on the Spur of the mountain tho
not fresh. I killed a Salmon trout on my return. The Hail which fell 2
nights past is yet to be Seen on the mountains; I Saw in my ramble to
day a red berry resembling Solomons Seal berry which the nativs call
Sol-me and use it to eate. my principal object in assending this
mountain was to view the countrey below, the rain continuing and
weather proved So Cloudy that I could not See any distance on my return
we dispatched 3 men Colter, Willard and Shannon in the Indian canoe to
get around the point if possible and examine the river, and the Bay
below for a god barber for our Canoes to lie in Safty &c. The tide at
every floot tide Came with great swells brakeing against the rocks &
Drift trees with great fury The rain Continue all day. nothing to eate
but pounded fish which we Keep as a reserve and use in Situations of
this kind.

[Clark, November 14, 1805]
Novr. 14th Thursday 1805
Rained last night without intermission and this morning the wind blew
hard from the ____ We Could not move, one Canoe was broken last night
against the rocks, by the waves dashing her against them in high tide
about 10 oClock 5 Indians Come up in a Canoe thro emence waves &
Swells, they landed and informed us they Saw the 3 men we Sent down
yesterday, at Some distance below Soon after those people Came Colter
one of the 3 men returned and informed us that he had proceeded with
his Canoe as far as they Could, for the waves and Could find no white
people, or Bay, he Saw a good Canoe barber & 2 Camps of Indians at no
great distance below and that those with us had taken his gig & knife
&c. which he forcably took from them & they left us, after our treating
them well. The rain Continue all day all wet as usial, killed only 2
fish to day for the whole Party, at 3 oClock Capt. Lewis Drewyer Jo. &
R. Fields & Frasure Set out down on the Shore to examine if any white
men were below within our reach, they took a empty Canoe & 5 men to Set
them around the Point on a Gravelley Beech which Colter informed was at
no great distance below. The Canoe returned at dusk half full of water,
from the waves which dashed over in passing the point Capt Lewis is
object is also to find a Small Bay as laid down by Vancouver just out
of the mouth of the Columbia River. rained as usial all the evening,
all wet and disagreeable Situated

[Clark, November 14, 1805]
November 14th Thursday 1805
rained all the last night without intermition, and this morning. wind
blows verry hard but our Situation is Such that we Cannot tell from
what point it comes- one of our Canoes is much broken by the waves
dashing it against the rocks- 5 Indians Came up in a Canoe, thro the
waves, which is verry high and role with great fury- They made Signs to
us that they Saw the 3 men we Sent down yesterday. only 3 of those
Indians landed, the other 2 which was women played off in the waves,
which induced me to Suspect that they had taken Something from our men
below, at this time one of the men Colter returnd by land and informed
us that those Indians had taken his Gigg & basket, I called to the
Squars to land and give back the gigg, which they would not doe untill
a man run with a gun, as if he intended to Shute them when they landed,
and Colter got his gig & basket I then ordered those fellows off, and
they verry readily Cleared out they are of the War-ci-a-cum N. Colter
informed us that "it was but a Short distance from where we lay around
the point to a butifull Sand beech, which continud for a long ways,
that he had found a good harber in the mouth of a creek near 2 Indian
Lodgesthat he had proceeded in the Canoe as far as he could for the
waves, the other two men Willard & Shannon had proceeded on down"

Capt Lewis concluded to proceed on by land & find if possible the white
people the Indians Say is below and examine if a Bay is Situated near
the mouth of this river as laid down by Vancouver in which we expect,
if there is white traders to find them &c. at 3 oClock he Set out with
4 men Drewyer Jos. & Reu. Fields & R. Frasure, in one of our large
canoes and 5 men to Set them around the point on the Sand beech. this
canoe returned nearly filled with water at Dark which it receved by the
waves dashing into it on its return, haveing landed Capt. Lewis & his
party Safe on the Sand beech. The rain Continues all day all wet. The
rain &c. which has continued without a longer intermition than 2 hours
at a time for ten days past has distroyd. the robes and rotted nearly
one half of the fiew Clothes the party has, perticularley the leather
Clothes,- fortunately for us we have no very Cold weather as yet and if
we have Cold weather before we Can kill & Dress Skins for Clothing the
bulk of the party will Suffer verry much.

[Clark, November 15, 1805]
November 15th Friday 1805
Rained all the last night at intervales of Sometimes of 2 hours, This
morning it became Calm & fair, I prepared to Set out at which time the
wind sprung up from the S. E. and blew down the River & in a fiew
minits raised Such Swells and waves brakeing on the Rocks at the point
as to render it unsafe to proceed. I went to the point in an empty
canoe and found it would be dangerous to proceed even in an empty Canoe
The Sun Shown untill 1 oClock p.m.which gave an oppertunity for us to
dry Some of our bedding, & examine our baggage, the greater Part of
which I found wet Some of our Pounded fish Spoiled I had all the arms
put in order & amunition examined.

The rainey weather Continued without a longer intermition than 2 hours
at a time from the 5th in the morng. untill the 16th is eleven days
rain, and the most disagreeable time I have experienced Confined on a
tempiest Coast wet, where I can neither get out to hunt, return to a
better Situation, or proceed on: in this Situation have we been for Six
days past.- fortunately the wind lay about 3 oClock we loaded I in
great haste and Set out passed the blustering Point below which is a
Sand beech, with a Small marshey bottom for 3 miles on the Stard. Side,
on which is a large village of 36 houses deserted by the Inds. & in
full possession of the flees, a Small Creek fall in at this village,
which waters the Country for a few miles back; Shannon & 5 Indians met
me here, Shannon informed me he met Capt. Lewis Some distance below &
he took willard with him & Sent him to meet me, the Inds with him wer
rogues, they had the night before Stold both his and Willards guns from
under their heads, Capt. Lewis & party arrived at the Camp of those
Indians at So Timely a period that the Inds. were allarmed & delivered
up the guns &c. The tide meeting of me and the emence Swells from the
main Ocean (imedeately in front of us) raised to Such a hite that I
concluded to form a Camp on the highest Spot I could find in the
marshey bottom, and proceed no further by water as the Coaste becomes
verry dangerous for Crafts of the Size of our Canoes-and as the Ocian
is imedeately in front and gives us an extensive view of it from Cape
disapointment to Point addams, my Situation is in the upper part of
Haley Bay S. 86° W. ____ miles Course five to Cape Disapt. and S. 35° W.
Course ____ miles from point Addams

The River here at its mouth from Point addams to the enterance of Haley
Bay above is ____ Miles or thereabouts, a large Isd. the lower point of
which is immediately in the mouth above

4 Indians in a Canoe Came down with papto roots to Sell, for which they
asked, blankets or robes, both of which we could not Spare I informed
those Indians all of which understood Some English that if they Stole
our guns &c the men would Certainly Shute them, I treated them with
great distance, & the Sentinal which was over our Baggage allarmed them
verry much, they all Promised not to take any thing, and if any thing
was taken by the Squars & bad boys to return them &c. the waves became
very high Evening fare & pleasent, our men all Comfortable in the Camps
they have made of the boards they found at the Town above

[Clark, November 15, 1805]
November 15th Friday 1805
Rained all the last night, this morning it became Calm and fair, I
preposed Setting out, and ordered the Canoes Repared and loaded; before
we could load our canoes the wind Sudenly Sprung up from the S. E and
blew with Such violence, that we could not proceed in Safty with the
loading. I proceeded to the point in an empty Canoe, and found that the
waves dashed against the rocks with Such violence that I thought it
unsave to Set out with the loaded Canoes- The Sun Shown untill 1 oClock
P M which afford us time to Dry our bedding and examine the baggage
which I found nearly all wet, Some of our pounded fish Spoiled in the
wet; I examined the amunition and Caused all the arms to be put in
order.

About 3 oClock the wind luled, and the river became calm, I had the
canoes loaded in great haste and Set Out, from this dismal nitich where
we have been confined for 6 days passed, without the possibility of
proceeding on, returning to a better Situation, or get out to hunt,
Scerce of Provisions, and torents of rain poreing on us all the time-
proceeded on passed the blustering point below which I found a butifull
Sand beech thro which runs a Small below the mouth of this Stream is a
village of 36 houses uninhabited by anything except flees, here I met
G. Shannon and 5 Indians. Shannon informed me that he met Capn. Lewis
at an Indian Hut about 10 miles below who had Sent him back to meet me,
he also told me the Indians were thievish, as the night before they had
Stolen both his and Willards rifles from under their heads, that they
Set out on their return and had not proceeded far up the beech before
they met Capt Lewis, whose arival was at a timely moment and alarmed
the Indians So that they instantly produced the Guns- I told those
Indians who accompanied Shannon that they Should not Come near us, and
if any one of their nation Stold anything from us, I would have him
Shot, which they understoot verry well. as the tide was Comeing in and
the Seas became verry high imediately from the Ocian (imediately
faceing us) I landed and formed a camp on the highest Spot I could find
between the hight of the tides, and the Slashers in a Small bottom this
I could plainly See would be the extent of our journey by water, as the
waves were too high at any Stage for our Canoes to proceed any further
down. in full view of the Ocian from Point Adams to Cape Disapointment,
I could not See any Island in the mouth of this river as laid down by
Vancouver. The Bay which he laies down in the mouth is imediately below
me. This Bay we call Haleys bay from a favourate Trader with the
Indians which they Say comes into this Bay and trades with them Course
to Point adams is S. 35°W. about 8 miles To Cape Disapointment is S. 86°W.
about 14 miles 4 Indians of the War-ki a cum nation Came down with
pap-pa-too to Sell &c. The Indians who accompanied Shannon from the
village below Speake a Different language from those above, and reside
to the north of this place The Call themselves Chin nooks, I told those
people that they had attempted to Steal 2 guns &c. that if any one of
their nation stole any thing that the Sentinl. whome they Saw near our
baggage with his gun would most certainly Shute them, they all promised
not to tuch a thing, and if any of their womin or bad boys took any
thing to return it imediately and Chastise them for it. I treated those
people with great distance. our men all Comfortable in their Camps
which they have made of boards from the old Village above. we made 3
miles to day.

[Clark, November 16, 1805]
November 16th Satturday 1805
a fine morning cool the latter part of the night, I had all our
articles of every discription examined, and found much wet, had all put
out & dried, The 5 Indians Theves left me. I took a meridean altd. with
Sextt. 50° 36 15 the Shakeing emige below- I Sent out Several hunters
Some to kill fowl others to hunt deer or Elk. The Sea is fomeing and
looks truly dismal to day, from the wind which blew to day from the S.
W. an Indian Canoe passed down to day, loaded with roots &c. three
Indians Came up from below I gave them Smoke but allowed then no kind
of Priveleges what ever, they camped with the 4 which Came down
yesterday, near us, The evening provd. Cloudy & I could make no lunar
observations. one man Sick with a violent Cold, Caught by lying in his
wet Clothes, Several nights Course from Stormey point to Cape
Disapointment is ____ Miles, passd a Small Creek and an old village at
2 miles on the Stard Side a Small Creek at 1 mile we Encamped just
above a Point in a Deep bay to the Stard. Side into which falls 2 Small
rivers Std. Grat many Indians liveing on the Bay & those two rivers,
the the Countrey on the Stard. Side high broken & thickly timbered,
that on the Lard. at Some distance from Point Adms high and mountains
on a Pinecal of a which is Snow at this time- near the Point is Low
bottom land

our hunters and fowlers killd 2 Deer 1 Crane & 2 ducks, my Servt. York
killed 2 Geese & 8 white, black and Speckle Brants, The White Brant,
with part of their wings black is much the largest, the black brant is
verry Small, a little larger than a large Duck- the deer pore but large

[Clark, November 16, 1805]
November 16th Saturday 1805
Cool the latter part of the last night this morning Clear and butifull;
I had all our articles of every discription examined and put out to
Dry. The 5 Chin nooks left us I took a meridenal altitude with the
Sextn. 50° 36' 15 which gave for Lattitude 46° 19' 11 1/10" North. I Sent
out Several hunters and fowlers in pursute Elk, Deer, or fowls of any
kind. wind hard from the S W The Waves high & look dismal indeed
breaking with great fury on our beech an Indian canoe pass down to day
loaded with Wap-pa-toe roots; Several Indians came up to day from
below, I gave them Smoke but allowed them no kind of privilage whatever
in the camp, they with the 4 which came down yesterday encamped a Short
distance from us. The evening proved Cloudy and I could not take any
Luner observations- One man Sick with a violent cold, Caught by laying
in his wet leather Clothes for maney nights past.

The Countrey on the Stard Side above Haley Bay is high broken and
thickley timbered on the Lard Side from Point Adams the Contrey appears
low for 15 or 20 miles back to the mountains, a pinical of which now is
Covered with Snow or hail, as the opposit is too far distant to be
distinguished well, I Shall not attempt to describe any thing on that
Side at present. our hunters and fowlers killed 2 Deer 1 Crain & 2
Ducks, and my man York killed 2 geese and 8 Brant, 3 of them white with
a part of their wings black and much larger than the Grey brant which
is a Sise larger than a Duck.

[Clark, November 17, 1805]
November 17th Sunday 1805
a fair cool windey morning wind from the East. every tide which rises 8
feet 6 Inches at this place, comes in with high Swells which brake on
the Sand Shore with great fury.

I Sent out 6 men to kill deer & fowls this morning at half past 1
oClock Capt. Lewis and his Party returned haveing around passd. Point
Disapointment and Some distance on the main Ocian to the N W. Several
Indians followed him & Soon after a canoe with wapto roots, & Lickorish
boiled, which they gave as presents, in return for which we gave more
than the worth to Satisfy,them a bad practice to receive a present of
Indians, as they are never Satisfied in return. our hunters killed 3
Deer & th fowler 2 Ducks & q brant I Surveyed a little on the corse &
made Some observns. The Chief of the nation below us Came up to See us
the name of the nation is Chin-nook and is noumerous live principally
on fish roots a fiew Elk and fowls. they are well armed with good
Fusees. I directed all the men who wished to See more of the Ocean to
Get ready to Set out with me on tomorrow day light. the following men
expressed a wish to accompany me i'e Seri. Nat Pryor Serjt. J. Ordway,
Jo. Fields R. Fields, Jo. Shannon, Jo Colter, William Bratten, Peter
Wiser, Shabono & my Servant York. all others being well Contented with
what part of the Ocean & its curiosities which Could be Seen from the
vicinity of our Camp.

[Clark, November 17, 1805]
November 17th Sunday 1805
A fair cool morning wind from the East. The tide rises at this place 8
feet 6 inches and comes in with great waves brakeing on the Sand beech
on which we lay with great fury Six hunters out this morning in serch
of Deer & fowl.

At half past 1 oClock Capt Lewis returned haveing travesed Haleys Bay
to Cape Disapointment and the Sea Coast to the North for Some distance.
Several Chinnook Indians followed (,apt L- and a Canoe came up with
roots mats &c. to Sell. those Chinnooks made us a present of a rute
boiled much resembling the common liquorice in taste and Size; in
return for this root we gave more than double the value to Satisfy
their craveing dispostn. It is a bad practice to receive a present from
those Indians as they are never Satisfied for what they reive in return
if ten time the value of the articles they gave. This Chin nook Nation
is about 400 Souls inhabid the Countrey on the Small rivrs which run
into the bay below us and on the Ponds to the N W of us, live
principally on fish and roots, they are well armed with fusees and
Sometimes kill Elk Deer and fowl. our hunters killed to day 3 Deer, 4
brant and 2 Ducks, and inform me they Saw Some Elk Sign. I directed all
the men who wished to See more of the main Ocian to prepare themselves
to Set out with me early on tomorrow morning. The principal Chief of
the Chinnooks & his familey came up to See us this evening-

[Clark, November 18, 1805]
Novr. 18th Monday 1805
a little Cloudy this morning I set out at day light with 10 men & my
Sevent, Shabono, Sergt. Pryer odderway Jos. & R. Fields Shannon Colter,
wiser, Lebiech & york proceeded on Down the Shore from the 1st point

At a run & Island near the Shore here the Traders ancher & trade? we
passed at each point a Soft Clifts of yellow, brown & dark Soft Stones
here Capt Lewis myself & Severl. of the men marked our names day of the
month & by Land &c. &c. from this S. W. 3 miles to the Iner pt. of Cape
Disapointmt passed a point & 2 Small nitches (Reuben Fields killed a
Vulter) we found a Curious fiat fish Shaped like a turtle, with fins on
each side, and a tale notched like a fish, the Internals on one Sid and
tale & fins flat wise This fish Flownder has a white on one Side & lies
flat to the Ground- passed from last hitch across to the ocean 1/2 a
mile low land the Cape is a high Partly bald hill, founded on rock, I
assencled a high Seperate bald hill Covered with long corse grass &
Seperated from the hight of Country by a Slashey bottom 2 miles S. 60 W
of the Cape- thence to a 2d Grassey pt is N. 50° W. 2 miles, Those hills
are founded on rocks & the waves brake with great fury against them,
the Coast is Sholey for Several miles of this Cape & for Some distance
off to the N W a Sand bar in the mouth. Sholey Some distance out from
the mouth The Coast from the Cape N W is open for a Short distance back
then it becomes thick piney Countrey intersperced with ponds

Point addams is S 20° W about 20 miles the Course on that Side bears S 45
W. I cannot assertain the prosise Course of the Deep water in the mouth
of the river, the Channel is but narrow. I proceeded on up above the 2d
point and Encamped on the Shore above the high tide, evening Clear, for
a Short time. Supd. on Brant and pounded fish men all Chearfull,
express a Desire to winter near the falls this winter.

[Clark, November 18, 1805]
November 18h Monday 1805
A little cloudy this morning I Set out with to men and my man York to
the Ocian by land. i. e. Seijt. Ordway & Pryor, Jos. & Ru. Fields, Go.
Shannon, W. Brattin,_J. Colter, P. Wiser, W. Labieche & P. Shabono one
of our interpreters & York. I Set out at Day light and proceeded on a
Sandy beech from Cape Disapointment to a high point of a Mountn. which
we shall call Clarke's Point of View beares S. 20° W. about 40 miles,
point adams is verry low and is Situated within the direction between
those two high points of land, the water appears verry Shole from off
the mouth of the river for a great distance, and I cannot assertain the
direction of the deepest Chanel, the Indians point nearest the opposit
Side. the waves appear to brake with tremendious force in every
direction quite across a large Sand bar lies within the mouth nearest
to point Adams which is nearly covered at high tide. I suped on brant
this evening with a little pounded fish. Some rain in the after part of
the night. men appear much Satisfied with their trip beholding with
estonishment the high waves dashing against the rocks & this emence
ocian

[Clark, November 19, 1805]
November 19th Tuesday 1805
began to rain a little before day and Continued raining untill 11
oClock I proceeded on thro emencely bad thickets & hills crossing 2
points to a 3rd on which we built a fire and Cooked a Deer which Jos.
Field Killd. from this point I can See into a Deep bend in the coast to
the N. E. for 10 miles. after Brackfast I proceeded on N. 20 E. 5 miles
to Comcement a large Sand bar at a low part ponds a little off from the
Coast here the high rockey hills end and a low marshey Countrey
Suckceed. I proceeded up the Course N. 10° W. 4 miles & marked my name &
the Day of the Month on a pine tree, the waters which Wash this Sand
beach is tinged with a deep brown Colour for Some distance out. The
Course Contd. is N. 20° W. low Coast and Sand beech, Saw a Dead Sturgen
10 feet long on the Sand, & the back bone of a Whale, as I conceived
raind I then returned to the Cape & dined, Some curious Deer on this
Course darker large boded Shorte legs Pronged horns & the top of the
tale black under part white as usial passed a nitch in the rocks below
into which falls a Stream, after Dinner I Set out on my return S. E.
passed over a low ridge & thro a piney countrey 21 Vs miles to the Bay,
thence up the Bay to the mouth of the Chen-nook River Crossed in the
Canoe we had left there & Encamped on the upper Side The Hills in the
point of this bay are not high, & imedeately below this River the
present yellow Bluffs above the River and up for about 2 miles the land
is low Slashey and Contains much drift wood, the Countrey up this Creek
is low with Copse of high land or as I may Say elevated. The Buzzard
which Ruben Fields killed diameter of one feather is- 11/4 & 1 Line
from the tip of one to the tip of the other wing is 9 feet 0 Inches,
from the point of the Bill to the tale is 3 feet 101/4 Ins. middle Toe
51/2 Inches, Toe nale 1 Inches wing feather 2 feet 1/2 In. Tale
feathers 141/4 In. Head is 61/4 Inch long including the beek

[Clark, November 19, 1805]
November 19th Tuesday 1805
a Cloudy rainey day proceeded up the Coast which runs from my camp 11/4
miles west of the iner extry of the Cape N. 20° W. 5 miles through a
rugged hilley countrey thickly off the Sea coast to the Comencment of
an extencive Sand beech which runs N. 10° W. to point Lewis about 20
miles distance. I proceeded up this coast 4 miles and marked my name on
a low pine. and returned 3 miles back (The Countrey opsd. this Sand
Coast is low and Slashey,) Crossed the point 2 miles to the bay and
encamped on Chinnook river- See another book for perticulars

[Clark, November 19, 1805]
Tuesday November the 19th 1805
I arose early this morning from under a wet blanket caused by a Shower
of rain which fell in the latter part of the last night and Sent two
men on a head with directions to proceed on near the Sea Coast and Kill
Something for brackfast and that I Should follow my Self in about half
an hour. after drying our blankets a little I Set out with a view to
proceed near the Coast the direction of which induced me to conclude
that at the distance of 8 or 10 miles, the Bay was at no great distance
across. I overtook the hunters at about 3 miles, they had killed a
Small Deer on which we brackfast it comened raining and Continud
moderately untill 11 oClock A M.

after takeing a Sumptious brackfast of venison which was rosted on
Stiks exposed to the fire, I proceeded on through ruged Country of high
hills and Steep hollers on a course from the Cape N 20° W. 5 miles on a
Direct line to the Commencement of a Sandy Coast which extended N. 10° W.
from the top of the hill above the Sand Shore to a Point of high land
distant near 20 miles. this point I have taken the Liberty of Calling
after my particular friend Lewis- at the commencement of this Sand
beech the high lands leave the Sea coast in a Direction to Chinnook
river, and does not touch the Sea Coast again below point Lewis
leaveing a low pondey countrey, maney places open with small ponds in
which there is great numbr. of fowl I am informed that the Chinnook
Nation inhabit this low countrey and live in large wood houses on a
river which passes through this bottom Parrilal to the Sea coast and
falls into the Bay

I proceeded on the Sandy Coast 4 miles, and marked my name on a Small
pine, the Day of the month & year, &c. and returned to the foot of the
hill, from which place I intended to Strike across to The Bay, I saw a
Sturgeon which had been thrown on Shore and left by the tide 10 feet in
length, and Several joints of the back bone of a whale which must have
foundered on this part of the Coast. after Dineing on the remains of
our Small Deer I proceeded through over a land S E with Some Ponds to
the bay distance about 2 miles, thence up to the mouth of Chinnook
river 2 miles, crossed this little river in the Canoe we left at its
mouth and Encamped on the upper Side in an open Sandy bottom- The hills
next to the bay Cape disapointment to a Short distance up the Chinnook
river is not verry high thickly Coverd. with different Species of pine
&c. maney of which are large, I observed in maney places pine of 3 or 4
feet through growing on the bodies of large trees which had fallen
down, and covered with moss and yet part Sound. The Deer of this Coast
differ materially from our Common deer in a much as they are much
darker deeper bodied Shorter ledged horns equally branched from the
beem the top of the tail black from the rute to the end Eyes larger and
do not lope but jump-.

[Clark, November 20, 1805]
Novr. 20 Wednesday 1805 Some rain last night despatchd. 3 men to hunt
Jo. Fields & Cotter to hunt Elk & Labich to kill some Brant for our
brackfast The Morning Cleared up fare and we proceeded on by the Same
rout we went out, at the River we found no Indians. made a raft & Ruben
Fields Crossed and took over a Small Canoe which lay at the Indian
Cabin- This Creek is at this time of high tide 300 yards wide & the
marshes for Some distance up the Creek Covered with water. not an
Indian to be Seen near the Creek. I proceeded on to Camp & on my way
was over taken by 3 Indians one gave us Sturgeon & Wapto roots to eate
I met Several parties on way all of them appeared to know me & was
distant, found all well at Camp, maney Indians about one of which had
on a robe made of 2 Sea Orter Skins. Capt Lewis offered him many things
for his Skins with others a blanket, a coat all of which he refused we
at length purchased it for a belt of Blue Beeds which the Squar had-
The tide being out we walked home on the beech

[Clark, November 20, 1805]
Wednesday November the 20th 1805
Some rain last night dispatched Labiech to kill Some fowl for our
brackfast he returned in about 2 hours with 8 large Ducks on which we
brackfast I proceeded on to the enterance of a Creek near a Cabin no
person being at this cabin and 2 Canoes laying on the opposit Shore
from us, I deturmined to have a raft made and Send a man over for a
canoe, a Small raft was Soon made, and Reuben Fields Crossed and
brought over a Canoe- This Creek which is the outlet of a number of
ponds, is at this time (high tide) 300 yds wide- I proceeded on up the
Beech and was overtaken by three Indians one of them gave me Some dried
Sturgeon and a fiew wappato roots, I employd Those Indians to take up
one of our Canoes which had been left by the first party that Came
down, for which Service I gave them each a fishing hook of a large
Size- on my way up I met Several parties of Chinnooks which I had not
before Seen they were on their return from our Camp. all those people
appeard to know my deturmonation of keeping every individual of their
nation at a proper distance, as they were guarded and resurved in my
presence &c. found maney of the Chin nooks with Capt. Lewis of whome
there was 2 Cheifs Com com mo ly & Chil-lar-la-wil to whome we gave
Medals and to one a flag. one of the Indians had on a roab made of 2
Sea Otter Skins the fur of them were more butifull than any fur I had
ever Seen both Capt. Lewis & my Self endeavored to purchase the roab
with different articles at length we precured it for a belt of blue
beeds which the Squar-wife of our interpreter Shabono wore around her
waste. in my absence the hunters had killed Several Deer and fowl of
different kinds

[Clark, November 21, 1805]
November 21st Thursday 1805
a Cloudy morning most of the Indians left us, The nation on the opposit
Side is Small & Called Clap-soil, Their great chief name Stil-la-sha
The nation liveing to the North is Called Chieltz. The chief is name
Malaugh not large nation and wore his beards as informed by the Inds.
In my absence the hunters Kild. 7 Deer, 4 brants & a Crane.

Great numbers of the dark brant passing Southerley, the white yet
Stationary, no gees & Swan to be Seen. The wind blew hard from the S.
E. which with the addition of the flood tide raised emence Swells &
waves which almost entered our Encampment morng. dark & Disagreeable, a
Supriseing Climent. We have not had One cold day Since we passed below
the last falls or great Shute & Some time before the Climent is
temperate, and the only change we have experienced is from fair weather
to rainey windey weather- I made a chief & gave a medel this man is
name Tow-wall and appears to have Some influence with the nation and
tells me he lives at the great Shute-we gave the Squar a Coate of Blue
Cloth for the belt of Blue Beeds we gave for the Sea otter Skins
purchased of an Indian. at 12 oClock it began to rain, and continued
moderately all day, Some wind from the S. E., waves too high for us to
proceed on our homeward bound journey. Lattitude of this place is 46° 19'
11 1/10" North Several Indians and Squars came this evening I beleave
for the purpose of gratifying the passions of our men, Those people
appear to View Sensuality as a necessary evile, and do not appear to
abhore this as Crime in the unmarried females. The young women Sport
openly with our men, and appear to receive the approbation of their
friends & relations for So doing maney of the women are handsom.

They are all low both men and women, I saw the name of J. Bowmon marked
or picked on a young Squars left arm. The women of this nation Pick
their legs in different figures as an orpiment. they were their hair
loose, Some trinkets in their ears, none in the nose as those above,
their Dress is as follows, i,e the men, were a roabe of either the
skins of ____ a Small fured animal, & which is most common, or the
Skins of the Sea orter, Loon, Swan, Beaver, Deer, Elk, or blankets
either red, blu, or white, which roabes cover the sholders arms & body,
all other parts are nakd.

The women were a Short peticoat of the iner bark of the white Ceder or
Arber Vita, which hang down loose in Strings nearly as low as the knee,
with a Short Robe which fall half way down the Thigh. no other part is
Covered. The orniments are beeds, Blue principally, large Brass wire
around their rists Som rings, and maney men have Salors Clothes, many
have good fusees & Ball & Powder- The women ware a String of Something
curious tied tight above the anckle, all have large Swelled legs &
thighs The men Small legs & thighs and Generally badly made- They live
on Elk Deer fowls, but principally fish and roots of 3 Kinds,
Lickorish, Wapto &c. The women have more privalages than is Common
amongst Indians- Pocks & Venerial is Common amongst them I Saw one man
& one woman who appeared to be all in Scabs, & Several men with the
venereal, their other Disorders and the remides for them I could not
lern we divided Some ribin between the men of our party to bestow on
their favourite Lasses, this plan to Save the knives & more valueable
articles.

Those people gave me Sturgion Salmon & wapto roots, & we bought roots,
Some mats &c. &c. for which we were obliged to give emence prices- we
also purchased a kind of Cranberry which the Indians Say the geather in
the low lands, off of Small either vines or bushes just abov the
ground- we also purchased hats made of Grass &c. of those Indians, Some
very handsom mats made of flags-Some fiew curious baskets made of a
Strong weed & willow or ____ Splits-, also a Sweet Soft black root,
about th Sise & Shape of a Carrot, this root they Value verry highly-
The Wapto root is Scerce, and highly valued by those people, this root
they roste in hot ashes like a potato and the outer Skin peals off, tho
this is a trouble they Seldom perform.

[Clark, November 21, 1805]
Thursday November 21st 1805
a cloudy morning most of the Chinnooks leave our Camp and return home,
great numbers of the dark brant passing to the South, the white Brant
have not yet commenced their flight. The wind blew hard from the S. E.
which with the addition of the flood tide raised verry high waves which
broke with great violence against the Shore throwing water into our
Camp- the fore part of this day Cloudy at 12 oClock it began to rain
and Continud all day moderately, Several Indians Visit us to day of
differant nations or Bands Some of the Chiltz Nation who reside on the
Sea Coast near Point Lewis, Several of the Clotsops who reside on the
opposit Side of the Columbia imediately opposit to us, and a Chief from
the Grand rapid to whome we gave a Medal.

An old woman & wife to a Cheif of the Chinnooks came and made a Camp
near ours She brought with her 6 young Squars I believe for the purpose
of gratifying the passions of the men of our party and receving for
those indulgiences Such Small as She (the old woman) thought proper to
accept of, Those people appear to view Sensuality as a Necessary evel,
and do not appear to abhor it as a Crime in the unmarried State- The
young females are fond of the attention of our men and appear to meet
the sincere approbation of their friends and connections, for thus
obtaining their favours; the womin of the Chinnook Nation have handsom
faces low and badly made with large legs & thighs which are generally
Swelled from a Stopage of the circulation in the feet (which are Small)
by maney Strands of Beeds or curious Strings which are drawn tight
around the leg above the anckle, their legs are also picked with
different figures, I Saw on the left arm of a Squar the following
letters,. Bowmon, all those are Considered by the natives of this
quarter as handsom deckerations, and a woman without those deckorations
is Considered as among the lower Class they ware their hair lose
hanging over their back and Sholders maney have blue beeds threaded &
hung from different parts of their ears and about ther neck and around
their wrists, their dress other wise is prosisely like that of the
Nation of Wa ci a cum as already discribed. a Short roab, and tissue or
kind of peticoat of the bark of Cedar which fall down in Strings as low
as the knee behind and not So low before maney of the men have blankets
of red blue or Spotted Cloth or the common three & 21/2 point blankets,
and Salors old Clothes which they appear to prise highly, they also
have robes of Sea Otter, Beaver, Elk, Deer, fox and Cat common to this
countrey, which I have never Seen in the U States. They also precure a
roabe from the nativs above, which is made of the Skins of a Small
animal about the Size of a Cat, which is light and dureable and highly
prized by those people- the greater numbers of the men of the Chinnooks
have Guns and powder and Ball- The Men are low homely and badly made,
Small Crooked legs large feet, and all of both Sects have flattened
heads- The food of this nation is principally fish & roots the fish
they precure from the river by the means of nets and gigs, and the
Salmon which run up the Small branches together with what they collect
drifted up on the Shores of the Sea coast near to where they live

The roots which they use are Several different kinds, the Wappato which
they precure from the nativs above, a black root which they call
Shaw-na tah que & the wild licquorish is the most Common, they also
kill a fiew Elk Deer & fowl- maney of the Chinnooks appear to have
venerious and pustelus disorders. one woman whome I saw at the beech
appeared all over in Scabs and ulsers &c.

we gave to the men each a pece of ribin We purchased Cramberies Mats
verry netely made of flags and rushes, Some roots, Salmon and I
purchased a hat made of Splits & Strong grass, which is made in the
fashion which was common in the U States two years ago also Small
baskets to hold Water made of Split and Straw, for those articles we
gave high prices-.

[Clark, November 22, 1805]
Novr. 22nd Friday 1805
Some little rain all the last night with wind, before day the wind
increased to a Storm from the S. S. E. and blew with violence throwing
the water of the river with emence waves out of its banks almost over
whelming us in water, O! how horriable is the day- This Storm Continued
all day with equal violence accompanied with rain, Several Indians
about us, nothing killed the waves & brakers flew over our Camp, one
Canoe Split by the Tossing of those waves- we are all Confined to our
Camp and wet. purchased some Wapto roots for which was given, brass
armbans & rings of which the Squars were fond. we find the Indians easy
ruled and kept in order by a Stricter indifference towards them

[Clark, November 22, 1805]
Friday November 22nd 1805
a moderate rain all the last night with wind, a little before Day light
the wind which was from the S S. E. blew with Such violence that we wer
almost overwhelmned with water blown from the river, this Storm did not
Sease at day but blew with nearly equal violence throughout the whole
day accompaned with rain. O! how horriable is the day waves brakeing
with great violence against the Shore throwing the Water into our Camp
&c. all wet and Confind to our Shelters, Several Indian men and women
Crouding about the mens Shelters to day, we purchased a fiew wappato
roots for which we gave armbans, & rings to the old Squar, those roots
are equal to the Irish potato, and is a tolerable Substitute for bread

The threat which I made to the men of this nation whome I first Saw,
and an indifference towards them, is I am fulley Convinced the Cause of
their Conducting themselves with great propriety towards ourselves &
Party.

[Clark, November 23, 1805]
November 23rd Saturday 1805
The Cloudy and Calm, a moderate rain the greater part of the last
night, Sent out men to hunt this morning and they Killed 3 Bucks,
rained at intervales all day. I marked my name the Day of the month &
year on a Beech trees & (By Land) Capt Lewis Branded his and the men
all marked their nams on trees about the Camp. one Indian Came up from
their village on some lakes near Haleys bay. In the Evening 7 Indians
of the Clatt Sopp nation, opposit Came over, they brought with them 2
Sea orter Skins, for which the asked Such high prices we were uneabled
to purchase, without reduceing our Small Stock of merchindize on which
we have to depend in part for a Subsistance on our return home, Kiled 4
brant & 3 Ducks to day

[Clark, November 23, 1805]
Saturday November 22rd 1805.
A calm Cloudy morning, a moderate rain the greater part of the last
night, Capt Lewis Branded a tree with his name Date &c. I marked my
name the Day & year on a Alder tree, the party all Cut the first
letters of their names on different trees in the bottom. our hunters
killed 3 Bucks, 4 Brant & 3 Ducks to day.

in the evening Seven indians of the Clot Sop Nation Came over in a
Canoe, they brought with them 2 Sea otter Skins for which they asked
blue beads &c. and Such high pricies that we were unable to purchase
them without reducing our Small Stock of merchendize, on which we
depended for Subcistance on our return up this river- mearly to try the
Indian who had one of those Skins, I offered him my Watch, handkerchief
a bunch of red beads and a dollar of the American Coin, all of which he
refused and demanded "ti-a, co-mo-shack" which is Chief beads and the
most common blue beads, but fiew of which we have at this time

This nation is the remains of a large nation destroyed by the Small pox
or Some other which those people were not acquainted with, they Speak
the Same language of the Chinnooks and resemble them in every respect
except that of Stealing, which we have not Cought them at as yet.

[Clark, November 24, 1805]
November 24th Sunday 1805
Several of the Chenn nook N. Came, one of them brought an Sea orter
Skin for which we gave Some blue Beeds- This day proved to be fair and
we dried our wet articles bedding &c. The hunters killed only 1 brant
no Deer or any thing else

The old chief of Chinn-nook nation and Several men & women Came to our
camp this evening & Smoked the pipe

Serjt J. Ordway
Cross & examine
S
Serjt. N. Pryor
do do
S
Sgt. P. Gass
do do
S
Jo. Shields
proceed to Sandy R

Go. Shannon
Examn. Cross
falls
T. P. Howard
do do
falls
P. Wiser
do do
S. R
J. Collins
do do
S. R
Jo Fields
do do
up
Al. Willard
do do
up
R Willard
do do
up
J. Potts
do do
falls
R. Frasure
do do
up
Wm. Bratten
do do
up
R. Fields
do do
falls
J. B. Thompson
do do
up
J. Colter
do do
up
H. Hall
do do
S. R.
Labeech
do do
S R
Peter Crusatte
do do
S R
J. B. Depage
do do
up
Shabono
- -
-
S. Guterich
do do
falls
W. Werner
do do
up
Go. Gibson
do do
up
Jos. Whitehouse
do do
up
Geo Drewyer
Examn other side
falls
McNeal
do do
up
York
" "
lookout

         falls         Sandy River         lookout up
         6         10                 12

Janey in favour of a place where there is plenty of Potas.

Cp L Proceed on to morrow & examine The other side if good hunting to
winter there, as Salt is an objt. if not to proceed on to Sandy it is
probable that a vestle will come in this winter, & that by proceeding
on at any distance would not inhance our journey in passing the Rockey
mountains, &c.

W C. In favour of proceding on without delay to the opposit Shore &
there examine, and find out both the disposition of the Indians, &
probibilaty of precureing Subsistance, and also enquire if the Tradeing
vestles will arrive before the time we Should depart in the Spring, and
if the Traders, Comonly arive in a Seasonable time, and we Can Subsist
without a depends. on our Stores of goods, to Continue as the Climent
would be more favourable on the Sea Coast for our naked men than higher
up the Countrey where the Climate must be more Severe- The advantage of
the arival of a vestle from whome we Can precure goods will be more
than an over ballance, for the bad liveing we Shall have in liveing on
Pore deer & Elk we may get in this neighbourhood. If we Cannot subsist
on the above terms to proceed on, and make Station Camps, to
neighbourhood of the Frendly village near the long narrows & delay
untill we Can proceed up the river. Salt water I view as an evil in as
much as it is not helthy- I am also of opinion that one two or three
weeks Exemination on the opposide if the propects are any wise
favourable, would not be too long

Variation of the Compass is 16° East

[Clark, November 24, 1805]
Sunday November 24th 1805.
A fair morning Sent out 6 hunters, and we proceeded to make the
following observations a Chief and Several men of the Chin nook nation
Came to Smoke with us this evening one of the men brought a Small Sea
otter Skin for which we gave Some blue beads- this day proved fair
which gave us an oppertunity of drying our wet articles, bedding &c.
&c. nothing killed to day except one Brant. the variation of the
Compass is 16° East.

being now determined to go into Winter quarters as Soon as possible, as
a convenient Situation to precure the Wild animals of the forest which
must be our dependance for Subsisting this Winter, we have every reason
to believe that the nativs have not provisions Suffient for our
Consumption, and if they had, their price's are So high that it would
take ten times as much to purchase their roots & Dried fish as we have
in our possesion, encluding our Small remains of merchindz and Clothes
&c. This Certinly enduces every individual of the party to make
diligient enquiries of the nativs the part of the Countrey in which the
wild Animals are most plenty. They generaly agree that the most Elk is
on the opposit Shore, and that the greatest numbers of Deer is up the
river at Some distance above

The Elk being an animal much larger than Deer, easier to kiled better
meat (in the winter when pore) and Skins better for the Clothes of our
party; added to-, a convenient Situation to the Sea coast where we
Could make Salt, and a probibility of vessels Comeing into the mouth of
Columbia ("which the Indians inform us would return to trade with them
in 3 months") from whome we might precure a fresh Supply of Indian
trinkets to purchase provisions on our return home; together with the
Solicitations of every individual, except one of our party induced us
Conclude to Cross the river and examine the opposit Side, and if a
Sufficent quantity of Elk could probebly be precured to fix on a
Situation as convenient to the Elk & Sea Coast as we Could find- added
to the above advantagies in being near the Sea Coast one most Strikeing
one occurs to me i e, the Climate which must be from every appearance
much milder than that above the 1st range of Mountains, The Indians are
Slightly Clothed and give an account of but little Snow, and the
weather which we have experiened Since we arrived in the neighbourhood
of the Sea Coast has been verry warm, and maney of the fiew days past
disagreeably So. if this Should be the Case it will most Certainly be
the best Situation of our naked party dressed as they are altogether in
leather.

[Clark, November 25, 1805]
November 25th Munday 1805
a fine day Several Indians Come up from below, we loaded and Set out up
the river, and proceeded on to the Shallow Bay, landed to dine, The
Swells too high to cross the river, agreeabley to our wish which is to
examine if game Can be precured Sufficent for us to winter on that
Side, after dinner which was on Drid pounded fish we proceeded on up on
the North Side to near the place of our Encampment of the 7th Instant
and encamped after night The evening cloudy wind of to day Generally
from the E S. E, Saw from near of last Campment Mount Ranier bearing
____

[Clark, November 25, 1805]
Monday 25th November 1805
The Wind being high rendered it impossible for us to Cross the river
from our Camp, we deturmind to proceed on up where it was narrow, we
Set out early accompanied by 7 Chit Sops for a fiew miles, they left us
and Crossed the river through emence high waves; we Dined in the
Shallow Bay on Dried pounded fish, after which we proceeded on near the
North Side of the Columbia, and encamp a little after night near our
Encampment of the 7th instant near a rock at Some distance in the
river. evening Cloudy the Winds of to day is generally E. S. E which
was a verry favourable point for us as the highlands kept it from us
Mt. St. Hilians Can be Seen from the mouth of this river.

[Clark, November 26, 1805]
November 26th Tuesday 1805
Cloudy and Some rain this morning at daylight wind blew from the E N.
E, we Set out and proceeded on up on the North Side of this great river
to a rock in the river from thence we Crossed to the lower point of an
____ Island passed between 2 Islands to the main Shore, and proceeded
down the South Side, passed 2 Inlets & halted below the 2d at a Indian
village of 9 large houses- those Indians live on an emenence behind a
Island or a Channel of the river not more than 300 yds wide, they live
on fish & Elk and Wapto roots, of which we bought a few at a high price
they Call them Selves Cat-tar-bets description

We proceeded on about 8 miles and Encamped in a deep bend to the South,
we had not been Encamped long ere 3 Indians Came in a Canoe to trade
the Wapto roots- we had rain all the day all wet and disagreeable a bad
place to Camp all around this great bend is high land thickly timbered
brushey & almost impossible to penetrate we Saw on an Island below the
village a place of deposit for the dead in Canoes

Great numbers of Swan Geese Brant Ducks & Gulls in this great bend
which is Crouded with low Islands covered with weeds grass &c. and
overflowed every flood tide The people of the last village is-____
they ask emence prices for what they have to Sel Blue Beeds is their
great trade they are fond of Clothes or blankits of Blue red or brown
We are now decending to see if a favourable place should offer on the
So Side to winter &c.

from a high Point opsd. a high Isd down the South Side is S. 30° W 6 mis
to a point of low land opsd. upr. pt of Isd. passed lowr. pt. 1st Isd.
marshey. at the upr. pt. Of 2 low Isd. opsd. each other at 4 miles

[Clark, November 26, 1805]
Tuesday 26th November 1805
Cloudy and Some rain this morning from 6 oClock. wind from the E. N. E,
we Set out out early and crossed a Short distance above the rock out in
the river, & between Some low marshey Islands to the South Side of the
Columbia at a low bottom about 3 miles below Point Samuel and proceeded
near the South Side leaveing the Seal Islands to our right and a
marshey bottom to the left 5 Miles to the Calt-har-mar Village of 9
large wood houses on a handsom elivated Situation near the foot of a
Spur of the high land behind a large low Island Seperated from the
Southerly Shore by a Chanel of about 200 yards Wide, This nation appear
to differ verry little either in language, Customs dress or appearance
from the Chin nooks & War-ci a cum live principally on fish and pappato
they have also other roots, and Some Elk meat.

We purchased Some green fish, & wap pa to for which we gave Imoderate
pricie's. after dining on the fresh fish which we purchased, we
proceeded on through a Deep bend to the South and encamped under a high
hill, where we found much difficuelty in precureing wood to burn, as it
was raining hard, as it had been the greater part of the day. Soon
after we encamped 3 Indians of the last town Came in a Canoe with
wappato roots to Sell to us Some of which we purchased with fish
hooksfrom the Village quite around this bend to the West the land is
high and thickly timbered with pine balsom &c. a Short distance below
the Calt har mer Village on the Island which is Opposit I observed
Several Canoes Scaffold in which Contained their dead, as I did not
examine this mode of deposing the dead, must refer it to a discription
hereafter.

[Clark, November 27, 1805]
November 27th Wednesday 1805
Some rain all the last night & this morning at day light 3 Canoes and
11 men Came down with roots meat, Skins &c. to Sill, they asked Such
high prices we were unable to purchase any thing, and as we were about
Setting out, discovered that one of those Indians had Stole an ax, we
Serched and found it under the roabe of one man whome we Shamed verry
much

we proceeded on, around Point William th Swells became high and rained
so hard we Concluded to halt and dry our Selves, Soon after our landing
the wind rose from the East and blew hard accompanied with rain, this
rain obliged us to unload & draw up our Canoes, one of which was Split
to feet before we got her out of the river, this place the Peninsoley
is about 50 yards and 3 miles around this point of Land. water Salt
below not Salt above.

[Clark, November 27, 1805]
Wednesday 27th November 1805
Rained all the last night and this morning it Continues moderatelyat
day light 3 Canoes and 11 Indians Came from the Village with roots
mats, Skins &c. to Sell, they asked Such high prices that we were
unable to purchase any thing of them, as we were about to Set out
missed one of our axes which was found under an Indians roab I shamed
this fellow verry much and told them they should not proceed with us-
we proceded on between maney Small Islands passing a Small river of
____ yds wide which the Indians Call ____ and around a verry remarkable
point which projects about 11/2 Miles directly towards the Shallow bay
the isthmus which joins it to the main land is not exceding 50 yards
and about 4 Miles around. we call this Point William

below this point the waves became So high we were Compelled to land
unload and traw up the Canoes, here we formed a Camp on the neck of
Land which joins Point William to the main at an old indian hut. The
rain Continued hard all day we are all Wet and disagreeable. one Canoe
Split before we Got her out of the Water 2 feet- The water at our Camp
Salt that above the isthmus fresh and fine

[Clark, November 28, 1805]
November 28th Thursday 1805
Wind Shifted about to the S. W. and blew hard accompanied with hard
rain all last night, we are all wet bedding and Stores, haveing nothing
to keep our Selves or Stores dry, our Lodge nearly worn out, and the
pieces of Sales & tents So full of holes & rotten that they will not
keep any thing dry, we Sent out the most of the men to drive the point
for deer, they Scattered through the point; Some Stood on the pensolu,
we Could find no deer, Several hunters attempted to penetrate the thick
woods to the main South Side without Suckcess, the Swan & gees wild and
Cannot be approached, and wind to high to go either back or forward,
and we have nothing to eate but a little Pounded fish which we
purchasd. at the Great falls, This is our present Situation,! truly
disagreeable. aded to this the robes of our Selves and men are all
rotten from being Continually wet, and we Cannot precure others, or
blankets in their places. about 12 oClock the wind Shifted about to the
N. W and blew with great violence for the remainder of the day at maney
times it blew for 15 or 20 minits with Such violence that I expected
every moment to See trees taken up by the roots, Some were blown down.
Those Squals were Suckceeded by rain, ! O how Tremendious is the day.
This dredfull wind and rain Continued with intervales of fair weather,
the greater part of the evening and night.

[Clark, November 28, 1805]
Thursday 28th November 1805
Wind Shifted about to the S. W. and blew hard accompanied with hard
rain. rained all the last night we are all wet our bedding and Stores
are also wet, we haveing nothing which is Sufficient to keep ourselves
bedding or Stores dry Several men in the point hunting deer without
Suckcess, the Swan and brant which are abundant Cannot be approached
Sufficently near to be killed, and the wind and waves too high to
proceed on to the place we expect to find Elk, & we have nothing to
eate except pounded fish which we brought from the Great falls, this is
our present Situation; truly disagreeable. about 12 oClock the wind
Shifted around to the N W. and blew with Such violence that I expected
every moment to See trees taken up by the roots, maney were blown down.
This wind and rain Continued with Short intervales all the latter part
of the night. O! how disagreeable is our Situation dureing this
dreadfull weather.

[Lewis, November 29, 1805]
November 29th 1805.
the wind being so high the party were unable to proceed with the
perogues. I determined therefore to proceed down the river on it's E.
side in surch of an eligible place for our winters residence and
accordingly set out early this morning in the small canoe accompanyed
by 5 men. drewyer R. Fields, Shannon, Colter & labiesh. proceeded along
the coast.

send out the hunters they killed 4 deer 2 brant a goos and seven ducks,
it rained upon us by showers all day. left three of these deer and took
with us one encamped at an old Indian hunting lodge which afforded us a
tolerable shelter from the rain, which continued by intervales
throughout the night.

[Clark, November 29, 1805]
November 29th Friday 1805
Blew hard and rained the greater part of the last night and this
morning, Capt Lewis and 5 men Set out in our Small Indian canoe (which
is made in the Indian fashion Calculated ride the waves) down the South
Side of the river to the place the Indians informed us by Signs that
numbers of Elk were to be found near the river- The Swells and waves
being too high for us to proceed down in our large Canoes, in Safty

I Sent out two hunters to hunt deer, & one to hunt fowl, all the others
employed in drying their leather and prepareing it for use, as but fiew
of them have many other Clothes to boste of at this time, we are Smoked
verry much in this Camp The Shore on the Side next the Sea is Covered
with butifull pebble of various Colours- our diat at this time and for
Severall days past is the dried pounded fish we purchased at the falls
boiled in a little Salt water

[Clark, November 29, 1805]
Friday 29th of November 1805
The wind and rain Continued all the last night, this morning much more
moderate. the waves Still high and rain Continues. Capt Lewis and 5
hunters Set out in our Indian Canoe (which is Calculated to ride wave)
dow to the place we expected to find Elk from the Inds. information,
they pointed to a Small Bay which is yet below us- I Sent out 2 men to
hunt Deer which I expected might be on the open hill Sides below,
another to hunt fowl in the deep bend above the point, all the others
engaged drying their leather before the fire, and prepareing it for
usethey haveing but fiew other Species of Clothing to ware at this time

The winds are from Such points that we cannot form our Camp So as to
provent the Smoke which is emencely disagreeable, and painfull to the
eyes- The Shore below the point at our Camp is formed of butifull
pebble of various colours. I observe but fiew birds of the Small kind,
great numbers of wild fowls of Various kinds, the large Buzzard with
white wings, grey and bald eagle's, large red tailed Hawks, ravens &
Crows in abundance, the blue Magpie, a Small brown bird which frequents
logs & about the roots of trees- Snakes, Lizards, Small bugs, worms,
Spiders, flyes & insects of different kinds are to be Seen in abundance
at this time.

[Lewis, November 30, 1805]
November 30th 1805.
cloudy morning set out before sun rise and continued our rout up the bey

Sent out three men to examin the country to the S. & W. they returned
after about 2 hours and informed me that the wood was so thick and
obstructed by marrasses & lakes that they were unable to proceed to the
ocean which could not be at any considerable distance fom the apparent
sound of the waves breaking on the Coast. we now returned and asscended
the inlet which we had last passd no fresh appearance of Elk or deer in
our rout so far. asscend the inlet as we intended about 1 m. found it
became much smaller and that it did not keep it's direction to the high
land which boar S. 10 W. but inclined West. therefore returned to the
large arm of the bay which we passed this morning. here we expect to
meet with the Clat-sop Indians, who have tantilized us with there being
much game in their neighbourhood. this information in fact was the
cause of my present resurch, for where there is most game is for us the
most eliguble winter station.- continued our rout up the large arm of
the bay about 6 miles and encamped on the Stard. side on the highland.
the water was quite sweet. therefore concluded that it must be supplyed
from a large crick. at our camp it is 120 yds. wide, tho it gets
narrower above. it rained but little on us today tho it was cloudy
generally.- Wind from N. E.- saw a great abundance of fowls, brant,
large geese, white brant sandhill Cranes, common blue crains,
cormarants, haulks, ravens, crows, gulls and a great variety of ducks,
the canvas back, duckinmallard, black and white diver, brown duck- &c &c

[Clark, November 30, 1805]
November 30th Saturday 1805
Some rain and hail with intervales of fair weather for 1 and 2 hours
dureing the night and untill 9 oClock this morning at which time it
Cleared up fair and the Sun Shown, I Send 5 men in a Canoe in the Deep
bend above the Peninsulear to hunt fowles, & 2 men in the thick woods
to hunt Elk had all our wet articles dried & the men all employed
dressing their Skins, I observe but few birds in this Countrey of the
Small kindsgreat numbers of wild fowl, The large Buzzard with white
under their wings Grey & Bald eagle large red tailed hawk, ravins,
Crows, & a small brown bird which is found about logs &c. but fiew
small hawks or other smaller birds to be seen at this time Snakes,
Lizzards, Snales bugs worms Spiders, flies & insects of different kinds
are to be Seen in plenty at this time. The Squar, gave me a piece of
Bread to day made of Some flower She had Cearfully kept for her child,
and had unfortunately got wet The hunters killed only 3 hawks, saw 3
Elk but Could not git a Shot at them, The fowlers, killed 3 black
ducks, with white Sharp bills, a brown Spot in their foward, Some white
under the tail, which Short, and a fiew of the tips of the wing
feathers white, Their toes are long Seperated and flaped, no Craw, keep
in emence large flocks in the Shallow waters & feed on Grass &c.-
Several men Complaining of being unwell to day- a Broock comes in to
the bend above the 1st point above, and a river falls in the next nitch
above this river is Small,- I observe rose bushes Pine, a kind of ash a
Species of Beech and a Species of Maple, in addition to the pine Lorrel
and under groth Common to the woods in this Lower Countrey the hills
are not high & Slope to the river

[Clark, November 30, 1805]
Saturday 30th of November 1805
Some rain and hail with intervales of fair weather for the Space of one
or two hours at a time dureing the night untill 9 oClock this morning,
at which time it Cleared away and the Sun Shewn for ____ hours, Several
men out hunting I Send 5 men in the bend above to hunt fowl &c. in a
Canoe, employ all the others in drying our wet articles by the fire
Several men Complain of a looseness and gripeing which I contribute to
the diet, pounded fish mixed with Salt water, I derect that in future
that the party mix the pounded fish with fresh water- The Squar gave me
a piece of bread made of flour which She had reserved for her child and
carefully Kept untill this time, which has unfortunately got wet, and a
little Sour- this bread I eate with great Satisfaction, it being the
only mouthfull I had tasted for Several months past. my hunters killed
three Hawks, which we found fat and delicious, they Saw 3 Elk but Could
not get a Shot at them. The fowlers killed 3 black Ducks with Sharp
White beeks keep in large flocks & feed on Grass, they have no Craw and
their toes are Seperate, Common in the U. States

The Chinnooks Cath ldh mah & others in this neighbourhood bury their
dead in their Canoes. for this purpose 4 pieces of Split timber are Set
erect on end, and sunk a fiew feet in the ground, each brace having
their flat Sides opposit to each other and Sufficiently far assunder to
admit the width of the Canoe in which the dead are to be deposited;
through each of those perpindicular posts, at the hight of 6 feet a
mortice is Cut, through which two bars of wood are incerted; on those
Cross bars a Small Canoe is placed, in which the body is laid after
beaing Carefully roled in a robe of Some dressed Skins; a paddle is
also deposited with them; a larger Canoe is now reversed, overlaying
and imbracing the Small one, and resting with its gunnals on the Cross
bars; one or more large mats of flags or rushes are then rold. around
the Canoe and the whole Securely lashed with a long Cord usially made
of the bark of the arbar vita or white Cedar. on the Cross bars which
Support the Canoes is frequently hung or laid various articles of
Clothing Culinary utensils &c. we cannot understand them Sufficiently
to make any enquiries relitive to their religious opinions, from their
depositing Various articles with their dead, beleve in a State of
future ixistance.

I walked on the point and observed rose bushes different Species of
pine, a Spcies of ash, alder, a Species of wild Crab Loral and Several
Species of under Broth Common to this lower part of the Columbia river-
The hills on this Coast rise high and are thickly covered with lofty
pine maney of which are 10 & 12 feet through and more than 200 feet
high. hills have a Steep assent.

[Lewis, December 1, 1805]
December 1st 1805
Cloudy morning wind from the S. E. sent out the men to hunt and examin
the country, they soon returned all except Drewyer and informed me that
the wood was so thick it was almost impenetrable and that there was but
little appearance of game; they had seen the track of one deer only and
a few small grey squirrels. these suirrels are about the size of the
red squirrel of the lakes and eastern Atlantic States, their bellies
are of a redish yellow, or tanners ooze colour the tale flat and as
long as the body eyes black and moderately large back and sides of a
greyish brown the brier with a brown bark and three laves which put
forth at the extremety of the twigs like the leaves of the blackbury
brier, tho is a kind of shrub and rises sometimes to the hight of 10
feet the green brier yet in leaf; the ash with a remarkable large leaf;
the large black alder. the large elder with skey blue buries. the broad
leave shrub which grows something like the quill wood but has no
joints, the leaf broad and deeply indented the bark peals hangs on the
stem and is of a yelowish brown colour. the seven bark is also found
here as is the common low cramburry-there is a wild crab apple which
the natives eat this growth differs but little in appearance from that
of the wild crab of the Atlantic States. but the fruit consists of
little oval hurries which grow in clusters at the extremities of the
twigs like the black haws. the fruit is of a brown colour, oval form
and about double as large as the black haw; the rind is smoth and tough
somewhat hard; the seed is like that of the wild crab and nearly as
large; the pulp is soft of a pale yellow coulour; and when the fruit
has been touched by the frost is not unpleasant, being an agreeable
assed. the tree which bears a red burry in clusters of a round form and
size of a red haw. the leaf like that of the small magnolia, and brark
smoth and of a brickdust red coulour it appears to be of the evergreen
kind.- half after one oclock Drewyer not yet arrived. heard him shoot 5
times just above us and am in hopes he has fallen in with a gang of elk.

[Clark, December 1, 1805]
December 1st Sunday 1805
Cloudy windey morning wind from the East, Sent out 2 hunters in the
woods, I intended to take 5 men in a Canoe and hunt the marshey Islands
above, found the wind too high & returned to partake of the dried fish,
The day Some what Cooler than usial, but Scercely perceveable. began to
rain at Sun Set and Continued half the night. my hunters returned
without any thing Saw 2 gang of Elk a disagreeable Situation, men all
employed in mending their leather Clothes, Socks &c. and Dressing Some
Leather. The Sea which is imedeately in front roars like a repeeted
roling thunder and have rored in that way ever Since our arrival in its
borders which is now 24 Days Since we arrived in Sight of the Great
Western Ocian, I cant Say Pasific as Since I have Seen it, it has been
the reverse. Elegant Canoes

[Clark, December 1, 1805]
Sunday December 1st 1805
A cloudy windey morning wind from the East, dispatched two hunters, I
deturmined to take a Canoe & a fiew men and hunt the marshey Islands
above Point William, the Wind rose So high that I could not proceed,
and returned to partake the dried fish, which is our Standing friend,
began to rain hard at Sun Set and Continud. my hunters returned without
any thing haveing Seen 2 parcels of elk men all employed to day in
mending their leather Clothes, Shoes &c. and Dressing leather.

The emence Seas and waves which breake on the rocks & Coasts to the S
W. & N W roars like an emence fall at a distance, and this roaring has
continued ever Since our arrival in the neighbourhood of the Sea Coast
which has been 24 days Since we arrived in Sight of the Great Western;
(for I cannot Say Pacific) Ocian as I have not Seen one pacific day
Since my arrival in its vicinity, and its waters are forming and
petially perpetually breake with emenc waves on the Sands and rockey
Coasts, tempestous and horiable. I have no account of Capt. Lewis Since
he left me.

[Clark, December 2, 1805]
December 2nd Monday 1805
Cloudy and Some little rain this morning I despatched 3 men to hunt and
2 and my Servent in a Canoe to a Creek above to try & Catch Some fish-
I am verry unwell the drid fish which is my only diet does not agree
with me and Several of the men Complain of a lax, and weakness- I
expect Capt. Lewis will return to day with the hunters and let us know
if Elk or deer Can be found Sufficent for us to winter on, If he does
not come I Shall move from this place, to one of better prospects for
game &c. Joseph Fields came home with the marrow bones of an Elk which
he had killed 6 miles distant, I sent out 6 men in a canoe for the
meat, the evening being late they did not return this night, which
proved fair moon Shineing night- This is the first Elk we have killed
on this Side the rockey mounts a great deal of Elk Sign in the
neighbourhood

[Clark, December 2, 1805]
Monday 2nd December 1805
Cloudy with Some rain this morning I Send out three men to hunt & 2 &
my man york in a Canoe up the Ke-ke-mar-que Creek in Serch of fish and
fowl- I feel verry unwell, and have entirely lost my appetite for the
Dried pounded fish which is in fact the cause of my disorder at
present- The men are generally Complaining of a lax and gripeing- In
the evening Joseph Field came in with the Marrow bones of a elk which
he killed at 6 miles distant, this welcome news to us. I dispatched Six
men in a empty Canoe with Jo. mediately for the elk which he Said was
about 3 miles from the water this is the first Elk which has been
killd. on this Side of the rockey mountains- Jo Fields givs me an
account of a great deel of Elk Sign & Says he Saw 2 Gangs of those
Animals in his rout, but it rained So hard that he could not Shoot
them- The party up the Creek returned without any thing and informs me
they could not See any fish in the Creek to kill and the fowls were too
wild to be killed, this must

[Clark, December 3, 1805]
December 3rd Tuesday 1805
a fair windey morning wind from the East, the men Sent after an Elk
yesterday returnd. with an Elk which revived the Sperits of my men
verry much, I am unwell and cannot Eate, the flesh O! how disagreeable
my Situation, a plenty of meat and incaple of eateing any- an Indian
Canoe Came down with 8 Indians in it from the upper village, I gave a
fish hook for a fiew Wap-e-to roots, which I eate in a little Elk Supe,
The Indians proceeded on down. wind Confines to blow, and Serjt. Pryor
& Gibson who went to hunt yesterday has not returnd. as yet I marked my
name & the day of the month and year on a large Pine tree on this
Peninsella & by land Capt William Clark December 3rd 1805. By Land. U
States in 1804 & 1805"- The Squar Broke the two Shank bones of the Elk
after the marrow was taken out, boiled them & extracted a Pint of
Greese or tallow from them- Serjt. Pryor & Gibson returned after night
and informed me they had been lost the greater part of the time they
were out, and had killed 6 Elk which they left lying haveing taken out
their interals. Some rain this afternoon

[Clark, December 3, 1805]
Tuesday 3d December 1805
a fair windey morning wind from the East the men returned with the Elk
which revived the Spirits of my party verry much I am Still unwell and
Can't eate even the flesh of the Elk. an Indian Canoe of 8 Indians Came
too, those Inds. are on their way down to the Chit Sops with Wap pa to
to barter with that nation, I purchasd. a fiew of those roots for which
I gave Small fish hooks, those roots I eate with a little Elks Soupe
which I found gave me great relief I found the roots both nurishing and
as a check to my disorder. The Indians proceeded on down through emence
high waves maney times their Canoe was entirely out of Sight before
they were 1/2 a mile distance. Serjt. Pryor & Gibson who went hunting
yesterday has not returned untill after night, they informed me that
they had killed 6 Elk at a great distance which they left lying,
haveing taken out their interals that they had been lost and in their
ramble saw a great deel of Elk Sign. after eateing the marrow out of
two Shank bones of an Elk, the Squar choped the bones fine boiled them
and extracted a pint of Grease, which is Superior to the tallow of the
animal. Some rain this evening I marked my name on a large pine tree
imediately on the isthmus William Clark December 3rd 1805. By Land from
the U. States in 1804 & 1805.

[Clark, December 4, 1805]
December 4th Wednesday 180151
Some little rain all the last night and this morning after day the rain
increased and Continued

I despatched Serjt. Pryer & 6 men to the Elk which he had killed
yesterday, with directions to Save the meet and take loads to the River
below in the next great bend- a Spring tide which rose 2 feet higher
than Common flud tides, and high water at 11 oClock to day- wind from
the S. E in the after noon hard wind from South- rained all day,
moderately the Swells too high for me to proceed down, as I intended, I
feel my self Something better and have an appetite to eate Something

[Clark, December 4, 1805]
Wednesday 4th December 1805
Some rain all the last night, this morning it increased with the wind
from the S. E. I Set out Sergiant Pryor and 6 men to the Elk he had
killed with directions to Carry the meat to a bay which he informed me
was below and as he believed at no great distance from the Elk, and I
Should proceed on to that bay as Soon as the wind would lay a little
and the tide went out in the evening- the Smoke is exceedingly
disagreeable and painfull to my eyes, my appetite has returned and I
feel much better of my late complaint- a Spring tide to day rose 2 feet
higher than Common flood tides and high water at 11 oClock- Hard wind
from the South this evening, rained moderately all day and the waves
too high for me to proceed in Safty to the bay as I intended, in Some
part of which I expected would be convenient for us to make winter
quarters, the reports of seven huntes agreeing that elke were in great
abundance about the Bay below. no account of Capt. Lewis. I fear Some
accident has taken place in his craft or party

[Clark, December 5, 1805]
December 5th Thursday 1805
Som hard Showers of rain last night, this morn Cloudy and drisley rain,
in the bay above the Showers appear harder. High water to day at 12
oClock this tide is 2 Ins. higher than that of yesterday all our Stores
again wet by the hard Showers of last night Capt Lewis's long delay
below has been the cause of no little uneasiness on my part for him, a
1000 conjectures has crouded into my mind respecting his probable
Situation & Safty-- rained hard. Capt Lewis returned haveing found a
good Situation and Elk Suffient to winter on, his party killed 6 Elk &
5 Deer in their absence in Serch of a Situation and game

Rain continued all the after pt. of the day accompanied with hard wind
from the S W. which provents our moveing from this Camp.

[Clark, December 5, 1805]
Thursday 5th of December 1805
Some hard Showers of rain last night, this morning Cloudy and drisley
at Some little distant above the isthmus the rain is much harder. high
water to day at 12 this tide is 2 inches higher than that of yesterday.
all our Stores and bedding are again wet by the hard rain of last
night. Capt. Lewis's long delay below, has been the Sorce of no little
uneasness on my part of his probable Situation and Safty, the repeeted
rains and hard winds which blows from the S, W. renders it impossible
for me to move with loaded Canoes along an unknown Coast we are all wet
& disagreeable; the party much better of indispositions-. Capt. Lewis
returned with 3 men in the Canoe and informs me that he thinks that a
Sufficient number of Elk may be prcured Convenient to a Situation on a
Small river which falls into a Small bay a Short distance below, that
his party had Killed 6 Elk & 5 Deer in his rout, two men of his party
left behind to Secure the Elk this was verry Satisfactory information
to all the party. we accordingly deturmined to proceed on to the
Situation which Capt. Lewis had Viewed as Soon as the wind and weather
Should permit and Comence building huts &c.

[Clark, December 6, 1805]
December 6th Friday 1805
Wind blew hard all the last night, and a moderate rain, the waves verry
high, This morning the wind which is Still from the S W increased and
rained Continued all day, at Dusk wind Shifted to the North and it
Cleared up and became fare, High water to day at 12 oClock & 13 Inches
higher than yesterday. we were obliged to move our Camp out of the
Water on high grown all wet.

[Clark, December 6, 1805]
Friday 6th of December 1805
The wind blew hard all the last night with a moderate rain, the waves
verry high, the wind increased & from the S. W. and the rain Continued
all day, about Dark the wind Shifted to the North cleared away and
became fair weather.

The high tide of today is 13 inches higher than yesterday, and obliged
us to move our Camp which was in a low Situation, on higher ground
Smoke exceedingly disagreeable.

[Clark, December 7, 1805]
December 7th Saturday 1805
Some rain from 10 to 12 last night this morning fair, we Set out at 8
oClock down to the place Capt Lewis pitched on for winter quarters,
when he was down proceeded on against the tide at the point No. 2 we
met our men Sent down after meet

To point Adams is West

To pt. Disapointment N 75 W

They informed me that they found the Elk after being lost in the woods
for one Day and part of another, the most of the meat was Spoiled, they
distance was So great and uncertain and the way bad, they brought only
the Skins, york was left behind by Some accident which detained us Some
time eer he Came up after passing round the pt. No. 2 in verry high
swells, we Stopd & Dined in the commencement of a bay, after which
proceeded on around the bay to S E. & assended a Creek 8 miles to a
high pt. & Camped haveing passed arm makeing up to our left into the
countrey

Mt. St. Helens is the mountain we mistook for Mt. Reeaneer

receved 2 Small Brooks on the East, extencive marshes at this place of
Encampment We propose to build & pass the winter, The situation is in
the Center of as we conceve a hunting Countrey- This day is fair except
about 12 oClock at which time Some rain and a hard wind imedeately
after we passed the point from the N. E which Continued for a about 2
hours and Cleared up. no meat

[Clark, December 7, 1805]
Saturday 7th of December 1805
Some rain from 10 to 12 last night, this morning fair, have every thing
put on board the Canoes and Set out to the place Capt Lewis had viewed
and thought well Situated for winter quarters- we proceeded on against
the tide to a point about ____ miles here we met Sergt Pryor and his
party returning to the Camp we had left without any meat, the waves
verry verry high, as much as our Canoes Could bear rendered it
impossible to land for the party, we proceeded on around the point into
the bay and landed to take brackfast on 2 Deer which had been killed &
hung up, one of which we found the other had been taken off by some
wild animal probably Panthors or the Wildcat of this Countrey here all
the party of Serjt Pryors joined us except my man york, who had Stoped
to rite his load and missed his way, Sergt Pryor informed us that he
had found the Elk, which was much further from the bay than he
expected, that they missed the way for one day and a half, & when he
found the Elk they were mostly Spoiled, and they only brought the Skins
of 4 of the Elk after brackfast I delayed about half an hour before
York Came up, and then proceeded around this Bay which I have taken the
liberty of calling Meriwethers Bay the Cristian name of Capt. Lewis who
no doubt was the 1st white man who ever Surveyed this Bay, we assended
a river which falls in on the South Side of this Bay 3 miles to the
first point of high land on the West Side, the place Capt. Lewis had
viewed and formed in a thick groth of pine about 200 yards from the
river, this situation is on a rise about 30 feet higher than the high
tides leavel and thickly Covered with lofty pine. this is certainly the
most eligable Situation for our purposes of any in its neighbourhood.

Meriwethers Bay is about 4 miles across deep & receves 2 rivers the Kil
how-d-nah-kle and the Ne tul and Several Small Creeks- we had a hard
wind from the N. E. and Some rain about 12 oClock to day which lasted 2
hours and Cleared away. From the Point above Meriwethers Bay

to Point Adams is West

to point Disapointment is N. 75° W

[Clark, December 8, 1805]
December 8th Sunday 1805
a Cloudy morning, I took 5 men and Set out to the Sea to find the
nearest place & make a way, to prevent our men getting lost and find a
place to make Salt, Steered S 62° W at 2 miles passed the head of a Brook
running to the right, the lands good roleing much falling timber, lofty
Pine of the Spruce kind, & Some fur, passed over a high hill & to a
Creek which we kept down 11/2 miles and left it to our right, Saw fish
in this Creek & Elk & Bear tracks on it, passed over a ridge to a low
marshey bottom which we Crossed thro water & thick brush for 1/2 a mile
to the Comencement of a Prarie which wavers, Covered with grass &
Sackay Commis, at 1/2 Crossed a marsh 200 yds wide, boggey and arrived
at a Creek which runs to the right. Saw a gange of Elk on the opposit
Side below, rafted the Creek, with much dificulty & followed the Elk
thro, emence bogs, & over 4 Small Knobs in the bogs about 4 miles to
the South & Killed an Elk, and formed a Camp, Covered our Selves with
the Elk Skins. the left of us Bogs & a lake or pond those bogs Shake,
much Cramberry growing amongst the moss. Some rain this evening we made
a harty Supper of the Elk & hung up the balsa

[Clark, December 8, 1805]
Sunday December 8th 1805 Fort Clatsop
We haveing fixed on this Situation as the one best Calculated for our
Winter quarters I deturmin'd to go as direct a Course as I could to the
Sea Coast which we Could here roar and appeared to be at no great
distance from us, my principal object is to look out a place to make
Salt, blaze the road or rout that they men out hunting might find the
direction to the fort if they Should get lost in cloudy weather-and See
the probibillity of game in that direction, for the Support of the Men,
we Shall Send to make Salt, I took with me five men and Set out on a
Course S 60 W proceeded on a dividing ridge through lofty piney land
much falling timber. passed the heads of 2 brooks one of them had wide
bottoms which was over flown & we waded to our knees crossed 2 Slashes
and arrived at a Creek in a open ridgey prarie covered with Sackacomma
this Creek we were obliged to raft, which is about 60 yards over and
runs in a direction to Point adams, we discovered a large gange of Elk
in the open lands, and we prosued them through verry bad Slashes and
Small ponds about 3 miles, Killed one and camped on a Spot Scercely
large enough to lie Clear of the Water. it is almost incredeable to
assurt the bogs which those animals Can pass through, I prosue'd this
gang of Elk through bogs which the wate of a man would Shake for 1/2 an
Acre, and maney places I Sunk into the mud and water up to my hips
without finding any bottom on the trale of those Elk. Those bogs are
Covered with a kind of moss among which I observe an ebundance of
Cramberries. in those Slashes Small Knobs are promisquisly Scattered
about which are Steep and thickly Covered with pine Common to the
Countrey & Lorel. we made a Camp of the Elk Skin to keep off the rain
which Continued to fall, the Small Knob on which we Camped did not
afford a Sufficiency of dry wood for our fire, we collected what dry
wood we Could and what Sticks we Could Cut down with the Tomahawks,
which made us a tolerable fire.

[Clark, December 9, 1805]
December 9th Monday 1805
rained all the last night we are all wet, Send 2 men in pursute of the
Elk & with the other 3 I Set out with a view to find the Ocian in our
first direction, which Can be at no great Distance, I crossed 3 Slashes
by wadeing to my knees & was prevented proceeding by the 4th which was
a pond of 200 yds. we. I went around, and was Stoped by a 5th which
apd. to be a rung Stream to the right. I then returned to the raft and
recrossd. & proceeded down the Stream I first Struck about 2 miles &
met 3 Indians, who informed me they lived on the See cost at a Short
distance, I de-termd. to accompany them to their vilg. & we Set out,
crossed the Stream, and 2 of the Indians took the Canoe over the
wavering open rich plains for 1/2 a mile and we Crossed the same stream
which run to the left, we then left the canoe and proceeded to the Same
Stream which runs to the right and empties its Self into the See here I
found their vilg. 4 Lodges on the west bank of this little river which
is here 70 yards wide, Crossed in a Canoe & was invited to a lodge by a
young Chief was treated great Politeness, we had new mats to Set on,
and himself and wife produced for us to eate, fish, Lickorish, & black
roots, on neet Small mats, and Cramberries & Sackacomey berris, in
bowls made of horn, Supe made of a kind of bread made of berries common
to this Countrey which they gave me in a neet wooden trencher, with a
Cockle Shell to eate it with It began to rain and with a tremendious
storm from the S. W. which lasted untill 10 oClock P M- when I was
disposd to go to Sleep 2 neet mats was produced & I lay on them but the
flees were So troublesom that I Slept but little Those people has 2
plays which they are fond of one is with a Been which they pass from
one hand into the other, and the oponent guess on this game the
resquist nubr of the white Beeds which is the principal property- they
other game is with round Pieces of wood much the Shape of the ____
Backgammon which they role thro between 2 pins.

[Clark, December 9, 1805]
Monday 9th December 1805
rained all the last night we are all wet, I directed 2 hunters Drewyer
& Shannon to go in pursute of the Elk, with the other 3 men I
determined to proceed on to the Ocian, & Set out on a Westerley
direction Crossed 3 Slashes and arived at a Creek which I could not
Cross as it was deep and no wood to make a raft, I proceeded down this
Creek a Short distance and found that I was in a fork of the Creek, I
then returned to raft on which we had Crossed the day. crossed and kept
down about one mile and met 3 Indians loaded with fresh Salmon which
they had Giged in the Creek I crossed yesterday in the hills, those
indians made Signs that they had a town on the Seacoast at no great
distance, and envited me to go to their town which envitation I
axcepted and accompand. them, they had a Canoe hid in the Creek which I
had just before rafted which I had not observed, we crossed in this
little Canoe just large enough to carry 3 men an their loads after
Crossing 2 of the Indians took the Canoe on theire Sholders and Carried
it across to the other Creek about 1/4 of a mile, we Crossed the 2d
Creek and proceeded on to the mouth of the Creek which makes a great
bend above the mouth of this Creek or to the S. is 3 houses and about
12 families of the Clat Sop Nation, we cross to those houses, which
were built on the S. exposur of the hill, Sunk into the ground about 4
feet the walls roof & gable ends are of Split pine boards, the dotes
Small with a ladder to decend to the iner part of the house, the fires
are 2 in the middle of the house their beads ar all around raised about
21/2 feet from the bottom flore all covered with mats and under those
beads was Stored their bags baskets and useless mats, those people
treated me with extrodeanary friendship, one man attached himself to me
as Soon as I entered the hut, Spred down new mats for me to Set on,
gave me fish berries rutes &c. on Small neet platteers of rushes to
eate which was repeated, all the Men of the other houses Came and
Smoked with me Those people appeared much neeter in their diat than
Indians are Comonly, and frequently wash theer faces and hands- in the
eveng an old woman presented a bowl made of a light Coloured horn a
kind of Surup made of Dried berries which is common to this Countrey
which the natives Call Shele wele this Surup I though was pleasent,
they Gave me Cockle Shells to eate a kind of Seuip made of bread of the
Shele well berries mixed with roots in which they presented in neet
trenchers made of wood. a flock of Brant lit in the Creek which was 70
yds wide I took up my Small rifle and Shot one which astonished those
people verry much, they plunged into the Creek and brought the brant on
Shorein the evening it began to rain and Continud accompanied with a
Violent wind from the S. W. untill 10 oClock P.M. those people have a
Singular game which they are verry fond of and is performed with
Something about the Size of a large been which they pass from, one hand
into the other with great dexterity dureing which time they Sing, and
ocasionally, hold out their hands for those who Chuse to risque their
property to guess which hand the been is in-; the individual who has
the been is a banker & opposed to all in the room. on this game they
risque their beeds & other parts of their most valuable effects- this
amusement has occupied about 3 hours of this evening, Several of the
lodge in which I am in have lost all the beeds which they had about
them- they have one other game which a man attempted to Show me, I do
not properly understand it, they make use of maney peces about the
Shape and size of Backgammon Pices which they role through between two
pins Stuck up at certain distancies &.- when I was Disposed to go to
Sleep the man who had been most attentive named Cus-ka-lah producd 2
new mats and Spred them near the fire, and derected his wife to go to
his bead which was the Signal for all to retire which they did
emediately. I had not been long on my mats before I was attacked most
violently by the flees and they kept up a close Siege dureing the night

[Clark, December 10, 1805]
December 10th 1805 Tusday
A Cloudey rainy morning those people was Some what astonished, at three
Shot I made with my little riffle to day, a gangu of Brant Set in the
little river, I Killd. 2 of them as they Set, and on my return Saw a
Duck which I took the head off of, the men plunged into the water like
Spaniards Dogs after those fowls, after eateing a brackfast which was
Similar to my Suppar, I attempted to purchase Some fiew roots which I
offered red beeds for, they would give Scercely any thing for Beeds of
that Colour, I then offered Small fish hooks which they were fond of
and gave me Some roots for them, I then Set out on my return by the
Same road I had went out accompd. by my young Chief by name Cus-ca-lar
who Crossed me over the 3 Creek, and returned I proceeded on to my Camp
thro a heavy Cold rain, Saw no game- at the Sea Cost near those Indins
I found various kinds of Shells, a kind of Bay opsd. those people with
a high pt. about 4 miles below, out from which at Some dists I Saw
large rocks, as the day was Cloudy I could not See distinctly- found
Capt Lewis with all hands felling trees, to build with, rained nearly
all day, in my absence they men had bt. in the 6 Elk which was Killed
Some days past 4 men complaining of being unwell from various causes

[Clark, December 10, 1805]
Tuesday 10th December 1805
a Cloudy rainey morning verry early I rose and walked on the Shore of
the Sea coast and picked up Several Curious Shells. I Saw Indians
walking up and down the beech which I did not at first understand the
Cause of, one man came to where I was and told me that he was in Serch
of fish which is frequently thrown up on Shore and left by the tide,
and told me the "Sturgion was verry good" and that the water when it
retired left fish which they eate this was Conclusive evedance to me
that this Small band depended in Some Measure for their winters
Subsistance on the fish which is thrown on Shore and left by the tide-
after amuseing my Self for about an hour on the edge of the rageing
Seas I returned to the houses, one of the Indians pointed to a flock of
Brant Sitting in the creek at Short distance below and requested me to
Shute one, I walked down with my Small rifle and killed two at about 40
yds distance, on my return to the houses two Small ducks Set at about
30 Steps from me the Indians pointed at the ducks they were near
together, I Shot at the ducks and accidently Shot the head of one off,
this Duck and brant was Carried to the house and every man Came around
examined the Duck looked at the gun the Size of the ball which was 100
to the pound and Said in their own language Clouch Musket, wake, com
ma-tax Musket which is, a good Musket do not under Stand this kind of
Musket &c. I entered the Same house I Slept in, they imediately Set
before me their best roots, fish and Surup-, I attempted to purchase a
Small Sea otter Skin for read beeds which I had in my pockets, they
would not trade for those beeds not priseing any other Colour than Blue
or White, I purchased a little of the berry bread and a fiew of their
roots for which I gave Small fish hooks, which they appeared fond of- I
then Set out on my return by the Same rout I had Come out accompanied
by Cus-ka lah and his brother as far as the 3d Creek, for the purpose
of Setting me across, from which place they returned, and I proceeded
on through a heavy rain to the Camp at our intended fort, Saw a bears
track & the tracks of 2 Elk in the thick woods- found Capt Lewis with
all the men out Cutting down trees for our huts &c. in my absence the
Men brought in the Six Elk which was killed Several days ago-. 4 men
Complaining of violent Coalds. three Indians in a Canoe Came up from
the Clat Sop Village yesterday and returned to day. The Sea Coast is
about 7 miles distant Nearly West about 5 miles of the distance through
a thick wood with reveens hills and Swamps the land, rich black moald 2
miles in a open wavering Sandy prarie, ridge runing parrelal to the
river, Covered with Green Grass.

[Clark, December 11, 1805]
December 11th Wednesday
rained all last night moderately, we are all employed putting up the
huts, rained at intervales all day moderately employed in putting up
Cabins for our winter quarters, one man with Turners, one with a
Strained Knee, one Sick with Disentary & Serjt. Pryor unwell from
haveing his Sholder out of place

[Clark, December 11, 1805]
Wednesday 11th December 1805
rained all the last night moderately we are all employed putting up
huts or Cabins for our winters quarters. Sergeant Pryor unwell from a
dislocation of his Sholder, Gibson with the disentary, Jo. Fields with
biles on his legs, & Werner with a Strained Knee. The rained Continued
moderately all day.

[Clark, December 12, 1805]
December 12th Thursday 1805
Some moderate Showers last night and this morning all hands who are
well employed in building Cabins, despatched 2 men to get board timber,
The flees so bad last night that, I made but a broken nights rest we
can't get them out of our robes & Skins, which we are obliged to make
use of for bedding Some rain to day at Intervales- all at work, in the
evening 2 Canoe of Indians Came from the 2 villages of Clotsop below, &
brought Wapitoo roots a black root they call Si-ni-tor and a Small Sea
orter Skin all of which we purchased for a fiew fishing hooks & Some
Snake Indian Tobacco. Those Indians appeare well disposed, I made a
Chief of one & gave him a Small medel, his name is Conyear we treated
those people well- they are tite Deelers, value Blu & white beeds verry
highly, and Sell their roots also highly as they purchase them from the
Indians abov for a high price

[Clark, December 12, 1805]
Thursday 12th December 1805
All hands that are well employ'd in Cutting logs and raising our winter
Cabins, detached two men to Split boards- Some rain at intervales all
last night and to day- The flees were So troublesom last night that I
made but a broken nights rest, we find great dificuelty in getting
those trouble insects out of our robes and blankets- in the evening two
Canoes of Chit Sops Visit us they brought with them Wap pa to, a black
Sweet root they Call Sha-na toe qua, and a Small Sea Otter Skin, all of
which we purchased for a fiew fishing hooks and a Small Sack of Indian
tobacco which was given by the Snake Inds.

Those Indians appear well disposed we gave a Medal to the principal
Chief named Con-ny-au or Com mo-wol and treated those with him with as
much attention as we could- I can readily discover that they are Close
deelers, & Stickle for a verry little, never close a bargin except they
think they have the advantage Value Blue beeds highly, white they also
prise but no other Colour do they Value in the least- the Wap pa to
they Sell high, this root the purchase at a high price from the nativs
above.

[Clark, December 13, 1805]
December 13th Friday 1805 The Indians left us to day after brackfast,
haveing Sold us 2 of the robes of a Small animal for which I intend
makeing a Capot, and Sold Capt Lewis 2 Loucirvia Skins for the Same
purpose. Drewyer & Shannon returned from hunting havg. killed 18 Elk
and butchered all except 2 which they Could not get as night provented
ther finding them & they Spoild.

3 Indians in a Canoe Came and offered us for Sale Sinutor roots, fish &
2 Sea otter Skins for Sale none of which we Could purchase. Some rain
last night and this day at Several times, light Showers. we Continue
building our houses of the Streightest & _____ logs, Sent out 2 men to
Split timber to Covet the Cabins, and I am glad to find the timber
Splits butifully, and of any width

[Clark, December 13, 1805]
Friday 13th December 1805
The Clatsops leave us to day after a brackfast on Elk which they
appeared to be very fond of before they left us they Sold me two robes
of the Skins of a Small animal about the Size of a Cat, and to Captain
Lewis 2 Cat or Loucirva Skins for the purpose of makeing a Coat.
Drewyer & Shannon returned from hunting, haveing killed 18 Elk & left
them boochered in the woods near the right fork of the river about 6
miles above this place- in the evining 3 Indians came in a Canoe, and
offered to us for Sale roots & 2 Sea otter Skins, neither of which we
Could purchase this evening. Some Showers of rain last night, and to
day Several verry hard Showers- we Continue to put up the Streight
butifull balsom pine on our houses-and we are much pleased to find that
the timber Splits most butifully and to the width of 2 feet or more.

[Clark, December 14, 1805]
December 14th Saturday 1805
a cloudy day & rained moderately all day we finish the log works of our
building, the Indians leave us to day after Selling a Small Sea otter
Skin and a roabe, Send 4 men to Stay at the Elk which is out in the
woods &c.

[Clark, December 14, 1805]
Saturday 14th December 1805
The Day Cloudy and rained moderately all day we finish the log work of
our building, the Indians leave us to day after Selling a Small Sea
otter Skin and a roab, dispatch 4 men to the Elk out in the woods with
derections to delay untill the party goes up tomorrow. all employd in
finishing a house to put meat into. all our last Supply of Elk has
Spoiled in the repeeted rains which has been fallen ever Since our
arrival at this place, and for a long time before, Scerce one man in
Camp Can host of being one day dry Since we landed at this point, the
Sick getting better, my man York Sick with Cholick & gripeing

[Clark, December 15, 1805]
December 15th Sunday 1805
I Set out with 16 men in 3 Canoes for the Elk proced up the 1st right
hand fork 4 miles & pack the meat from the woods to the Cano from 4
mile to 3 miles distance all hands pack not one man exempted from this
labour I also pack my Self Some of this meat, and Cook for those out in
packing Some rain in the evening Cloudy all day, the last load of meat
all the party got out of the road or Direction and did not get to the
Canoe untill after night, 5 did not join to night

[Clark, December 15, 1805]
Sunday the 15th December 1805.
I Set out early with 16 men and 3 Canoes for the Elk, proceed up the
River three miles and thence up a large Creek from the right about 3
miles the hite of the tide water drew up the Canoes and all hands went
out in three different parties and brought in to the Canoe each Man a
quarter of Elk, I Sent them out for a Second load and had Some of the
first Cooked against their return, after eateing a harty diner
dispatched the party for a third and last load, about half the men
missed their way and did not get to the Canoes untill after Dark, and
Serjt. Ordway Colter, Colins Whitehouse & McNeal Staid out all night
without fire and in the rain- Cloudy all day Some rain in the evening.

[Clark, December 16, 1805]
December 16th Monday 1805
rained all the last night we Covered our Selves as well as we Could
with Elk Skins, & Set up the greater part of the night, all wet I lay
in the water verry Cold, the 5 men who Stayed out all night joined me
this morning Cold & wet, Ordway Colter Collens, Jo Whitehouse J McNeal,
I had the two Canoes loaded with the 11 Elk which was brought to the
Canoes, despatched 12 men to meet me below with 2 Elk, The rain
Contines, with Tremendious gusts of wind, which is Tremds. I proceeded
on and took in the 2 Elk which was brought to the Creek, & Send back 7
men to Carrey to the Canoe & take down to Camp 3 Elk which was left in
the woods, and I proceeded on to Camp thro the Same Chanel I had assd.
The winds violent Trees falling in every derection, whorl winds, with
gusts of rain Hail & Thunder, this kind of weather lasted all day,
Certainly one of the worst days that ever was! I found 3 Indeans with
Capt Lewis in camp they had brought fish to Sell, we had a house
Covered with Punchen & our meat hung up. Several men Complaining of
hurting themselves Carry meet, &c.

[Clark, December 16, 1805]
Monday 16th December 1805
I as also the party with me experiencd a most dreadfull night rain and
wet without any Couvering, indeed we Set up the greater part of the
Night, when we lay down the water Soon Came under us and obliged us to
rise. the five men who Stayed out all night joind me this morning wet
and Cold, haveing Stayed out without fire or Shelter and the rain
poreing down upon them all night their appearance was truly
distressingthey had left all their loads near the place they Spent the
night- I dispatched 12 men for 2 Elk which was reather below on the
opposit Side of the Creak, with directions to meet me at the 2d bend in
the Creek below, had all the meat which had been brought in yesterday
put into 2 Canoes and proceeded down to the 2d bend where I met the 12
men with the 2 Elk, dispatchd 6 men with one of those who Staid out
last night for the meet left in the woods & the remainder an elk at
Some distance and proceeded on my Self with 3 Canoes to the fort. wind
violent from the S E

trees falling, rain and hail, we with Some risque proceeded on thro the
high waves in the river, a tempestious disagreeable day.

I found 3 indians at our Camp, they brought fish to Sell which were
pore & not fit for use, had the meet house coverd and the meat all hung
up, Several men complain of haveing hurt themselves heavy loads of meat.

[Clark, December 17, 1805]
December 17th Tuesday 1805
rained Some last night and this morning, all hands at work about the
huts Chinking them, The 7 men left to bring in the Elk left in the
woods Come with 2 the 3rd they Could not find, as it was that left by
the party that got lost night before last

The after part of the Day fair & Cool, fore part of the Day rain hailed
& blew hard, The mountain which lies S. E of this is covered with Snow
to day we fleece all the meat and hang it up over a Small Smoke The
trees are hard to Split for Punchens to Cover our houses &c.

[Clark, December 17, 1805]
Tuesday 17th of December 1805
Some rain last night and a continuation of it this morning. all the men
at work about the houses, Some Chinking, Dobbing Cutting out dores &c.
&c. The 7 men left to bring in the Elk arrived and informed that they
Could not find the meat that the party who Stayed out all night had
left- the forepart of this day rained hailed and blew hard, the after
part is fair and Cool- a Mountain which is S. ____° E. about 10 miles
distant has got Snow on its top which is ruged and uneavin

Cause a Small fire & Smoke to be made under the meat which is hung up
in Small peaces. The trees which our men have fallen latterly Split
verry badly into boards. The most of our Stores are wet. our Leather
Lodge has become So rotten that the Smallest thing tares it into holes
and it is now Scrcely Sufficent to keep off the rain off a Spot
Sufficiently large for our bead.

[Clark, December 18, 1805]
December 18th Wednesday 1805
rained and Snowed alturnitely all the last night and the gusts of Snow
and hail continue untill 12 oClock, Cold and a dreadfull day wind hard
and unsettled, we continue at work at our huts, the men being but
thinly dressed, and no Shoes causes us to doe but little- at 12 the
Snow & hail Seased & the after part of the day was Cloudy with Some
rain.

[Clark, December 18, 1805]
Wednesday 18th December 1805
rained and Snowed alternetly all the last night, and Spurts of Snow and
Hail Continued untill 12 oClock, which has chilled the air which is
Cool and disagreeable, the wind hard & unsettled- The men being thinly
Dressed and mockersons without Socks is the reason that but little can
be done at the Houses to day- at 12 the Hail & Snow Seased, and rain
Suckceeded for the latter part of the day

[Lewis, December 18, 1805]
Fort Clatsop, December 18th 1805.
This day one of the men shot a bird of the Corvus genus, which was
feeding on some fragments of meat near the camp. this bird is about the
size of the kingbird or bee martin, and not unlike that bird in form.
the beak is 3/4 of an inch long, wide at the base, of a convex, and
cultrated figure, beset with some small black hairs near it's base. the
chaps are of nearly equal lengths tho the upper exceeds the under one a
little, and has a small nich in the upper chap near the extremity
perceptable only by close examineation. the colour of the beak is
black. the eye is large and prominent, the puple black, and iris of a
dark yellowish brown. the legs and feet are black and imbricated. has
four toes on each foot armed with long sharp tallons; the hinder toe is
nearly as long as the middle toe in front and longer than the two
remaining toes. the tale is composed of twelve fathers the longest of
which are five inches, being six in number placed in the center. the
remaining six are placed 3 on either side and graduly deminish to four
inches which is the shortest and outer feathers. the tail is half the
length of the bird, the whole length from the extremity of the beak to
the extremity of the tale being 10 Inches. the head from it's joining
the nect forward as far as the eyes nearly to the base of the beak and
on each side as low as the center of the eye is black. arround the base
of the beak the throat jaws, neck, brest and belley are of a pale
bluish white. the wings back and tale are of a bluish black with a
small shade of brown. this bird is common to this piny country are also
found in the rockey mountains on the waters of the columbia river or
woody side of those mountains, appear to frequent the highest sumits of
those mountains as far as they are covered with timber. their note is
que, quit-it, que-hoo; and tah, tah, &- there is another bird of
reather larger size which I saw on the woddy parts of the rockey
mountains and on the waters of the Missouri, this bird I could never
kill tho I made several attempts, the predominate colour is a dark blue
the tale is long and they are not crested; I believe them to be of the
corvus genus also. their note is char, char, char-ar, char; the large
blue crested corvus of the Columbia river is also

[Lewis, December 19, 1805]
Discription of the blue Crested corvus bird common to the woody and
western side of the Rockey mountains, and all the woody country from
thence to the Pacific Ocean It's beak is black convex, cultrated, wide
at its base where it is beset with hairs, and is 11 inches from the
opening of the chaps to their extremity, and from the joining of the
head to the extremity of the upper chap 1 1/8 Inches, the upper exceeds
the under chap a little; the nostrils are small round unconnected and
placed near the base of the beak where they lye concealed by the hairs
or hairy feathers which cover the base of the upper chap. the eye
reather large and full but not prominent and of a deep bluefish black,
there being no difference in the colour of the puple and the iris. the
crest is very full the feathers from 1 to 11/2 Inches long and occupye
the whole crown of the head. the head neck, the whole of the body
including the coverts of the wings, the upper disk of the tail and
wings are of a fine gossey bright indigo blue Colour the under disk of
the tail and wings are of a dark brown nearly black. the leg and first
joint of the tye are 41/4 In. long, the legs and feet are black and the
front covered with 6 scales the hinder part smothe, the toes are also
imbrecated, four in number long and armed with long sharp black
tallons. the upper disk of the first four or five feathers of the wing
next to the boddy, are marked with small transverse stripes of black as
are also the upper side of the two center feathers of the tail; the
tail is five inches long & is composed of twelve feathers of equal
length. the tail 1 & 1/2 as long as the boddy. the whole length from
the point of the beak to extremity of the tail 1 Foot 1 Inch; from the
tip of one to the tip of the other wing 1 Foot 51/2 Inches. the Conta.
the size & the whole Contour of this bird resembles very much the blue
jay or jaybird as they are called in the U States. like them also they
seldom rest in one place long but are in constant motion hoping from
spra to spray. what has been said is more immediately applicable to the
male, the colours of the female are somewhat different in her the head
crest neck half the back downwards and the converts of the wings are of
a dark brown, but sometimes there is a little touch of the Indigo on
the short feathers on the head at the base of the upper chap. this bird
feeds on flesh when they can procure it, also on bugs flies and buries.
I do not know whether they distroy little birds but their tallons
indicate their capacity to do so if nature, has directed it. their note
is loud and frequently repeated cha' -a cha' -a' &c.- also twat twat
twat, very quick

[Clark, December 19, 1805]
December 19th Thursday 1805
Some rain with intervales of fair weather last night, The morning Clear
and wind from S W. I despatched Sjt. Pryer with 8 men in 2 Canoes
across the bay for the boads of an Indian house which is abandoned, the
other part of the men continue to doe a little at the huts, the after
part of the day Cloudy with hail & rain, Sgt. Pryer and party returned
with 2 Canoe loads of Boards, two Indians Came & Stayed but a Short time

[Clark, December 19, 1805]
Thursday 19th December 1805
Some rain with intervales of fair weather last night, this morning
Clear & the wind from the S, W. we dispatched Sjt. Pryor with 8 men in
2 Canoes across Meriwethers Bay for the boards of an old Indian house
which is vacant, the residue of the men at work at their huts- the
after part of the Day Cloudy with Hail and rain, Serjt. Pryor & party
returned in the evening with a load of old boards which was found to be
verry indifferent

2 Indians Cam and Stayed a Short time to day

[Clark, December 20, 1805]
December 20th Friday 1805
Some rain and hail last night and this morning it rained hard untill 10
oClock, men all employd Carrying Punchens and Covering Cabins 4 of
which we had Covered, & Set Some to Dobing- the after part of the day
Cloudy and Some Showers of rain. 3 Indians came with Lickorish
Sackacomie berries & mats to Sell, for which they asked Such high
prices that we did not purchase any of them,- Those people ask double &
tribble the value of everry thing they have to Sell, and never take
less than the full value of any thing, they prise only Blue & white
heeds, files fish hooks and Tobacco- Tobacco and Blue beeds principally

[Clark, December 20, 1805]
Friday 20th of December 1805
Some rain and hail last night and the rained Continued untill 10 oClock
a,m, Men all employd in Carrying punchens or boards & Covering the
houses, 4 of which were Covered to day, the after part of the day
Cloudy with Several Showers of rain- 3 Indians arrive in a Canoe. they
brought with them mats, roots & Sackacome berries to Sell for which
they asked Such high prices that we did not purchase any of them. Those
people ask generally double and tribble the value of what they have to
Sell, and never take less than the real value of the article in Such
things as is calculated to do them Service. Such as Blue & white heeds,
with which they trade with the nativs above; files which they make use
of to Sharpen their tools, fish hooks of different Sises and tobacco-
Tobacco and blue beeds they do prefur to every thing.

[Clark, December 21, 1805]
December 21st Saturday 1805
rain as usial last night and all day to day moderately. we Continued at
the Cabins dobbing & Shinking of them, fall Several trees which would
not Split into punchins- the Indians were detected in Stealing a Spoon
& a Bone, and left us, our Sackey Commy out Send 2 men to gather Some
at the ocian, Saw Elk Sign

[Clark, December 21, 1805]
Saturday 21st December 1805
rained as useal all the last night, and contd. moderately all day to
day without any intermition, men employd at the houses. one of the
indians was detected Stealing a horn Spoon, and leave the Camp.
dispatched two men to the open lands near the Ocian for Sackacome,
which we make use of to mix with our tobacco to Smoke which has an
agreeable flavour.

[Clark, December 22, 1805]
December 22nd Sunday 1805
rained all the last night & to day without much intermition we finish
dobbig 4 huts which is all we have Covered, the Punchin floor & Bunks
finished Drewyer go out to trap- Sjt. J. Ordway, Gibson & my Servent
Sick Several with Biles on them & bruses of different kinds, much of
our meat Spoiled.

[Clark, December 22, 1805]
Sunday 22nd December 1805
rained Continued all the last night and to day without much
intermition, men employd doeing what they can at the houses. Drewyer
Set out up the Creek to Set his traps for beaver, Sergt. ordway, Gibson
& my Servent Sick, Several men Complain of biles and bruses of
differant kinds.

We discover that part of our last Supply of meat is Spoiling from the
womph of the weather not withstanding a constant Smoke kept under it
day and night.

[Clark, December 23, 1805]
December 23rd Monday 1805
rained without intermition all last night, and this day much Thunder in
the morning and evening with rain and Some hail to day, we are all
employd about our huts have ours Covered and Dobed & we move into it, 2
Canoes of Indians Came up to day. I purchased 3 mats verry neetly made,
2 bags made with Flags verry neetly made, those the Clotsops Carry ther
fish in. also a Panthor Skin and Some Lickorish roots, for which I gave
a worn out file, 6 fish hooks & Some Pounded fish which to us was
Spoiled, but those people were fond of- in the evining those people
left us I also gave a String of wompom to a Chief, and Sent a Small
pice of Simimon to a Sick Indian in the Town who had attached himself
to me

[Clark, December 23, 1805]
Monday 23rd December 1805
Rained without intermition all the last night and to day with Thunder
and Hail the fore and after part of this day Capt Lewis and my Self
move into our hut to day unfinished- two Canoes with Indians of the
Clat Sop nation Came up to day. I purchased 3 mats and bags all neetly
made of flags and rushes, those bags are nearly Square of different
size's open on one Side, I also purchased a panthor Skin 71/2 feet long
including the tail, all of which I gave 6 Small fish hooks, a Small
worn out file & Some pounded fish which we Could not use as it was So
long wet that it was Soft and molded, the Indians of this neighbourhood
prize the pound'd fish verry highly, I have not observed this method of
Secureing fish on any other part of the Columbian waters then that
about the Great falls. I gave a 2d Chief a String of wampom, and Sent a
little pounded fish to Cus-ca-lah who was Sick in the village & could
not come to See us.

[Clark, December 24, 1805]
December 24th Tuesday-5
Some hard rain at different times last night, and moderately this
morning without intermition all hands employed in Carrying Punchens &
finishing Covering the huts, and the greater part of the men move into
them a hard rain in the evening.

Cuscalar the young Clot Sop Chief Came with a young brother and 2 young
Squar, they gave or laid before Capt Lewis and my Self a mat and each a
large Parsel of roots, Some time after he demanded 2 files for his
Present we returned the present as we had no files to Speare which
displeased them a little they then offered a woman to each which we
also declined axcpting which also displeased them. Jo Fields finish for
Capt Lewis and my Self each a wide Slab hued to write on, I gave a
handkerchief &c

[Clark, December 24, 1805]
Tuesday 24th December 1805
hard rain at Different times last night and all this day without
intermition. men all employd in finishing their huts and moveing into
them.

Cuscalah the Indian who had treated me So politely when I was at the
Clatsops village, come up in a Canoe with his young brother & 2 Squars
he laid before Capt Lewis and my Self each a mat and a parcel of roots
Some time in the evening two files was demanded for the presents of
mats and roots, as we had no files to part with, we each returned the
present which we had received, which displeased Cuscalah a little. he
then offered a woman to each of us which we also declined axcepting of,
which displeased the whole party verry much- the female part appeared
to be highly disgusted at our refuseing to axcept of their favours &c.

our Store of Meat entirely Spoiled, we are obliged to make use of it as
we have nothing else except a little pounded fish, the remains of what
we purchased near the great falls of the Columbia, and which we have
ever found to be a convenient resort, and a portable method of curing
fish

[Clark, December 25, 1805]
December 25th Christmas 1805 Wednesday
Some rain at different times last night and Showers of hail with
intervales of fair Starr light, This morning at day we were Saluted by
all our party under our winders, a Shout and a Song- after brackfast we
divided our tobacco which amounted to 2 Carrots, one half we gave to
the party who used Tobacco those who did not we gave a Handkerchief as
a present, The day proved Showery all day, the Inds. left us this
eveningall our party moved into their huts. we dried Some of our wet
goods. I rcved a present of a Fleeshe Hoserey vest draws & Socks of
Capt Lewis, pr. Mockerson of Whitehouse, a Small Indian basket of
Guterich, & 2 Doz weasels tales of the Squar of Shabono, & Some black
roots of the Indians G. D. Saw a Snake passing across the parth

Our Diner to day Consisted of pore Elk boiled, Spilt fish & Some roots,
a bad Christmass diner worm Day

[Clark, December 25, 1805]
Christmas Wednesday 25th December 1805
at day light this morning we were awoke by the discharge of the fire
arm of all our party & a Selute, Shoute and a Song which the whole
party joined in under our windows, after which they retired to their
rooms were Chearfull all the morning- after brackfast we divided our
Tobacco which amounted to 12 carrots one half of which we gave to the
men of the party who used tobacco, and to those who doe not use it we
make a present of a handkerchief, The Indians leave us in the evening
all the party Snugly fixed in their huts- I recved a presnt of Capt L.
of a fleece hosrie Shirt Draws and Socks-, a pr. mockersons of
Whitehouse a Small Indian basket of Gutherich, two Dozen white weazils
tails of the Indian woman, & Some black root of the Indians before
their departure- Drewyer informs me that he Saw a Snake pass across the
parth to day. The day proved Showerey wet and disagreeable.

we would have Spent this day the nativity of Christ in feasting, had we
any thing either to raise our Sperits or even gratify our appetites,
our Diner concisted of pore Elk, So much Spoiled that we eate it thro
mear necessity, Some Spoiled pounded fish and a fiew roots.

[Clark, December 26, 1805]
December 26th Thursday 1805
rained and blew hard last night Some hard Thunder, The rain continued
as usial all day and wind blew hard from the S. E, Joseph Fields finish
a Table & 2 Seats for us. we dry our wet articles and have the blankets
fleed, The flees are So troublesom that I have Slept but little for 2
nights past and we have regularly to kill them out of our blankets
every day for Several past- maney of the men have ther Powder wet by
the horns being repeetdly wet, hut Smoke verry bad.

[Clark, December 26, 1805]
Thursday 26th December 1805
rained and blew with great Violence S E all the last night, Some hard
Claps of Thunder, the rain as usial Continued all day- we dry our wet
articles before the fire, and have our blankets fleed, great numbers
were Caught out of the blankets, those trouble insects are So abundant
that we have to have them killd. out of our blankets every day or get
no Sleep at night- The powder in maney of the mens horns are wet from
their being so long exposed to the rain &c.

[Clark, December 27, 1805]
December 27th Friday 1805.
rained last night as usial and the greater part of this day, the men
Complete Chimneys & Bunks to day, in the evening a Chief and 4 men Come
of the Clotsop nation, Chief Co-ma wool we Sent out R. Fields & Collins
to hunt and order Drewyer, Shannon & Labiach to Set out early to morrow
to hunt,- Jo Fields, Bratten, & Gibson to make Salt at Point Addams,-
Willard & Wiser, to assist them in carrying the Kitties &c to the
Ocian, and all the others to finish the Pickets and gates. worm weather
I Saw a Musquetor which I Showed Capt. Lewis- Those Indians gave is, a
black root they Call Shan-na-tah que a kind of Licquerish which they
rost in embers and Call Cul ho-mo, a black berry the Size of a Cherry &
Dried which they call Shel-well,- all of which they prise highly and
make use of as food to live on, for which Capt Lewis gave the chief a
Cap of Sheep Skin and I his Son, ear bobs, Piece of riben, a pice of
brass, and 2 Small fishing hooks, of which they were much pleased Those
roots & berres, are greatfull to our Stomcks as we have nothing to eate
but Pore Elk meet, nearly Spoiled; & this accident of Spoiled meet, is
owing to wormth & the repeeted rains, which cause the meet to tante
before we Can get it from the woods Musquetors troublesorn

[Clark, December 27, 1805]
Friday 27th December 1805
rained last night as usial and the greater part of this day. In the
evening Co-mo wool the Chief and 4 men of the Clat Sop nation they
presented us a root which resembles the licquirish in Size and taste,
which they roste like a potato which they Call Cul ho-mo, also a black
root which is cured in a kill like the pash-a-co above; this root has a
Sweet taste and the natives are verry fond of it- they Call this root
Shaw-na-tah-que. also a dried berry about the size of a Chery which
they Call Shele well all those roots those Indians value highly and
give them verry Spearingly. in return for the above roots Capt Lewis
gave the Chief a Small piece of Sheap Skin to Ware on his head, I gave
his Son a par of ear bobs and a pece of ribon, and a Small piece of
brass for which they were much pleased.

Those roots and berries are timely and extreamly greatfull to our
Stomachs, as we have nothing to eate but Spoiled Elk meat, I Showed
Capt L. 2 Musquetors to day, or an insect So much the Size Shape and
appearance of a Musquetor that we Could observe no kind of differance.

[Clark, December 28, 1805]
December 28th Saturday 1805
rained as usial, a great part of the last night, and this morning
rained and the wind blew hard from the S. E. Sent out the hunters and
Salt makers, & employd the baleanc of the men Carrying the Pickets &c.
&c. hunters Sent out yesterday returned, haveing killed one deer near
the Sea cost, my boy york verry unwell from violent Colds & Strains
Carrying in meet and lifting logs on the huts to build them, This day
is worm, and rained all day moderately without intermition.

[Clark, December 28, 1805]
Saturday the 28th December 1805
rained as usial the greater part of the last night and a continuation
this morning accompanied with wind from the S East Derected Drewyer,
Shannon, Labeash, Reuben Field, and Collins to hunt; Jos. Fields,
Bratten, Gibson to proceed to the Ocean at Some Convenient place form a
Camp and Commence makeing Salt with 5 of the largest Kittles, and
Willard and Wiser to assist them in Carrying the Kittles to the Sea
Coastall the other men to be employed about putting up pickets &
makeing the gates of the fort. my man Y. verry unwell from a violent
Coald and Strain by Carrying meet from the woods and lifting the heavy
logs on the works &c. rained all Day without intermition. the Weather
verry worm.

[Clark, December 29, 1805]
December 29th Sunday 1805
rained last night as usial, this morning Cloudy without rain a hard
wind from the S. E. The Inds. left us this morning and returned to
their village, after begging for maney things which they did not secure
as we Could not Spare them I gave the Chief Canio a Razor, Sent out 3
men across the river to hunt, all others employd putting up pickets
Pete Crusat Sick with a violent Cold My Servent better- we are told by
the Indians that a whale has foundered on the Coast to the N. W and
their nations is collecting fat of him, the wind is too high for us to
See it, Capt Lewis is been in readiness 2 days to go and Collect Some
of the whale oyle the wind has proved too high as yet for him to Set
out in Safty In the evening a young Chief 4 men and 2 womin of the
War-ci-a-cum tribe came in a large canoe with Wapto roots, Dressed Elk
Skins &c. to Sell, the Chief made me a present of about a half a bushel
of those roots- we gave him a medal of a Small Size and a piece of red
ribin to tie around the top of his Hat which was made with a double
Cone, the diameter of the upper about 3 Inches the lower a about 1 foot

We purchased about 11/2 bushels of those roots for which we gave Some
few red beeds, Small pices of brass wire and old Check- those roots
proved greatfull to us as we are now liveing on Spoiled Elk which is
extreamly disagreeable to the Smel. as well as the taste, I can plainly
discover that a considerable exchange of property is Continually
Carried on between the Tribes and villages of those people they all
dress litely ware nothing below the waste, a pice of fur abt. around
the body, and a Short robe which Composes the total of their dress,
except a few Split hats, and heeds around ther necks wrists and
anckles, and a few in their ears. They are small and not handsom
generally Speaking women perticularly.

The Chin nook womin are lude and Carry on Sport publickly the Clotsop
and others appear deffidend, and reserved The flees are So noumerous in
this Countrey and difficult to get Cleare of that the Indians have
difft. houses & villages to which they remove frequently to get rid of
them, and not withstanding all their precautions, they never Step into
our hut without leaveing Sworms of those troublesom insects. Indeed I
Scercely get to Sleep half the night Clear of the torments of those
flees, with the precaution of haveing my blankets Serched and the flees
killed every day- The 1 s of those insects we Saw on the Collumbia
River was at the 1 s Great falls- I have the Satisfaction to Say that
we had but little rain in the Course of this day, not as much as would
wet a person. but hard wind and Cloudy all day.

[Clark, December 29, 1805]
Sunday 29th December 1805
rained all the last night a usial, this morning Cloudy without rain, a
hard wind from the S. E I gave the Cheif a razor, and himself and party
left us after begging us for maney articles none of which they recvied
as we Could not Spare the articles they were most in want of. Peter
Crusat

Sick with a violent Cold, my man Y. better. all hands employed about
the Pickets & gates of the fort. we were informed day before yesterday
that a whale had foundered on the coast to the S. W. near the Kil a mox
N. and that the greater part of the Clat Sops were gorn for the oile &
blubber, the wind proves too high for us to proceed by water to See
this monster, Capt Lewis has been in readiness Since we first heard of
the whale to go and see it and collect Some of its Oil, the wind has
proved too high as yet for him to proceed- this evining a young Chief 4
Men and 2 womin of the War ci a cum Nation arrived, and offered for
Sale Dressed Elk Skins and Wap pa to, the Chief made us a preasent of
about 1/2 a bushel of those roots. and we purchased about 11/2 bushels
of those roots for which we gave Some fiew red beeds Small peaces of
brass wire & old Check those roots proved a greatfull addition to our
Spoiled Elk, which has become verry disagreeable both to the taste &
Smell we gave this Chief a Medal of a Small Size and a piece of red
riben to tie around the top of his hat which was of a Singular
Construction Those people will not Sell all their Wap pa to to us they
inform us that they are on their way to trade with the Chit Sops. The
nations above Carry on a verry Considerable interchange of property
with those in this neighbourhood. they pass altogether by water, they
have no roads or pathes through the Countrey which we have observed,
except across portages from one Creek to another, all go litely dressed
ware nothing below the waste in the Coaldest of weather, a piece of fur
around their bodies and a Short roabe Composes the Sum total of their
dress, except a few hats, and heeds about their necks arms and legs
Small badly made and homely generally. The flees are So noumerous and
hard to get rid of; that the Indians have different houses which they
resort to occasionally, not withstanding all their precautions they
never Step into our house without leaveing Sworms of those tormenting
insects; and they torment us in Such a manner as to deprive us of half
the nights Sleep frequently- the first of those insects which we saw on
the Columbian waters was at the Canoe portage at the great falls. Hard
winds & Cloudy all day but verry little rain to day.

[Clark, December 30, 1805]
December 30th Monday 1805
Hard wind and Some rain last night, this morning fair and the Sun Shown
for a Short time 4 Indians Came from the upper Villages they offered us
roots which we did not Chuse to axcept of, as their expectations for
those presents of a fiew roots is 3 or 4 times their real worth, those
Indians with those of yesterday Continued all day. Drewyer & party of
hunters returned and informed they had killed 4 Elk, a party of 6 men
was imediately Sent for the meet, they returned at Dusk, with the 4
Elk, of which we had a Sumptious Supper of Elk Tongues & marrow bones
which was truly gratifying.

The fort was Completed this evening and at Sun Set we let The Indians
know that, our Custom will be to Shut the gates at Sun Set, at which
time, they must all go out of the fort those people who are verry
foward and disegreeable, left the huts with reluctiance- This day
proved the best we have had Since at this place, only 3 Showers of rain
to day, Cloudy nearly all day, in the evening the wind luled and the
fore part of the night fair and clear. I Saw flies & different kinds of
insects in motion to day Snakes are yet to be seen, and Snales without
Cover is Common and large, fowls of every kind Common to this quarter
abound in the Creek & Bay near us

[Clark, December 30, 1805]
Monday 30th December 1805
Hard wind and Some rain last night. this morning the Sun Shown for a
Short time- four Indians came down from the War cia cum Village, they
offered us roots which we did not think proper to accept of as in
return they expect 3 or 4 times as much as the roots as we Could
purchase the Roots for, and are never Satisfied with what they receive,
those 4 Indians & these that Came yesterday Stayed all day. Drewyer
returned and informed that he had killed 4 Elk at no great distance
off, a party of 6 men was imediately dispatched for the meat, and
returned at Dusk with the 4 Elk- we had a Sumptious Supper of Elks
tongues & marrow bones which was truly gratifying- our fortification is
Completed this evening-and at Sun Set we let the nativs know that our
Custom will be in future, to Shut the gates at Sun Set at which time
all Indians must go out of the fort and not return into it untill next
morning after Sunrise at which time the gates will be opened, those of
the War ci a cum Nation who are very foward left the houses with
reluctianc this day proved to be the fairest and best which we have had
since our arrival at this place, only three Showers dureing this whole
day, wind the fore part of the day.

[Clark, December 31, 1805]
December 31st Tuesday 1805
A Cloudy night & Some rain, this day proved Cloudy and Some Showers of
rain to day all the Indians Continued at their Camp near us, 2 others
Canoes Came one from the War-ci-a-cum Village, with three Indians, and
the other from higher up the river of the Skil-lute nation with three
men and a Squar; Those people brought with them Some Wapto roots, mats
made of flags, & rushes, dried fish and Some fiew Shene-tock-we (or
black) roots & Dressed Elk Skins, all of which they asked enormous
prices for, particularly the Dressed Elk Skins; I purchased of those
people Some Wapto roots, two mats and a Small pouch of Tobacco of their
own manufactory- for which I gave large fish hooks, which they were
verry fond, those Indians are much more reserved and better behaved to
day than yesterday- the Sight of our Sentinal who walks on his post,
has made this reform in those people who but yesterday was verry
impertenant and disagreeable to all- This evening they all Cleared out
before the time to Shut the gates, without being derected to doe So- I
derected Sinks to be dug and a Sentinal Box which was accomplished one
of those Indeans brought a Musquet to be repared, which only wanted a
Screw flattened, for which he gave me a Peck of Wapto roots, I gave him
a flint and a pice of Sheep Skin of which he was pleased

[Clark, December 31, 1805]
Tuesday 31st December 1805
last night was Cloudy and Some rain, this day prove Cloudy and Showerry
all day, all the Indians Continue at their Camp near us, two other
Canoes arrived, one from the War ci a cum Village with 3 indians and
the other of 3 men & a Squar from higher up the river and are of the
Skil-lute nation, those people brought with them Some Wappato roots,
mats made of flags and rushes dried fish, and a fiew Shaw-na tah-que
and Dressed Elk Skins, all of which they asked enormous prices for,
perticularly the dressed Elk Skins, I purchased of those people Some
Wap pa to two mats and about 3 pipes of their tobacco in a neet little
bag made of rushes- This tobacco was much like what we had Seen before
with the So So ne or Snake indians, for those articles I gave a large
fishing hook and Several other Small articles, the fishinghooks they
were verry fond of. Those Skit lutes are much better behaved than the
War ci a cum indeed we found a great alteration in the Conduct of them
all this morning, the Sight of our Sentinal on his post at the gate,
together with our deturmined proseedure of putting all out at Sun Set
has made this reform in those War ci a corns who is foward impertinant
an thieveish.

The nativs all leave us the fort this evening before Sun Set without
being told or desired to do So- we had Sinks dug & a Sentinal box made-
a Skit lute brought a gun which he requested me to have repared, it
only wanted a Screw flattened So as to Catch, I put a flint into his
gun & he presented me in return a peck of Wappato for payment, I gave
him piece of a Sheap Skin and a Small piece of blue Cloth to Cover his
lock for which he was much pleased and gave me in return Some roots &c.

I Saw flies and different kinds of insects in motion to day- Snakes are
yet to be Seen and Snales without Covers is Common and verry large
water fowls of various kinds are in great numbers in the rivers and
Creeks and the sides of Meriwethers Bay near us but excessively wild-
the fore part of this night fair and Clear

With the party of Clat Sops who visited us last was a man of much
lighter Coloured than the nativs are generaly, he was freckled with
long duskey red hair, about 25 years of age, and must Certainly be half
white at least, this man appeared to understand more of the English
language than the others of his party, but did not Speak a word of
English, he possessed all the habits of the indians

[Lewis, January 1, 1806]
Fort Clatsop 1806.
January 1st Tuesday.
This morning I was awoke at an early hour by the discharge of a volley
of small arms, which were fired by our party in front of our quarters
to usher in the new year; this was the only mark of rispect which we
had it in our power to pay this celebrated day. our repast of this day
tho better than that of Christmass, consisted principally in the
anticipation of the 1st day of January 1807, when in the bosom of our
friends we hope to participate in the mirth and hilarity of the day,
and when with the zest given by the recollection of the present, we
shall completely, both mentally and corporally, enjoy the repast which
the hand of civilization has prepared for us. at present we were
content with eating our boiled Elk and wappetoe, and solacing our
thirst with our only beverage pure water. two of our hunters who set
out this morning reterned in the evening having killed two bucks elk;
they presented Capt. Clark and myself each a marrow-bone and tonge, on
which we suped. visited today by a few of the Clotsops who brought some
roots and burries for the purpose of trading with us. we were uneasy
with rispect to two of our men, Willard and Wiser, who were dispatched
on the 28th ulto. with the saltmakers, and were directed to return
immediately; their not having returned induces us to believe it
probable that they have missed their way.- our fourtification being now
completed we issued an order for the more exact and uniform dicipline
and government of the garrison. (see orderly book 1st January 1806).-

[Clark, January 1, 1806]
January 1st Wednesday 1806
This morning proved cloudy with moderate rain, after a pleasent worm
night during which there fell but little rain- This morning at Day we
wer Saluted from the party without, wishing us a "hapy new year" a
Shout and discharge of their arms- no Indians to be Seen this morning-
they left the place of their encampment dureing the last night The work
of our houses and fort being now Complete, we Ishued an order in which
we pointed out the rules & regulations for the government of the Party
in respect to the Indians as also for the Safty and protection of our
Selves &c.

two Clotsops Came with a mat and Some fiew roots of Cut wha mo, for
which they asked a file they did not trade but Continued all night

Sent out 2 hunters this morning who returned, haveing killed 2 Elk
about 3 miles distant, Some fiew Showers of rain in the Course of this
day. Cloudy all the day.

[Clark, January 1, 1806]
Fort Clatsop 1806
Wednesday the 1st of January
This morning I was awoke at an early hour by the discharge of a Volley
of Small arms, which were fired by our party in front of our quarters
to usher in the new year, this was the only mark of respect which we
had it in our power to pay this Selibrated day. our repast of this day
tho better than that of Christmas Consisted principally in the
anticipation of the 1st day of January 1807, when in the bosom of our
friends we hope to participate in the mirth and hilarity of the day,
and when with the relish given by the recollection of the present, we
Shall Completely, both mentally and Corparally, the repast which the
hand of Civilization has produced for us. at present we were Content
with eating our boiled Elk and Wappato, and Solacing our thirst with
our only beverage pure water. two of our hunters who Set out this
morning returned in the evening haveing killed two Buck Elks; they
presented Capt. Lewis and my Self each a marrow bone and tongue on
which we Suped- we are visited to day by a fiew of the Clatsops by
water they brought some roots and berries for the purpose of tradeing
with us. our fortification being now Complete we issue an order for the
more exact and uniform dicipline and government of the garrison. (See
orderly book Jany 2d 1806)

[Lewis, January 1, 1806]
Fort Clatsop, January 1st 1806
The fort being now completed, the Commanding officers think proper to
direct that the guard shall as usual consist of one Sergeant and three
privates, and that the same be regularly relieved each morning at sun
rise. The post of the new guard shall be in the room of the Sergeants
rispectivly commanding the same. the centinel shall be posted, both day
and night, on the parade in front of the commanding offercers quarters;
tho should he at any time think proper to remove himself to any other
part of the fort, in order the better to inform himself of the desighns
or approach of any party of savages, he is not only at liberty, but is
hereby required to do so. It shall be the duty of the centinel also to
announce the arrival of all parties of Indians to the Sergeant of the
Guard, who shall immediately report the same to the Commanding officers.

The Commanding Officers require and charge the Garrison to treat the
natives in a friendly manner; nor will they be permitted at any time,
to abuse, assault or strike them; unless such abuse assault or stroke
be first given by the natives. nevertheless it shall be right for any
individual, in a peaceable manner, to refuse admittance to, or put out
of his room, any native who may become troublesome to him; and should
such native refuse to go when requested, or attempt to enter their
rooms after being forbidden to do so; it shall be the duty of the
Sergeant of the guard on information of the same, to put such native
out of the fort and see that he is not again admitted during that day
unless specially permitted; and the Sergeant of the guard may for this
purpose imploy such coercive measures (not extending to the taking of
life) as shall at his discretion be deemed necessary to effect the same.

When any native shall be detected in theft, the Sergt. of the guard
shall immediately inform the Commanding offercers of the same, to the
end that such measures may be pursued with rispect to the culprit as
they shall think most expedient.

At sunset on each day, the Sergt. attended by the interpreter Charbono
and two of his guard, will collect and put out of the fort, all Indians
except such as may specially be permitted to remain by the Commanding
offercers, nor shall they be again admitted untill the main gate be
opened the ensuing morning.

At Sunset, or immediately after the Indians have been dismissed, both
gates shall be shut, and secured, and the main gate locked and continue
so untill sunrise the next morning; the water-gate may be used freely
by the Garrison for the purpose of passing and repassing at all times,
tho from sunset, untill sunrise, it shall be the duty of the centinel,
to open the gate for, and shut it after all persons passing and
repassing, suffering the same never to remain unfixed long than is
absolutely necessary.

It shall be the duty of the Sergt. of the guard to keep the kee of the
Meat house, and to cause the guard to keep regular fires therein when
the same may be necessary; and also once at least in 24 hours to visit
the canoes and see that they are safely secured; and shall further on
each morning after he is relieved, make his report verbally to the
Commandg officers.

Each of the old guard will every morning after being relieved furnish
two loads of wood for the commanding offercers fire.

No man is to be particularly exempt from the duty of bringing meat from
the woods, nor none except the Cooks and Interpreters from that of
mounting guard.

Each mess being furnished with an ax, they are directed to deposit in
the room of the commanding offercers all other public tools of which
they are possessed; nor shall the same at any time hereafter be taken
from the said deposit without the knoledge and permission of the
commanding officers; and any individual so borrowing the tools are
strictly required to bring the same back the moment he has ceased to
use them, and no case shall they be permited to keep them out all night.

Any individual selling or disposing of any tool or iron or steel
instrument, arms, accoutrements or ammunicion, shall be deemed guilty
of a breach of this order, and shall be tryed and punished
accordingly.the tools loaned to John Shields are excepted from the
restrictions of this order.

Meriwether Lewis
Capt. 1st U.S. Regt.
Wm. Clark
Capt. &c

[Lewis, January 2, 1806]
Thursday, January 2nd 1806
Sent out a party of men and brought in the two Elk which were killed
yesterday. Willard and Wiser have not yet returned nor have a party of
hunters returned who set out on the 26th Ulto. the Indians who visited
yesterday left us at 1 P M today after having disposed of their roots
and berries for a few fishinghooks and some other small articles. we
are infested with swarms of flees already in our new habitations; the
presumption is therefore strong that we shall not devest ourselves of
this intolerably troublesome vermin during our residence here. The
large, and small or whistling swan, sand hill Crane, large and small
gees, brown and white brant, Cormorant, duckan mallard, Canvisback
duck, and several other species of ducks, still remain with us; tho I
do not think that they are as plenty as on our first arrival in the
neighbourhood. Drewyer visited his traps and took an otter. the fur of
both the beaver and otter in this country are extreemly good; those
annamals are tolerably plenty near the sea coast, and on the small
Creeks and rivers as high as the grand rappids, but are by no means as
much so as on the upper part of the Missouri.

[Clark, January 2, 1806]
January 2nd Thursday 1806.
A Cloudy rainey morning after a wet night. dispatched 12 Men for the
two Elk Killed yesterday which they brought in at 11 oClock. the day
proved Cloudy and wet, the Indians left us at 1 oClock P. M, Drewyer
visited his traps which had one otter in one of them. The flees are
verry troublesom, our huts have alreadey Sworms of those disagreeable
insects in them, and I fear we Shall not get rid of them dureing our
delay at this place.

[Clark, January 2, 1806]
Thursday 2nd of January 1806.
Sent out a party of men and brought in the two Elk which was killed
yesterday. Willard & Wiser have not yet returned nor have a party of
hunters who Set out on the 26th ulto the Indians who visited us
yesterday left us at 1 P. M to day after haveing disposed of their
roots and berries for a fiew fishing hooks and Some other Small
articles. we are infestd. with Sworms of flees already in our new
habatations; the presumption is therefore Strong that we Shall not
devest our Selves of this intolerably troublesom vermin dureing our
residence here. The large, & Small or whistling Swan, Sand hill crane,
large & Small Gees, brown and white brant, Comorant, Duckanmallard,
canvis back duck, and Several other Species of Ducks Still remain with
us; tho I doe not think they are as plenty as on our first arrival in
the neighbourhood. Drewyer visit his traps at took out an otter. the
fur of both the beaver and otter as also the rackoon in this countrey
are extreemly good; those animals are tolerably plenty near the Sea
coast, on the Small creeks and rivers as high as the grand Rapids.

[Lewis, January 3, 1806]
Friday January 3d 1806.
At 11 A.M. we were visited by our near neighbours, Chief or Tia,
Como-wool; alias Conia and six Clatsops. they brought for sale some
roots buries and three dogs also a small quantity of fresh blubber.
this blubber they informed us they had obtained from their neighbours
the Callamucksz who inhabit the coast to the S. E. near whose vilage a
whale had recently perished. this blubber the Indians eat and esteeme
it excellent food. our party from necessaty having been obliged to
subsist some lenth of time on dogs have now become extreemly fond of
their flesh; it is worthy of remark that while we lived principally on
the flesh of this anamal we were much more healthy strong and more
fleshey than we had been since we left the Buffaloe country. for my own
part I have become so perfectly reconciled to the dog that I think it
an agreeable food and would prefer it vastly to lean Venison or Elk. a
small Crow, the blue crested Corvus and the smaller corvus with a white
brest, the little brown ren, a large brown sparrow, the bald Eagle and
the beatifull Buzzard of the columbia still continue with us.- Sent
Sergt. Gass and George Shannon to the saltmakers who are somewhere on
the coast to the S. W. of us, to enquire after Willard and Wiser who
have not yet returned. Reubin Fields Collins and Pots the hunters who
set out on the 26th Ulto. returned this evening after dark. they
reported that they had been about 15 Miles up the river at the head of
the bay just below us and had hunted the country from thence down on
the East side of the river, even to a considerable distance from it and
had proved unsuccessful) having killed one deer and a few fowls, barely
as much as subsisted them. this reminded us of the necessity of taking
time by the forelock, and keep out several parties while we have yet a
little meat beforehand.I gave the Chief Comowooll a pare of sattin
breechies with which he appeared much pleased.

[Clark, January 3, 1806]
January 3rd Friday 1806
The Sun rose fair this morning for the first time for Six weeks past,
the Clouds Soon obscure it from our view, and a Shower of rain
Suckceededlast night we had Sharp lightening a hard thunder Suckceeded
with heavy Showers of hail, and rain, which Continud with intervales of
fair moon Shine dureing the night. Sent out Sergt. Gass & 2 men to the
Salt makers with a vew to know what is the Cause of the delay of 2 of
our party Willard & Wiser who we are uneasy about, as they were to have
been back 6 days ago.

[Clark, January 3, 1806]
Friday the 3rd January 1806
At 11 A. m. we were visited by our near neighbour Chief (or Tia) Co mo
wool alias Conia and Six Clat sops. they brought for Sale Some roots
berries and 3 Dogs also a Small quantity of fresh blubber. this blubber
they informed us they had obtained from their neighbours the Cal la mox
who inhabit the coast to the S. E near one of their Villages a Whale
had recently perished. this blubber the Indians eat and esteem it
excellent food. our party from necescity have been obliged to Subsist
Some length of time on dogs have now become extreamly fond of their
flesh; it is worthey of remark that while we lived principally on the
flesh of this animal we wer much more helthy Strong and more fleshey
then we have been Sence we left the Buffalow Country. as for my own
part I have not become reconsiled to the taste of this animal as yet. a
Small Crow, the blue Crested Corvus and the Smaller Corvus with a white
breast, the little brown ren, and a large brown Sparrow, the bald
Eagle, and the butifull Buzzard of the Columbia Still Continue with us,
Send Sarjt. Gass and G. Shannon to the Salt makers who are on the Sea
Coast to the S, W. of us, to enquire after Willard & Wiser who have not
yet returned. R. Field, potts & Collins the hunters who Set out on the
28th ulto. returned this evening after dark. they reported that they
had been about 15 miles up the river which falls into Meriwethers Bay
to the East of us, and had hunted the Country a considerable distance
to East, and had proved unsucksesfull haveing killed one Deer and a
fiew fowls, bearly as much as Subsisted them. this reminded us of the
necessity of takeing time by the forelock, and keep out Several parties
while we have yet a little meat beforehand. Capt Lewis gave the Cheif
Cania a par of Sattin breechies with which he appeared much pleased.

[Lewis, January 4, 1806]
Saturday January 4th 1806.
Comowooll and the Clatsops who visited us yesterday left us in the
evening. These people the Chinnooks and others residing in this
neighbourhood and speaking the same language have been very friendly to
us; they appear to be a mild inoffensive people but will pilfer if they
have an opportuny to do so where they conceive themselves not liable to
detection. they are great higlers in trade and if they conceive you
anxious to purchase will be a whole day bargaining for a handfull of
roots; this I should have thought proceeded from their want of
knowledge of the comparitive value of articles of merchandize and the
fear of being cheated, did I not find that they invariably refuse the
price first offered them and afterwards very frequently accept a
smaller quantity of the same article; in order to satisfy myself on
this subject I once offered a Chinnook my watch two knives and a
considerable quantity of beads for a small inferior sea Otter's skin
which I did not much want, he immediately conceived it of great value,
and refused to barter except I would double the quantity of beads; the
next day with a great deal of importunity on his part I received the
skin in exchange for a few strans of the same beads he had refused the
day before. I therefore believe this trait in their character proceeds
from an avaricious all grasping disposition. in this rispect they
differ from all Indians I ever became acquainted with, for their
dispositions invariably lead them to give whatever they are possessed
off no matter how usefull or valuable, for a bauble which pleases their
fancy, without consulting it's usefullness or value. nothing
interesting occurred today, or more so, than our wappetoe being all
exhausted.

[Clark, January 4, 1806]
Saturday 4th January 1806
Comowool and the Clatsops who visited us yesterday left us in the
morning. Those people the Chinnook and others resideing in this
neighbourhood and Speaking the Same language have been very friendly to
us; they appear to be a mild inoffensive people but will pilfer if they
have an oppertunity to do So when they Conceive themselves not liable
to detection. they are great higlers in trade and if they Conceive you
anxious to purchase will be a whole day bargaining for a hand full of
roots; this I Should have thought proceeded from their want of
Knowledge of the Comparitive value of articles of merchindize and the
fear of being Cheated, did I not find that they invariably refuse the
price first offered them and afterwards very frequently accept a
Smaller quantity of the Same article; in order to Satisfy myself on
this point, I once offered a Clatsop man my watch a knife, a Dollar of
the Coin of U State and hand full of beeds, for a Small Sea otter Skin,
which I did not much want, he immediately Conceived it of great value,
and refused to Sell unless I would give as maney more beads; the next
day with a great deel of importunity on his part we receved the Skin in
exchange for a fiew Strans of the Same beeds he had refused the day
before. I therefore beleive this treat in their Charector proceeds from
an avericious all grasping dis-position. in this respect they differ
from all Indians I ever became acquainted with, for their dispositions
invariably lead them to give what ever they are possessed off no matter
how usefull or valueable, for a bauble which pleases their fancy,
without Consulting its usefullness or value. nothing occured to day, or
more So, than our wappato being all exhausted.

[Lewis, January 5, 1806]
Sunday January 5th 1806.
At 5 P.M. Willard and Wiser returned, they had not been lost as we
apprehended. they informed us that it was not untill the fifth day
after leaving the Fort that they could find a convenient place for
making salt; that they had at length established themselves on the
coast about 15 Miles S. W. from this, near the lodge of some Killamuck
families; that the Indians were very friendly and had given them a
considerable quantity of the blubber of a whale which perished on the
coast some distance S. E. of them; part of this blubber they brought
with them, it was white & not unlike the fat of Poark, tho the texture
was more spongey and somewhat coarser. I had a part of it cooked and
found it very pallitable and tender, it resembled the beaver or the dog
in flavour. it may appear somewhat extraordinary tho it is a fact that
the flesh of the beaver and dog possess a very great affinity in point
of flavour. These lads also informed us that J. Fields, Bratton and
Gibson (the Salt makers) had with their assistance erected a
comfortable camp killed an Elk and several deer and secured a good
stock of meat; they commenced the making of salt and found that they
could obtain from 3 quarts to a gallon a day; they brought with them a
specemine of the salt of about a gallon, we found it excellent, fine,
strong, & white; this was a great treat to myself and most of the
party, having not had any since the 20th ultmo.; I say most of the
party, for my friend Capt. Clark declares it to be a mear matter of
indifference with him whether he uses it or not; for myself I must
confess I felt a considerable inconvenience from the want of it; the
want of bread I consider as trivial provided, I get fat meat, for as to
the species of meat I am not very particular, the flesh of the dog the
horse and the wolf, having from habit become equally formiliar with any
other, and I have learned to think that if the chord be sufficiently
strong, which binds the soul and boddy together, it dose not so much
matter about the materials which compose it. Colter also returned this
evening unsuccessfull from the chase, having been absent since the 1st
Inst.- Capt. Clark determined this evening to set out early tomorrow
with two canoes and 12 men in quest of the whale, or at all events to
purchase from the Indians a parcel of the blubber, for this purpose he
prepared a small assortment of merchandize to take with him.

[Clark, January 5, 1806]
Sunday 5th of January 1806
At 5 p.m.Willard and Wiser returned, they had not been lost as we
expected. they informd us that it was not untill the 5th day after
leaveing the fort, that they Could find a Convenient place for makeing
Salt; that they had at length established themselves on the Sea Coast
about 15 miles S. W. from this, near the houses of Some Clat Sop & Kil
a mox families; that the Indians were very friendly and had given them
a considerable quantity of the blubber of the whale which perished on
the Coast Some distance S. E. of them, it was white and not unlike the
fat of Pork, tho the texture was more Spungey and Somewhat Coarser. we
had part of it Cooked and found it very pallitable and tender, it
resembles the beaver in flavour. those men also informed us that the
Salt makers with their assistance had erected a Comfortable Camp, had
killed an Elk and Several Deer and Secured a good Stock of Meat; they
Commenced the makeing of Salt and found that they Could make from 3
quarts to a gallon a day; they brought with them a Specimen of the
Salt, of about a gallon, we found it excellent white & fine, but not So
Strong as the rock Salt or that made in Kentucky or the Western parts
of the U, States- this Salt was a great treat to most of the party,
haveing not had any Since the 20th ulto. as to my Self I care but
little whether I have any with my meat or not; provided the meat fat,
haveing from habit become entirely cearless about my diat, and I have
learned to think that if the Cord be Sufficiently Strong which binds
the Soul and boddy together, it does not So much matter about the
materials which Compose it.

Colter returned this evening unsecksessfull from the Chase, haveing
been absent since the 1st inst.

I determine to Set out early tomorrow with two canoes & 12 men in quest
of the whale, or at all events to purchase from the indians a parcel of
the blubber, for this purpose I made up a Small assortment of
merchindize, and directed the men to hold themselves in readiness &c.

[Lewis, January 6, 1806]
Monday January 6th 1806.
Capt Clark set out after an early breakfast with the party in two
canoes as had been concerted the last evening; Charbono and his Indian
woman were also of the party; the Indian woman was very impotunate to
be permited to go, and was therefore indulged; she observed that she
had traveled a long way with us to see the great waters, and that now
that monstrous fish was also to be seen, she thought it very hard she
could not be permitted to see either (she had never yet been to the
Ocean).

The Clatsops, Chinnooks, Killamucks &c. are very loquacious and
inquisitive; they possess good memories and have repeated to us the
names capasities of the vessels &c of many traders and others who have
visited the mouth of this river; they are generally low in stature,
proportionably small, reather lighter complected and much more illy
formed than the Indians of the Missouri and those of our frontier; they
are generally cheerfull but never gay. with us their conversation
generally turns upon the subjects of trade, smoking, eating or their
women; about the latter they speak without reserve in their presents,
of their every part, and of the most formiliar connection. they do not
hold the virtue of their women in high estimation, and will even
prostitute their wives and daughters for a fishinghook or a stran of
beads. in common with other savage nations they make their women
perform every species of domestic drudgery. but in almost every species
of this drudgery the men also participate. their women are also
compelled to geather roots, and assist them in taking fish, which
articles form much the greatest part of their subsistance;
notwithstanding the survile manner in which they treat their women they
pay much more rispect to their judgment and oppinions in many rispects
than most indian nations; their women are permitted to speak freely
before them, and sometimes appear to command with a tone of authority;
they generally consult them in their traffic and act in conformity to
their opinions. I think it may be established as a general maxim that
those nations treat their old people and women with most differrence
and rispect where they subsist principally on such articles that these
can participate with the men in obtaining them; and that, that part of
the community are treated with.least attention, when the act of
procuring subsistence devolves intirely on the men in the vigor of
life. It appears to me that nature has been much more deficient in her
filial tie than in any other of the strong affections of the human
heart, and therefore think, our old men equally with our women indebted
to civilization for their ease and comfort. Among the Siouxs,
Assinniboins and others on the Missouri who subsist by hunting it is a
custom when a person of either sex becomes so old and infurm that they
are unable to travel on foot from camp to camp as they rome in surch of
subsistance, for the children or near relations of such person to leave
them without compunction or remose; on those occasions they usually
place within their reach a small peace of meat and a platter of water,
telling the poor old superannuated wretch for his consolation, that he
or she had lived long enough, that it was time they should dye and go
to their relations who can afford to take care of them much better than
they could. I am informed that this custom prevails even among the
Minetares Arwerharmays and Recares when attended by their old people on
their hunting excurtions; but in justice to these people I must observe
that it appeared to me at their vilages, that they provided tolerably
well for their aged persons, and several of their feasts appear to have
principally for their object a contribution for their aged and infirm
persons.

This day I overhalled our merchandize and dryed it by the fire, found
it all damp; we have not been able to keep anything dry for many days
together since we arrived in this neighbourhood, the humidity of the
air has been so excessively great. our merchandize is reduced to a mear
handfull, and our comfort during our return the next year much depends
on it, it is therefore almost unnecessary to add that we much regret
the reduced state of this fund.

[Clark, January 6, 1806]
2 3 4 5 & all Day
6t of January 1805 all last night rained without intermition, & the
morning. I sat out with 12 men in 2 Canoes to around thro the bay and
up a Creek to an old landing at which place the Indians have a roade
across thro Shashes West I landed made the Canoes fast and Set out up
the Cree on a road passed thro 3 Stashes to a pond, then up & around th
bend along a bad thick way, took an Indian path which took us to a
Creek which runs into the Sand bay at which place we found a Canoe
which took over 3 men at a time crossed and on the top of a rise Saw
Elk prosued & Killed one and encamped at the forks of a Creek the West
Eate th Elk all up. a fine Butifull moon Shining night unto _____, Swan
Geese, Brand &c.

[Clark, January 6, 1806]
Monday 6th of January 1806
The last evening Shabono and his Indian woman was very impatient to be
permitted to go with me, and was therefore indulged; She observed that
She had traveled a long way with us to See the great waters, and that
now that monstrous fish was also to be Seen, She thought it verry hard
that She Could not be permitted to See either (She had never yet been
to the Ocian). after an early brackfast I Set out with two Canoes down
the Ne tel R into Meriwether Bay with a view to proced on to the
Clatsop town, and hire a guide to conduct me through the Creeks which I
had every reason to beleeve Comunicated both with the Bay and a Small
river near to which our men were making Salt. Soon after I arrived in
the Bay the wind Sprung up from the N. W and blew So hard and raised
the waves so high that we were obliged to put into a Small Creek Short
of the Village. finding I could not proceed on to the Village in Safty,
I deturmined to assend this Creek as high as the Canoes would go; which
from its directions must be near the open lands in which I had been on
the 10th ulto., and leave the Canoes and proceed on by land. at the
distance of about 3 miles up this Creek I observed Some high open land,
at which place a road Set out and had every appearance of a portage,
here I landed drew up the Canoes and Set out by land, proceeded on
through 3 deep Slashes to a pond about a mile in length and 200 yards
wide, kept up this pond leaving it to the right, and passing the head
to a Creek which we Could not Cross, this Creek is the one which I
rafted on the 8th & 9 ultimo. and at no great distance from where I
crossed in Cus ca lars Canoe on the 10th ulto. to which place I
expected a find a canoe, we proceeded on and found a Small Canoe at the
place I expected, calculated to Carry 3 men, we crossed and from the
top of a ridge in the Prarie we Saw a large gange of Elk feeding about
2 miles below on our direction. I divided the party So as to be Certain
of an elk, Several Shot were fired only one Elk fell, I had this Elk
butchered and carried to a Creak in advance at which place I intended
to encamp, two other Elk were badly Shot, but as it was nearly dark we
Could not pursue them, we proceeded on to the forks of the Creek which
we had just Crossed turning around to the S W. and meeting one of equal
Size from the South, the two makeing a little river 70 yards wide which
falls into the Ocian near the 3 Clat Sop houses which I visited on the
9th ulto. in the forks of this Creek we found Some drift pine which had
been left on the Shore by the tide of which we made fires. the evening
a butifull Clear moon Shiney night, and the 1st fair night which we
have had for 2 months

[Lewis, January 7, 1806]
Monday January 7th 1806.
Last evening Drewyer visited his traps and caught a beaver and an
otter; the beaver was large and fat we have therefore fared sumptuously
today; this we consider a great prize for another reason, it being a
full grown beaver was well supplyed with the materials for making bate
with which to catch others. this bate when properly prepared will
intice the beaver to visit it as far as he can smell it, and this I
think may be safely stated at a mile, their sense of smelling being
very accute. To prepare beaver bate, the castor or bark stone is taken
as the base, this is gently pressed out of the bladderlike bag which
contains it, into a phiol of 4 ounces with a wide mouth; if you have
them you will put from four to six stone in a phiol of that capacity,
to this you will add half a nutmeg, a douzen or 15 grains of cloves and
thirty grains of cinimon finely pulverized, stir them well together and
then add as much ardent sperits to the composition as will reduce it
the consistency mustard prepared for the table; when thus prepared it
resembles mustard precisely to all appearance. when you cannot procure
a phiol a bottle made of horn or a tight earthen vessel will answer, in
all cases it must be excluded from the air or it will soon loose it's
virtue; it is fit for uce immediately it is prepared but becomes much
stronger and better in about four or five days and will keep for months
provided it be perfectly secluded from the air. when cloves are not to
be had use double the quantity of Allspice, and when no spice can be
obtained use the bark of the root of sausafras; when sperits cannot be
had use oil stone of the beaver adding mearly a sufficient quantity to
moisten the other materials, or reduce it to a stif past. it appears to
me that the principal uce of the spices is only to give a variety to
the scent of the bark stone and if so the mace vineller and other
sweetsmelling spices might be employed with equal advantage. The male
beaver has six stones, two which contain a substance much like finely
pulvarized bark of a pale yellow colour and not unlike tanner's ooz in
smell, these are called the bark stones or castors; two others, which
like the bark stone resemble small bladders, contain a pure oil of a
strong rank disagreeable smell, and not unlike train oil, these are
called the oil stones; and 2 others of generation. the Barkstones are
about two inches in length, the others somewhat smaller all are of a
long oval form; and lye in a bunch together between the skin and the
root of the tail, beneath or behind the fundament with which they are
closely connected and seem to communicate. the pride of the female lyes
on the inner side much like those of the hog. they have no further
parts of generation that I can perceive and therefore beleive that like
the birds they copulate with the extremity of the gut. The female have
from two to four young ones at a birth and bring fourth once a year
only, which usually happens about the latter end of may and begining of
June. at this stage she is said to drive the male from the lodge, who
would otherwise destroy the young.- dryed our lodge and had it put away
under shelter; this is the first day during which we have had no rain
since we arrived at this place. nothing extraordinary happened today.

[Clark, January 7, 1806]
Jany 7th Tuesday 1806
Set out at Day light, porceded up the Creek about 2 mile and crossed on
a tree trunk the Salt makers have fallen across, then proceeded on to
the Ocean 3/4 mile & proceded up 3 miles to the mouth of Colimex River
about 80 or 100 yds wide verry rapid & Cuts its banks, here we found an
old Village of 3 houses, one only inhabited by one familey, I gave the
man a fish hook to put the party across, on the bank found a Skeet fish
which had been lef by the tide proceded on 2 miles on the bank opposit
a kind of bay the river Cross to the Sea Cost to 2 Inds Indians Lodges
at which place I found our Salt makers near the foot of a mountain
which form the Shore. Brackfast and hirired an Indian to pilot me to
the Ca le mix nation where the whale is for which I gave a file, we
proceded on the Stone under a high hill on our right bluff. Soft Stone
Sees verry high, Several parts of this hill recently Sliped in, about
3/4 of a mile abov the Houses Saw a Canoe in which the Dead was buried
at 21/2 miles assended a Steep mountain, as Steep at it is possible
places for 1500 feet we hauled our Selves up by the assistence of the
bushes if one had Given way we must have fallen a great distant the
Steepest worst & highest mountain I ever assended I think it at least
1500 feet highr than the Sea imidiately under on the riht. we met 14
Indians loaded with blubber proceded on thro an unusual bad way falling
timber bendig under logs &c. and encamped on a Creek which runs to my
left find Day and night, the timber Spruc White Cedar & &.

[Clark, January 7, 1806]
Tuesday 7th of January 1806
Some frost this morning. It may appear Somewhat incrediable, but So it
is that the Elk which was killed last evening was eaten except about 8
pounds, which I directed to be taken along with the Skin, I proceded up
the South fork of the Creek about 2 miles and crossed on a pine tree
which had been fallen by the Saltmakers on their first going out, on
this tree we crossed the deepest of the water and waded on the opposit
Side for 30 yards, from thence to the ocian 3/4 of a mile through a
Continuation of open ridgey Prarie, here the Coast is Sandy, we
proceeded on the Sandy beech nearly South for 3 miles to the mouth of
butifull river with bold and rapid Current of 85 yards wide and 3 feet
deep in the Shallowest place, a Short distance up this river on the N E
Side is the remains of an old village of Clatsops. I entered a house
where I found a Man 2 Womn & 3 Children, they appeared retchedly pore &
dirty, I hired the man to Set us across the River which I call after
the Nation Clat Sop river for which I gave 2 fishing hooks- at this
place the Creek over which I crossed on a tree passes within 100 yards
of the Clat Sop river over which the nativs have a portage which
affords them an easy Communication with the villages near point adams,
and at the mouth of the Creek, on which we lay last night. in walking
on the Sand after crossing the river I Saw a Singular Species of fish
which I had never before Seen one of the men Call this fish a Skaite,
it is properly a Thornback. I proceeded on about 2 miles to near the
base of high Mountain where I found our Salt makers, and with them
Sergt. Gass, Geo. Shannon was out in the woods assisting Jo Field and
gibson to kill Some meat, the Salt makers had made a neet Close Camp,
Convenient to wood Salt water and the fresh water of the Clat Sop river
which at this place was within 100 paces of the Ocian they wer also
Situated near 4 houses of Clatsops & Killamox, who they informed me had
been verry kind and attentive to them. I hired a young Indian to pilot
me to the whale for which Service I gave him a file in hand and
promised Several other Small articles on my return, left Sergt. Gass
and one man of my party Werner to make Salt & permited Bratten to
accompany me, we proceeded on the round Slipery Stones under a high
hill which projected into the ocian about 4 miles further than the
direction of the Coast. after walking for 21/2 miles on the Stones my
guide made a Sudin halt, pointed to the top of the mountain and uttered
the word Pe Shack which means bad, and made Signs that we could not
proceed any further on the rocks, but must pass over that mountain, I
hesitated a moment & view this emence mountain the top of which was
obscured in the clouds, and the assent appeard. to be almost
perpindecular; as the Small Indian parth allong which they had brought
emence loads but a fiew hours before, led up this mountain and appeared
to assend in a Sideling direction, I thought more than probable that
the assent might be torerably easy and therefore proceeded on, I soon
found that the ____ become much worst as I assended, and at one place
we were obliged to Support and draw our Selves up by the bushes & roots
for near 100 feet, and after about 2 hours labour and fatigue we
reached the top of this high mountain, from the top of which I looked
down with estonishment to behold the hight which we had assended, which
appeared to be 10 or 12 hundred feet up a mountain which appeared to be
almost perpindicular, here we met 14 Indians men and women loaded with
the oil & Blubber of the whale. In the face of this tremendeous
precipic imediately below us, there is a Strater of white earth (which
my guide informed me) the neighbouring indians use to paint themselves,
and which appears to me to resemble the earth of which the French
Porcelain is made; I am confident that this earth Contains argill, but
whether it also Contains Silex or magnesia, or either of those earths
in a proper perpotion I am unable to deturmine. we left the top of the
precipice and proceeded on a bad road and encamped on a Small run passin
g to the left. all much fatiagued

[Lewis, January 8, 1806]
Tuesday January 8th 1806.
Our meat is begining to become scarse; sent Drewyer and Collins to hunt
this morning. the guard duty being hard on the men who now remain in
the fort I have for their relief since the departure of Capt. Clark
made the Cooks mount guard. Sergt. Gass and Shannon have not yet
returned, nor can I immajen what is the cause of their detention. In
consequence of the clouds this evening I lost my P.M. observation for
Equal Altitudes, and from the same cause have not been able to take a
single observation since we have been at this place. nothing
extraordinary happened today.

The Clatsops Chinnooks and others inhabiting the coast and country in
this neighbourhood, are excessively fond of smoking tobacco. in the act
of smoking they appear to swallow it as they dran it from the pipe, and
for many draughts together you will not perceive the smoke which they
take from the pipe; in the same manner also they inhale it in their
lungs untill they become surcharged with this vapour when they puff it
out to a great distance through their nostils and mouth; I have no
doubt the smoke of the tobacco in this manner becomes much more
intoxicating and that they do possess themselves of all it's virtues in
their fullest extent; they freequently give us sounding proofs of it's
creating a dismorallity of order in the abdomen, nor are those light
matters thought indelicate in either sex, but all take the liberty of
obeying the dictates of nature without reserve. these people do not
appear to know the uce of sperituous liquors, they never having once
asked us for it; I presume therefore that the traders who visit them
have never indulged them with the uce of it; from what ever cause this
may proceede, it is a very fortunate occurrence, as well for the
natives themselves, as for the quiet and safety of thos whites who
visit them.

[Clark, January 8, 1806]
Jany 8 Wedned
Set out at Day a fine morning wind hard from S. E at 11/2 miles arived
at a Open where I had a view of the Seas Coast for a long Distance
rocks in every direction. Struck a branch and come down to the Sea at
which place an old village between 2 Creeks of the Colemix Nation which
inhabits this Coast, grave yard deposed of in Canoes in which the
bodies are laid in boxes in the Canoe, Paddles &c thos poople must use
thos Canoes in the higher Seas of which then ever I Saw on a Cost
ruding Countrey Crossed 3 points rocks great Distanc in the Sea, hill
Sides Sliping from emins ravins which appears to _____ proceeded on to
the mouth of a Creek about 80 yards wide at which Place I saw 5 Lodges
of Indian of the Ca la mix nation, boiling whale in a trough of about
20 gallons with hot Stones, and the oyle they put into a Canoe I
proceded on a Short distance to the whales which was nothing more than
the Sceleton, of 105 feet long, we took out a few bones and returned to
the Cabins at the mouth of the Creek, and attempted to trade with thos
people who I found Close and Capricious, would not trade the Smallest
piece except they thought they got an advantage of the bargain, their
disposition is averitious, & independant in trade, they offered to
trade for Elk of which we had not I purchased some oile and about 120 w
of Blubber after rendered, finding they would not trade I Deturmined to
return home with what we have The Houses of these people appear
temporary a ridge pole on 2 forks Supported a Certain number of Split
boards of the red Cedar & pine, Set on the end the gable ends of the
Same materials and Calculated for 2 families first, The Dress and
appearenc of the nativs as also the language is procisely that of the
Clopsots & Chinnooks, those people Save their oile in bladder Guts &c.

Their food is principally fish that is thrown on the Shores by the Seas
& left by the tide, This Cost is rockey, the mountains high & rugged,
They inform me that their nation lives in 5 villages to the S E of this
place at the mouths of Creek in which they catch Samn. in the Season, I
got of those people a few roots Some Sturgeon whale-____ &. They Call a
whale E cu-la a Creek Shu man, they have Some fiew Sea ortter for which
they ask Such prices I could not purchase any of them

Th party much fatigued in crossing 1 mountain & 4 high Points Steep &
Slipery, also Stony Beach Slippery and tiresom The high tide obliged me
to delay untill late before the tide put out, I Shot a raven & a gul
with my Small riffle which Suppised these people a little They are fond
of blue & white large beed only, files & fish Hooks which are large-
after Diner we Set out Crossed the Creek in a Small Canoe The tide out
and Encamped on the opposit Side, I was asked for ferrage and paid a
pin, one hut on the Side in which I Camped & Village a Short distance
above which I did not See last night, all the men came over & Smoked
with me, about bed time I herd a hollowing on the opposit Side of the
river which allarnied all the Indian men about me, they run across the
Creek, I Suspected perhaps Some of my party was over after the Squars,
by exemening found that McNeal was not in Camp, my guide who Staid with
me told me Some body throat was Cut. I emediately Sent Serjt Pryor & 2
men across for McNeal, they Soon returned haveing met the person I was
anxious to find out the Cause of the allarm, McNeal Said that a man
envited him to go across and get Some fish, locked arms of which he
Contd to hold he took him into a lodge and the woman gave him a Small
piec the man then invited him to another, the woman of the lodge puled
his blanket, & Sent out a Squar to hollow across, to inform of
Something which aid. McNeal I Sent over Sergt. Pryor to Know the Cause
of the allarm which he was informed that a Plot was laid to kill McNeal
for his Blanket & Clothes by this Indian who was from another Villg at
Some distance, and that She had attempted to Stop McNeal & findeing She
Could not that She then allarmed the men, Several of the mans Band was
with me who imedeately Cleared out, 2 men Came over & Slept at my feet.
I kept a guard & Sentinel all night a fair night wind blew from S. E.
during the evening I acquired all the information possiable respecting
the Coast to the S. E. got the name of many nations & the Nos. of their
houses, a map of the Coast in their way. I am very pore & weak for want
of Sufficient food and fear much that I shall require more assistance
to get back than I had to get to this place. a deturmined purcistance
will as it has done carry me through

[Clark, January 8, 1806]
Wednesday 8th January 1805
The last night proved fair and Cold wind hard from the S. E. we Set out
early and proceeded to the top of the mountain next to the which is
much the highest part and that part faceing the Sea is open, from this
point I beheld the grandest and most pleasing prospects which my eyes
ever surveyed, in my frount a boundless Ocean; to the N. and N. E. the
coast as as far as my sight Could be extended, the Seas rageing with
emence wave and brakeing with great force from the rocks of Cape
Disapointment as far as I could See to the N. W. The Clatsops Chinnooks
and other villagers on each Side of the Columbia river and in the
Praries below me, the meanderings of 3 handsom Streams heading in Small
lakes at the foot the high Country; The Columbia River for a Some
distance up, with its Bays and Small rivers and on the other Side I
have a view of the Coast for an emence distance to the S. E. by S. the
nitches and points of high land which forms this Corse for a long ways
aded to the inoumerable rocks of emence Sise out at a great distance
from the Shore and against which the Seas brak with great force gives
this Coast a most romantic appearance. from this point of View my guide
pointed to a village at the mouth of a Small river near which place he
Said the whale was, he also pointed to 4 other places where the
princpal Villages of the Kil la mox were Situated, I could plainly See
the houses of 2 of those Villeges & the Smoke of a 3rd which was two
far of for me to disern with my naked eye- after taking the Courses and
computed the Distances in my own mind, I proceeded on down a Steep
decent to a Single house the remains of an old Kil a mox Town in a
nitch imediately on the Sea Coast, at which place great no. of eregular
rocks are out and the waves comes in with great force. Near this old
Town I observed large Canoes of the neetest kind on the ground Some of
which appeared nearly decayed others quit Sound, I examoned those
Canoes and found they were the repository of the dead- This Custom of
Secureing the Dead differs a little from the Chinnooks. the Kil a mox
Secure the dead bodies in an oblong box of Plank, which is placed in an
open Canoe resting on the ground, in which is put a paddle and Sundery
other articles the property of the disceased. The Coast in the
neighbourhood of this old village is slipping from the Sides of the
high hills, in emence masses; fifty or a hundred acres at a time give
way and a great proportion of an instant precipitated into the Ocean.
those hills and mountains are principally composed of a yellow Clay;
their Slipping off or Spliting assunder at this time is no doubt Caused
by the incessant rains which has fallen within the last two months. the
mountans Covered with a verry heavy Croth of pine & furr, also the
white Cedar or arbor vita and a Small proportion of the black alder,
this alder grows to the hight of Sixty or Seventy feet and from 2 to 3
feet in diamiter. Some Species of pine on the top of the Point of View
rise to the emmence hight of 210 feet and from 8 to 12 feet in
diameter, and are perfectly Sound and Solid. Wind hard from the S. E
and See looked ____ in the after part of the Day breaking with great
force against the Scattering rocks at Some distance from Shore, and the
ruged rockey points under which we wer obleged to pass and if we had
unfortunately made one false Stet we Should eneviateably have fallen
into the Sea and dashed against the rocks in an instant, fortunately we
passed over 3 of those dismal points and arived on a butifull Sand
Shore on which we Continued for 2 miles, Crossed a Creek 80 yards near
5 Cabins, and proceeded to the place the whale had perished, found only
the Skelleton of this monster on the Sand between 2 of the villages of
the Kil a mox nation; the Whale was already pillaged of every valuable
part by the Kil a mox Inds. in the vecinity of whose village's it lay
on the Strand where the waves and tide had driven up & left it. this
Skeleton measured 105 feet. I returned to the village of 5 Cabins on
the Creek which I shall call E co-la or whale Creek, found the nativs
busily engaged boiling the blubber, which they performed in a large
Squar wooden trought by means of hot Stones; the oil when extracted was
Secured in bladders and the Guts of the whale; the blubber from which
the oil was only partially extracted by this process, was laid by in
their Cabins in large flickes for use; those flickes they usially
expose to the fire on a wooden Spit untill it is prutty well wormed
through and then eate it either alone or with roots of the rush, Shaw
na tdk we or diped in the oil. The Kil a mox although they possessed
large quantities of this blubber and oil were so prenurious that they
disposed of it with great reluctiance and in Small quantities only;
insomuch that my utmost exertion aided by the party with the Small
Stock of merchindize I had taken with me were not able to precure more
blubber than about 300 wt. and a fiew gallons of oil; Small as this
Stock is I prise it highly; and thank providence for directing the
whale to us; and think him much more kind to us than he was to jonah,
having Sent this monster to be Swallowed by us in Sted of Swallowing of
us as jonah's did. I recrossed E co la Creek and Encamped on the bank
at which place we observed an ebundance of fine wood the Indian men
followed me for the purpose of Smokeing. I enquired of those people as
well as I could by Signs the Situation, mode of liveing & Strength of
their nation They informed me that the bulk of their nation lived in 3
large villages Still further along the Sea coast to the S, S, W. at the
enterence Of 3 Creek which fell into a bay, and that other houses were
Scattered about on the Coast, Bay and on a Small river which fell into
the Bay in which they Cought Salmon, and from this Creek (which I call
Kil a mox River) they crossed over to the Wappato I. on the
Shock-ah-lil com (which is the Indian name for the Columbia river) and
purchased Wappato &c. that the nation was once verry large and that
they had a great maney houses, In Salmon Season they Cought great
numbers of that fish in the Small Creeks, when the Salmon was Scerce
they found Sturgion and a variety of other fish thrown up by the waves
and left by the tide which was verry fine, Elk was plenty in the
mountains, but they Could not Kill maney of them with their arrows. The
Kil d mox in their habits Customs manners dress & language differ but
little from the Clatsops, Chinnooks and others in this neighbourhood
are of the Same form of those of the Clatsops with a Dore at each end &
two fire places i, e the house is double as long as wide and divided
into 2 equal parts with a post in the middle Supporting the ridge pole,
and in the middle of each of those divisions they make their fires,
dotes Small & houses Sunk 5 feet

[Lewis, January 9, 1806]
Friday January 9th 1806.
Our men are now very much engaged in dressing Elk and Deer skins for
mockersons and cloathing. the deer are extreemly scarce in this
neighbourhood, some are to be found near the praries and open grounds
along the coast. this evening we heard seven guns in quick succession
after each other, they appeared to be on the Creek to the South of us
and several miles distant; I expect that the hunters Drewyer and
Collins have fallen in with a gang of Elk. some marrow bones and a
little fresh meat would be exceptable; I have been living for two days
past on poor dryed Elk, or jurk as the hunters term it.

The Clatsops Chinnooks &c. bury their dead in their canoes. for this
purpose four pieces of split timber are set erect on end, and sunk a
few feet in the grown, each brace having their flat sides opposite to
each other and sufficiently far assunder to admit the width of the
canoes in which the dead are to be deposited; through each of these
perpendicular posts, at the hight of six feet a mortice is cut, through
which two bars of wood are incerted; on these cross bars a small canoe
is placed in which the body is laid after being carefully roled in a
robe of some dressed skins; a paddle is also deposited with them; a
larger canoe is now reversed, overlaying and imbracing the small one,
and resting with it's gunwals on the cross bars; one or more large mats
of rushes or flags are then roled around the canoes and the whole
securely lashed with a long cord, usually made of the bark of the Arbor
vita or white cedar. on the cross bars which support the canoes is
frequently hung or laid various articles of cloathing culinary
eutensels &c. I cannot understand them sufficiently to make any
enquiries relitive to their religeous opinions, but presume from their
depositing various articles with their dead, that they believe in a
state of future existence.

The persons who usually visit the entrance of this river for the
purpose of traffic or hunting I believe are either English or
Americans; the Indians inform us that they speak the same language with
ourselves, and give us proofs of their varacity by repeating many words
of English, as musquit, powder, shot, nife, file, damned rascal, sun of
a bitch &c. whether these traders are from Nootka sound, from some
other late establishment on this coast, or immediately from the U
States or Great Brittain, I am at a loss to determine, nor can the
Indians inform us. the Indians whom I have asked in what direction the
traders go when they depart from hence, or arrive here, always point to
the S. W. from which it is presumeable that Nootka cannot be their
destination; and as from Indian information a majority of these traders
annually visit them about the beginning of April and remain with them
six or seven Months, they cannot come immediately from Great Britain or
the U States, the distance being too great for them to go and return in
the ballance of the year. from this circumstance I am sometimes induced
to believe that there is some other establishment on the coast of
America south West of this place of which little is but yet known to
the world, or it may be perhaps on some Island in the pacific ocean
between the Continents of Asia and America to the South West of us.
This traffic on the part of the whites consists in vending, guns,
(principally old british or American musquits) powder, balls and Shot,
Copper and brass kettles, brass teakettles and coffee pots, blankets
from two to three point, scarlet and blue Cloth (coarse), plates and
strips of sheet copper and brass, large brass wire, knives, beads and
tobacco with fishinghooks buttons and some other small articles; also a
considerable quantity of Sailor's cloaths, as hats coats, trowsers and
shirts. for these they receive in return from the natives, dressed and
undressed Elkskins, skins of the sea Otter, common Otter, beaver,
common fox, spuck, and tiger cat; also dryed and pounded sammon in
baskets, and a kind of buisquit, which the natives make of roots called
by them shappelell. The natives are extravegantly fond of the most
common cheap blue and white beads, of moderate size, or such that from
50 to 70 will weigh one penneyweight. the blue is usually pefered to
the white; these beads constitute the principal circulating medium with
all the indian tribes on this river; for these beads they will dispose
any article they possess.- the beads are strung on strans of a fathom
in length and in that manner sold by the bredth or yard.-

[Clark, January 9, 1806]
January 9th Thursday 1806
a fine morning wind N E Set out at day lighte every man Some meat of
the whale and a little oile proceded on the track we Came out to a
house at a branch where we halted 1/2 an hour to rest this house is at
at place an old village has formerly been, on the Coast at the
Comencment ____ 27 foot wide 35 feet long Sunk in the ground 5 feet 2
Dotes & 2 fire places dotes 29 Ins. high & 141/4 wide handsom Steps to
decend down a post in the middle Coverede with boards Split thin an 2
feet wide, old grave in Canoes of 3 feet 8 Inches wide & 5 feet long
neetly made high at bow proceded on to the top of the hill Passing 3
bad points rockey &. from the Point Clarks Point of view Cape Disapt.
bears S. 12° E passing a Great point at 15 miles one at 40 miles rocks
out to the 1st large point from the Creek 4 points, between the 1st
large Point and 2d a point of many large rocks, Day Clouded up, I can
See a point Bearing N 5° East along way just in Sight. from Clarks View
Point to Cape Disapointment is N 20° W. To point adams &the open Slope
point is North and a Sharp point, met a party of Chinnooks going to get
whale blubber to eate & oile each of which they eate together, we also
over took Several parties of the Clot Sops loaded with imence laods of
the blubber and oile maney of those loads I with difficuelty raised,
Estonishing what custom will do. at 2 oClock we arrived at the Camp of
our Salt makers verry much fatigued, more So than I ever was before,
the Indians all proceeded on, I concluded to Stay all night, as the
party was much fatigued, and Send out 2 men which I had left here to
hunt Ducks up the little river, Jo. Fields had killed an Elk and
brought in a quarter on which we Dined he also had killed & brought in
a Deer. The Indians with the oile & bluber tole me they had to purchase
of the Ca-le nixx and would Come to the fort & Sell to us in 3 Days
time, this I incouraged, as I expect to purchase at the fort as cheep
as at the village at which I was, day proved fine. rained the greater
part of the night I went into an Indian Lodge they were pore Durty and
the house full of flees. he offered me roots which they geather on the
Sea Cost a kind of rush, of which they offered me to eate,

[Clark, January 9, 1806]
Thursday 9th of January 1806
a fine morning wind from the N. E. last night about 10 oClock while
Smokeing with the nativ's I was alarmed by a loud Srile voice from the
Cabins on the opposite Side, the Indians all run immediately across to
the village, my guide who Continued with me made Signs that Some one's
throat was Cut, by enquiry I found that one man McNeal was absent, I
imediately Sent off Sergt. N. Pryor & 4 men in quest of McNeal who they
met comeing across the Creak in great hast, and informed me that the
people were alarmed on the opposit Side at Something but what he could
not tell, a man had verry friendly envited him to go and eate in his
lodge, that the Indian had locked armes with him and went to a lodge in
which a woman gave him Some blubber, that the man envited him to
another lodge to get Something better, and the woman held him by the
blanket which he had around him another ran out and hollow'd and his
pretended friend disapeared- I emediately ordered every man to hold
themselves in a State of rediness and Sent Sergt. Pryor & 4 men to know
the cause of the alarm which was found to be a premeditated plan of the
pretended friend of McNeal to assanate for his Blanket and what fiew
articles he had about him, which was found out by a Chin nook woman who
allarmed the men of the village who were with me in time to prevent the
horred act. this man was of another band at Some distance and ran off
as Soon as he was discovered. we have now to look back and Shudder at
the dreadfull road on which we have to return of 45 miles S E of Point
adams & 35 miles from Fort Clatsop. I had the blubber & oil divided
among the party and Set out about Sunrise and returned by the Same rout
we had went out, met Several parties of men & womin of the Chinnook and
Clatsops nations, on their way to trade with the Kil a mox for blubber
and oil; on the Steep decent of the Mountain I overtook five men and
Six womin with emence loads of the Oil and blubber of the Whale, those
Indians had passed by Some rout by which we missed them as we went out
yesterday; one of the women in the act of getting down a Steep part of
the mountain her load by Some means had Sliped off her back, and She
was holding the load by a Strap which was fastened to the mat bag in
which it was in, in one hand and holding a bush by the other, as I was
in front of my party, I endeavored to relieve this woman by takeing her
load untill She Could get to a better place a little below, & to my
estonishment found the load as much as I Could lift and must exceed 100
wt. the husband of this woman who was below Soon came to her releif,
those people proceeded on with us to the Salt works, at which place we
arrived late in the evening, found them without meat, and 3 of the
Party J. Field Gibson & Shannon out hunting. as I was excessively
fatigued and my party appeared verry much so, I deturmined to Stay
untill the morning and rest our Selves a little. The Clatsops proceeded
on with their lodes- The Clatsops, Chin nooks Kil a mox &c. are verry
loquacious and inquisitive; they possess good memories and have
repeeted to us the names capasities of the Vessels &c of maney traders
and others who have visited the mouth of this river; they are generally
low in Statue, proportionably Small, reather lighter complected and
much more illy formed than the Indians of the Missouri and those of our
fronteers; they are generally Chearfull but never gay. with us their
Conversation generally turns upon the subject of trade, Smokeing,
eating or their womin; about the latter, they Speak without reserve in
their presence, of their every part, and of the most farmiliar
Connection. they do not hold the virtue of their womin in high
estimation, and will even prostitute their wives and Daughters for a
fishing hook or a Stran of beeds. in Common with other Savage nations
they make their womin perform every Species of domestic drugery; but in
almost every Species of this drugery the men also participate. their
woman are compelled to gather roots, and assist them in takeing fish;
which articles form much the greater part of their Subsistance;
notwithstanding the Survile manner in which they treat their womin they
pay much more respect to their judgement and oppinion in maney respects
than most indian nations; their womin are permited to Speak freely
before them, and Sometimes appear to command with a tone of authority;
they generally consult them in their traffic and act conformably to
their opinions.

I think it may be established as a general maxim that those nations
treat their old people and women with most defference and respect where
they Subsist principally on Such articles that these can participate
with the men in obtaining them; and that, that part of the Community
are treated with least attention, when the act of precureing
subsistance devolves intirely on the men in the vigor of life. It
appears to me that nature has been much more deficient in her filial
ties than in any others of the Strong effections of the humane heart,
and therefore think our old men equally with our woman indebted to
Sivilization for their ease and Comfort. I am told among the Sioux's,
Assinniboins and others on the Missouri who Subsist by hunting it is a
Custom when a person of either Sex becoms So old and infirm that they
are unable to travel on foot, from Camp to Camp as they rove in serch
of Subsistance, for the Children or near relations of Such person to
leave them without Compunction or remorse; on those occasions they
usially place within their reach a Small piece of meat and a platter of
water, telling the poor old Superannuated retch for their Consolation,
that he or She had lived long enough, and that it was time they Should
die and go to their relations who Can afford to take Care of them, much
better than they Could. I am informed that the Me ne tar es Ar war har
mays and Ricares when attended by their old people on their hunting
expedition prosued the Same Custom; but injustice to those people I
must observe that it appeared to me at their villages, that they
provided tolerably well for their aged persons, and Several of their
feasts appear to have principally for their object a contribution for
their aged and infirm persons. In one of the Mandan villages I Saw an
old man to whome I gave a knife and enquired his age, he Said he had
Seen more than 100 winters, and that he Should Soon go down the river
to their old village- he requested I would give him Something to
prevent the pain in his back his grand Son a Young man rebuked the old
man and Said it was not worth while, that it was time for the old man
to die. the old man occupied one Side of the fire and was furnished
with plenty of Covouring and food, and every attention appeared to be
paid him &c. Jo. Field in my absence had killed an Elk and a Deer,
brought in the Deer and half of the Elk on a part of which we Suped,
Some rain a little after dark. I visited a house near the Salt boilers
found it inhabited by 2 families, they were pore dirty and their house
Sworming with flees.-

[Lewis, January 10, 1806]
Saturday January 10th 1806.
About 10 A.M. I was visited by Tia Shah-har-war-cap and eleven of his
nation in one large canoe; these are the Cuth'-lah-mah nation who
reside first above us on the South side of the Columbia river; this is
the first time that I have seen the Chief, he was hunting when we past
his vilage on our way to this place. I gave him a medal of the smallest
size; he presented me with some indian tobacco and a basquit of
wappetoe, in return for which I gave him some thread for making a
skiming net and a small piece of tobacco. these people speak the same
language with the Chinnooks and Catsops whom they also resemble in
their dress customs manners &c. they brought some dryed salmon,
wappetoe, dogs, and mats made of rushes and flags, to barter; their
dogs and a part of their wappetoe they disposed off, an remained all
night near the fort. This morning Drewyer and Collins returned having
killed two Elk only, and one of those had died in their view over a
small lake which they had not the means of passing it being late in the
evening and has of course spoiled, as it laid with the entrals in it
all night; as the tide was going out we could not send for the elk
today, therefore ordered a party to go for it early in the morning and
George and Collins to continue their hunt; meat has now become scarce
with us.

Capt Clark returned at to P.M. this evening with the majority of the
party who accompanyed him; having left some men to assist the
saltmakers to bring in the meat of two Elk which they had killed, and
sent 2 others through by land to hunt. Capt. Clark found the whale on
the Coast about 45 Miles S. E. of Point Adams, and about 35 Miles from
Fort Clatsop by the rout he took; The whale was already pillaged of
every valuable part by the Killamucks, in the vicinity of one of whose
villages it lay on the strand where the waves and tide had driven up
and left it. this skelleton measured one hundred and five feet. Capt.
C. found the natives busily engaged in boiling the blubber, which they
performed in a large wooden trought by means of hot stones; the oil
when extracted was secured in bladders and the guts of the whale; the
blubber, from which the oil was only partially extracted by this
process, was laid by in their lodges in large fliches for uce; this
they usually expose to the fire on a wooden spit untill it is pretty
well warmed through and then eat it either alone or with the roots of
the rush, squawmash, fern wappetoe &c. The natives although they
possessed large quantities of this blubber and oil were so penurious
that they disposed of it with great reluctance and in small quantities
only; insomuch that the utmost exertions of Capt. C. and the whole
party aided by the little stock of merchandize he had taken with him
and some small articles which the men had, were not able to procure
more blubber than about 300 lb. and a few gallons of the oil; this they
have brought with them, and small as the store is, we prize it highly,
and thank providence for directing the whale to us, and think him much
more kind to us than he was jonah, having sent this monster to be
swallowed by us in stead of swallowing of us as jona's did. Capt. C.
found the road along the coast extreemly difficult of axcess, lying
over some high rough and stoney hills, one of which he discribes as
being much higher than the others, having it's base washed by the Ocean
over which it rares it's towering summit perpendicularly to the hight
of 1500 feet; from this summit Capt. C. informed me that there was a
delightfull and most extensive view of the Ocean, the coast and
adjacent country; this Mout. I have taken the liberty of naming Clark's
Mountain and point of view; it is situated about 30 M. S. E. of Point
Adams and projects about 21/2 miles into the Ocean; Killamucks river
falls in a little to the N. W. of this mountain; in the face of this
tremendious precepice there is a stra of white earth (see specimen No.
____) which the neighbouring Indians use to paint themselves, and which
appears to me to resemble the earth of which the French Porcelain is
made; I am confident this earth contains Argill, but wether it also
contains Silex or magnesia, or either of those earths in a proper
proportion I am unable to determine.- Shannon and Gass were found with
the Salt makers and ordered to return McNeal was near being
assassinated by a Killamuck Indian, but fortunately escaped in
consequence of a Chinnook woman giving information to Capt. C., the
party and Indians with them before the villain had prepaired himself to
execute his purposes. The party returned excessively fortiegued and
tired of their jaunt. Killamucks river is 85 yards wide, rappid and 3
feet deep in the shallowest part. The Killamucks in their habits
customs manners dress and language differ but little from the Clatsops
& Chinnooks. they place their dead in canoes resting on the ground
uncovered, having previously secured the dead bodies in an oblong box
of plank.

The coast in the neighbourhood of Clarks Mountain is sliping off &
falling into the Ocean in immence masses; fifty or a hundred Acres at a
time give way and a great proportion in an instant precipitated into
the Ocean. these hills and mountains are principally composed of a
yellow clay; there sliping off or spliting assunder at this time is no
doubt caused by the incessant rains which have fallen within the last
two months. the country in general as about Fort Clatsop is covered
with a very heavy growth of several species of pine & furr, also the
arbor vita or white cedar and a small proportion of the black Alder
which last sometimes grows to the hight of sixty or seventy feet, and
from two to four feet in diameter. some species of the pine rise to the
immence hight of 210 feet and are from 7 to 12 feet in diameter, and
are perfectly sound and solid.

[Clark, January 10, 1806]
Jany 10 Friday 1806
I left Sergt. Gass here and Set out at Sun rise, Crossed the little
river which I waded 85 yards wide & 3 feet Deep Swift, at which place I
Saw Several Indians one of which had 2 butifull Sea orter Skins on as a
roabe, here the Creek which I crossed at a tree and on which I camped
the 6th inst. came within 200 yds of the river & they Inds. make a
portage here, Continued on a place 3 miles Crossed this Creek in a
Small Canoe. here I expected to find Shannon and gibson with meet to
furnish the Salt makers, but did not, divided the party Sent 2 men to
my right to try and kill Elk, Soon after met Gibson & Shannon with
meat, they had killed 2 Elk 2 miles to my right, I divided the meat
between the party, and the load of 3 men whome I Send with gibson &
Shannon to help Carrey the 2 Elk to the Salt makers, and I my Self and
the party returned by the Same rout we went out to the Canoes Rd.
Frasure behaved very badly, and mutonous- he also lost his large Knife.
I Sent him back to look for his knife, with Directions to return with
the party of Serjt Gass, I proceded on, here is a portage of 1/4 of a
mile from this Creck to a branch which falls into the Bay, we proceeded
on a much bette road than we went out across a Deep Slash and found our
Canoes Safe, and Set out at Sunset, and arived at the foart, wet and
Cold at 9 oClock P.M. found a Cheif & number of Indians both Encamped
on the Shore, and at the fort of the Cath la-hur Tribe which lives at
no great distance above this back of an Island Close under the South
Side of the Columbia River

Those people Speake the Same Language of the Clotsops dress nearly
alike the men of both Cut their hair in the neck. use blankets of the
manifactory of the nativs near the falls of the Sheep Wool-fond of
brass arm bands and Check, They bring Wap-pa-to root (which is
Sagittifolia or the Common arrow head which is Cultivated by the
Chinees) to Sell.

[Clark, January 10, 1806]
Friday the 10th of January 1806
I derected Serjt. Gass to Continue with the Salt makers untill Shannon
return from hunting, and then himself and Shannon to return to the
Fort, I Set out at Sunrise with the party waded the Clat Sop river
which I found to be 85 Steps across and 3 feet deep, on the opposite
Side a Kil a mox Indian Came to and offered to Sell Some roots of which
I did not want, he had a robe made of 2 large Sea otter Skins which I
offered to purchase, but he would not part with them, we returned by
nearly the Same rout which I had Come out, at four miles, I met Gibson
& Shannon each with a load of meat, they informed me that they had
killed Elk about 2 miles off, I directed 3 men to go with the hunters
and help them pack the meat to the place they were makeing Salt, and
return to the fort with Serjt. Gass, the balance of the party took the
load of the 3 men, after crossing the 2d Creek frasure informed me that
he had lost his big knife, here we Dined, I put frasurs load on my
guide who is yet with me, and Sent him back in Serch of his knife with
directions to join the other men who were out packing meat & return to
the fort all together. I arrived at the Canoes about Sunset, the tides
was Comeing in I thought it a favourable time to go on to the fort at
which place we arrived at 10 oClock P M, found Several inidians of the
Cath'-lah-mah nation the great Chief Shahhar-wah cop who reside not far
above us on the South Side of the Columbia River, this is the first
time I have Seen the Chief, he was hunting when we passed his village
on our way to this place, we gave him a medal of the Smallest Size, he
presented me with a basquet of Wappato, in return for which I gave him
a fish hook of a large Size and Some wire, those people Speak the Same
language with the Chinnooks and Clatsops, whome they all resemble in
Dress, Custom, manners &c. they brought Some Dried Salmon, Wappato,
Dogs, and mats made of rushes & flags to barter; their Dogs and part of
their wappato they disposed of, and remained in their Camp near the
fort all night.

In my absence the hunters from the fort killed only two Elk which is
yet out in the woods. Capt. Lewis examined our Small Stock of
merchendize found Some of it wet and Dried it by the fire. Our
merchindize is reduced to a mear handfull, and our Comfort, dureing our
return next year, much depends on it, it is therefore almost
unnecessary to add that it is much reduced The nativs in this
neighbourhood are excessively fond of Smokeing tobacco. in the act of
Smokeing they appear to Swallow it as they draw it from the pipe, and
for maney draughts together you will not perceive the Smoke they take
from the pipe, in the Same manner they inhale it in their longs untill
they become Surcharged with the vapour when they puff it out to a great
distance through their norstils and mouth; I have no doubt that tobacco
Smoked in this manner becomes much more intoxicating, and that they do
possess themselves of all its virtues to the fullest extent; they
frequently give us Sounding proofs of its createing a dismorallity of
order in the abdomen, nor are those light matters thought indelicate in
either Sex, but all take the liberty of obeying the dicktates of nature
without reserve. Those people do not appear to know the use of
Speritious licquors, they never haveing once asked us for it; I prosume
therefore that the traders who visit them have never indulged them with
the use of it; of whatever Cause this may proceed, it is a verry
fortunate occurrence, as well for the nativs themselves, as for the
quiet and Safty of those whites who visit them. George Drewyer visited
this traps in my absence and caught a Beaver & a otter; the beaver was
large and fat, and Capt. L. has feested Sumptiously on it yesterday;
this we Consider as a great prize, it being a full grown beaver was
well Supplyed with the materials for makeing bate with which to Catch
others. this bate when properly prepared will entice the beaver to
visit it as far as he can Smell it, and this I think may be Safely
Stated at 1/2 a mile, their Sence of Smelling being verry accute. To
prepare beaver bate, the Caster or bark Stone is taken as the base,
this is generally pressed out of the bladder like bag which Contains
it, into a phiol of 4 ounces with a wide mouth; if you have them you
will put from 4 to 6 Stone in a phial of that Capacity, to this you
will add half a nutmeg, a Dozen or 15 grains of Cloves and 30 grains of
Sinimon finely pulverised, Stur them well together, and then add as
much ardent Sperits to the Composition as will reduce it to the
Consistancey of mustard prepared for the table, when thus prepared it
resembles mustard precisely to all appearance. When you cannot precure
a phial a bottle made of horn or a light earthern vessel will answer,
in all Cases it must be excluded from the air or it will Soon lose its
Virtue; it is fit for use imediately it is prepared but becoms much
Stronger and better in 4 or 5 days and will keep for months provided it
be purfectly Secluded from the air. when Cloves are not to be had use
double the quantity of allspice, and when no Spices can be obtained use
the bark of the root of the Sausafras; when Sperits cannot be had use
oil Stone of the beaver adding mearly a Sufficent quantity to moisten
the other materials, or reduce it to a Stiff paste. it appears to me
that the principal use of the Spices is only to give a variety to the
Scent of the bark Stone and if So the mace vineller, and other Sweet
Smelling Spices might be employd with equal advantage. The Male Beaver
has Six stones, two which Contanes a Substance much like finely
pulverised bark of a pale yellow Colour and not unlike tanner's ooz in
Smell, these are Called the bark Stones or castors; two others, which
like the bark stone resemble Small blatters, contain a pure oil of a
Strong rank disagreable Smell, and not unlike train Oil, these are
Called the Oil Stones, and two others of Generation. The bark stones
are about 2 inches in length, the others Somewhat Smaller, all are of a
long Oval form, and lye in a bunch together between the skin and the
root of the tail beneath or behind the fundiment with which they are
Closely Connected and Seam to Communicate, the pride of the female lye
on the inner Side much like those of the hog they have no further parts
of Generation that I can proceive, and therefore believe that like the
birds they Coperate with the extremity of the gut. The female have from
2 to 4 young ones at a birth and bring forth once a year only which
usially happins about the Latter end of May and beginning of June. at
this Stage She is Said to drive the Mail from the lodge, who would
otherwise distroy the young

[Lewis, January 11, 1806]
Sunday January 11th 1806.
Sent a party early this morning for the Elk which was killed on the
9th. they returned with it in the evening; Drewyer and Collins also
returned without having killed anything. this morning the Sergt. of the
guard reported the absence of our Indian Canoe, on enquiry we found
that those who came in it last evening had been negligent in securing
her and the tide in the course of the night had taken her off; we sent
a party down to the bay in surch of her, they returned unsuccessfull,
the party also who went up the river and Creek in quest of the meat
were ordered to lookout for her but were equally unsuccessfull; we
ordered a party to resume their resurches for her early tomorrow; this
will be a very considerable loss to us if we do not recover her; she is
so light that four men can carry her on their sholders a mile or more
without resting; and will carry three men and from 12 to 15 hundred
lbs. the Cuthlahmahs left us this evening on their way to the Catsops,
to whom they purpose bartering their wappetoe for the blubber and oil
of the whale, which the latter purchased for beads &c. from the
Killamucks; in this manner there is a trade continually carryed on by
the natives of the river each trading some article or other with their
neighbours above and below them; and thus articles which are vended by
the whites at the entrance of this river, find their way to the most
distant nations enhabiting it's waters.

[Clark, January 11, 1806]
Saturday 11th of January 1806
Sent a party early this morning for the Elk which was killed on the 9th
they returned with it in the evining; This morning the Serjt. of the
guard reported that our Indian Canoe had gone a Drift, on enquiry we
found that those who Came in it last evening had been negligent in
Secureing her, and the tide in Corse of the night had taken her off; we
Sent a party down to the bay in Serch of her, they returned
unsecksessfull, the party who went up the river and Creek after meat
were derected to look out for her but were equally unsecksessfull; this
will be a verry considerable loss to us if we do not recover her, She
is so light that 4 men Can Carry her on their Sholders a mile or more
without resting, and will Carry four men and from 10 to 12 hundred
pounds. The Cath IA mahs left us this evening on their way to the
Clatsops, to whome they perpose bartering their wappato for the blubber
& Oil of the whale, which the latter purchased for Beeds &c. from the
Kil a mox; in this manner there is a trade Continually Carried on by
the nativs of the river each tradeing Some articles or other with their
neighbours above and below them, and those articles which are Vended by
the whites at their enterance of this river, find their way to the most
distant nations inhabiting its waters.

[Lewis, January 12, 1806]
Monday January 12th 1806.
The men who were sent in surch of the canoe returned without being able
to find her, we therefore give her over as lost. This morning sent out
Drewyer and one man to hunt, they returned in the evening, Drewyer
having killed seven Elk; I scarcely know how we should subsist were it
not for the exertions of this excellet hunter. At 2 P.M. the ballance
of the party who had been left by Capt. C. arrived; about the same time
the two hunters also arrived who had been dispatched by Capt C. for the
purpose of hunting on the 9th inst.; they had killed nothing. We have
heretofore usually divided the meat when first killed among the four
messes into which we have divided our party leaving to each the care of
preserving and the discretion of using it, but we find that they make
such prodigal use of it when they hapen to have a tolerable stock on
hand that we have determined to adapt a different system with our
present stock of seven Elk; this is to jerk it & issue it to them in
small quantities.

[Clark, January 12, 1806]
Sunday the 12th January 1806
This morning Sent out Drewyer and one man to hunt, they returned in the
evening Drewyer haveing killed 7 Elk; I scercely know how we Should
Subsist, I beleive but badly if it was not for the exertions of this
excellent hunter; maney others also exert themselves, but not being
accquainted with the best method of finding and killing the elk and no
other wild animals is to be found in this quarter, they are
unsucksessfull in their exertions. at 2 P. M Serjt. Gass and the men I
left to assist the Salt makers in Carrying in their meat arrived also
the hunters which I directed to hunt in the point, they killed
nothing-. We have heretofore devided the meat when first killed among
the four messes, into which we have divided our party, leaveing to each
the Care of preserving and distribution of useing it; but we find that
they make such prodigal use of it when they happen to have a tolerable
Stock on hand, that we are determined to adapt a Different System with
our present stock of Seven Elk; this is to jurk it and issue it to them
in Small quantities

[Lewis, January 13, 1806]
Tuesday January 13th 1806.
This morning I took all the men who could be spared from the Fort and
set out in quest of the flesh of the seven Elk that were killed
yesterday, we found it in good order being untouched by the wolves, of
which indeed there are but few in this country; at 1 P.M. we returned
having gotten all the meat to the fort. this evening we exhausted the
last of our candles, but fortunately had taken the precaution to bring
with us moulds and wick, by means of which and some Elk's tallow in our
possession we do not yet consider ourselves destitute of this necessary
article; the Elk we have killed have a very small portion of tallow.

The traders usually arrive in this quarter, as has been before
observed, in the month of April, and remain untill October; when here
they lay at anchor in a bay within Cape Disappointment on the N. side
of the river; here they are visited by the natives in their canoes who
run along side and barter their comodities with them, their being no
houses or fortification on shore for that purpose. the nations who
repare thither are fist, those of the sea coast S. E. of the entrance
of the river, who reside in the order in which their names are
mentioned, begining at the entrance of the river (viz) The Clatsop,
Killamuck, Ne-cost, Nat-ti, Nat-chies, Tarl-che, E-slitch, You-cone and
So-see. secondly those inhabiting the N. W. coast begining at the
entrance of the river and mentioned in the same order; the Chinnook and
Chiltch the latter very numerous; and thirdly the Cath-lah-mah, and
Skil-lutes, the latter numerous and inhabiting the river from a few
miles above the marshey Islands, where the Cuth-lahmahs cease, to the
grand rappids. These last may be esteemed the principal carryers or
intermediate traders betwen the whites and the Indians of the Sea
Coast, and the E-ne-shurs, the E-chee-lutes, and the Chil-luckkit-te
quaws, who inhabit the river above, to the grand falls inclusive, and
who prepare most of the pounded fish which is brought to market. The
bay in which this trade is carryed on is spacious and commodious, and
perfectly secure from all except the S. and S. E. winds, these however
are the most prevalent and strong winds in the Winter season. fresh
water and wood are very convenient and excellent timber for refiting
and reparing vessels.

[Clark, January 13, 1806]
Monday 13th January 1806
Capt. Lewis took all the men which Could be Speared from the Fort and
Set out in quest of the flesh of the Seven Elk which were killed
yesterday they found the meat all Secure untouched by the Wolves, of
which indeed there are but fiew in this Countrey; at 1 P.M. the party
returned with the 2d and Last load of meat to the fort. this evening we
finished all last of our Candles, we brought with us, but fortunately
had taken the precaution to bring with us moulds and wick, by means of
which and Some Elk tallow in our possession we do not think our Selves
distitute of this necessary article, the Elk which have been killed
have a verry Small portion of tallow. The Traders usially arrive in
this quarter, in the month of april, and remain until October; when
here they lay at anchor in a Bay within Cape Disapointment on the N.
Side of the river; here they are visited by the nativs in their Canoes
who run along Side and barter their Comodities with them, their being
no houses or fortification on Shore for that purpose.

The nations who repare thither ar first those of the Sea Coast S. E & N
W of the enterance of the river, who reside in the order in which their
names are mentioned to the S E. the Clat Sops, Kil-a-mox, and those to
the N W. the Chin nooks, and Chiltch; and Secondly the Cath-lah-mah,
War-ki-a-cum, and Skil-lutes, the latter noumerous and inhabiting those
last may be considered or intermedeate traders between the whites and
nations on the Sea Coast, and the E-ne-churs, the E-chee-lutes, and the
Chil-luck-kitte-quaws, who inhabit the river up to the great falls
inclusive, and who prepare most of the pounded fish which is brought to
Market.

The Bay in which the trade is Carried on is Spacious and Commodious,
and perfectly Secure from all except the S. & S E Winds and those blow
but Seldom the most prevalent & Strong winds are from the S W & N W in
the Winter Season. fish water and wood are very Convenient and
excellent timber for refitting and repareing vessels.-.

[Lewis, January 14, 1806]
Wednesday January 14th 1806.
This morning the Sergt. of the Guard reported the absence of one of the
large perogues, it had broken the chord by which it was attatched and
the tide had taken it off; we sent a party immediately in surch of her,
they returned in about 3 hours having fortunately found her. we now
directed three of the perogues to be drawn up out of reach of the tide
and the fourth to be mored in the small branch just above the landing
and confined with a strong rope of Elk-skin. had we lost this perogue
also we should have been obliged to make three small ones, which with
the few tools we have now left would be a serious undertaking. a
fatiegue of 6 men employed in jerking the Elk beaf.

From the best estimate we were enabled to make as we dscended the
Columbia we conceived that the natives inhabiting that noble stream,
for some miles above the great falls to the grand rappids inclusive
annually prepare about 30,000 lbs. of pounded sammon for market. but
whether this fish is an article of commerce with the whites or is
exclusively sold to and consumed by the natives of the sea Coast, we
are at a loss to determine. the first of those positions I am disposed
to credit most, but, still I must confess that I cannot imagine what
the white merchant's object can be in purchasing this fish, or where
they dispose of it. and on the other hand the Indians in this
neighbourhood as well as the Skillutes have an abundance of dryed
sammon which they take in the creeks and inlets, and I have never seen
any of this pounded fish in their lodges, which I pesume would have
been the case if they purchased this pounded fish for their own
consumption. the Indians who prepared this dryed and pounded fish,
informed us that it was to trade with the whites, and shewed us many
articles of European manufacture which they obtained for it. it is true
they obtain those articles principally for their fish but they trade
with the Skillutes for them and not immediately with the whites; the
intermediate merchants and carryers, the Skillutes, may possibly
consume a part of this fish themselves and dispose of the ballance of
it the natives of the sea coast, and from them obtain such articles as
they again trade with the whites.

[Clark, January 14, 1806]
Tuesday 14th January 1806
This morning the Serjt. of the guard reported the absence of one of our
Canoes it had broken the Cord by which it was attached and the tide had
taken her off; we Sent a party imediately in Serch of her, they
returned in about 3 hours haveing fortunately found her. we now derect
that 3 of the canoes be drawed up out of reach of the tide and the 4th
to be tied with a long Strong Cord of Elk Skins, ready for use. had we
lost this large Canoe we Should have been obliged to make 3 other Small
ones, which with the fiew tools we have now left would be a Serious
undertakeing. a fatiege of Six men employd in jurking the Elk beef.
From the best estermate we were enabled to make as we decended the
Columbia we Conceived that the nativs inhabiting that noble Stream
(from the enterance of Lewis's river to the neighbourhood of the falls
the nativs Consume all the fish they Catch either for food or fuel)
From Tow ar ne hi ooks River or a fiew mils above the Great falls to
the grand rapids inclusive anually prepare about 30,000 lbs of pounded
fish (Chiefly Salmon) for market, but whether this fish is an article
of Commerce with their neighbours or is exclusively Sold to, and
Consumed by the nativs of the Sea coast, we are at a loss to determine
the latter of those positions I am dispose to credit most, as I cannot
imagine what the white merchents objet Could be in purchaseing fish, or
where they Could dispose of it. on the other hand the Indians in this
neighbourhood as well as the Skillutes and those above have an
abundance of Dryed Salmon which they take in the Creeks and inlets.
they are excessively fond of the pounded fish haveing frequently asked
us for Some of it-. the Indians who prepared this pounded fish made
Signs that they traded it with people below them for Beeds and trinkets
&c and Showed us maney articles of European manufacture which they
obtained for it; The Skillutes and Indians about the great rapids are
the intermediate merchants and Carryers, and no doubt Consume a part of
this fish themselves and dispose of the ballance of it to the nativs of
the Sea coast, and from this obtain Such articles as they again trade
with the whites.

The persons who usially visit the enterence of this river for the
purpose of traffic or hunting, I believe is either English or
Americans; the Indians inform us that they Speak the Same language with
our Selves, and gave us proofs of their varacity by repeating maney
words of English, Sun of a pitch &c. whether those traders are from
Nootka Sound, from Some other late establishment on this Coast, or
imediately from the U States or Great Brittain, I am at a loss to
determine, nor Can the Indians inform us. the Indians whome I have
asked in what direction the traders go when they depart from hence,
allways point to the S. W. from which it is prosumeable that Nootka
cannot be their distination, and from Indian information a majority of
those traders annually visit them about the beginning of April and
remain Some time and either remain or revisit them in the fall of which
I cannot properly understand, from this Circumstance they Cannot Come
directly from the U States or Great Brittain, the distance being to
great for them to go and return in the ballance of a year. I am
Sometimes induced to believe that there is Some other Establishment on
the Coast of America South of this place of which little is but yet
known to the world, or it may be perhaps on Some Island in the Pacific
Ocian between the Continant of America & Asia to the S. W. of us. This
traffic on the part of the whites Consist in vending, guns, principally
old British or American Musquets, powder, balls and Shote, brass tea
kettles, Blankets from two to three points, Scarlet and blue Cloth
(Coarse), plates and Strips of Sheet Copper and brass, large brass wire
Knives Beeds &Tobacco with fishing hooks, buttons and Some other Small
articles; also a considerable quantity of Salors Clothes, as hats,
Coats, Trouses and Shirts. for those they receive in return from the
nativs Dressed and undressed Elk Skins, Skins of the Sea otter, Common
Otter, beaver, common fox, Speck, and tiger Cat, also Some Salmon dried
or pounded and a kind of buisket, which the nativs make of roots called
by them Shappelell. The nativs are extravigantly fond of the most
Common Cheap Blue and white beeds, of moderate Size, or Such that from
50 to 70 will way one pennyweight, the blue is usially prefured to the
white; those beeds Constitute the principal Circulating medium with all
the Indian tribes on this river; for those beeds they will dispose of
any article they possess-. the beeds are Strung on Straps of a fathom
in length & in that manner Sold by the breth or yard-.

[Lewis, January 15, 1806]
Thursday January 15th 1806.
Had a large coat completed out of the skins of the Tiger Cat and those
also of a small animal about the size of a squirrel not known to me;
these skins I procured from the Indians who had previously dressed them
and formed them into robes; it took seven of these robes to complete
the coat. we had determined to send out two hunting parties today but
it rained so incessantly that we posponed it. no occurrence worthy of
relation took place today.

The implyments used by the Chinnooks Clatsops Cuthlahmahs &c in hunting
are the gun the bow & arrow, deadfalls, pitts, snares, and spears or
gigs; their guns are usually of an inferior quality being oald refuse
American & brittish Musquits which have been repared for this trade.
there are some very good peices among them, but they are invariably in
bad order; they apear not to have been long enouh accustomed to fire
arms to understand the management of them. they have no rifles. Their
guns and amunition they reserve for the Elk, deer and bear, of the two
last however there are but few in their neighbourhood. they keep their
powder in small japaned tin flasks which they obtain with their
amunition from the traders; when they happen to have no ball or shot,
they substitute gravel or peices of potmettal, and are insensible of
the damage done thereby to their guns. The bow and arrow is the most
common instrument among them, every man being furnished with them
whether he has a gun or not; this instrument is imployed
indiscriminately in hunting every species of anamal on which they
subsist. Their bows are extreamly neat and very elastic, they are about
two and a half feet in length, and two inches in width in the center,
thence tapering graduly to the extremities where they are half an inch
wide they are very flat and thin, formed of the heart of the arbor vita
or white cedar, the back of the bow being thickly covered with sinews
of the Elk laid on with a gleue which they make from the sturgeon; the
string is made of sinues of the Elk also. the arrow is formed of two
parts usually tho sometime entire; those formed of two parts are
unequally divided that part on which the feathers are placed occupyes
four fifths of it's length and is formed of light white pine reather
larger than a swan's quill, in the lower extremity of this is a
circular mortice secured by sinues roled arround it; this mortice
receives the one end of the 2nd part which is of a smaller size than
the first and about five inches long, in the end of this the barb is
fixed and confined with sinue, this barb is either stone, iron or
copper, if metal in this form forming at it's point a greater angle
than those of any other Indians I have observed. the shorter part of
the arrow is of hearder wood as are also the whole of the arrow when it
is of one piece only. as these people live in a country abounding in
ponds lakes &c and frequently hunt in their canoes and shoot at fowl
and other anamals where the arrow missing its object would be lost in
the water they are constructed in the manner just discribed in order to
make them float should they fall in the water, and consequently can
again he recovered by the hunter; the quiver is usually the skin of a
young bear or that of a wolf invariably open at the side in stead of
the end as the quivers of other Indians generally are; this
construction appears to answer better for the canoe than if they were
open at the end only. maney of the Elk we have killed since we have
been here, have been wounded with these arrows, the short piece with
the barb remaining in the animal and grown up in the flesh.- the
deadfalls and snares are employed in taking the wolf the raccoon and
fox of which there are a few only. the spear or gig is used to take the
sea otter, the common otter, spuck, and beaver. their gig consists of
two points or barbs and are the same in their construction as those
discribed before as being common among the Indians on the upper part of
this river. their pits are employed in taking the Elk, and of course
are large and deep, some of them a cube of 12 or 14 feet. these are
usually placed by the side of a large fallen tree which as well as the
pit lye across the toads frequented by the Elk. these pitts are
disguised with the slender boughs of trees and moss; the unwary Elk in
passing the tree precipitates himself into the pitt which is
sufficiently deep to prevent his escape, and is thus taken.

[Clark, January 15, 1806]
Friday 15th of January 1806
Capt. Lewis had a large Coat finished made of the Skins of the tiger
Cat, and those of the Small animal about the Size of Small Cat not
known to me; those Skins were precured from the Indians who had
previously dressed them and formed them into robes; it took Seven of
those robes to Complete the Coat. no occurrence worthey of remark took
place. rained hard all day. The imployments used by the Chinnooks
Clatsops, Cath lah mahs Kil a mox &c. in hunting are the gun the bow &
arrow, dead falls, Pitts, Snares, and Spears or gigs; their guns are
usially of an inferior quallity being old refuse american or brittish
muskets which have been repared for this trade there are Some verry
good pieces among them, but they are invariably in bad order they
appear not to be long enough acquainted with fire arms to understand
the management of them. They have no rifles. Their guns and amunition
they reserve for the Elk, Deer, and Bear, of the two last however there
are but fiew in their neighbourhoods. they keep their powder in Small
japaned tin flasks which they obtain with their amunition from the
traders; when they happen to have no Ball or Shot they Substitute
Gravel and are insenceable of the dammage done thereby to their Guns.

The Bow and arrow is the most common instrement among them, every man
being furnished with them whether he has a gun or not, this instrement
is imployed indiscreminately in hunting every Species of animal on
which they Subsist, Their bows are extreemly meet neat and very
elastic, they are about two feet Six inches long and two inches wide in
the Center, thence tapering gradually to the extremities, where they ar
3/4 of an Inch wide, they are very flat and thin, formed of the heart
of the arbor vita or white Cedar, the back of the Bow being thickly
Covered with Sinues of the Elk laid on with a Gleue which they make
from the Sturgeon; the String is made of the Sinues of the Elk also,
the arrow is formed of two parts usually tho Sometimes entire; those
formed of 2 parts are uneaquilly devided, the part on which the
feathers are placed occupie 4/5 of it's length and is formed of light
white pine rather larger than a Swans quill, in the lower extremity of
this is a Circular mortice Secured by Sinues raped around it; this
mortice recives the one end of the 2d part which is of Smaller Size
than the first and about five inches long, in the end of this the barb
is fixed and Confined with Sinues, the berb is either Iron Copper or
Stone- in this form forming at its point a greater angle than those of
any other Indians I have observed. The Shorter part of the arrow is of
harder wood, as are also the whole of the arrow where it is of one
piece only. as these people live in a Countrey abounding in Ponds lakes
&c. and frequently hunt in their Canoes and Shoot at fowls and other
animals where the arrow missing its object would be lost in the water
they are constructed in the Manner just discribed in order to make them
flote Should they fall in the water, and Consequently Can again be
recovered by the hunter; the quiver is useally the Skin of a young bear
or that of a wolf invariably open at the Side in Sted of the end, as
the quiver of other Indians generally are, this Construction appears to
answer better for the Canoe, than if they were open at the end only.
maney of the Elk which our hunters have killd. Sence we have been here
have been wounded with those arrows, the Short piece with the barbe
remaining in the Animal and grown up in the flesh.- the Deadfalls &
Snares are employd in takeing the Wolf, the racoon and fox of which
there are a fiew. the Spear or gig is used to take the Sea otter,
Spuck, & Beaver. The gig consists of two points or birbs and are the
Same in their Construction as those which are Common among the Indians
on the upper part of this river and before discribed. Their pitts are
employed in takeing the Elk, and of Course are large and Deep, Some of
them a Cube of 12 or 14 feet, those ar commonly placed by the Side of a
large fallen tree which as well as the pitt lie across the roads
frequented by the Elk, these pitts are disguised with the Slender bows
of trees & moss; the unwarry Elk in passing the tree precipates himself
into the Pitt which is Sufficiently deep to prevent his escape.-

[Lewis, January 16, 1806]
Friday January 16th 1806.
This evening we finished curing the meat. no occurrence worthy of
relation took place today. we have plenty of Elk beef for the present
and a little salt, our houses dry and comfortable, and having made up
our minds to remain until the 1st of April, every one appears content
with his situation and his fare. it is true that we could even travel
now on our return as far as the timbered country reaches, or to the
falls of the river; but further it would be madness for us to attempt
to proceede untill April, as the indians inform us that the snows lye
knee deep in the plains of Columbia during the winter, and in these
plains we could scarcely get as much fuel of any kind as would cook our
provision as we descended the river; and even were we happyly over
these plains and again in the woody country at the foot of the Rocky
Mountains we could not possibly pass that immence barrier of mountains
on which the snows ly in winter to the debth in many places of 20 feet;
in short the Indians inform us that they are impracticable untill about
the 1st of June, at which time even there is an abundance of snow but a
scanty subsistence may be obtained for the horses.- we should not
therefore forward ourselves on our homeward journey by reaching the
rocky mountains early than the 1st of June, which we can easily effect
by seting out from hence on the 1st of April.

The Clatsops Chinnooks &c. in fishing employ the common streight net,
the scooping or diping net with a long handle, the gig, and the hook
and line. the common net is of different lengths and debths usually
employed in taking the sammon, Carr and trout in the inlets among the
marshey grounds and the mouths of deep creeks. the skiming or scooping
net to take small fish in the spring and summer season; the gig and
hook are employed indiscriminately at all seasons in taking such fish
as they can procure by their means. their nets and fishing lines are
made of the silk-grass or white cedar bark; and their hooks are
generally of European manufactary, tho before the whites visited them
they made hooks of bone and other substances formed in the following
manner A C, and C. B. are two small pieces of bone about the size of a
strong twine, these are flattened and leveled off of their extremities
near C. where they are firmly attatched together with sinues and
covered with rosin. C A. is reduced to a sharp point at A where it is
also bent in a little; C B. is attatched to the line, for about half
it's length at the upper extremity B. the whole forming two sides of an
accute angled triangle.

[Clark, January 16, 1806]
Saturday 16th January 1806
This evening we finished cureing the meat. no occurrence worthey of
relation took place to day. we have a plenty of Elk beef for the
present and a little Salt, our houses dry and Comfortable, haveing made
up our minds to Stay untill the 1st of April every one appears
contented with his Situation, and his fair. it is true we Could travel
even now on our return as far as the timbered Country reaches, or to
the falls of the river, but further it would be madness for us to
attempt to proceed untill april, as the indians inform us that the
Snows lyes knee deep in the Columbian Plains dureing the winter, and in
those planes we could not git as much wood as would Cook our provisions
untill the drift wood comes down in the Spring and lodges on the Shore
&c. and even were we happily over those plains and in the woodey
countrey at the foot of the rockey mountains, we could not possibly
pass that emence bearier of mountains on which the Snow lyes in winter
to the debth in maney placs of 20 feet; in Short the Indians tell us
they impassable untill about the 1s of June, at which time even then is
an abundance of snow but a Scanty Subsistance may be had for the
horses- we Should not foward our homeward journey any by reaching the
Rocky mountains earlier than the 1st of June which we can effect by
Setting out from hence by the 1st of April

The Clatsops, Chinnooks &c. in fishing employ the Common Streight net,
the Scooping or dipping net with a long handle, the gig, and the hook
and line. the Common nets are of different lengths and debths usually
employd in takeing the Salmon, Carr and trout in the inlets among the
marshey grounds and the mouths of deep Creeks,- the Skiming or scooping
nets to take Smaller fish in the Spring and Summer Season; the gig and
hook are employed indiscreminately at all Seasons in takeing Such fish
as they Can precure by these means. their nets and fishing lines are
made of the Silk Grass or white Cedar bark; and their hooks are
generally of European manufactory, tho before the whites visited them
they made their Hooks of bone and other Substances formed in the
following manner A C and B C are two Small pieces of bone about the
Size of a Strong twine, these are flattened & beaveled off to their
extremites at C, where they are firmley attached together and Covered
with rozin C A is reduced to a Sharp point at A where it is also bent
in a little; C B is attached to the line, at the upper extremity B. the
whole forming two Sides of an accute angled triangle. the line has a
loop at D which it is anexed to a longer line and taken off at
pleasure. Those Hooks are yet common among the nativs on the upper
parts of the Columbia river for to Catch fish in Deep places.

[Lewis, January 17, 1806]
Saturday January 17th 1806
This morning we were visited by Comowool and 7 of the Clatsops our
nearest neighbours, who left us again in the evening. They brought with
them some roots and buries for sale, of which however they disposed of
but very few as they asked for them such prices as our stock in trade
would not license us in giving. the Chief Comowool gave us some roots
and buries for which we gave him in return a mockerson awl and some
thread; the latter he wished for the purpose of making a skiming net.
one of the party was dressed in three very eligant Sea Otter skins
which we much wanted; for these we offered him many articles but he
would not dispose of them for any other consideration but blue beads,
of these we had only six fathoms left, which being 4 less than his
price for each skin he would not exchange nor would a knife or an
equivalent in beads of any other colour answer his purposes, these
coarse blue beads are their favorite merchandiz, and are called by them
tia Commashuck or Chiefs beads. the best wampum is not so much esteemed
by them as the most inferior beads. Sent Coalter out to hunt this
morning, he shortly after returned with a deer, venison is a rarity
with us we have had none for some weeks. Drewyer also set out on a
hunting excertion and took one man with him. he intends both to hunt
the Elk and trap the beaver.

The Culinary articles of the Indians in our neighbourhood consist of
wooden bowls or throughs, baskets, wooden spoons and woden scures or
spits. Their wooden bowls and troughs are of different forms and sizes,
and most generally dug out of a solid piece; they are ither round or
simi globular, in the form of a canoe, cubic, and cubic at top
terminating in a globe at bottom; these are extreemly well executed and
many of them neatly carved the larger vessels with hand-holes to them;
in these vessels they boil their fish or flesh by means of hot stones
which they immerce in the water with the article to be boiled. they
also render the oil of fish or other anamals in the same manner. their
baskets are formed of cedar bark and beargrass so closely interwoven
with the fingers that they are watertight without the aid of gum or
rosin; some of these are highly ornamented with strans of beargrass
which they dye of several colours and interweave in a great variety of
figures; this serves them the double perpose of holding their water or
wearing on their heads; and are of different capacites from that of the
smallest cup to five or six gallons; they are generally of a conic form
or reather the segment of a cone of which the smaller end forms the
base or bottom of the basket. these they make very expediciously and
dispose off for a mear trifle. it is for the construction of these
baskets that the beargrass becomes an article of traffic among the
natives this grass grows only on their high mountains near the snowey
region; the blade is about 3/8 of an inch wide and 2 feet long smoth
pliant and strong; the young blades which are white from not being
exposed to the sun or air, are those most commonly employed,
particularly in their neatest work. Their spoons are not remarkable nor
abundant, they are generally large and the bole brawd. their meat is
roasted with a sharp scure, one end of which is incerted in the meat
with the other is set erect in the ground. the spit for roasting fish
has it's upper extremity split, and between it's limbs the center of
the fish is inscerted with it's head downwards and the tale and
extremities of the scure secured with a string, the sides of the fish,
which was in the first instance split on the back, are expanded by
means of small splinters of wood which extend crosswise the fish. a
small mat of rushes or flags is the usual plate or dish on which their
fish, flesh, roots or burries are served. they make a number of bags
and baskets not watertight of cedar bark, silk-grass, rushes, flags and
common coarse sedge. in these they secure their dryed fish, rooots,
buries, &c.

[Clark, January 17, 1806]
Sunday 17th January 1806
This morning we were visited by Comowool and 7 of the Clatsops our
nearest neighbours, who left us again in the evening. They brought with
them Some roots and beries for Sale, of which however they disposed of
very fiew as they asked for them Such prices as our Stock in trade
would not licence us in giveing. The Chief Comowool gave us Some roots
and berries, for which we gave him in return a mockerson awl and Some
thread; the latter he wished for the purpose of makeing a Skiming Net.
one of the party was dressed in three verry elegant Sea otter Skins
which we much wanted; for these we offered him maney articles but he
would not dispose of them for aney other Consideration but Blue beeds,
of those we had only Six fathoms left, which being 4 less than his
price for each Skin he would not exchange nor would a Knife or any
other equivolent in beeds of aney other Colour answer his purpose;
these Coarse blue beeds are their favourite merchandize and are Called
by them Tia com ma shuck or Chief beeds, the best Wampom is not as much
esteemed by them as the most indifferent beeds. Sent Colter out to hunt
he Shortly after returned with a Deer, Venison is a rarity with us we
have had none for Some weeks. Drewyer Set out on a hunting expedition
one man went with him. he intends to hunt the Elk and trap the beaver.

The Culianary articles of the Indians in our neighbourhood Consists of
wooden bowls or troughs, Baskets, Shell and wooden Spoons and wooden
Scures or Spits, their wooden Bowles and troughs are of different forms
and Sizes, and most generally dug out of Solid piecies; they are either
round, Square or in the form of a canoe; those are extreemly well
executed and maney of them neetly covered, the larger vessels with
handholes to them; in these vessels they boil their fish or flesh by
means of hot Stones which they immerce in the water with the articles
to be boiled. They also render the Oil of the fish, or other animals in
the Same manner. Their baskets are formed of Cedar bark and bargrass So
closely interwoven withe hands or fingers that they are watertight
without the aid of gum or rozin; Some of those are highly ornimented
with the Straps of bargrass which they dye of Several Colours and
interweave in a great variety of figures; this Serves a double purpose
of holding the Water or wareing on their heads; and are of different
Capacities, from that of a Smallest Cup to five or Six gallons, they
are generally of a Conic form or reather the Segment of a Cone of which
the Smaller end forms the base or bottom of the basket. these they make
verry expediciously and dispose of for a mear trifle. it is for the
Construction of those baskets that Bargrass becoms an article of
traffic among the nativs of the Columbia. this grass grows only on
their mountains near the Snowey region; the blade is about 3/8 of an
inch wide and 2 feet long Smothe plient & Strong; the young blades
which are white from not being exposed to the Sun or air, are those
which are most Commonly employ'd, particularly in their neatest work.
Their wooden Spoons are not remarkable nor abundant, they are large &
the bowls broad. their meat is roasted with a Sharp Scure, one end of
which is incerted in the meat while the other is Set erect in the
ground. The Spit for roasting fish has its upper extremity Split, and
between its limbs the Center of the fish is incerted with its head
downwards, and the tale and the extremities of the Scure Secured with a
String, the Side of the fish, which was in the first instance Split in
the back, are expanded by means of Small Splinters of wood which extend
Crosswise the fish. a Small mat of rushes or flags is the usual plate,
or Dish on which their fish, flesh, roots & berries are Served. they
make a number of Bags and Baskets not water tight of Cedar bark Silk
Grass, rushes, flags, and common Gorse Sedge-. in those they Secure
their dried fish, roots berries &.-

[Lewis, January 18, 1806]
Sunday January 18th 1806.
Two of the Clatsops who were here yesterday returned today for a dog
they had left; they remained with us a few hours and departed. no
further occurrence worthy of relation took place. the men are still
much engaged in dressing skins in order to cloath themselves and
prepare for our homeward journey. The Clatsops Chinnooks &c construct
their houses of timber altogether. they are from 14 to 20 feet wide and
from 20 to 60 feet in length, and acommodate one or more families
sometimes three or four families reside in the same room. thes houses
are also divided by a partition of boards, but this happens only in the
largest houses as the rooms are always large compared with the number
of inhabitants. these houses are constructed in the following manner;
two or more posts of split timber agreeably to the number of divisions
or partitions are furst provided, these are sunk in the ground at one
end and rise perpendicularly to the hight of 14 or 18 feet, the tops of
them are hollowed in such manner as to receive the ends of a round beam
of timber which reaches from one to the other, most commonly the whole
length of the building, and forming the upper part of the roof; two
other sets of posts and poles are now placed at proper distances on
either side of the first, formed in a similar manner and parrallel to
it; these last rise to the intended hight of the eves, which is usually
about 5 feet. smaller sticks of timber are now provided and are placed
by pares in the form of rafters, resting on, and reaching from the
lower to the upper horizontal beam, to both of which they are attatched
at either end with the cedar bark; two or three ranges of small poles
are now placed horizontally on these rafters on each side of the roof
and are secured likewise with strings of the Cedar bark. the ends sides
and partitions are then formed with one range of wide boards of abut
two inches thick, which are sunk in the ground a small distance at
their lower ends and stand erect with their upper ends Taping on the
outside of the eve poles and end rafters to which they are secured by
an outer pole lying parallel with the eve poles and rafters being
secured to them by chords of cedar bark which pass through wholes made
in the boards at certain distances for that purpose; the rough roof is
then covered with a double range of thin boards, and an aperture of 2
by 3 feet left in the center of the roof to permit the smoke to pass.
these houses are sometimes sunk to the debth of 4 or 5 feet in which
cace the eve of the house comes nearly to the surface of the earth. in
the center of each room a space of six by eight feet square is sunk
about twelve inches lower than the floor having it's sides secured with
four sticks of squar timber, in this space they make their fire, their
fuel being generally pine bark. mats are spread arround the fire on all
sides, on these they set in the day and frequently sleep at night. on
the inner side of the hose on two sides and sometimes on three, there
is a range of upright peices about 4 feet removed from the wall; these
are also sunk in the ground at their lower ends, and secured at top to
the rafters, from these other peices ar extended horizontally to the
wall and are secured in the usual method by bark to the upright peices
which support the eve poles. on these short horizontal pieces of which
there are sometimes two ranges one above the other, boards are laid,
which either form ther beads, or shelves on which to put their goods
and chattles of almost every discription. their uncured fish is hung on
sticks in the smoke of their fires as is also the flesh of the Elk when
they happen to be fortunate enough to procure it which is but seldom.

[Clark, January 18, 1806]
Monday 18th January 1806
Two of the Clatsops that were here yesterday returned to day for a Dog
they had left; they remained with us a fiew hours and departed. no
further accounts worthey of relation took place. the men are much
engaged dressing Skins in order to Cloath themselves and prepare for
the homeward journey.

The Clatsops Chinnooks &c. construct their Houses of timber altogether.
they are from 14 to 20 feet wide, and from 20 to 60 feet in length, and
accomodate one or more families Sometimes three or four families reside
in the Same room. this house is also devided by petitions of Boards,
but this happens only in the largest houses, as the rooms are always
large Compared with the number of inhabitents. those houses are
Constructed in the following manner; two or more posts of Split timber
agreeably to the number of devisions or partitions are first provided,
these are Sunk in the ground at one end and raised pirpindicular to the
hight of 12 or 14 feet, the top of them are hollowed So as to recive
the end of a round beem of timber which reaches from one to the other
or the entire length of the house; and forming the ridge pole; two
other Sets of posts and poles are then placed at proper distancies on
either Side of the first, formed in a Similar manner and parrelal to
it; those last rise to the intended hight of the eves, which is usially
about 5 feet,- Smaller Sticks of timber is then previded and are placed
by pears in the form of rafters, resting on, and reaching from the
lower to the upper horizontial beam, to both of which they are atached
at either end with the Cedar bark; two or 3 ranges of Small poles are
then placed Horizontially on these rafters on each Side of the roof &
are Secured likewise with Cedar bark. the ends, Sides, and partitions
are then formed, with one range of wide boards of about 2 inches thick,
which are Sunk in the ground a Small distance at their lower ends &
Stands erect with their upper ends lapping on the out Side of the eve
poles and end rafters to which they are Secured by a outer pole lyeing
parrelal with the eve pole and rafters being Secured to them by Cords
of Cedar bark which pass through wholes made in the bods at Certain
distances for that purpose; the rough roof is then Covered with a
double range of thin boards, and an aperture of 2 by 3 feet left in the
Center of the roof to admit the Smoke to pass. These houses are
commonly Sunk to the debth of 4 or 5 feet in which Case the eve of the
house comes nearly to the Surface of the earth. in the Center of each
room a Space of from 6 by 8 feet is Sunk about 12 inches lower than the
Hoar haveing its Sides Secured by four thick boards or Squar pieces of
timber, in this Space they make their fire, their fuel being generally
dry pine Split Small which they perform with a peice of an Elks horn
Sharpened at one end drove into the wood with a Stone. mats are Spred
around the fire on all Sides, on these they Sit in the day and
frequently Sleep at night. on the inner Side of the house on two Sides
and Sometimes on three, there is a range of upright pieces about 4 feet
removed from the wall; these are also Sunk in the ground at their lower
end, and Secured at top to the rafters, from those, other pieces are
extended horozontially to the wall and are Secured in the usial manner
with bark to the upright pieces which Support the eve pole. on these
Short horizontial peics of which there are Sometimes two ranges one
above the other, boards are laid, which either form their beads, or
Shelves on which to put their goods and Chattles, of almost every
discription. their uncured fish is hung on Sticks in the Smoke of their
fires as is also the flesh of the Elk when they happen to be fortunate
enough to precure it which is but Seldom

[Lewis, January 19, 1806]
Monday January 19th 1806.
This morning sent out two parties of hunters, consisting of Collins and
Willard whom we sent down the bay towards point Adams, and Labuish and
Shannon whom we sent up Fort River; the fist by land and the latter by
water. we were visited today by two Clatsop men and a woman who brought
for sale some Sea Otter skins of which we purchased one, giving in
exchange the remainder of our blue beads consisting of 6 fathoms and
about the same quantity of small white beads and a knife. we also
purchased a small quantity of train oil for a pair of Brass armbands
and a hat for some fishinghooks. these hats are of their own
manufactory and are composed of Cedar bark and bear grass interwoven
with the fingers and ornimented with various colours and figures, they
are nearly waterproof, light, and I am convinced are much more durable
than either chip or straw. These hats form a small article of traffic
with the Clatsops and Chinnooks who dispose of them to the whites. the
form of the hat is that which was in vogue in the Ued States and great
Britain in the years 1800 & 1801 with a high crown reather larger at
the top than where it joins the brim; the brim narrow or about 2 or
21/2 inches.

Several families of these people usually reside together in the same
room; they appear to be the father & mother and their sons with their
son's wives and children; their provision seems to be in common and the
greatest harmoney appears to exist among them. The old man is not
always rispected as the head of the family, that duty most commonly
devolves on one of the young men. They have seldom more than one wife,
yet the plurality of wives is not denyed them by their customs. These
families when ascociated form nations or bands of nations each
acknoledging the authority of it's own chieftain who dose not appear to
be heriditary, nor his power to extend further than a mear repremand
for any improper act of an individual; the creation of a chief depends
upon the upright deportment of the individual & his ability and
disposition to render service to the community; and his authority or
the deference paid him is in exact equilibrio with the popularity or
voluntary esteem he has acquired among the individuals of his band or
nation. Their laws like those of all uncivilized Indians consist of a
set of customs which have grown out of their local situations. not
being able to speak their language we have not been able to inform
ourselves of the existence of any peculiar customs among them.

[Clark, January 19, 1806]
Tuesday 19th of January 1806
This morning Sent out two parties of hunters, one party towards Point
adams and the other party up Ne tel River by water. we were visited to
day by two Clatsop men and a woman who brought for Sale Some Sea otter
Skins of which we purchased one gave in exchange the remainder of our
blue heeds Consisting of 6 fathoms, and the Same quantity of Small
white beids and a knife. we also purchased a Small quantity of train
oil for a par of Brass arm bands, and a hat for Som fishinghooks. these
hats are of their own manufactory and are Composed of Cedar bark and
bear grass interwoven with the fingers and ornimented with various
Colours and figures, they are nearly water proof, light, and I am
Convinced are much more dureable than either Chip or Straw,- These hats
form a article of traffic with Clatsops an Chinnooks who dispose of
them to the whites, the form of the Hats is that which was in voge in
the U States and Great Britain in 1800 & 1801 with a high Crown rather
larger at the top than where it joins the brim, the brim narrow about 2
or 21/2 inches.

Several families of those people usially reside together in the Same
room; they appear to be the father mother with their Sons and their
Sons wives and children; their provisions appears to be in common and
the greatest harmoney appears to exist among them. the old man is not
always respected as the head of the family that duty generally devolves
on one of the young men. They have Sildom more than one wife, yet
plurality of wives are not denyed them by their Customs. those families
when associated form bands of nations each acknowledgeing the authority
of its own Chieftains, who does not appear to be herititary, or has
power to extend further than a mear repremand for any improper
deportment of the indevidual; the Creation of a Chief depends upon the
upright Conduct of the individual his abiltity and disposition to
render Service to the Comunity, and his authority and the defference
paid him is in extent equilibrio with the popolarity or volintary
esteem he has acquired among the individuals of his band, or nation.
Their Laws like all uncivilized Indians Consist of a Set of customs
which has grown out of their local Situations. not being able to Speak
their language we have not been able to inform ourselves of the
existance of any peculiar Customs among them.

[Lewis, January 20, 1806]
Tuesday January 20th 1806.
Visited this morning by three Clatsops who remained with us all day;
the object of their visit is mearly to smoke the pipe. on the morning
of the eighteenth we issued 6 lbs. of jirked Elk pr. man, this evening
the Sergt. repoted that it was all exhausted; the six lbs. have
therefore lasted two days and a half only. at this rate our seven Elk
will last us only 3 days longer, yet no one seems much concerned about
the state of the stores; so much for habit. we have latterly so
frequently had our stock of provisions reduced to a minimum and
sometimes taken a small touch of fasting that three days full allowance
excites no concern. In those cases our skill as hunters afford us some
consolation, for if there is any game of any discription in our
neighbourhood we can track it up and kill it. most of the party have
become very expert with the rifle. The Indians who visited us today
understood us sufficiently to inform us that the whites did not barter
for the pounded fish; that it was purchased and consumed by the
Clatsops, Chinnooks, Cathlahmah's and Skillutes. The native roots which
furnish a considerable proportion of the subsistence of the indians in
our neighbourhood are those of a species of Thistle, fern and rush; the
Liquorice, and a small celindric root the top of which I have not yet
seen, this last resembles the sweet pittatoe very much in it's flavor
and consistency.

[Clark, January 20, 1806]
Wednesday 20th January 1806
Visited this morning by three Clapsots who remained with us all day;
the object of their visit is mearly to Smoke the pipe. on the morning
of the 18 inst. we issued 6 wt. of jurked meat pr. man, this evening
the Serjt. reports that is all exhosted; the 6 w. have therefore lasted
2 days and a half only. at this rate our Seven Elk will only last us 3
days longer, yet no one appears much concerned about the State of the
Stores; So much for habet. we have latterly so frequently had our Stock
of provisions reduced to a minimum and Sometimes taken a Small tuck of
fasting that 3 days full allowance exites no concern. In those Cases
our Skill as hunters affords us Some Consolation, for if there is any
game of any discription in our neighbourhood we can track it up and
kill it. most of the party have become very expert with the rifle. The
Indians who visit us to day understood us Sufficiently to inform us
that the white who visit them did not barter for the pounded fish; that
it was purchased and Consumed by the Clatsops, Chin nooks, Cath lah
mahs and Skil lutes, and Kil a moxs.

The native roots which furnish a considerable proportion of the
Subsistance of the indians in our neighbourhoodd are those of a Species
of Thistle, fern, and rush; the Licquorice, and a Small celindric root
the top of which I have not yet Seen, this last resembles the Sweet
potato verry much in its flavour and Consistency.

[Lewis, January 21, 1806]
Wednesday January 21st 1806.
Two of the hunters Shannon & Labuish returned having killed three Elk.
Ordered a party to go in quest of the meat early tomorrow morning and
the hunters to return and continue the chase. the Indians left us about
12 O'Clk. The root of the thistle, called by the natives shan-ne-tahque
is a perpendicular fusiform and possesses from two to four radicles; is
from 9 to 15 Inces in length and about the size a mans thumb; the rhind
somewhat rough and of a brown colour; the consistence when first taken
from the earth is white and nearly as crisp as a carrot; when prepared
for uce by the same process before discribed of the white bulb or
pashshequo quawmash, it becomes black, and is more shugary than any
fuit or root that I have met with in uce among the natives; the sweet
is precisely that of the sugar in flavor; this root is sometimes eaten
also when first taken from the ground without any preperation; but in
this way is vastly in-ferior. it delights most in a deep rich dry lome
which has a good mixture of sand. the stem of this plant is simple
ascending celindric and hisped. the root leaves yet possess their
virdure and are about half grown of a plale green. the cauline leaf as
well as the stem of the last season are now dead, but in rispect to
it's form &c. it is simple, crenate, & oblong, reather more obtuse at
it's apex than at the base or insertion; it's margin armed with
prickles while it's disks are hairy, it's insertion decurrent and
position declining. the flower is also dry and mutilad. the pericarp
seems much like that of the common thistle. it rises to the hight of
from 3 to 4 feet.-

[Clark, January 21, 1806]
Thursday 21st of January 1806
Two of the hunters Shannon & Labieche returned haveing killed three
Elk, ordered a party to go in quest of the meat early tomorrow morning
and the hunters to return and continue the chase-. the Indians left us
about 12 oClock.

The root of the thistle called by the nativs Chan-ne-tak-que is
pirpendicular and possesses from two to 4 radicles; is from 9 to 15
inches in length and is Commonly about the Size of a mans thum the
rhine Somewhat rough and of a brown Colour; the Consistence when first
taken from the earth is white and nearly as Crisp as a Carrot, when
prepared for use by the Same process before discribed of the white bulb
or gash she quo, qua-mosh, it becomes black and is more Sugary than any
root I have met with among the nativs; the Sweet is prosisely that of
the Sugar in flavor, this root is Sometimes eaten when first taken from
the ground without any preperation, in this way it is well tasted but
soon weathers and becoms hard and insipped. it delights most in a deep
rich moist lome which has a good mixture of Sand- The Stems of this
plant is Simple ascending celindric and hisped. the root leaves, posses
their virdue and are about half grown of a deep Green. the Cauline leaf
as well as the Stem of the last Season are now dead, but in respect to
it's form &c. it is Simple Crenated and oblong, rather more obtuce at
it's apex than the base or insertion, it's margin armed with prickles
while it's disks are hairy, its insertion decurrent and position
declineing. the flower is also dry and mutilated the pericarp seems
much like that of the Common thistle it rises to the hight of from 3 to
4 feet.

[Lewis, January 22, 1806]
Thursday January 22nd 1806.
The party sent for the meat this morning returned with it in the
Evening; it was in very inferior order, in short the animals were poor.
Reubin Fields also remained with the other hunters Shannon & Labuish
our late supply of salt is out. we have not yet heared a sentence from
the other two parties of hunter's who are below us towards Point Adams
and the Praries.

There are three species of fern in this neighbourhood the root one of
which the natves eat; this grows very abundant in the open uplands and
praries where the latter are not sandy and consist of deep loose rich
black lome. the root is horizontal sometimes a little deverging or
obliquely descending, frequently dividing itself as it procedes into
two equal branches and shooting up a number of stems; it lies about 4
Inces beneath the surface of the earth. the root is celindric, with few
or no radicles and from the size of a goose quill to that of a man's
finger; the center of the root is divided into two equal parts by a
strong flat & white ligament like a piece of thin tape on either side
of this there is a white substance which when the root is roasted in
the embers is much like wheat dough and not very unlike it in flavour,
though it has also a pungency which becomes more visible after you have
chewed it some little time; this pungency was disagreeable to me, but
the natives eat it very voraciously and I have no doubt but it is a
very nutricious food. the bark of the root is black, somewhat rough,
thin and brittle, it easily seperates in flakes from the part which is
eaten as dose also the internal liggament. this root perennil. in rich
lands this plant rises to the hight of from 4 to five feet. the stem is
smooth celindric, slightly groved on one side erect about half it's
hight on the 2 first branches thence reclining backwards from the
grooved side; it puts forth it's branches which are in reallyty long
footstalks by pares from one side only and near the edges of the
groove, these larger footstalks are also grooved cilindric and
gradually tapering towards the extremity, puting forth alternate
footstalks on either side of the grove near it's edge; these lesser
footstalks the same in form as the first put forth from forty to fifty
alternate pinate leaves which are sessile, horizontal, multipartite for
half their length from the point of insertion and terminating in a long
shaped apex, and are also revolute with the upper disk smoth and the
lower slightly cottanny. these alternate leaves after proceeding half
the length of the footstalk cease to be partite and assume the tongue
like form altogether. this plant produces no flower or fruit whatever,
is of a fine green colour in summer and a beautiful) plant. the top is
annual and is of course dead at present.-

[Clark, January 22, 1806]
Friday 22nd January 1806
The party Sent for the meat this morning returned with it in the
evening; it was in verry inferior order, in Short the animals were
pore. Rieuben Field Shannon and Labiech remained in the woods to hunt.
our late Supply of Salt is out. we have not heard a word of the other
hunters who are below us towards point adams and the Praries. Some rain
this day at intervales

There are three Species of fern in this neighbourhood the root one of
which the nativs eate; that of which the nativs eate produce no flowers
whatever or fruit of a fine green Colour and the top is annual, and in
Course dead at present.

I observe no difference between the licorice of this Countrey and that
Common to maney parts of the United States where it is sometimes
Cultivated in our gardins-. this plant delights in a deep lose Sandy
Soil; here it grows verry abundant and large; the nativs roste it in
the embers and pound it Slightly with a Small Stick in order to make it
Seperate more readily from the Strong liggaments which forms the center
of the root; this they discard and chew and Swallow the ballance of the
root; this last is filled with a number of thin membrencies like
network, too tough to be masticated and which I find it necessary also
to discard. This root when roasted possesses an agreeable flavour not
unlike the Sweet potato. The root of the thistle (described yesterday)
after undergoing the process of Sweting or bakeing in a kiln is
Sometimes eaten with the train oil also, at other times pounded fine
and mixed with Cold water, untill reduced to the Consistancy of Gruel;
in this way I think it verry agreeable. but the most valuable of all
their roots is foreign to this neighbourhood I mean the Wappetoe.

The Wappetoe, or bulb of the Sagitifolia or common arrow head, which
grows in great abundance in the marshey grounds of that butifull and
fertile vally on the Columbia commenceing just above the quick Sand
River and extending downwards for about 70 miles. this bulb forms a
principal article of trafic between the inhabitents of the vally and
those of their neighbourhood or Sea coast.

[Lewis, January 23, 1806]
Friday January 23rd 1806.
This morning dispatched Howard and Warner to the Camp of the Saltmakes
for a supply of salt. The men of the garison are still busily employed
in dressing Elk's skins for cloathing, they find great difficulty for
the want of branes; we have not soap to supply the deficiency, nor can
we procure ashes to make the lye; none of the pines which we use for
fuel affords any ashes; extrawdinary as it may seem, the greene wood is
consoomed without leaving the residium of a particle of ashes.

The root of the rush used by the natives is a sollid bulb about one
inch in length and usually as thick as a man's thumb, of an ovate form
depressed on two or more sides, covered with a thin smothe black rind.
the pulp is white brittle and easily masticated either raw or roasted
the latter is the way in which it is most usually prepared for uce.
this root is reather insipid in point of flavour, it grows in greatest
abundance along the sea coast in the sandy grounds and is most used by
the Killamucks and those inhabiting the coast. each root sends up one
stock only which is annual, the root being perenniel. the bulb is
attatched to the bottom of the caulis or stem by a firm small and
strong radicle of about one Inch long; this radicle is mearly the
prolongation of the caulis and decends perpendicilarly; a little above
the junction of this radicle with the caulis, the latter is surrounded
in a whorl with a set of small radicles from 6 to 9 inches long which
are obliquely descending. the caulis is celindric erect hollow and
jointed, and is about the size or reather larger than the largest
quill. it rises to the hight of 3 or 4 feet, not branching nor dose it
either bear flower or seed that I can discover tho I am far from
denying that it dose so sometimes, but I have not been able to discover
it. the stem is rough like the sand rush and is much like it when green
or in it's succulent state. at each joint it puts out from twenty to
thirty long lineal stellate or radiate & horizontal leaves which
surround the stem. above each joint about half an inch the stem is
sheathed like the sand rush.

[Clark, January 23, 1806]
Saturday 23rd of January 1806
This morning dispatched Howard & Werner to the Camp of the Salt makers
for a Supply of Salt. the men of the garrison are Still busily employed
in dressing Elk Skins for cloathing, they fine great dificuelty for the
want of branes; we have not Soap to Supply the deficiency, nor can we
precure ashes to make the lye; none of the pine which we use for fuel
afford any ashes; extrawdinary as it may seem, the green wood is
cosumed without leaveing the risideum of a particle of ashes.-

The root of the rush used by the nativs is a Solid bulb about one inch
in length and usially as thick as a mans thumb, of an ovel form
depressed on two or more Sides, covered with a thin black rine. the
pulp is white brittle and easily masticated either raw or rosted, the
latter is the way it is most commonly prepared for use. this root is
reather insippid in point of flavour, it grows in the Greatest
abundance along the Sea coast in the wet Sandy grounds and is most used
by the Kil a mox and those inhabiting the Sea coast. each root Sends up
its Stalk which is annual, the root being perennial. the bulb is
atached to the bottom of the Stem by a firm Small and Strong radicle
which is mearly the prolongation of the Stem which is hollow and
jointed and is rather larger than the largest quill. it rises to the
hight of 3 or 4 feet, not branching no does it either bear flower or
Seed that I could discover tho I am far from denying that it does So
Sometimes, and perhaps every year, but I have not been able to discover
it, the Stem is rough like the Sand rush, and it's much like it when
green, at each joint it puts out from 20 to 30 radiate & horizontal
leaves which Surrounds the Stem. above each joint about half an inch
the Stem is Shethed like the Sand rush.

The instruments used by the nativs in digging their roots is a Strong
Stick of three feet and a half long Sharpened at the lower end and its
upper inserted into a part of an Elks or buck's horn which Serves as a
handle; Standing transvirsely in the Stick- or it is in this form as
thus A is the lower part which is a little hooked B is the upper part
or handle of Horn.

[Lewis, January 24, 1806]
Saturday January 24th 1806.
Drewyer and Baptiest La Paage returned this morning in a large Canoe
with Comowooll and six Clatsops. they brought two deer and the flesh of
three Elk & one Elk's skin, having given the flesh of one other Elk
which they killed and three Elk's skins to the Indians as the price of
their assistance in transporting the ballance of the meat to the Fort;
these Elk and deer were killed near point Adams and the Indians carryed
them on their backs about six miles, before the waves were sufficiently
low to permit their being taken on board their canoes. the Indians
remained with us all day. The Indians witnissed Drewyer's shooting some
of those Elk, which has given them a very exalted opinion of us as
marksmen and the superior excellence of our rifles compared with their
guns; this may probably be of service to us, as it will deter them from
any acts of hostility if they have ever meditated any such. My Air-gun
also astonishes them very much, they cannot comprehend it's shooting so
often and without powder; and think that it is great medicine which
comprehends every thing that is to them incomprehensible.

I observe no difference between the liquorice of this country and that
common to many parts of the United states where it is also sometimes
cultivated in our gardens. this plant delights in a deep loose sandy
soil; here it grows very abundant and large; the natives roast it in
the embers and pound it slightly with a small stick in order to make it
seperate more readily from the strong liggament which forms the center
of the root; this the natives discard and chew and swallow the ballance
of the root; this last is filled with a number of thin membrenacious
lamela like net work, too tough to be masticated and which I find it
necessary also to discard. this root when roasted possesses an
agreeable flavour not unlike the sweet pittaitoe. beside the small
celindric root mentioned on the 20th inst., they have also another
about the same form size and appearance which they use much with the
train oil, this root is usually boiled; to me it possesses a
disagreeable bitterness. the top of this plant I have never yet seen.
The root of the thistle after undergoing the prossess of sweating or
baking in a kiln is sometimes eaten with the train oil also, and at
other times pounded fine and mixed with could water untill reduced to
the consistency of sagamity or indian mush; in this way I think it very
agreeable. but the most valuable of all their roots is foreign to this
neighbourhood I mean the Wappetoe, or the bulb of the Sagitifolia or
common arrow head, which grows in great abundance in the marshey
grounds of that beatifull and firtile valley on the Columbia commencing
just above the entrance of Quicksand River, and extending downwards for
about 70 Miles. this bulb forms a principal article of traffic between
the inhabitants of the valley and those of this neighbourhood or sea
coast. The instrument used by the natives in diging their roots is a
strong stick of 31/2 feet long sharpened at the lower end and it's
upper inscerted into a part of an Elks or buck's horn which serves as a
handle, standing transversely with the stick or it is in this form A
the lower point, B the upper part or handle.

[Clark, January 24, 1806]
Sunday 24th of January 1806
Drewyer and Bapteist laPage returned this morning in a large Canoe with
Commowol and six Clatsops. they brought two Deer and three Elk and one
elk Skin, haveing given the flesh of one other Elk they killed and
three Elk skins to the Indians as the price of their assistance in
transporting the ballance of the meat to the Fort; these Deer and Elk
were killed near pt. Adams and those Indians Carried them on their
Backs near 4 miles, before the waves were Sufficiently low to permit
their being taken on board their Canoes. The indians remain'd with us
all day. The Clapsots witnessed Drewyers Shooting Some of those Elk,
which has given them a very exolted opinion of us as marksmen and the
Superior excellency of our rifles Compared with their guns; this may
probably be of service to us, as it will deter them from any acts of
hostility if they have ever meditated any such.

our air gun also astonishes them very much, they Cannot Comprehend its
Shooting So often and without powder, and think that it is great
medison which Comprehends every thing that is to them incomprehensible.

The nativs of this neighbourhood ware no further Covering than a light
roabe, their feet legs & every other part exposed to the frost Snow &
ice &c.

[Lewis, January 25, 1806]
Sunday January 25th 1806.
Commowooll and the Clatsops departed early this morning. At meridian
Colter returned and repoted that his comrade hunter Willard had
continued his hunt from point Adams towards the salt makers; and that
they had killed only those two deer which the Indians brought
yesterday. In the evening Collins one of the saltmakers returned and
reported that they had mad about one bushel of salt & that himself and
two others had hunted from the salt camp for five days without killing
any thing and they had been obliged to subsist on some whale which they
procured from the natives.

The native fruits and buries in uce among the Indians of this
neighbourhood are a deep purple burry about the size of a small cherry
called by them Shal-lun, a small pale red bury called Sol'-me; the
vineing or low Crambury, a light brown bury reather larger and much the
shape of the black haw; and a scarlet bury about the size of a small
cherry the plant called by the Canadin Engages of the N. W. sac a
commis produces this bury; this plant is so called from the
circumstance of the Clerks of those trading companies carrying the
leaves of this plant in a small bag for the purpose of smokeing of
which they are excessively fond. the Indians call this bury ____

I have lately learned that the natives whome I have heretofore named as
distinct nations, living on the sea coast S. E. of the Killamucks, are
only bands of that numerous nation, which continues to extend itself
much further on that coast than I have enumerated them, but of the
particular appellations of those distant bands I have not yet been
enabled to inform myself; their language also is somewhat different
from the Clatsops Chinnooks and Cathlahmahs; but I have not yet obtaind
a vocabulary which I shall do the first oportunity which offers.

[Clark, January 25, 1806]
Monday 25th of January 1806
Commowol and the Clatsops departed early this morning. Colter returned
and reported that his comrade hunter Willard had Continued his hunt
from Point Adams towards the Saltmakers; and that they had killed only
those two deer which the indians brought yesterday; in the evening
Collins one of the Saltmakers returned and reported that they had made
about one bushel of Salt and that himself and two others had hunted
from the Salt Camp for five days without killing any thing and they had
been obliged to Subsist on Some whale which they purchased from the
nativs-.

The native fruits and berries in use among the Indians of this
neighbourhood are a Deep purple about the Size of a Small cherry called
by them Shal lun, a Small pale red berry called Sol me; the vineing or
low brown berry, a light brown berry rather larger and much the Shape
of a black haw; and a Scarlet berry about the Size of a Small Chirry
the plant Called by the Canadian Engages of the N. W. Sac a commis
produces this berry; this plant is So Called from the circumstances of
the Clerks of these tradeing Companies Carrying the leaves of this
plant in a Small bag for the purpose of Smokeing of which they are
excessively fond the Indians Call this berry ____

[Lewis, January 26, 1806]
Monday January 26th 1806.
Werner and Howard who were sent for salt on the 23rd have not yet
returned, we are apprehensive that they have missed their way; neither
of them are very good woodsmen, and this thick heavy timbered pine
country added to the constant cloudy weather makes it difficult for
even a good woodsman to steer for any considerable distance the course
he wishes. we ordered Collins to return early in the morning and rejoin
the salt makers, and gave him some small articles of merchandize to
purchase provisions from the Indians, in the event of their still being
unfortunate in the chase. The Shallun or deep purple berry is in form
much like the huckkleberry and terminates bluntly with a kind of cap or
cover at the end like that fruit; they are attatched seperately to the
sides of the boughs of the shrub by a very short stem hanging
underneath the same and are frequently placed very near each other on
the same bough; it is a full bearer. the berry is easily geathered as
it seperates from the bough readily, while the leaf is strongly
affixed. the shrub which produces this fruit rises to the hight of 6 or
8 feet sometimes grows on the high lands but moste generally in the
swampy or marshey grounds; it is an evergreen. the stem or trunk is
from three to 10 Inches in circumference irregularly and much branched,
seldom more than one steem proceding from the same root, tho they are
frequently associated very thickly. the bark is somewhat rough and of a
redish brown colour. the wood is very firm and hard. the leaves are
alternate declining and attatched by a short fotstalk to the two
horizontal sides of the boughs; the form is a long oval, reather more
accute towards its apex than at the point of insertion; it's margin
slightly serrate, it's sides colapsing or partially foalding upwards or
channelled; it is also thick firm smothe and glossey, the upper surface
of a fine deep green, while the under disk is of a pale or whiteish
green. this shrub retains it's virdure very perfectly during the winter
and is a beautifull shrub.- the natives either eat these berrys when
ripe immediately from the bushes or dryed in the sun or by means of
their sweating kilns; very frequently they pound them and bake then in
large loaves of 10 or fifteen pounds; this bread keeps very well during
one season and retains the moist jeucies of the fruit much better than
by any other method of preservation. this bread is broken and stired in
could water until it be sufficiently thick and then eaten; in this way
the natives most generally use it.

[Clark, January 26, 1806]
Tuesday 26th of January 1806
We order Collins to return early in the morning and join the Salt
makers, and gave him Some Small articles of merchendize to purchase
Some provisions from the indians in the event of their Still being
unfortunate in the chase.

The or deep purple berry is in form much like the huckleberry and
termonate bluntly with a kind of Cap or cover at the end like that
fruit; they are attached Seperately to the Sides of the boughes of the
shrub by a very Short Stem ganging under neath the Same, and are
frequently placed verry near each other on the Same bough it is a full
bearer; the berry is easily gathered as it Seperates from the bough,
readily, while the leaf is Strongly affixed. the Shrub which produces
this fruit rises to the hight of 6 or 8 feet Sometimes grows on high
lands but most frequently in Swampy or marshey grounds; it is an ever
green. the Stem or trunk is from 3 to 10 inches in circumferance
irrigularly and much branched, Seldom more than one Stem proceeding
from the Same root, tho they are frequently associated very thickly.
the bark is Somewhat rough and of a redish brown Colour. the wood is
very firm and hard. the leaves are alternate declining and attachd by a
Short fotstalk to the two horozontal Sides of the bough's; the form is
a long oval, reather more accute towards its apex that at the point of
insertion; it's Sides partially folding upwards; or Channeled, it is
also thick Smothe and glossy, the upper Surfice of a fine deep green,
while the under disk is of a pale or whiteish green. this Shrub retains
its verdure verry perfectly dureing the winter and is a butifull
Shrub-. the nativs either eate those berries ripe imediately from the
bushes, or dried in the Sun or by means of the Swetting kiln; verry
frequently they pound them and bake them in large loaves 10 or 15
pounds weight; this bread keeps verry well dureing one Season and
retains the moist jouicies of the frute much better than any other
method of preperation. The bread is broken and Stured in Coald water
untill it be Sufficiently thick and then eaten, in this way the nativ's
most generally use it-.-.

[Lewis, January 27, 1806]
Tuesday January 27th 1806.
This morning Collins set out for the Salt works. in the evening Shannon
returned and reported that himself and party had killed ten Elk. he
left Labuche and R. fields with the Elk. two of those Elk he informed
us were at the distance of nine miles from this place near the top of a
mountain, that the rout by which they mus be brought was at least four
miles by land through a country almost inaccessible from the fallen
timber, brush and sink-holes, which were now disgused by the snow; we
therefore concluded to relinquish those two Elk for the present, and
ordered every man who could be speared from the fort to go early in the
morning in surch of the other eight.

Goodrich has recovered from the Louis veneri which he contracted from
an amorous contact with a Chinnook damsel. I cured him as I did Gibson
last winter by the uce of murcury. I cannot learn that the Indians have
any simples which are sovereign specifics in the cure of this disease;
and indeed I doubt very much wheter any of them have any means of
effecting a perfect cure. when once this disorder is contracted by them
it continues with them during life; but always ends in decipitude,
death, or premature old age; tho from the uce of certain simples
together with their diet, they support this disorder with but little
inconvenience for many years, and even enjoy a tolerable share of
health; particularly so among the Chippeways who I believe to be better
skilled in the uce of those simples than any nation of Savages in North
America. The Chippeways use a decoction of the root of the Lobelia, and
that of a species of sumac common to the Atlantic states and to this
country near and on the Western side of the Rocky Mountains. this is
the smallest species of the sumac, readily distinguished by it's winged
rib, or common footstalk, which supports it's oppositely pinnate
leaves. these decoctions are drank freely and without limitation. the
same decoctions are used in cases of the gonnaerea and are effecatious
and sovereign. notwithstanding that this disorder dose exist among the
Indians on the Columbia yet it is witnessed in but few individuals, at
least the males who are always sufficiently exposed to the observations
or inspection of the phisician. in my whole rout down this river I did
not see more than two or three with the gonnaerea and about double that
number with the pox.

The beary which the natives call solme is the production of a plant
about the size and much the shape of that common to the atlantic states
which produces the berry commonly called Solloman's seal berry. this
berry also is attatched to the top of the stem in the same manner; and
is of a globelar form, consisting of a thin soft pellecle which
encloses a soft pulp inveloping from three to four seeds, white, firm,
smothe, and in the form of a third or quarter of a globe, and large in
proportion to the fruit or about the size of the seed of the common
small grape. this berry when grown and unripe is not speckled as that
of the Solomon's seal berry is; this last has only one globular smoth
white firm seed in each berry.the Solme grows in the woodlands among
the moss and is an annual plant to all appearance.

[Clark, January 27, 1806]
Wednesday 27th January 1806
This morning Collins Set out to the Saltmakers Shannon returned and
reported that himself and party had killed 10 Elk. he lef Labiech & R
Field with the Elk, two of those Elk he informed us was at the distance
of 9 miles from this place near the top of a mountain, that the rout by
which they must be brought was at least 5 miles by land thro a Countrey
almost inexcessable, from the fallen timber brush, and Sink holes,
which were now disguised by the Snow; we therefore Concluded to
relinquish those two Elks for the present, and ordered every man that
Could be Speared from the Fort to go early in the morning in Serch of
the other Eight, which is at no great distance from the Netul river, on
which we are. Goudrich has recoverd from the louis veneri which he
contracted from a amorous Contact with a Chinnook damsel. he was Cured
as Gibson was with murcury by ____ I cannot lern that the Indians have
any Simples Sovereign Specifics in the cure of this disease; indeed I
doubt verry much whether any of them have any means of effecting a
perfect cure. when once this disorder is contracted by them it
Continues with them dureing life; but always ends in decepitude, death;
or premature old age; tho from the use of certain Simples together with
their diet, they Support this disorder with but little inconveniance
for maney years, and even enjoy a tolerable Share of health;
particularly So among the Chippeways who I beleive to be better Skilled
in the use of those Simples than any nation of Indians in North
America. The Chippaways use a decoction of the root of the Labelia, and
that of a Species of Sumac Common to the Atlantic States and to this
countrey near and on the western Side of the Rocky mountains. This is
the Smallest Specis of Sumake, readily distinguished by it's winged
rib, or common footstalk, which Supports it's oppositly pinnate leaves.
these decoctions are drank freely and without limatation. the Same
decoctions are used also in cases of the gonnarea and are effecatious
and sovereign. notwithstanding that this disorder does exist among the
indians on the Columbia yet it is witnessed in but fiew individuals
high up the river, or at least the males who are always Sufficiently
exposed to the observation or inspection of the phisician. in my whole
rout down this river I did not See more than two or three with Gonnarea
and about double that number with the Pox.

The berry which the nativs Call Sol me is the production of a plant
about the Size and much the Shape of that Common to the atlantic States
which produces the berry Commonly Called Sollomons Seal berry this
berry is also attached to the top of the Stem in the Same manner; and
is of a globular form Consisting of a thin Soft Pellicle rine which
encloses a Soft Pellicle pulp inveloping from 3 to 4 Seed, white firm,
Smothe, and in the form of a third or a quarter of a Globe, and large
in perportion to the fruit, or about the Size of the Seed of the Common
Small grape. the berry when grown and unripe is not Specked as the
Solomon's seal Berry is; this last haveing only one Globaler Smothe,
ferm, white Seed in each berry-. the Sol me grows in the wood lands
amonge the moss and on the high ridges. and is an annual plant to all
appearance

[Lewis, January 28, 1806]
Wednesday January 28th 1806.
Drewyer and Baptiest La Page set out this morning on a hunting
excurtion. about noon Howard and Werner returned with a supply of salt;
the badness of the weather and the difficulty of the road had caused
their delay. they inform us that the salt makers are still much
straitened for provision, having killed two deer only in the last six
days; and that there are no Elk in their neighbourhood. The party that
were sent this morning up Netul river for the Elk returned in the even
ing with three of them only; the Elk had been killed just before the
snow fell which had covered them and so altered the apparent face of
the country that the hunters could not find the Elk which they had
killed. the river on which Fort Clatsop stands we now call Ne-tul, this
being the name by which the Clatsops call it.

The Cranbury of this neighbourhood is precisely the same common to the
U States, and is the production of marshey or boggy grounds. The light
brown berry, is the fruit of a tree about the size shape and appearance
in every rispect with that in the U. States called the wild crab apple;
the leaf is also precisely the same as is also the bark in texture and
colour. the berrys grow in clumps at the end of the small branches;
each berry supported by a seperate stem, and as many as from 3 to 18 or
20 in a clump. the berry is ovate with one of it's extremities
attatched to the peduncle, where it is in a small degre concave like
the insertion of the stem of the crab apple. I know not whether this
fruit can properly be denominated a berry, it is a pulpy pericarp, the
outer coat of which is in a thin smoth, tho firm tough pillecle; the
pericarp containing a membranous capsule with from three to four cells,
each containing a seperate single seed in form and colour like that of
the wild crab. The wood of this tree is excessively hard when seasoned.
the natives make great uce of it to form their wedges with which they
split their boards of pine for the purpose of building houses. these
wedges they also employ in spliting their fire-wood and in hollowing
out their canoes. I have seen the natives drive the wedges of this wood
into solid dry pine which it cleft without fracturing or injuring the
wedg in the smallest degree. we have also found this wood usefull to us
for ax handles as well as glutts or wedges. the native also have wedges
made of the beams of the Elk's horns which appear to answer extremely
well. this fruit is exceedingly assid, and resembles the flavor of the
wild crab.

[Clark, January 28, 1806]
Thursday 28th January 1806
Drewyer and Baptiest Lapage Set out this morning on a hunting
excurtion. about noon Howard & Werner returned with a Supply of Salt;
the badness of the weather and the dificuelty of the road had detained
them. they informed us that the Salt makers are Still much Stratened
for provisions haveing killed two deer only in the last Six days; and
that there are no Elk in their neighbourhood.

The party that was Sent up the Netul river for the Elk returned this
evening with three of them only; The Elk had been killed just before
the Snow fell which had Covered them and So altered the apparant face
of the Countrey that the hunters Could not find them. The River on
which Fort Clat Sop Stands we now call Netul, this being the name by
which the Clatsops Call it.

The Cranberry of this neighbourhood is precisely the Same Common to the
united States, and is the production of boggy or mashey grounds.-.

The light-brown berry, is the fruit of a tree, about the Size Shape and
appearance in every respect with that in the united States called the
wild Crab apple; the leaf is also presisely the Same as is also the
bark in textue and colour. the berry grows in Clumps at the ends of the
Smaller branches; each berry Supported by a Stem, and as maney as from
3 to 18 or 20 in a Clump. the berry is oval with one of its extremitis
attatched to the peduncle, where it is in a Small degree Concave like
the insersion of the Stem of the Crab apple. I know not whether this
fruit Can properly be denomonated a berry, it is a pulpy pericarp, the
outer coat of which is a thin Smothe, capsule with from three to four
Cells, each containing a Seperate Single Seed in form and Colour like
that of the wild Crab apple The wood of this tree is excessively hard
when Seasoned. The nativs make great use of it to form their wedges of
which they Split their boards of Pine for the purpose of building
houses. those wedges they employ in common with those formed of the
Elks horn, in Splitting their fire wood and in hollowing out their
Canoes. I have Seen the nativs drive the wedges of this wood into a
solid dry pine which it cleft without fractureing injuring the wedge in
the Smallest degree. we have also found this wood useful) to us for ax
handles, as well as glutt or wedges. The bark of this tree is chewed by
our party in place of tobacco.

The fruit is exceedingly ascid and resembles the flavor of the wild
Crab.

[Lewis, January 29, 1806]
Thursday January 29th 1806.
Nothing worthy of notice occurred today. our fare is the flesh of lean
elk boiled with pure water, and a little salt. the whale blubber which
we have used very sparingly is now exhausted. on this food I do not
feel strong, but enjoy the most perfect health;- a keen appetite
supplys in a great degree the want of more luxurious sauses or dishes,
and still render my ordinary meals not uninteresting to me, for I find
myself sometimes enquiring of the cook whether dinner or breakfast is
ready.-

The Sac a commis is the growth of high dry situations, and invariably
in a piney country or on it's borders. it is generally found in the
open piney woodland as on the Western side of the Rocky mountain but in
this neighbourhood we find it only in the praries or on their borders
in the more open wood lands; a very rich soil is not absolutely
necessary, as a meager one frequently produces it abundantly. the
natives on this side of the Rockey mountains who can procure this berry
invariably use it; to me it is a very tasteless and insippid fruit.
this shrub is an evergreen, the leaves retain their virdure most
perfectly through the winter even in the most rigid climate as on lake
Winnipic. the root of this shrub puts forth a great number of stems
which seperate near the surface of the ground; each stem from the size
of a small quill to that of a man's finger; these are much branched the
branches forming an accute angle with the stem, and all more poperly
pocumbent than creeping, for altho it sometimes puts forth radicles
from the stem and branches which strike obliquely into the ground,
these radicles are by no means general, equable in their distances from
each other nor do they appear to be calculated to furnish nutriment to
the plant but reather to hold the stem or branch in it's place. the
bark is formed of several thin layers of a smoth thin brittle substance
of a dark or redish brown colour easily seperated from the woody stem
in flakes. the leaves with rispect to their position are scatered yet
closely arranged near the extremities of the twigs particularly. the
leaf is about 3/4 of an inch in length and about half that in width, is
oval but obtusely pointed, absolutely entire, thick, smoth, firm, a
deep green and slightly grooved. the leaf is supported by a small
footstalk of proportionable length. the berry is attatched in an
irregular and scattered manner to the small boughs among the leaves,
tho frequently closely arranged, but always supported by seperate short
and small peduncles, the insertion of which poduces a slight concavity
in the bury while it's opposite side is slightly convex; the form of
the berry is a spheroid; the shorter diameter being in a line with the
peduncle.- this berry is a pericarp the outer coat of which is a thin
firm tough pellicle, the inner part consists of a dry mealy powder of a
yellowish white colour invelloping from four to six proportionably
large hard light brown seeds each in the form of a section of a
spheroid which figure they form when united, and are destitute of any
membranous covering.- the colour of this fruit is a fine scarlet. the
natives usually eat them without any preperation. the fruit ripens in
september and remains on the bushes all winter. the frost appears to
take no effect on it. these berries are sometimes geathered and hung in
their lodges in bags where they dry without further trouble, for in
their most succulent state they appear to be almost as dry as flour.

[Clark, January 29, 1806]
Friday 29th January 1806
Nothing worthey of notice occured to day. our fare is the flesh of lean
Elk boiled with pure water and a little Salt. the whale blubber which
we have used very Spearingly is now exhosted. on this food I do not
feel Strong, but enjoy tolerable health-. a keen appetite Supplies in a
great degree the want of more luxurious Sauses or dishes, and Still
renders my ordanary meals not uninteresting to me, for I find myself
Sometimes enquireing of the Cook whether dinner Supper or Brackfast is
readyindeed my appetite is but Seldom gratified, not even after I have
eaten what I conceve a Sufficency.-

Maney of the nativs of the Columbia were hats & most commonly of a
conic figure without a brim confined on the head by means of a String
which passes under the chin and is attached to the two opposit Sides of
a Secondary rim within the hat- the hat at top termonates in a pointed
knob of a conic form, or in this Shape. these hats are made of the bark
of Cedar and beargrass wrought with the fingers So closely that it
Casts the rain most effectually in the Shape which they give them for
their own use or that just discribed, on these hats they work various
figures of different colours, but most commonly only black and white
are employed. these figures are faint representations of the whales,
the Canoes, and the harpooners Strikeing them. Sometimes Square dimonds
triangle &c. The form of a knife which Seems to be prefured by those
people is a double Edged and double pointed dagger the handle being
near the middle, the blades of uneaquel length, the longest from 9 to
10 incs. and the Shorter one from 3 to 5 inches. those knives they
Carry with them habitually and most usially in the hand, Sometimes
exposed, when in Company with Strangers under their Robes with this
knife they Cut & Clense their fish make their arrows &c. this is the
form of the Knife A is a Small loop of a Strong twine throng through
which they Sometimes they incert the thumb in order to prevent it being
wrested from their hand.-.

[Lewis, January 30, 1806]
Friday January 30th 1806.
Nothing transpired today worthy of notice. we are agreeably
disappointed in our fuel which is altogether green pine. we had
supposed that it burn but illy, but we have found that by spliting it
that it burns very well. The dress of the Clatsops and others in this
neighbourhood differs but little from that discribed of the skillutes;
they never wear leggins or mockersons which the mildness of this
climate I presume has rendered in a great measure unnecessary; and
their being obliged to be frequently in the water also renders those
articles of dress inconvenient. they wear a hat of a conic figure
without a brim confined on the head by means of a string which passes
under the chin and is attatched to the two opsite sides of a secondary
rim within the hat. the hat at top terminates in a pointed knob of a
connic form also, or in this shape. these hats are made of the bark of
cedar and beargrass wrought with the fingers so closely that it casts
the rain most effectually in the shape which they give them for their
own uce or that just discribed. on these hats they work various figures
of different colours, but most commonly only black and white are
employed. these figures are faint representations of whales the canoes
and the harpoonneers striking them. sometimes squares dimonds triangles
&c. The form of knife which seems to be prefered by these people is a
double edged and double pointed daggar; the handle being in the middle,
and the blades of unequal lengths, the longest usually from 9 to ten
inches and the shorter one from four to five. these knives they carry
with them habitually and most usually in the hand, sometimes exposed
but most usually particularly when in company with strangers, under
their robes with this knife they cut and clense their fish make their
arrows &c. this is somewhat the form of the knife- A is a small loop of
a strong twine through which they sometimes insert the thumb in order
to prevent it's being wrested from their hand.

[Clark, January 30, 1806]
Fort Clatsop on the Pacific Ocian
on the South Side of the Columbia River
Thursday 30th January 1806
Nothing transpired to day worthey of notice. we are agreeably
disapointed in our fuel which is altogether green pine. we had Supposed
that it burned badly, but we have found by Spliting it burns very well.

The dress of the Clatsops and others of the nativs in the neighbourhood
differ but little from that described of the Skilutes and Wau ki a
cums; they never ware ligins or mockersons which the mildness of the
Climate I presume has rendered in a great measure unnecessary; and
their being obliged to be frequently in the water also renders those
articles of dress inconveniant.

The Sac-a commis is the groth of high dry Situations, and invariably in
a piney Country, or on its borders; it is Generally found in the open
piney woodlands as on the Western Side of the Rocky mountains but in
this neighbourhood we find it in the praries or on the borders in the
more open woodland's; a very rich Soil is not absolutely necessary, as
a meager one frequently produces it abundantly. the nativs on the West
side of the Rocky mountains who can precure this berry invariably use
it; to me it is a very tasteless and insipid frute. This Shrub is an
evergreen, the leaves retain their virdue most perfectly throughout the
winter even in the most rigid climate as on Lake Winnipic. the root of
this shrub puts foth a great number of Stems, which seperate near the
surface of the ground; each Stem from the size of a Small quill, to
that of a mans finger. These are much branched forming an accute angle
with the Stem, and all more properly procumbent than crossing, for
altho it sometimes puts foth radicles from the Stems and branches which
Strike obliquely into the ground, those radicles are by no means
general, equable in their distances from each other nor do they appear
to be calculated to furnish nutriment to the plant but rather to hold
the Stem or branch in its place. the bark is formed of several thin
layers of a Smothe thin brittle substance of a redish brown colour
easily seperated from the woody Stem in flakes. the leaves with respect
to their possition are scatter'd yet closely arranged near the
extremities of the twigs particularly. the leaves are about 3/4 of an
inch in length and about half that in width, is oval but obtusely
pointed, absolutely entire, thick, Smoth, firm, a deep green and
slightly grooved. the leaf is Supported by a Small footstalk of
preportionable length. the berry is attached in an irregular and
Scattered manner to the Small boughs among the leaves, tho frequently
Closely arranged, but always Supported by a Seperate Short and Small
peduncles, the incersion of which produces a Small concavity in the
berry while its opposit side is Slightly convex; the form of the berry
is a Spheroid, the Shorter diameter being in a line with the peduncle
or Stem-. this berry is a pericarp the outer Coat of which is a thin
firm tough pellicle, the inner part consists of dry mealy powder of a
yellowish white colour invelloping from four to six propotionably large
hard light brown seeds each in the form of section of a spheroid which
figure they form when united, and are distitute of any membranous
covering.- the colour of this fruit is a fine scarlet. the nativs
usually eat them without any preparation. the fruit ripens in September
and remains on the bushes all winter. the frost appears to take no
effects on it. these berries are Sometimes gathered and hung in their
houses in bags where they dry without further trouble, for in their
succulent State they appear to be almost as dry as flour.

[Lewis, January 31, 1806]
Saturday January 31st 1806.
Sent a party of eight men up the river this morning to renew their
surch for the Elk and also to hunt; they proceded but a few miles
before they found the river so obstructed with ice that they were
obliged to return. Joseph Fields arrived this evening, informed us that
he had been hunting in company with Gibson and Willard for the last
five days in order to obtain some meat for himself and the other Salt
makers, and that he had been unsuccessfull untill yesday evening when
he had fortunately killed two Elk, about six miles distant from this
place and about 8 from the salt works; he left Gibson and Willard to
dry the meat of these Elk and had come for the assistance of some men
to carry the meat to the salt camp; for this purpose we ordered four
men to accompany him early in the morning. discovered that McNeal had
the pox, gave him medecine. Charbono found a bird dead lying near the
fort this morning and brought it to me I immediately recognized it to
be of the same kind of that which I had seen in the Rocky mountains on
the morning of the 20th of September last. this bird is about the size
as near as may be of the robbin. it's contour also is precisely the
same with that bird. it measures one foot 31/4 Inches from tip to tip
of the wings when extended. 91/4 inches from the extremity of the beak
to that of the tail. the tail is 33/4 inches in length, and composed of
eleven feathers of the same length. The beak is smoth, black, convex
and cultrated; one and 1/8 inches from the point to the opening of the
chaps and 3/4 only uncovered with feathers; the upper chap exceeds the
other a little in length. a few small black hairs garnish the sides of
the base of the upper chap. the eye is of a uniform deep sea green or
black, moderately large. it's legs feet and tallons are white; the legs
are an inch and a 1/4 in length and smoth; four toes on each foot, of
which that in front is the same length with the leg including the
length of the tallon, which is 4 lines; the three remaining toes are
3/4 of an inch, each armed with proportionably long tallons. the toes
are slightly imbricated. the tallons are curved and sharply pointed.
The crown of the head from the beak back to the neck, the back of the
neck imbracing reather more than half the circumpherence of the neck,
the back and tale, are of bluish dark brown; the two outer feathers of
the tale have a little dash of white near their tips not percemtible
when the tail is foalded. a fine black forms the ground of the wings;
two stripes of the same colour pass on either side of the head from the
base of the beak along the side of the head to it's junction with the
neck, and imbraces the eye to it's upper edge; a third stripe of the
same colour 3/4 of an inch in width passes from the sides of the neck
just above the butts of the wings across the croop in the form of a
gorget. the throat or under part of the neck brest and belly is of a
fine yellowish brick red. a narrow stripe of this colour also commences
just above the center of each eye, and extends backwards to the neck as
far as the black stripe reaches before discribed, to which, it appears
to answer as a border. the feathers which form the 1st and second
ranges of the coverts of the two joints of the wing next the body, are
beautifully tiped with this brick red; as is also each large feather of
the wing on the short side of it's plumage for 1/2 an inch in length
commening at the extremity of the feathers which form the first or main
covert of the wing. this is a beatifull little bird. I have never heard
it's note it appears to be silent. it feeds on berries, and I beleive
is a rare bird even in this country, or at least this is the second
time only that I have seen it.- between the legs of this bird the
feathers are white, and those which form the tuft underneath the tail
are a mixture of white and a brick red.

[Clark, January 31, 1806]
Friday January 31st 1806
Sent a party of Eight men with the hunters to renew their Serch for the
Elk, and also to hunt; they proceeded but a fiew miles before they
found the river So obstructed with ice that they were obliged to
return. Jo. Field arrives this evening, informs us That he had been
hunting in Company with gibson and willard for the last four days in
order to obtain some meat for himself and the other Salt-makers, and
that he had been unsucksessfull untill yesterday evening when he had
fortunately killed two Elk, about six miles distant from this place and
about 8 from the Salt works; he left gibson and willard to dry the meat
of those Elk, and had come for assistance to carry the meat to the Salt
Camp; for this purpose we ordered four men to accompany him early in
the morning. discovered that McNeal had the pox, gave him medicine.
Chabono found a bird dead lying near the Fort this morning and brought
it in, I reconized it to be the Same kind of that which I had Seen in
the Rocky Mountains at severl different times. this berd is about the
Size as near as may be of the robin. it's contour is also presisely the
Same with that bird. it measured one foot 3/4 inches from tip to tip of
the wings when extended. 91/4 inches from the extremity of the beak to
that of the tail. the tail is 33/4 inches in length, and Composed of 11
feathers of the Same length. The beak is Smoth, black, convex and
cultrated; 1 1/8 inchs from the point to the opening of the Chaps and
3/4 only uncovered with feathers, the upper Chap exceeds the other a
little in length. a fiew Small black hairs garnish the Side of the
upper chap. The Eye is of a uniform deep Sea green or black, moderately
large. it's legs feet and tallants are white; the legs are of 11/4 in
length and Smoth; four toes on each foot, of which that in front is the
Same length of the leg including the tallants, which is 4 lines; the 3
remaining toes are 3/4 of an inch, each armed with proportianably large
tallons. the toes are Slightly imbricated. the tallons are curved and
Sharply pointed. The Crown of the head from the beak back to the neck
imbracing rather more than half the circumphrence of the neck, the Back
and tail is of a bluish dark brown; the two outer feathers of the tail
have a little dash of white near the tips, not proceivable when the
tail is foalded. a fine black forms the ground of the wings; two
Stripes of the same colour passes on either side of the Head from the
base of the Back along the Side of the head to it's junction with the
neck, and embraces the eye to its upper edge; a third Stripe of the
Same Colour 3/4 of an inch in width passes from the Side of the neck
just above the buts of the wings across the troop in the form of a
gorget. the throat or under part of the neck brest and belly is of a
fine Yellowish brick red. a narrow Stripe of this Colour also Commences
just above the center of each eye, and extends backwards to the Neck as
far as the black Spots reaches before discribed, to which it appears to
answer as a border. the feathers which form the 1st and Second range of
the coverts of the two joints of the wings next the body are butifully
aped with this Brick red; as is also each large feather of the wing on
the Short Side of its plumage for 1/2 an inch in length Comencing at
the extremity of the feather which form the first or main Covert of the
wing. This is a butifull little bird. I have never herd its notes it
appears to be Silent. it feeds on berries, and I believe is a rare bird
even in this country-. between the legs of this bird the feathers are
white, and those which form the tuft underneath the tail are a mixture
of white and Brick red.

[Lewis, February 1, 1806]
Saturday February 1st 1806.
This morning a party of four men set out with Joseph Fields; Sergt.
Gass with a party of five men again set out up the Netul river in surch
of the Elk which had been killed some days since, and which could not
be found in consequence of the snow. The Canoes of the natives
inhabiting the lower portion of the Columbia River make their canoes
remarkably neat light and well addapted for riding high waves. I have
seen the natives near the coast riding waves in these canoes with
safety and apparently without concern where I should have thought it
impossible for any vessel of the same size to lived a minute. they are
built of whitecedar or Arborvita generally, but sometimes of the firr.
they are cut out of a solid stick of timber, the gunwals at the upper
edge foald over outwards and are about 5/8 of an inch thick and 4 or
five broad, and stand horrizontally forming a kind of rim to the canoe
to prevent the water beating into it. they are all furnished with more
or less crossbars in proportion to the size of the canoe. these bars
are round sticks about half the size of a man's arm, which are incerted
through holes (just) made in either side of the canoe just below the
rim of the gunwall and are further secured with strings of waytape;
these crossbars serve to lift and manage the canoe on land. when the
natives land they invariably take their canoes on shore, unless they
are heavily laden, and then even, if they remain all night, they
discharge their loads and take the canoes on shore. some of the large
canoes are upwards of 50 feet long and will carry from 8 to 10 thousand
lbs. or from 20 to thirty persons and some of them particularly on the
sea coast are waxed painted and ornimented with curious images at bough
and Stern; those images sometimes rise to the hight of five feet; the
pedestals on which these immages are fixed are sometimes cut out of the
solid stick with the canoe, and the imagary is formed of seperate small
peices of timber firmly united with tenants and motices without the
assistance of a single spike of any kind. when the natives are engaged
in navigating their canoes one sets in the stern and steers with a
paddle the others set by pears and paddle over the gunwall next them,
they all kneel in the bottom of the canoe and set on their feet. their
paddles are of a uniform shape of which this is an imitation these
paddles are made very thin and the middle of the blade is thick and
hollowed out siddonly and made thin at the sides while the center forms
a kind of rib. the blade occupys about one third of the length of the
paddle which is usually from 41/2 to 5 feet. I have observed four forms
of canoe only in uce among the nations below the grand chatarac of this
river they are as follow. this is the smallest size about 15 feet long
and calculated for one or two persons, and are most common among the
Cathlahmahs and Wack ki a cums among the marshey Islands. A the bow; B,
the stern; these are from twenty to thirty five feet and from two 1/2
to 3 feet in the beam and about 2 feet in the hole; this canoe is
common to all the nations below the grand rappids. it is here made
deeper and shorter in proportion than they really are.- the bowsprit
from C, to D is brought to a sharp edge tapering gradually from the
sides.

This is the most common forms of the canoe in uce among the Indians
from; the Chil-luck-kit-te-quaw inclusive to the Ocean and is usually
about 30 or 35 feet long, and will carry from ten to twelve persons. 4
men are competent to carry them a considerable distance say a mile
without resting. A is the end which they use as the bow, but which on
first sight I took to be the stern C. D. is a comb cut of the sollid
stick with the canoe and projects from the center of the end of the
canoe being about 1 inch thirck it's sides parallel and edge at C D.
sharp. it is from 9 to 11 Inches in length and extends from the
underpart of the bowsprit at A to the bottom of the canoe at D.- the
stern B. is mearly rounding and graduly ascending. 1 2 3 represents the
rim of the gunwalls about 4 Inches wide, reather ascending as they
recede from the canoe. 4 5 6 7 8 are the round holes through which the
cross bars are inserted.

This form of canoe we did not meet with untill we reached tidewater or
below the grand rappids. from thence down it is common to all the
nations but more particularly the Killamucks and others of the coast.
these are the largest canoes. B. is the bow and comb. C. the stern and
comb. their immages are representations of a great variety of grotesque
figures, any of which might be safely worshiped without committing a
breach of the commandments.

They have but few axes among them, and the only too usually imployed in
felling the trees or forming the canoe, carving &c is a chissel formed
of an old file about an Inch or an Inch and a half broad. this chissel
has sometimes a large block of wood for a handle; they grasp the
chissel just below the block with the right hand holding the edge down
while with the left they take hold of the top of the block and strike
backhanded against the wood with the edge of the chissel. a person
would suppose that the forming of a large canoe with an instrument like
this was the work of several years; but these people make them in a few
weeks. they prize their canoes very highly; we have been anxious to
obtain some of them, for our journey up the river but have not been
able to obtain one as yet from the natives in this neighbourhood.-
today we opened and examined all our ammunition, which had been secured
in leaden canesters. we found twenty seven of the best rifle powder, 4
of common rifle, three of glaized and one of the musqut powder in good
order, perfectly as dry as when first put in the canesters, altho the
whole of it from various accedents has been for hours under the water.
these cannesters contain four lbs. of powder each and 8 of lead. had it
not have been for that happy expedient which I devised of securing the
powder by means of the lead, we should not have had a single charge of
powder at this time. three of the canesters which had been accedentally
bruized and cracked, one which was carelessly stoped, and a fifth that
had been penetrated with a nail, were a little dammaged; these we gave
to the men to make dry; however exclusive of those five we have an
abundant stock to last us back; and we always take care to put a
proportion of it in each canoe, to the end that should one canoe or
more be lost we should still not be entirely bereft of ammunition,
which is now our only hope for subsistence and defence in a rout of
4000 miles through a country exclusively inhabited by savages.

[Clark, February 1, 1806]
Saturday February 1st 1806
This morning a party of four men Set out with Jo. Field; and Sergt.
Gass with a party of five men again Set out up the Netul river in Serch
of the Elk which had been killed Some days since, and which Could not
be found in Consequence of the Snow.

The Canoes of the nativs inhabitting the lower part of the Columbia
River from the Long narrows down make their canoes remarkably neat
light and well addapted for rideing high waves. I have Seen the nativs
near the Coast rideing waves in these Canoes in Safty and appearantly
without Concern when I Should it impossible for any vessel of the Same
Size to have lived or kept above water a minute. they are built of
Arborvitia or white Cedar generally, but Sometimes of fir. they are cut
out of a solid Stick of timber, the gunnals at the upper edge fold over
outwards and are about 5/8 of an inch thick and 4 or 5 broad, and Stand
out nearly Horizontially forming a kind of rim to the Canoe to prevent
the water beating into it. they are all furnished with more or less
Cross bars agreeably to thier sizes of the Canoe, those bars are round
Sticks about 1 inch and 1/2 diameter which are atached to the iner Side
of the canoes a little below the rim on either Side with throngs of
Cedar bark which is incerted through holes and made fast to the ends of
the Stick, which is made Smaller than the other part of the Stick to
prevent the cord Slipping off these cross bears Serve to Strengthen the
canoe, and by which they lift and manage her on land. when the nativs
land they invariably take their Canoes on Shore unless they are heavily
ladined, and then even, if they remain all night, they discharge their
loads and take the Canoe on Shore.

Some of the large Canoes are upwards of 50 feet long and will Carry
from 8 to 12 thousand lbs. or from 20 to 30 persons, and Some of them
particularly on the Sea Coast are waxed painted and ornimented with
curious images on bow and Stern; those images sometimes rise to the
hight of five feet; the pedestile on which these images are fixed, are
Sometimes cut out of the Solid Stick with the Canoe, and the image is
formed of Seperate pieces of timber firmly united with tenants and
mortices without the appearance of a Single Spike or nail of any kind.
when the nativs are engaged in navigateing their Canoes, one Sets in
the Stern and Stears with a paddle the others Set by pars and paddle
over their gunnals next them, they all kneel in the bottom of the Canoe
and Set on their feet. their paddles are of an uniform shape which this
is an imitation those paddles are made verry thin and the middle of the
blade is thick and hollowed out Suddenly, and made thin on the Sides,
the center forming a kind of ridge. the handle occupies about 1/8 of
the length of the paddle which is usually 4 to 41/2 feet in length. I
have observed five forms of Canoes only in use among the nativs below
the Grand Cataract of this river. they areas follows. this is the
Smallest Size about 15 feet long, 12 and Calculated for one two men
mearly to cross creeks, take over Short portages to navagate the ponds
and Still water, and is mostly in use amongst the Clatsops and
Chinnooks. this is the next Smallest and from 16 to 20 feet long and
calculated for two or 3 persons and are most common among the
Wau-ki-a-cums and Cath-lah-mahs among the marshey Islands, near their
villages. A the bow; B the Stern; those are from 20 to 40 feet in
length and from 21/2 to 31/2 feet in the beam and about 2 feet deep;
this Canoe is common to all the nations below the grand Rapids it here
made deeper and Shorter in pertotion than the Canoe realy is, the bow
sprit from C. to D. is brought to a Sharp edge tapering gradually from
the Sides. This is the most common form of the Canoes in use among the
indians from the Chil-luck-kit-te quaw inclusive to the ocian and is
commonly from about 30 to 35 feet long, and will carry from 10 to 12
persons. 4 men are competent to carry them a considerable distance Say
a mile without resting. A is the end the nativs use as the bow, but
which on first Sight I took to be the Stern c. d. is a comb cut of the
solid wood with the Canoe, and projects from the Center of the end of
the Canoe being about 1 inch thick, it's Sides parallel and edge at c,
d, Sharp it is from 9 to 11 inches in debth and extends from the under
part of the bow sprit at A to the bottom at, d,. the Stern B is nearly
rounding and gradually assending. 1, 2, 3, represents the rim of the
gunnals about 4 inches wide, reather ascending as they recede from the
Canoe. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, are the holes through which the String pass to
fasten the round pieces which pass Crosswise the Canoe to Strengthen &
lift her. This form of a canoe we did not meet with untill we reached
tide water or below the Great Rapids. from thence down it is common to
all the nations but more particularly the Kil a mox and others of the
Coast. these are the largest Canoes, I measured one at the Kilamox
villag S S W of us which was ____ feet long ____ feet wide and ____
feet deep, and they are most Commonly about that Size. B is the how,
and Comb. C, the stern and Comb. Their images are representations of a
great variety of grotesque figures, any of which might be Safely
worshiped without commiting a breach of the Commandments.

They have but fiew axes among them, and the only tool usially employd
in forming the Canoe, carveing &c is a chissel formed of an old file
about an inch or 11/2 inchs broad, this chissel has Sometimes a large
block of wood for a handle; they grasp the chissel just below the block
with the right hand holding the top of the block, and Strikes backwards
against the wood with the edge of the Chissel. a person would Suppose
that forming a large Canoe with an enstriment like this was the work of
Several years; but those people make them in a fiew weeks. They prize
their Canoes very highly; we have been anxious to obtain Some of them,
for our journy up the river but have not been able to obtain one as yet
from the nativs in this neighbourhood.

To day we opened and examined all our Ammunition, which has been
Secured in leaden Canistirs. we found twenty Sevin of the best Rifle
powder, 4 of Common rifle, 3 of Glaize and one of Musquet powder in
good order, perfectly as dry as when first put in the Canisters, altho
the whole of it from various accidince have been for hours under the
water. these Cannisters Contain 4 pounds of powder each and 8 of Lead.
had it not been for that happy expedient which Capt Lewis devised of
Securing the powder by means of the Lead, we Should have found great
dificuelty in keeping dry powder untill this time-; those Cannisters
which had been accidently brused and cracked, one which was carelessly
Stoped, and a fifth which had been penetrated with a nail; were wet and
damaged; those we gave to the men to Dry; however exclusive of those 5
we have an abundant Stock to last us back; and we always take Care to
put a purpotion of it in each canoe, to the end that Should one Canoe
or more be lost we Should Still not be entirely bereft of ammunition,
which is now our only hope for Subsistance and defences in the rout of
4,000 miles through a Country exclusively inhabited by Indians-many
bands of which are Savage in every Sense of the word-.

[Lewis, February 2, 1806]
Sunday February 2cd 1806.
Not any occurrence today worthy of notice; but all are pleased, that
one month of the time which binds us to Fort Clatsop and which
seperates us from our friends has now elapsed. one of the games of
amusement and wrisk of the Indians of this neighbourhood like that of
the Sosones consists in hiding in the hand some small article about the
size of a bean; this they throw from one hand to the other with great
dexterity accompanying their opperations with a particular song which
seems to have been addapted to the game; when the individul who holds
the peice has amused himself sufficiently by exchanging it from one
hand to the other, he hold out his hands for his compettitors to guess
which hand contains the peice; if they hit on the hand which contains
the peice they win the wager otherwise loose. the individual who holds
the peice is a kind of banker and plays for the time being against all
the others in the room; when he has lost all the property which he has
to venture, or thinks proper at any time, he transfers the peice to
some other who then also becoms banker. The Sosone and Minnetares &c
have a game of a singular kind but those divide themselves in two
parties and play for a common wager to which each individual
contributes to form the stock of his party. one of them holdes the
peice and some one of the opposite party gesses which hand contains if
he hits on the hand which contains it the peice is transferred to the
opposite party and the victor counts one, if he misses the party still
retain the peice and score one but the individual tranfers the peice to
some other of his own party; the game is set to any number they think
proper, and like the natives of this quarter they always accompany
their opperations with a particular song. the natives here have also
another game which consists in bowling some small round peices about
the size of Bacgammon men, between two small upright sticks placed a
few inches asunder, but the principals of the game I have not learn not
understanding their language sufficiently to obtain an explanation.
their boys amuse themselves with their bows and arrows as those do of
every Indian nation with which I am acquainted. these people are
excessively fond of their games of risk and bet freely every species of
property of which they are possessed. They have a smal dog which they
make usefull only in hunting the Elk.

[Clark, February 2, 1806]
Sunday February 2nd 1806
Not any accurrence to day worthy of notice; but all are pleased, that
one month of the time which binds us to fort Clatsop, and which
Seperates us from our friends, has now alapsed.

The games of amusements of the natives of this neighbourhood are
Several, one of which is verry similar to one which the Sosone's &
Minatare's are verry fond of and frequently play. they devide
themselves into two parties and play for a common wager to which each
individual Contributes to form the Stock of his party, one of them
holdes the piece which is usually about the Size of a Bean, and Some
one of the oposit party gesses which hand Contains, if he hits on the
hand which Contains it, the piece is transfired to the opposit party
and the victor Counts one, if he misses the party Still retains the
piece and scores one, but the individual transfirs the piece to Some
one of his own party; the game is Set to any number they think proper.
they always accompany their opperations with a particular Song. The
amusements of the boys of all nations which I am acquainted with are
generally the Bows and arrows.

All nations of Indians with which I am acquainted are excessive fond of
their games of risk, and bet away Species of property of which they are
possessed.

The nativs of this neighbourhood have a Small Dog which they make
usefull only in hunting the Elk.

[Lewis, February 3, 1806]
Monday February 3rd 1806.
About three o'clock Drewyer and La Page, returned; Drewyer had killed
seven Elk in the point below us, several miles distant but can be
approached with in 3/4 of a mile with canoes by means of a small creek
which discharges itself into the bay on this side of the Clatsop
village direct Sergt. pryor to go in quest of the meat, the wind was so
high that they were unable to set out untill a little before sunset,
when they departed; at 10 P.M. they return excessively could and
informed us that they could not make land on this side of the bay nor
get into the creek in consequence of the tide being out and much lower
than usual. we are apprehensive that the Clatsops who know where the
meat is will rob us of a part if not the whole of it. at half after 4
P.M. Sergt Gass returned with his party, they brought with them the
flesh of four other Elk which the hunters had found, being a part of
the ten which were killed up the Netul river the other day. he left R.
Fields, Shannon and Labuish to continue the hunt and made an
appointment to return to them on Friday. late in the evening the four
men who had been sent to assist the saltmakers in transporting meat
which they had killed to their camp, also returned, and brought with
them all the salt which had been made, consisting of about one busshel
only. with the means we have of boiling the salt water we find it a
very tedious opperation, that of making salt, notwithstanding we keep
the kettles boiling day and night. we calculate on three bushels
lasting us from hence to our deposits of that article on the Missouri.

[Clark, February 3, 1806]
Monday February 3rd 1806
About 3 oClock Drewyer & Lapage returned, Drewyer had killed Seven Elk
in the point below us, Several miles distant, but Can be approached
within 3/4 of a mile with Canoes by means of a Small Creak which
discharges itself into the Bay, on this Sid of the Clatsop Village.
Directed Serjt. Pryor to go in quest of the meat, the winds was So high
that they were unable to Set out until) a little before Sunset, when
they departed; at 10 P.M. they returned excessively Cold and informed
us that they could not make land on this Side of the bay or get into
the Creek in consequence of the tides being out and much lower than
usial. we are apprehensive that the Clatsops knowing where the meat is,
will rob us of a part if not the whole of it. at half after 4 P. M
Sergt. Gass returned with his party they brought with them the flesh of
4 other Elk which the hunters had found, being part of the 10 which
were killed up the Netul river the other day. He left Ro. Field,
Shannon & Labiesh to Continue the hunt, and made an appointment to
return to them on friday. late in the evening the four men who had been
Sent to assist the Saltmakers in transporting meat which they had
killed to their Camp also returned, and brought with them all the Salt
which had been made, consisting of about one Sushel only. with the
means we have of boiling the Salt water we find it a very tegious
opperation that of makeing Salt, notwithstanding the Kitties are kept
boiling day and night. we Calculate on three bushels lasting us from
hiere to our deposit of that article on the Missouri.

[Lewis, February 4, 1806]
Tuesday February 4th 1806.
Sergt. Pryor with a party of five men set out again in quest of the Elk
which Drewyer had killed. Drewyer and La Page also returned to continue
the chase in the same quarter. the Elk are in much better order in the
point near the praries than they are in the woody country arround us or
up the Netul. in the praries they feed on grass and rushes,
considerable quantities of which are yet green and succulet. in the
woody country their food is huckle berry bushes, fern, and an evergreen
shrub which resembles the lore) in some measure; the last constitutes
the greater part of their food and grows abundantly through all the
timbered country, particularly the hillsides and more broken parts of
it. There are sveral species of fir in this neighbourhood which I shall
discribe as well as my slender botanicall skit will enable me and for
the convenience of comparison with each other shal number them. (No 1.)
a species which grows to immence size; very commonly 27 feet in the
girth six feet above the surface of the earth, and in several instances
we have found them as much as 36 feet in the girth or 12 feet diameter
perfectly solid and entire. they frequently rise to the hight of 230
feet, and one hundred and twenty or 30 of that hight without a limb.
this timber is white and soft throughout and rives better than any
other species which we have tryed. the bark skales off in irregula
rounded flakes and is of a redish brown colour particularly of the
younger growth. the stem of this tree is simple branching, ascending,
not very defuse, and proliferous. the leaf of this tree is acerose,
1/10th of an Inch in width, and 3/4 of an Inch in length; is firm, stif
and accuminate; they are triangular, a little declining, thickly
scattered on all sides of the bough, but rispect the three uppersides
only and are also sessile growing from little triangular pedestals of
soft spungy elastic bark. at the junction of the boughs, the bud-scales
continue to incircle their rispective twigs for several yeas; at least
three years is common and I have counted as many as the growth of four
years beyond these scales. this tree affords but little rosin. it's
cone I have not yet had an opportunity to discover altho I have sought
it frequently; the trees of this kind which we have felled have had no
cones on them.

[Clark, February 4, 1806]
Tuesday February 4th 1806
Serjt. Pryor with a party of 5 men Set out again in quest of the Elk
which Drewyer had Killed. Drewyer also returned to continue the Chase
in the Same quarter. the Elk are in much better order in the point near
the praries than they are in the woodey Country around us or up the
Netul. in the praries they feed on grass and rushes, which are yet
green. in the woddey Countrey their food is huckleberry bushes, fern,
and the Shal-lon an evergreen Shrub, which resembles the Lorel in Some
measure; the last constitutes the greater part of their food and grows
abundant through all the timbered Country, particularly the hill Sides
and more broken parts of it. There are Several Species of Fir in this
neighbourhood which I shall discribe as well as my botanicale Skill
will enable me, and for the Convenience of Comparrison with each other
Shall number them. (No. i,) a Species which grows to an emence size;
verry commonly 27 feet in Surcumferonce at 6 feet above the surface of
the earth, and in Several instances we have found them as much as 36
feet in the Girth, or 12 feet Diameter perfectly Solid & entire. they
frequently rise to the hight of 230 feet, and 120 or 30 of that hight
without a limb. this timber is white and Soft throughout and rives
better than any other Species we have tried the bark Shales off in
arregular rounded flakes and is of a redish brown Colour, particularly
of the younger growth, the Stem of this tree is simple branching,
assending, not very defuse, and proliferous, the leaf of this tree is
accerose 1/2 a line in width, and 3/4 of an inch in length; is firm
Stiff and accuminate; they are triangular, little declineing, thickly
scattered on all Sides of the Bough, but respect the three upper Sides
only Growing from little triangular pedistals of Soft Spungy Elastic
bark. at the junction of these bough's, the bud-scales continue to
incircle the respective twigs for several years; at least 3 years is
common and I have counted as maney as the groth of 4 years beyond these
Scales. this tree affords but little rozin. it's cone I have not yet
had an oppertunity to discover altho I have Sought it frequently; the
trees of this kind which we have fell'd have had no cones on them.

[Lewis, February 5, 1806]
Wednesday February 5th 1806.
Late this evening one of the hunters fired his gun over the swamp of
the Netul opposite to the fort and hooped. I sent sergt. Gass and a
party of men over; the tide being in, they took advantage of a little
creek which makes up in that direction nearly to the highlands, and in
their way fortunately recovered our Indian Canoe, so long lost and much
lamented. The Hunter proved to be Reubin Fields, who reported that he
had killed six Elk on the East side of the Netul a little above us; and
that yesterday he had heard Shannon and Labuishe fire six or seven
shots after he had seperated from them and supposed that they had also
killed several other Elk. Filds brought with him a phesant which
differed but little from those common to the Atlantic states; it's
brown is reather brighter and more of a redish tint. it has eighteen
feathers in the tale of about six inches in length. this bird is also
booted as low as the toes. the two tufts of long black feathers on each
side of the neck most conspicuous in the male of those of the Atlantic
states is also observable in every particular with this.- Fir No. 2 is
next in dignity in point of size. it is much the most common species,
it may be sad to constitute at least one half of the timber in this
neighbourhood. it appears to be of the spruse kind. it rises to the
hight of 160 to 180 feet very commonly and is from 4 to 6 feet in
diameter, very streight round and regularly tapering. the bark is thin
of a dark colour, and much divided with small longitudinal
intersticies; that of the boughs and young trees is somewhat smoth but
not so much so as the balsom fir nor that of the white pine of our
country. the wood is white throughout and reather soft but very tough,
and difficult to rive. The trunk of this tree is a simple branching
diffused stem and not proliferous as the pines & firs usially are but
like most other trees it puts forth buds from the sides of the small
boughs as well as their extremities. the stem usually terminates in a
very slender pointed top like the cedar. The leaves are petiolate, the
footstalk small short and oppressed; acerose reather more than half a
line in width and very unequal in length, the greatest length being
little more than half an inch, while others intermixed on every part of
the bough are not more than a 1/4 in length. flat with a small
longitudinal channel in the upper disk which is of a deep green and
glossey, while the uder disk is of a whiteish green only; two ranked,
obtusely pointed, soft and flexable. this tree affords but little
rosin. the cone is remarkably small not larger than the end of a man's
thumb soft, flexable and of an ovate form, produced at the ends of the
small twigs.

[Clark, February 5, 1806]
Wednesday February 5th 1806
Late this evening one of the hunters fired off his gun over the marsh
of the Netul opposit to the fort & hhoped. we Sent Sergt. Gass and a
party of men over; the tide being in they took advantage of a little
Creek which makes up in that direction nearly to the high lands, and in
their way fortunately recovered our Indian Canoe So long lost and much
lamented. The hunter provd. to be Reubin Field, who reported that he
had killed Six Elk on the East Side of the Netul a little above us; and
that he had parted with Shannon and Labiesh yesterday after he had herd
them fire Six or Seven Shot after he had Seperated from them, and
Supposed that they had also killed Several other Elk. Fields brought
with him a Pheasant which differs but little from those Common to the
United States- Fur No. 2 is next in dignity in point of Size. it is
much the most common Species, it may be Said to Constitute one half of
the timber of this neigh-bourhood. it appears to be of the Spruce kind.
it rises to the higth of 160 or 180 feet very Commonly and is from 4 to
6 feet in diameter, very Streight round and regularly tapering. the
bark is thin of a dark colour, and much divided with Small longitudinal
interstices; that of the boughs and young trees are Somewhat Smoth but
not So much so as the balsom fir, nor that of the white pine of our
Countrey. the wood is white throughout and rather Soft but rather tough
and dificuelt to rive. The trunk of this tree is Simple branching,
deffused Stem and not proliferous as the pine and fir usially are, but
like most other trees it puts foth buds from the Sides of the Small
boughes as well as from their extremities. the Stem usially termonate
in a very slender pointed top like the Cedar. The leaves are petiolate,
the footstalk Small Short and oppressed; acerose reather more than 1/2
a line in wedth and very uneaqual in length, the greatest length being
a little more than half an inch, while others intermixed on every part
of the bough are not more than a 1/4 of an inch in length. flat with a
Small longitudinal channel in the upper disk which is of a Deep green
and glossy, while the under disk is of a whitish green only; two
ranked, obtusely pointed, Soft and flexable. this tree affords but
little rosin. the Cone is remarkably Small, not larger than the end of
a mans thumb Soft, flexable and of an oval form, produced at the end of
a Small twig.

[Lewis, February 6, 1806]
Thursday February 6th 1806.
Sent Sergts. Gass and Ordway this morning with R. Fields and a party of
men to bring in the Elk which Field had killed. Late in the evening
Sergt. Pryor returned with the flesh of about 2 Elk and 4 skins the
Indians having purloined the ballance of seven Elk which Drewyer killed
the other day. I find that there are 2 vilages of Indians living on the
N. side of the Columbia near the Marshy Islands who call themselves
Wackki-a-cum. these I have hertofore Considered as Cath-lah-mahs. they
speak the same language and are the same in every other rispect.

No. 3 A species of fir which one of my men informs me is precisely the
same with that called the balsam fir of Canada. it grows here to
considerable size, being from 21/2 to 4 feet in diameter and rises to
the hight of eighty or an hundred feet. it's stem is simple branching,
ascending and proliferous. it's leaves are sessile, acerose, one 1/8 of
an inch in 1/16th of an inch in width, thickly scattered on all sides
of the twigs as far as the growth of four preceeding years and rispect
the three undersides only the uper side being neglected and the under
side but thinly furnished; gibbous, a little declining, obtusely
pointed, soft flexible, and the upper disk longitudinally marked with a
slight channel; this disk is of a glossy deep green, the under one
green tho paler and not glossy. this tree affords considerable
quantities of a fine clear arromatic balsam in appearance and taste
like the Canadian balsam. smal pustules filled with this balsam rise
with a blister like appearance on the body of the tree and it's
branches; the bark which covers these pustules is soft thin smoth and
easily punctured. the bark of the tree generally is thin of a dark
brown colour and reather smooth tho not as much so as the white pine of
our county. the wood is white and soft.- (No. 4) is a species of fir
which in point of size is much that of No. 2. the stem simple branching
ascending and proliferous; the bark of a redish dark brown and thicker
than that of No. 3. it is divided with small longitudinal interstices,
but these are not so much ramifyed as in species No. 2. the leaves with
rispect to their position in regard to each other is the same with the
balsam fir, as is the leaf in every other rispect except that it not
more than 2/3ds the width and little more than half the length of the
other, nor is it's upper disk of so deep a green nor so glossey. it
affords no balsam and but little rosin. the wood also white soft and
reather porus tho tough.- No 5. is a species of fir which arrives to
the size of Nos. 2 and 4, the stem simple branching, diffuse and
proliferous. the bark thin, dark brown, much divided with small
longitudinal interstices and sometimes scaleing off in thin rolling
flakes. it affords but little rosin and the wood is redish white 2/3ds
of the diameter in the center, the ballance white, somewhat porus and
tough. the twigs are much longer and more slender than in either of the
other species. the leaves are acerose, 1/20th of an inch in width, and
an inch in length, sessile, inserted on all sides of the bough,
streight, their extremities pointing obliquely toward the extremities
of the bough and more thickly placed than in either of the other
species; gibbous and flexeable but more stif than any except No. 1 and
more blontly pointed than either of the other species; the upper disk
has a small longitudinal channel and is of a deep green tho not so
glossy as the balsam fir, the under disk is of a pale green.- No. 65
the white pine; or what is usually so called in Virginia. I see no
difference between this and that of the mountains in Virginia; unless
it be the uncommon length of cone of this found here, which are
sometimes 16 or 18 inches in length and about 4 inches in
circumpherence. I do not recollect those of virginia perfectly but it
strikes me that they are not so long. this species is not common I have
only seen it but in one instance since I have been in this
neighbourhood which was on the border of Haley's bay on the N. side of
the Columbia near the Ocean.

[Clark, February 6, 1806]
Thursday February 6th 1806
Sent Serjt. Gass and party this morning with Ru Field to bring in the
Elk which Field had killed. late in the evening Serjt. Pryor returned
with the fish of about 2 Elk and four skins the Indians haveing taken
the ballance of Seven Elk which Drewyer killed the other day. I find
that those people will all Steal.

No. 3 a Species of fir, which one of my men inform me is presisely the
Same with that called the balsam fir of Canada. it grows here to
considerable Size, being from 21/2 to 4 feet in diameeter and rises to
the hight of 100 or 120 feet. it's Stem is Simple branching assending
and proliferous-. it's leaves are cessile, acerose, 1/8 of an inch in
length and 1/16 of an inch in width, thickly scattered on all Sides of
the twigs as far as the groth of four proceeding years, and respects
the three undersides only, the upper Side being neglected and the under
Side but thinly furnished; gibbous a little declineing, obtusely
pointed, Soft flexable, and the upper disk longitudinally marked with a
Slight Channel; this disk is of a glossy deep green, the under one
green tho paler and not glossy. This tree affords a considerable
quantity of a fine Clear arromatic Balsom in appearance and taste like
the Canadian balsom. Small pustuls filled with the balsom rise with a
blister like appearance on the body of the tree and it's branches; the
bark which covers these pustules is Soft thin Smothe and easily
punctured. the bark of the tree is generally thin of a dark brown
colour and reather Smooth tho not as much so as the white pine of the
U. States the wood is white and Soft.

No. 4 a Species of fir which in point of Size is much that of No 2,-.
the Stem Simple branching assending and proliferous; the bark of a
redish dark brown and thicker than that of No. 3. it is devided with
Small longitudinal interstices, but these are not So much ramefied as
in the Specis No. 2. the leaves with respect to their possition in
reguard to each other is the Same with the balsam fir, as is the leaf
in every other respect than that, it is not more than 2/3ds the width
and little more than half the length of the other, nor is it's upper
disk of so deep a green nor glossy. it affords no balsam, and but
little rosin. the wood also white Soft and reather porus tho tough-.-
No. 5 is a species of fir which arives to the Size of No. 2, and No. 4.
the Stem Simple branching, diffuse and proliferous. the bark thin dark
brown, much divided with Small longitudinal interstices scaleing off in
thin rolling flakes. it affords but little rosin and the wood is redish
white 2/3ds of the diamieter in the Center the ballance white Somewhat
porus and tough. the twigs are much longer and more slender than in
either of the other speceies. the leaves are acerose 1/20 of an inch in
width, and an inch in length, sessile, inserted on all Sides of the
bough, Streight, their extremities pointing obliquely towards the
extremities of the bough and more thickly placed than in either of the
other Species; gibbous and flexable but more stiff than any except No.
1 and more blontly pointed than either of the other Species; the upper
disk has a Small longitudinal Channel and is of a deep green tho not so
Glossy as the balsam fir, the under disk is of a pail green. No. 6 the
White pine; or what is usially So Called in Virginia. I see no
difference between this and that of the mountains in Virginia; unless
it be the uncommon length of the cone of this found here, which are
Sometimes 16 or 18 inches in length and about 4 inches in Surcumfrance.
I do not recollect those of Virginia, but it Strikes me that they are
not So long. this Species is not common I have Seen it only in three
instances since I have been in this neighbourhood, I saw a few on
Haleys bay on the North Side of the Columbia River, a fiew scattering
on the Sea coast to the North on one of which I engraved my name-and
Some on the S S E Side of E co la Creek near the Kil a mox nation, at
which place I Saw the white & red Cedar

[Lewis, February 7, 1806]
Friday February 7th 1806.
This evening Sergt. Ordway and Wiser returned with a part of the meat
which R. Fields had killed; the ballance of the party with Sergt. Gass
remained in order to bring the ballance of the meat to the river at a
point agreed on where the canoe is to meet them again tomorrow morning.
This evening we had what I call an excellent supper it consisted of a
marrowbone a piece and a brisket of boiled Elk that had the appearance
of a little fat on it. this for Fort Clatsop is living in high stile.
In this neighbourhood I observe the honeysuckle common in our country I
first met with it on the waters of the Kooskooske near the Chopunnish
nation, and again below the grand rappids In the Columbian Valley on
tidewater. The Elder also common to our country grows in great
abundance in the rich woodlands on this side of the rocky Mountains;
tho it differs Here in the colour of it's berry, this being of a pale
sky blue while that of the U States is a deep perple. The seven bark or
nine-bark as it is called in the U States is also common in this
quarter. There is a species of huckleberry common to the piny lands
from the commencement of the Columbian valley to the seacoast; it rises
to the hight of 6 or 8 feet. is a simple branching some what defuse
stem; the main body or trunk is cilindric and of a dark brown, while
the colateral branches are green smooth, squar, and put forth a number
of alternate branches of the same colour and form from the two
horizontal sides only. the fruit is a small deep perple berry which the
natives inform us is very good. the leaf is thin of a pale green and
small being 3/4 of an inch in length and 3/8 in width; oval
terminateing more accutely at the apex than near the insertion of the
footstalk which is at the base; veined, nearly entire, serrate but so
slightly so that it is scarcely perceptible; footstalk short and there
position with rispect to each other is alternate and two ranked,
proceeding from the horizontal sides of the bough only. The small pox
has distroyed a great number of the natives in this quarter. it
prevailed about 4 years since among the Clatsops and distroy several
hundred of them, four of their chiefs fell victyms to it's ravages.
those Clatsops are deposited in their canoes on the bay a few miles
below us. I think the late ravages of the small pox may well account
for the number of remains of vilages which we find deserted on the
river and Sea coast in this quarter.

[Clark, February 7, 1806]
Friday February 7th 1806
This evening Serjt Ordway and wiser returned with a part of the meat
which R. Field had killed; the balance of the Party with Serjt. Gass
remained in order to bring the ballance of the meat to the river at a
point agreeed on, where the Canoe is to meet them again tomorrow
morning. This evening we had what I call an excellent supper it
consisted of a marrowbone, a piece of brisket of boiled Elk that had
the appearance of a little fat on it. this for Fort Clatsop is liveing
in high Stile, and in fact fiesting-.

In this neighbourhood I observe the honeysuckle common in the U States,
I first met with it on the waters of the Kooskooske near the Chopunnish
Nation, and again below the grand rapids in the Columbian Vally on tide
water. The Elder also common to our Countrey grows in great abundance
in the rich wood land on this Side of the rocky mountains, tho it
differs here in the Colour of its berry, this being of a pale Sky blue
while that of the U, States is a deep purple. The Seven or nine bark as
it is called in the U, States is also Common in this quarter. There is
a Species of huckkleberry Common to the piney lands from the
Commencement of the Columbian Vally to the Sea coast; it rises to the
hight of 6 or 8 feet, is a Simple branching, Somewhat defused Stem; the
main body or trunk is cilindric branches are green Smothe squar, and
put foth a number of alternet branches of the Same Colour and form from
the two horizontal Sides only. the frute is a small deep purple berry
which the nativs inform us is very good, the leaf is thin of a pale
green and Small being 3/4 of an inch in length and 3/8 in width; oval
terminateing more accoutely at the apax, than near the insersion of the
footstalk which is at the base vened nearly entire; footstalks Short
and their position in respect to each other is alternate and too
ranked, proceeding from the horizontal Side of the bough only.

The Small Pox had distroyed a great number of the nativs in this
quarter. it provailed about 4 or 5 yrs Sinc among the Clatsops, and
distroy'd Several hundreds of them, four of their Chiefs fell a victym
to it's ravages. these Clatsops are Deposited in their Canoes on the
bay a fiew miles below us. I think the late ravages of the Small Pox,
may well account for the number of remains of villages which I Saw on
my rout to the Kil a mox in Several places-.

[Lewis, February 8, 1806]
Saturday February 8th 1806.
Sent Sergt. Ordway and two men this morning to join the party with
Sergt. Gass and bring the ballance of R. Fields's Elk. in the evening
they returned with the balance of the flesh of five Elk, that of one of
them having become tainted and unfit for uce. late in the evening
Sergt. Pryor returned with Shannon Labuish and his party down the
Netul. they brought with them the flesh of 4 Elk which those two
hunters had killed. we have both dined and suped on Elk's tongues and
marrow bones.

I have discovered that the shrub and fruit discribed on the 26th of
January is not that which the Indians call the Shal-lon, but that is
such as is there discribed, and the berry is estemed and used by the
natives as there mentioned except that it is not like the shallon,
baked in large loaves, but is simply dryed in the sun for winter uce,
when they either eat them in thir dryed state or boil them in water.
The Shallon is the production of a shrub which I have heretofore taken
to be a speceis of loral and mentioned as abounding in this
neighbourhood and that the Elk fed much on it's leaves. it generally
rises to the hight of 3 feet but not unusually attains to that of 5
feet. it grows very thick and is from the size of a goos quill to that
of a man's thumb, celindric, the bark of the older or larger part of
the stock is of a redish brown colour while that of the younger
branches and succulent shoots are red where most exposed to the sun and
green elsewhere. the stem is simple branching reclining, and partially
fluxouse, or at least the smaler stocks or such parts of them and the
boughs as produce the leaves, take a different direction at the
insertion of every petiole. the leaf is oval four & 3/4 inches in
length and 21/2 in width. petiolate, the petiole short only 3/8th of an
inch in length, celindric with a slight channel on it's upper side
where it is generally red; undivided or entire, slightly serrate, the
apex termineating in an accute point; the upper disk of a glossey deep
green, the under disk of a pale green; veined. the leaves are also
alternate and two ranked. the root is horizontal puting forth
perpendicular radicles. this shrub is an evergreen. the fruit is a deep
perple berry about the size of a buck short or common black cherry, of
an ovate form tho reather more bluntly pointed, than at the insertion
of the peduncle; at the extremity, the thin coloured membranous
pellicle, which forms the surface of the pericarp, is divided into five
accute angular points, which meet in the center, and contains a soft
pulp of the same colour invelloping a great number of small brown
kidney formed seeds. each berry is supported by a seperate celindric
peduncle of half an inch in length; these to the number of ten or
twelve issue from a common peduncle or footstalk which is fuxouse and
forms the termination of the twig of the present years growth; each
peduncle supporting a berry is furnished with one oblong bracte placed
at it's insertion on the common footstalk which when the fruit is ripe
withers with the peduncle.

[Clark, February 8, 1806]
Saturday February 8th 1806
Sent Serjt. Ordway and two men this morning to joint the party with
Serjt. Gass, and bring the ballance of R. Field's Elk. in the evening
they returned with the ballance of the flesh of five Elk, that of one
of them having become tainted and unfit for use. late in the evening
Serjt. Pryor returned with Shannon Labieshe and his party down the
Netul. they brought with them the flesh of 4 Elk which those two
hunters had killed.

we have both Dined and Suped on Elks tongues and marrowbones. a great
Luxury for Fort Clatsop.

The Shat lon is a production of Shrub which I have taken heretofore to
be a Species of Loral and mentioned as abounding in this neighbourhood,
and that the Elk feed much on its leaves. it generally rises to the
hight of 3 feet, and not unusially attain to that of 5 feet. it grows
very thick and is from the size of that of a goose quil to that of a
mans thumb, Celendric. the bark of the older or larger part of the
Stalk is of a redish brown Colour, whilst that of the younger branches
& succulent Shoots are red where most exposed to the Sun and green
elsewhere. the Stem is Simple branching, reclineing and partially
fuxouse, or at least the Smaller Stalks or Such parts of them and their
boughs which produce the leaves, take a different direction at the
insertion of every petiole. A, A, the leaves as they grow from the
Stalk B. B. B the Stalk between each leaf.

The leaf is oval 4 and 3/4 inches in length, and 2 and a half in width.
petiolate, the potiale Short only 3/8 of an inch in length cilindric
with a Slight Channel on its upper Side where it is generally red;
undevided, or entire, Slightly serrate, the apex termonateing in an
accute point; the upper disk of a glossy deep Green, the under disk of
a pail Green, veined. the leaves are also alternate and two ranked. the
root is horozontal, putting foth pirpendicular radicles. This Shrub is
an evergreen. the frute is a deep purple berry about the Size of a buck
Shot or common black cherry, of an ovale form, tho reather more bluntly
pointed than at the insertion of the peduncle, at the extremity, the
thin coloured membranus pellicle, which forms the Surfice of the
paricarp, is divided into 4 anguar points, which meet at the Center,
and Contains a Soft pulp of the Same Colour invelloping a great number
of Small brown kidney formed Seedeach berry is Supported by a Seperate
celindric peduncle of half an inch in length, these to the number of 10
or 12 issue from a common peduncle of footstalk which forms the
termination of the twig of the present years groth; each peduncle
Supporting a berry is furnished with one oblong bracte placed at it's
insertion on the common footstalk, which when the frute is ripe withers
with the peduncle-.

[Lewis, February 9, 1806]
Sunday February 9th 1806
This morning Collins and Wiser set out on a hunting excurtion; they
took our Indian canoe and passed the Netul a little above us. in the
evening Drewyer returned; had killed nothing but one beaver. he saw one
black bear, which is the only one which has been seen in this
neighbourhood since our arrival; the Indians inform us that they are
abundant but are now in their holes.

in the marshy ground frequently overflown by the tides there grows a
species of fir which I take to be the same of No. 5 which it resembles
in every particular except that it is more defusely branched and not so
large, being seldom more than 30 feet high and 18 inches or 2 feet in
diameter; it's being more defusely branched may proceed from it's open
situation seldom growing very close. the cone is 21/2 inches in length
and 33/4 in it's greatest circumpherence, which is near it's base, and
from which it tapers regularly to a point. it is formed of imbricated
scales of a bluntly rounded form, thin not very firm and smoth. a thin
leaf is inserted into the pith of the cone, which overlays the center
of and extends 1/2 an inch beyond the point of each scale. the form of
this leaf is somewhat thus overlaying one of the imbricated scales.

The stem of the black alder of this country before mentioned as
arriving to great size, is simply branching and defuse. the bark is
smooth of a light colour with white coloured spreading spots or
blotches, resembling much that of the beech; the leaf fructification &c
is precisely that of the common alder of our country. these trees grow
seperately from different roots and not in clusters or clumps as those
of the Atlantic states. fearing that our meat would spoil we set six
men to jurking it.

[Clark, February 9, 1806]
Sunday February 9th 1806
This morning Collins & Wiser Set out on a hunting excurtion; in the
evening Drewyer returned; had Killed nothing but one Beaver. he Saw one
black Bear, which is the only one which has been seen in the
neighbourhood Since our arrival. the Indians inform us that they are
abundant but are now in their holes.

In the marshey grounds frequently overflown by the tides there grows a
Species of fir which I took to be the Same of No. 5. from examonation I
find it a distinct species of fir. it is more perfusely branched. This
tree Seldom rises to a greater hight than 35 or 40 feet and is from 2
to 4 feet in Diamieter; the Bark the Same with that of No. 1. only
reather more rugid. the leaf is acerose, 2/10 of an inch in width and
3/4 in length, they are firm Stiff and Somewhat accuminated, ending in
a Short pointed hard tendril, gibbous thickly scattered on all Sides of
the bough as respects the 3 upper Sides only; those which have their
insertion on the underside incline side- wise with their points upwards
giveing the leaf the Shape of a Sythe. the others are perpindicular or
pointing upwards, growing as in No. 1 from Small triangular pedestals
of a Soft Spungy elastic bark. the under disk of these leaves or that
which grows nearest to the Base of the bough is of a dark glossy green,
while the upper or opposit side is of a whiteish pale green; in this
respect differing from almost all leaves. The boughs retain their
leaves as far back as almost to the Sixth year's groth. the peculiarity
of the budscales observed in No. 1 is obsd. in this Species. The Cone
is 31/2 Inches in length, and 3 in circumfranse, of an ovale figure
being thickest in the middle and tapering and terminateing in two
obtuce points. it composes several flexable, thin, obtusely jointed
Smoth and redish brown imbricated scales. each scale Covering two small
winged Seed and being itself Covered in the center by a small thin
inferior scale accutely pointed. The Cone is Some what of this figure.
they proceed from the sides as well as the extremities of the bough,
but in the former case allways at or near the Commencement of Some one
years groth which in Some instances are as far back as the third year

The Stem of the Black Alder of this countrey before mentioned as
ariveing at great Size, is Simple branching and defuse. the bark is
Smoth of a light Colour with white Coloured Spredding Spots or
blotches, resembling much that of beech. the leaf is procisely that of
the Common alder of the United States or Virginia. those trees grow
Seperately from different roots and not in Clusters or Clumps, as those
of the atlantic States, casts its folage about the 1st of December.

Fearing that our meat would Spoil we Set Six men to jurking it to day,
which they are obliged to perform in a house under shelter from the
repeated rains.

[Lewis, February 10, 1806]
Monday February 10th 1806.
Drewyer visited his traps today but caught no beaver. Collins and Wiser
returned had killed no Elk. Willard arrived late in the evening from
the Saltworks, had cut his knee very badly with his tommahawk. he had
killed four Elk not far from the Salt works the day before yesterday,
which he had butched and took a part of the meat to camp, but having
cut his knee was unable to be longer ucefull at the works and had
returned. he informed us that Bratton was very unwell, and that Gibson
was so sick that he could not set up or walk alone and had desired him
to ask us to have him brought to the Fort. Coalter also returned this
evening. continue the operation of drying our meat.

There is a tree common to the Columbia river below the entrance of
cataract river which in it's appearance when divested of it's foliage,
much resembles the white ash; the appearance of the wood and bark is
also that of the ash. it's stem is simple branching and diffuse. the
leaf is petiolate, plane, scattered, palmate lobate, divided by four
deep sinuses; the lobes are repand, or terminate in from 3 to 5 accute
angular points, while their margins are indented with irregular and
somewhat circular incissures. the petiole is celendric smooth and 7
inches long. the leaf 8 inches in length and 12 in bredth. this tree is
frequently 3 feet in diameter and rises to 40 or 50 feet high. the
fruit is a winged seed somewhate like the maple. in the same part of
the country there is also another growth which resembles the white
maple in it's appearance, only that it is by no means so large; seldom
being more than from 6 to 9 inches in diamater, and from 15 to 20 feet
high; they frequently grow in clusters as if from the same bed of roots
spreading and leaning outwards. the twigs are long and slender. the
stems simple branching. the bark smooth and in colour resembling that
of the white maple. the leaf is petiolate, plane, scattered nearly
circular, with it's margin cut with accute angular incissures of an
inch in length and from six to 8 in number the accute angular points
formed by which incissures are crenate, or cut with small accute
angular incissures. or in this form. it is 3 inches in length, and 4 in
width. the petiole celindric smooth and one and a 1/4 inches long. the
fruit or flower not known.

[Clark, February 10, 1806]
Monday February 10th 1806
Collins and Wiser returned without killing any Elk. Willard arrived
late this evening from the Salt Camp, he had cut his knee very badly
with his tomahawk. he had killed four Elk not far from the Salt Camp,
the day before yesterday, which he had butchered and took a part of the
meat to the Camp, but haveing Cut his Knee was unable to be longer
Servisable at the works & had returned. he informed us that Bratten was
very unwell, and that Gibson was So Sick that he could not Set up or
walk alone, and had desired him to ask us to have him brought to the
Fort. Colter also returnd. this evening. continue the opperation of
dryin our meat.

There is a tree common to the Columbia river below the enterance of
Cataract River which in its appearance when divested of its folage,
much resembles the white ash; the appearance of the wood and bark is
also that of the ash. it's Stem is Simple branching and diffuse. the
lief is petiolate, plane, scattered palmate lobate, divided by four
deep Sinusus; the lobes are repand or terminate in from 3 to 5 accute
angular points, while their margins are indented with irregular and
Somewhat Circular incissures. the peteole is Celindric Smoth and 7
inches long. the leaf 8 inches in length and 12 in bredth. this tree is
frequently 2 & 3 feet in diamieter, and rises to 50 or 60 feet high-the
froot is a winged Seed Somewhat like the maple. In the Same part of the
countrey there is also another groth, which resembles the white maple
in its appearance, only that it is by no means so large, seldom being
more than from 6 to 9 inches in diamieter, and from 20 to 30 feet high;
they frequently grow in clusters as if from the same bed or root,
Spreading and leaning outwards. the twigs are long and Slender. the
Stems simple branching. the bark Smoth and in Colour resembles that of
the white maple. the leaf is patiolate, plain, scattered nearly
circular, with it's margin cut with accute anglar incissures of an inch
in length and from 6 to 8 in number, the accute angular points formed,
by which incissures, are crenate, or cut with small angular incissures.
or in this form. it is 3 inches in length, and 4 in width. the petiole
is cilendric smoth and 11/4 inches long. the froot or flour I have not
as yet found out &c.

[Lewis, February 11, 1806]
Tuesday February 11th 1806.
This morning Sergt. Gass Reubin Fields and Thompson passed the Netul
opposite to us on a hunting expedition. sent Sergt Pryor with a party
of four men to bring Gibson to the fort. also sent Colter and Wiser to
the Salt works to carry on the business with Joseph Fields; as Bratton
had been sick we desired him to return to the Fort also if he thought
proper; however in the event of his not coming Wiser was directed to
return.

There is a shrub which grows commonly in this neighbourhood which is
precisely the same with that in Virginia some times called the
quillwood. also another which grows near the water in somewhat moist
grounds & rises to the hight of 5 or 6 feet with a large, peteolate
spreading plane, crenate and somewhat woolly leaf like the rose
raspberry. it is much branched the bark of a redish brown colour and is
covered with a number of short hooked thorns which renders it extreemly
disagreeable to pass among; it dose not cast it's foliage untill about
the 1st of December. this is also the case with the black alder. There
is also found in this neighbourhood an evergreen shrub which I take to
be another variety of the Shallun and that discribed under that name in
mistake on the 26th of January. this shrub rises to the hight of from
four to five feet, the stem simple branching, defuse and much branched.
the bark is of a redish dark brown, that of the mane stein is somewhat
rough while that of the boughs is smooth. the leaves are petiolate the
petiole 1/40 of an inch long; oblong, obtuse at the apex and accute
angular at the insertion of the petiole; 3/4 of an inch in length and
Ysths in width; convex, somewhat revolute, serrate, smoth and of a
paler green than the evergreens usually are; they are also opposite and
ascending. the fruit is a small deep perple berry like the common
huckleberry of a pleasent flavor. they are seperately scattered &
attatched to the small boughs by short peduncles.-. the natives eat
this berry when ripe but seldom collect it in such quantities as to dry
it for winter uce.

[Clark, February 11, 1806]
Tuesday February 11th 1806.
This Morning Serjt. Gass R. Field and J. Thompson passed the Netul
opposit to us on a hunting expedition. Sent Serjeant Natl. Pryor with 4
men in a Canoe to bring gibson to the Fort. also Sent Colter & P. Weser
to the Salt works to carry on the business with Jos. Field; as bratten
is also Sick we derected that he Should return to the fort if he
continued unwell; There is Shrub which grows Commonly in this
neighbourhood which grows on the Steep Sides of the hills and also in
low moist grounds, and rise to the hight of 5 or 6 feet with a large
peteolate, Spreading plain crenate and Somewhat woolly leaf like the
rose raspberry. it is much branched the bark of a redish brown colour
and is covered with a number of Short hooked thorns which renders it
extreamly disagreeable to pass among, it does not cast its foliage
untill about the 1st of December.

There is a Species of bryor which is common in this neighbourhood of a
green colour which grows most abundant in the rich dry lands near the
water courses, but is also found in Small quantities in the piney lands
at a distance from the water Courses in the former Situations the Stem
is frequently the Size of a mans finger and rise perpendicularly to the
hight of 4 or 5 feet when it decends in an arch and becoms procumbent
or rests on Some neighbouring plant or Srubs; it is Simple unbranched
and celindric; in the latter Situation it is much Smaller, and usially
procumbent. the Stem is armed with Sharp and hooked bryors. the leaf is
peteolate, ternate and resembles in Shape and appearance that of the
purple Raspberry common to the atlantic States. The frute is a berry
resembling the Blackberry in every respect and is eaten when ripe and
much esteemed by the nativs but is not dryed for winters Consumption.
in the Countrey about the enterance of the quick Sand rivers I first
discovered this bryor, it grows So abundantly in the furtile Vally of
Columbia and on the Islands in that part of the river, that the
Countrey near the river is almost impenitrable in maney places. This
green Bryor retains its leaf or foliage and virdue untill late in
December. The Briory bush with a wide leaf is also one of its
ascociates.

[Lewis, February 12, 1806]
Wednesday February 12th 1806.
This morning we were visited by a Clatsop man who brought with him
three dogs as a remuneration for the Elk which him self and nation had
stolen from us some little time since, how ever the dogs took the alarm
and ran off; we suffered him to remain in the fort all night.

There are two species of ever green shrubs which I first met with at
the grand rappids of the Columbia and which I have since found in this
neighbourhood also; they grow in rich dry ground not far usually from
some watercourse. the roots of both species are creeping and celindric.
the stem of the 1st is from a foot to 18 inches high and as large as a
goosqull; it is simple unbranced and erect. it's leaves are cauline,
compound and spreading. the leafets are jointed and oppositely pinnate,
3 pare & terminating in one, sessile, widest at the base and tapering
to an accuminated point, an inch and a quarter the greatest width, and
3 inches & a 1/4 in length. each point of their crenate margins armed
with a subulate thorn or spine and are from 13 to 17 in number. they
are also veined, glossy, carinated and wrinkled; their points obliquely
pointing towards the extremity of the common footstalk.- The stem of
the 2nd is procumbent abot the size of the former, jointed and
unbranched. it's leaves are cauline, compound and oppositely pinnate;
the rib from 14 to 16 inches long celindric and smooth. the leafets
21/2 inches long and 1 inch wide. greatest width 1/2 inch from their
base, to which they are regularly rounded, and from the same point
tapering to an accute apex, wich is mostly, but not invariably
tirminated with a small subulate thorn. they are jointed and oppositely
pinnate, consisting of 6 pare and terminating in one, sessile serrate,
or like the teeth of a whipsaw, each point terminating in a small
subulate spine, being from 25 to 27 in number; veined, smooth, plane
and of a deep green, their points tending obliquely towards the
extremity of the rib or common footstalk. I do not know the fruit or
flower of either. the 1st resembles the plant common to many parts of
the U States called the mountain holley.

[Clark, February 12, 1806]
Wednesday February 12th 1806.
This morning we were visited by a Clatsop man who brought with him
three dogs as a remuneration for the Elk which himself and Nation had
Stolen from us Some little time Sence, however the dogs took the alarm
and ran off; we suffered him to remain in the fort all night.

There are two Species of evergreen Shrubs. this is the leaf of one
which I first met with at the grand rapids of the Columbia River, and
which I have sence found in this neighbourhood also; they usially grow
in rich dry ground not far from Some water course. the roots of both
Species are creeping and celindric. the Stem of the first (as above) is
from a foot to 18 inches high and as large as a Goose quil; it is
Simple and erect. its leaves are cauline, and Spredding. the leafits
are jointed & oppositly poinnate 3 par and termonateing in one, cessile
widest at the base and tapering to an accuminated point, an inch and
1/4 the greatest width; & 31/4 inches in length. each point of their
crenate margins armed with a thorn or Spine, and are from 13 to 17 in
number. they are also veined, glossy, corinated and wrinkled; their
points obliquely pointing towards the extremity of the Common footstalk.

The Stem of the 2nd is procumbent about the Size of the former, jointed
and umbracated. it's leaves are Cauline, compound and oppositly
pointed; the rib from 14 to 16 inches long Celendric and Smooth the
leafits 21/2 inches long and 1 inch wide. the greatest width 1/2 inch
from their base which they are regularly rounded, and from the Same
point tapering to an accute apex, which is mostly but not entirely
termonated with a Small Subulate thorn. they are jointed & oppositly
pointed consisting of 6 par and termonateing in one (in this form)
sessile, Serrate, or like the teeth of a whipsaw, each point
terminateing in a small subulate spine, being from 25 to 27 in numbr;
veined, Smoth, plane and of a deep green, their points tending
obliquely towards the extremity of the rib or common footstalk. I do
not know the fruit or flower of either. the 1st resembles a plant
Common to maney parts of the United States Called the Mountain Holly

[Lewis, February 13, 1806]
Thursday February 13th 1806.
The Clatsop left us this morning at 11 A.M. not any thing transpired
during the day worthy of notice. yesterday we completed the operation
of drying the meat, and think we have a sufficient stock to last us
this month. the Indians inform us that we shall have great abundance of
a small fish in March which from their discription must be the herring.
these people have also informed us that one More who sometimes touches
at this place and trades with the natives of this coast, had on board
of his vessel three Cows, and that when he left them he continued his
course along the N. W. coast. I think this strong circumstancial proof
that there is a stettlement of white persons at Nootka sound or some
point to the N. W. of us on the coast.

There is a species of bryer which is common in this neighbourhood of a
green colour which grows most abundant in the rich dry lands near the
watercourses, but is also found in small quantities in the piny lands
at a distance from the watercourses in the former situation the stem is
frequently the size of a man's finger and rises perpendicularly to the
hight of 4 or 5 feet when it decends in an arch and becomes procumbent
or rests on some neighbouring plants or shrubs; it is simple unbranched
and celindric; in the latter situation it is much smaller and usually
procumbent. the stem is armed with sharp and hooked bryers. the leaf is
peteolate ternate and resembles in shape and appearance that of the
perple raspberry common to the Atlantic states. the fruit is a berry
resembling the black berry in every rispect and is eaten when ripe and
much esteemed by the natives but is not dryed for winter consumption.
in the country about the entrance of the quicksand river I first
discovered this bryer. it groows so abundantly in the fertile valley of
Columbia and the Islands in that part of the river that the country
near the river is almost impenitrable in many places. the briary bush
with a wide leaf is also one of it's ascociates. the green bryer
retains it's foliage and verdure untill late in December.- There are
also two species of firn which are common to this country beside that
formerly discribed of which the natives eat the roots. these from their
disparity in point of size I shall designate the large and small firn.
both species continue green all winter.- The large farn, rises to the
height of 3 or four feet the stem is a common footstalk or rib which
proceedes immediately from the radix wich is somewhat flat on two sides
about the size of a man's arm and covered with innumerable black coarce
capillary radicles which issue from every pat of it's surface; one of
those roots or a collected bed of them will send fourth from twenty to
forty of those common footstalks all of which decline or bend outwards
from the common center. these ribs are cylindric and marked
longitudinally their whole length with a groove or channel on their
upper side. on either side of this grove a little below it's edge, the
leafets are inserted, being shortly petiolate for about 2/3 ds of the
length of the middle rib commencing at the bottom and from thence to
the extremity sessile. the rib is terminated by a single undivided
lanceolate gagged leafet. the leafets are lanceolate, from 2 to 4
inches in length gagged and have a small accute angular projection on
the upper edge near the base where it is spuar on the side which has
the projection and obliquely cut at the base on the other side of the
rib of the leafet. or which will give a better idea in this form. the
upper surface is Smooth and of a deep green the under disk of a pale
green and covered with a brown bubersence of a woolly appearance
particularly near the cental fiber or rib. these leafets are
alternately pinnate. they are in number from 110 to 140; shortest at
the two extremities of the common footstalk and longest in the center,
graduly lengthening and deminishing as they succeed each other.-

The small firn also rises with a common footstalk from the radix and
are from four to eight in number. about 8 inches long; the central rib
marked with a slight longitudinal groove throughout it's whole length.
the leafets are oppositely pinnate about 1/3 rd of the length of the
common footstalk from the bottom and thence alternately pinnate; the
footstalk terminating in a simple undivided nearly entire lanceolate
leafet. the leafets are oblong, obtuse, convex absolutely entire,
marked on the upper disk with a slight longitudinal groove in place of
the central rib, smooth and of a deep green. near the upper extremity
these leafets are decursively pinnate as are also those of the large f
rn. The grasses of this neighbourhood are generally coase harsh and
sedge-like, and grow in large tufts. there is none except in the open
grounds. near the coast on the tops of some of the untimbered hills
there is a finer and softer species which resembles much the green
swoard. the salt marshes also produce a coarse grass, Bull rushes and
the Cattail flagg. the two last the natives make great use in preparing
their mats bags &c.

[Clark, February 13, 1806]
Tuesday February 13th 1806.
The Clatsop left us this morning at 11 A.M. not anything transpired
dureing the day worthy of notice. yesterday we completed the opperation
of drying the meat, and think we have a Sufficient Stock to last us
this month. the Indians inform us that we shall have great abundance of
Small fish in March. which from the discription must be the Herring.
Those people have also informed us that one Moore who sometimes touches
at this place and traded with the nativs of this Coast, had on board
his Ship 3 Cows, and that when he left them he continued his course
along the N W. Coast. I think this (if those Cows were not Coats)
Strong circumstantial proof that their is a Settlement of white persons
at Nootka Sound or Some place to the N W. of us on the coast.

There are also two Species of firn which are common to this Countrey
besides that before mentioned of which the nativs eate the roots. these
two from their disparity in point of Size I shall distinguish the large
and Small firn. both species continue green all winter

The large fern, rise to the hight of 3 or 4 feet, the Stem is a Common
footstalk or rib which proceeds imediately from the radix which is
Somewhat flat on two Sides about the Size of a man's arm and covered
with innumerable black coarse capillary radicles which issue from every
part of its surface; one of those roots or a collected bead of them
will Send forth from 20 to 40 of those Common footstalks all of which
decline or bend outwards from the Common center. those ribs are
cylindric and marked longitudinally their whole length with a groove or
channel on their upper Side. on either Side of this groove a little
below it's edge, the leafets are inserted, being partly petiolate for
about 2/3ds of the length of the middle rib, commenceing at the bottom
and from thence to the extremity Sessile. the rib is termonated by a
Single undevided lanceolate gagged leafet. the leafets are lanceolate,
from 2 to 4 inches in length gagged and have a Small accute angular
projection and obliquely cut at the base on either Side of the rib of
the leafet. upper Surface is Smooth and of a deep Green, the under disk
of a pale Green and covered with a brown Substance of a woolly
appearance particalarly near the center fiber or rib these leafets are
alternately pointed they are in number from 110 to 140; shortest at the
two extremities of the common footstalk and longest in the center,
gradually lengthing and diminishing as they Suckceed each other

The Small firn also rises with a Common footstalk from the radix and
are from 4 to 8 in number, about 8 inches long; the Central rib marked
with a Slight longitudinal Groove through out it's whole length. the
leafets are oppositly pinnate about A of the length of the Common
footstalk from the bottom and thence alternately pinnate; the footstalk
termonating in a Simple undevided nearly entire lanceolate leafet. the
leafets are oblong, obtuse, convex absolutely entire, marked on the
upper disk with a Slight longitudinal grove in place of the central
rib, smooth and of a deep green; near the upper extremity those lefets
are decurscivily pinnate as are also those of the larg firn.

The Grass's of this neighbourhood are generally coarse harsh and Sedge
like, and grow in large tufts. there is none except in the open
grounds. near the Coast on the top of Some of the untimbered hills
there is a finer and Softer Species which resembles much the
Greensword. the Salt marshes also produce a Corse grass, Bullrushes and
the Cattail flaggs. of the two last the nativs make great use in
prepareing their mats bags &c. in those bags they Carry their fish
Berries roots &c.

[Lewis, February 14, 1806]
Friday February 14th 1806.
We are very uneasy with rispect to our sick men at the salt works.
Sergt. Pryor and party have not yet returned nor can we conceive what
causes their delay. Drewyer visited his traps today and caught a very
fine fat beaver on which we feasted this evening. on the 11th inst.
Capt Clark completed a map of the country through which we have been
passing from Fort Mandan to this place. in this map the Missouri
Jefferson's river the S. E. branch of the Columbia, Kooskooske and
Columbia from the entrance of the S. E. fork to the pacific Ocean as
well as a part of Flathead river and our tract across the Rocky
Mountains are laid down by celestial observation and survey. the rivers
are also connected at their sources with other rivers agreeably to the
information of the natives and the most probable conjecture arrising
from their capacities and the relative positions of their rispective
entrances which last have with but few exceptions been established by
celestial observation. we now discover that we have found the most
practicable and navigable passage across the Continent of North
America; it is that which we traveled with the exception of that part
of our rout from the neighbourhood of the entrance of Dearborn's River
untill we arrived on Clarks river at the entrance of Traveler's rest
creek; the distance between those two points would be traveled more
advantageously by land as the navigation of the Missouri above the
river Dearborn is laborious and 420 miles distant by which no advantage
is gained as the rout which we are compelled to travel by land from the
source of Jefferson's river to the entrance of Travelers rest Creek is
220 miles being further by 500 miles than that from the entrance of
Dearborn's river to the last mentioned point and a much worse rout if
Indian information is to be relyed on; from the same information the
Flathead river like that of the S. E. fork of the Columbia which heads
with Jefferson's and Maddison's Rivers can not be navigated through the
Rocky Mountains in consequence of falls & rappids and as a confermation
of this fact, we discovered that there were no salmon in the Flathead
river, which is the case in the S. E. branch of the Columbia although
it is not navigable. added to this, the Indians further inform us, that
the Flathead river runs in the direction of the Rocky Mountains for a
great distance to the North before it discharges itself into the
Columbia river, which last from the same information from the entrance
of the S. E. fork to that of Flathead river is obstructed with a great
number of difficult and dangerous rappids. considering therefore the
danger and difficulties attending the navigation of the Columbia in
this part, as well as the circuitous and distant rout formed by itself
and the Flathead river we conceive that even admitting the Flathead
river contrary to information to be as navigable as the Columbia river
below it's entrance, that the tract by land over the Rocky Mountains
usually traveled by the natives from the Entrance of Traveller's-rest
Creek to the forks of the Kooskooske is preferable; the same being a
distance of 184 Miles. The inferrence therefore deduced from those
premices are that the best and most Practicable rout across the
Continent is by way of the Missouri to the entrance of Dearborn's river
or near that place; from thence to flathead river at the entrance of
Traveller's rest Creek, from thence up Traveller's rest creek to the
forks, from whence you pursue a range of mounttains which divides the
waters of the two forks of this creek, and which still continuing it's
West wardly course divides the waters of the two forks of the
Kooskooske river to their junction; from thence to decend this river by
water to the S. E. branch of the Columbia, thence down that river to
the Columbia and with the latter to the Pacific Ocean.

[Clark, February 14, 1806]
Friday February 14th 1806
We are very uneasy with respect to our Sick men at the Salt works.
Serjt. Pryor and party haveing not yet returneded, nor can we conceive
what can be the Cause of their delay. Drewyer visited his traps & to
day and Cought a fine fat beaver on which we feasted this evening and
thought it a great delecessey.-.

I compleated a map of the Countrey through which we have been passing
from the Mississippi at the Mouth of Missouri to this place. In the Map
the Missouri Jefferson's river the S. E. branch of the Columbia or
Lewis's river, Koos-koos-ke and Columbia from the enterance of the S. E
fork to the pacific Ocian, as well as a part of Clark's river and our
track across the Rocky Mountains are laid down by celestial
observations and Survey. the rivers are also conected at their Sources
with other rivers agreeably to the information of the nativs and the
most probable conjecture arrising from their capacities and the
relative positions of their respective enterances which last have with
but fiew exceptions been established by celestial observations. We now
discover that we have found the most practicable and navigable passage
across the Continent of North America; it is that which we have
traveled with the exception of that part of our rout from the foot of
the Falls of the Missouri, or in neighbourhood of the enterance of the
Rocky Mountains untill we arive on Clarks river at the enterence of
Travelers-rest Creek; the distance between those two points would be
traveled more advantagiously by land as the navigation of the Missouri
above the Falls is crooked laborious and 521 miles distant by which no
advantage is gained as the rout which we are compelled to travel by
land from the Source of Jeffersons River to the enterance of Travellers
rest Creek is 220 miles being further by At. 600 miles than that from
the Falls of the Missourie to the last mentioned point (Travellers rest
Creek) and a much worse rout if indian information is to be relied on
which is from the So so nee or Snake Indians, and the Flatheads of the
Columbia west of the rocky mountains. from the Same information Clarks
river like that of the S. E. branch of the Columbia which heads with
Jefferson's and Maddisons river's can not be navagated thro the rocky
mountains in consequence of falls and rapids, and as a confirmation of
the fact we discovered that there were no Salmon in Clark's river,
which is not the Case in the S. E. branch of the Columbia altho it is
not navagable. added to this, the Indians of different quartes further
inform us, that Clark's river runs in the direction of the Rocky
Mountains for a great distance to the north before it discharges itself
into the Columbia river-- from the Same information the Columbia from
the enterance of the S. E. branch to the enterance of Clark's river is
obstructed with a great number of dificuelt and dangerous rapids (and
the place Clark's river comes out of the Rocky mountains is a
tremendious falls &c which there is no possibillity of passing the
mountains either by land or water.) Considering therefore the dangers
and deficuelties attending the navigation of the Columbia in this part,
as well as the circuitous and distant rout formed by itself and that of
Clark's River we Conceive that even admitting that Clarks river
contrary to information to be as navagable as the Columbia below it's
enterance, that the tract by land over the Rocky Mountains usially
traveled by the nativs from the enterance of Travellers rest Creek to
the Forks of the Kooskooske is preferable; the Same being a distance of
184 miles. The inferrence therefore deduced from these premises are,
that the best and most practicable rout across the Continent is by way
of the Missouri to the Great Falls; thence to Clarks river at the
enterance of Travellers rest Creek, from thence up travillers rest
Creek to the forks, from whence you prosue a range of mountains which
divides the waters of the two forks of this Creek, and which still
Continues it's westwardly Course on the mountains which divides the
waters of the two forks of the Kooskooske river to their junction; from
thence to decend this river to the S. E. branch of the Columbia, thence
down that river to the Columbia, and down the Latter to the Pacific
Ocian-. There is a large river which falls into the Columbia on its
South Side at what point we could not lern; which passes thro those
extencive Columbian Plains from the South East, and as the Indians
inform us head in the mountains South of the head of Jeffersons River
and at no great distance from the Spanish Settlements, and that that
fork which heads with the River Rajhone and waters of the Missouri
passes through those extensive plains in which there is no wood, and
the river Crowded with rapids & falls many of which are impassable. the
other or westerly fork passes near a range of mountains and is the fork
which great numbers of Indian Bands of the So sone or Snake Indians,
this fork most probably heads with North River or the waters of
Callifornia. This River may afford a practicable land Communication
with New Mexico by means of its western fork. This river cannot be
navagable as an unpracticable rapid is within one mile of its enterance
into the Columbia, and we are fully purswaded that a rout by this river
if practicable at all, would lengthen the distance greatly and
incounter the Same dificuelties in passing the Rocky Mountains with the
rout by way of Travellers rest Creek & Clarks river.

[Lewis, February 15, 1806]
Saturday February 15th 1806.
Drewyer and Whitehouse set out this morning on a hunting excurtion
towards the praries of Point Adams. we have heard our hunters over the
Netul fire several shot today, but have had no account from them as
yet. about 3 P.M. Bratton arrived from the salt works and informed us
that Sergt. Pryor and party were on their way with Gibson who is so
much reduced that he cannot stand alone and that they are obliged to
carry him in a litter. Bratton himself appears much reduced with his
late indisposition but is now recovering fast. Bratton informed that
the cause of Sergt. Pryor's delay was attributeable to the winds which
had been so violent for several days as to render it impossible to get
a canoe up the creek to the point where it was necessary to pass with
Gibson. the S. W. winds are frequently very violent on the coast when
we are but little sensible of them at Fort Clatsop. in consequence of
the lofty and thickly timbered fir country which surrounds us on that
quarter from the South to the North East.

after dark Sergt. Pryor arrived with Gibson. we are much pleased in
finding him by no means as ill as we had expected. we do no conceive
him in danger by any means, tho he has yet a fever and is much reduced.
we beleive his disorder to have orriginated in a violent cold which he
contracted in hunting and pursuing Elk and other game through the swams
and marshes about the salt works. he is nearly free from pain tho a
gooddeel reduced and very languid. we gave him broken dozes of diluted
nitre and made him drink plentifully of sage tea, had his feet bathed
in warm water and at 9 P.M. gave him 35 drops of laudanum.

The quadrupeds of this country from the Rocky Mountains to the pacific
Ocean are 1st the domestic animals, consisting of the horse and the dog
only; 2cdly the native wild animals, consisting of the Brown white or
grizly bear, (which I beleive to be the same family with a mearly
accedental difference in point of colour) the black bear, the common
red deer, the black tailed fallow deer, the Mule deer, Elk, the large
brown wolf, the small woolf of the plains, the large wolf of the
plains, the tiger cat, the common red fox, black fox or fisher, silver
fox, large red fox of the plains, small fox of the plains or kit fox,
Antelope, sheep, beaver, common otter, sea Otter, mink, spuck, seal,
racoon, large grey squirrel, small brown squirrel, small grey squirrel,
ground squirrel, sewelel, Braro, rat, mouse, mole, Panther, hare,
rabbit, and polecat or skunk. all of which shall be severally noticed
in the order in which they occur as well as shuch others as I learn do
exist and which not been here recapitulated. The horse is confined
principally to the nations inhabiting the great plains of Columbia
extending from Latitude 40° to 50° N. and occuping the tract of country
lying between the rocky mountains and a range of Mountains which pass
the columbia river about the great falls or from Longitude 116 to 121
West. in this extesive tract of principally untimbered country so far
as we have leant the following nations reside (viz) the Sosone or snake
Indians, the Chopunnish, sokulks, Cutssahnims, Chymnapums, Ehelutes,
Eneshuh & Chilluckkittequaws. all of whom enjoy the bennefit of that
docile, generous and valuable anamal the horse, and all of them except
the three last have immence numbers of them. Their horses appear to be
of an excellent race; they are lofty eligantly formed active and
durable; in short many of them look like the fine English coarsers and
would make a figure in any country. some of those horses are pided with
large spots of white irregularly scattered and intermixed with the
black brown bey or some other dark colour, but much the larger portion
are of an uniform colour with stars snips and white feet, or in this
rispect marked much like our best blooded horses in virginia, which
they resemble as well in fleetness and bottom as in form and colours.
the natives suffer them to run at large in the plains, the grass of
which furnishes them with their only subsistence their masters taking
no trouble to lay in a winters store for them, but they even keep fat
if not much used on the dry grass of the plains during the winter. no
rain scarcely ever falls in these plains and the grass is short and but
thin. The natives appear to take no pains in scelecting their male
horses from which they breed, in short those of that discription which
I have noticed appeared much the most indifferent. whether the horse
was orrigeonally a native of this country or not it is out of my power
to determine as we can not understand the language of the natives
sufficiently to ask the question. at all events the country and climate
appears well adapted to this anamal. horses are said to be found wild
in many parts of this extensive plain country. the several tribes of
Sosones who reside towards Mexico on the waters of Clark's river or
particularly one of them called Sh&-bo-bo-ah have also a great number
of mules, which among the Indians I find are much more highly prized
than horses. an eligant horse may be purchased of the natives in this
country for a lew peads or other paltry trinkets which in the U States
would not cost more than one or two dollars. This abundance and
cheapness of horses will be extremely advantageous to those who may
hereafter attemt the fir trade to the East Indies by way of the
Columbia river and the Pacific Ocean.- the mules in the possession of
the Indians are principally stolen from the Spaniards of Mexeco; they
appear to be large and fine such as we have seen. Among the Sosones of
the upper part of the S. E. fork of the Columbia we saw several horses
with spanish brands on them which we supposed had been stolen from the
inhabitants of Mexeco.

[Clark, February 15, 1806]
Saturday February 15th 1806
Drewyer and Whitehouse Set out on a hunting excurtion towards the
mountains Southwest of us. we have heard our hunters over the Netul
fire Several Shot today, but have had no account of them as yet. 3 P.M.
Bratten arived from the Saltworks, and informed us that Serjt. Pryor
and party were on their way with gibson in a litter. he is verry bad
and much reduced with his present indisposition. Wm. Bratten appears
much reduced, and is yet verry unwell. he informs that the Cause of
Sergt. Pryor's delay was attributiable to the winds which had been so
violent for Several days as to render it impossible to get a Canoe up
the Creek to the point where it was necessary to pass with Gibson. the
S. W. winds are frequently very violent on the coast when we are but
little Sensible of them at Fort Clatsop. in Consequence of the lofty
and thickly timbered fir country which Surrounds us from that quarter,
from the South to the N. East.-. After Dark Sergt. Pryor arrived with
Gibson. we are much pleased in findeing him by no means as ill as we
had expected. we do not conceive him in danger by any means, tho he has
yet a fever and is much reduced. we believe his disorder to have
originated in a violent Cold which he contracted in hunting and
prosueing Elk and other game through the Swamps and marshes about the
salt works. he is nearly free from pain tho a good deel reduced and
very languid. we gave him double doses of diluted niter and made him
drink plentifully of Sage tea, had his feat bathed in worm water and at
9 P.M. gave him 35 drops of laudanum.

The quadrupeds of this countrey from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific
Ocian are first the Domestic Animals, consisting of the Horses and Dogs
only; 2ndly the Native Wild Animals, consisting of the White, brown, or
Grizly bear (which I believe to be the same family with a mearly
accidentail difference in point of Colour) The Black Bear, the Elk, the
Common red Deer, the Mule deer, the black tailed fallow Deer, the large
brown wolf, the Small wolf of the Plains, the large wolf of the Plains,
Panther, the tiger cat, the common red fox, the black fox or fisher,
the Silver fox, large red fox of the plains, Small fox of the plains or
kit fox, Antelope, Sheep, beaver, Common Otter, Sea Otter, minks, Seals
racoons, large Grey Squerrel, Small brown Squirrel, Small grey
Squirrel, Ground Squirrel, Sewelel, Braro, rat, mouse, mole, hare,
rabbet, and pole Cat or Skunk. all of which Shall be Severally noticed
in the order in which they occur as well as Such others as I learn do
exist, and which not been here recapitulated.

The Horse is principally Confined to the Nations inhabiting the great
Plains of Columbia extending from Latitude 40° to 50° N. and occupying the
tract of Countrey lying between the Rocky Mountains and a rang of
mountains which pass the Columbia River about the Great Falls or from
Longitude 116° to 121° West in this extensive tract of Principally
untimbered countrey So far as we have lernt the following nations
reside (viz) The Sosone, or Snake Indians inhabiting the South fork or
____ River, the Chopunnish, Sokulk's, Cutssahnims, Chym na pum,
Ehelutes, Eneshuh & Chilluckkittequaws. all of whome enjoy the benifit
of that docile generous and valueable Animal the Horse, and all of them
except the three last have emence numbers of them. their horses appear
to be of an excellent race; they are lofty eligantly formed active and
durable; in Short maney of them look like the fine English coursers and
would make a figure in any country. Some of those horses in pided with
large spots of white irrigularly scattered and intermixed with black,
brown, Bey or Some other dark colour, but much the larger portion are
of a uniform Colour with Stars, snips, and white feet, or in this
respect marked much like our best blooded horses in the U, States,
which they resemble as well in fleetness and bottom as in form and
Colour. the nativs Suffer them to run at large in the plains, the Grass
of which furnish them with their only Subsistance, their owners takeing
no trouble to lay in a winters Store for them, but they keep fat if not
much used on the dry grass of the plains dureing the winter. rain
scercely ever falls in those plains and the Grass is Short and but
thin. the nativs appear to take no pains in Selecting their male horses
from which they bread, in Short those of that discription which I have
noticed appear much the most indifferent. whether the horses was
originally a native of this Country or not, it is out of my power to
determine as we cannot understand the language of the nativs
Sufficiently to ask the question. at all events the Country and Climate
appears well adapted to this Animal. Horses are Said to be found wild
in maney parts of this extensive plain Country-. The Several tribes of
Sosones who reside near Mexico on the waters of Clark's river, or
particularly one of them called Shd-bo-bo-ah have also a great number
of Mules, which among the Inds. I find are much more highly prized than
horses. an eligant horse may be purchased of the nativs in this Country
for a fiew beeds or other paltry trinkits which in the United States
would not cost more than one or two dollars. This abundance and
Cheepness of horses will be extremely advantagious to those who may
hereafter attempt the fir trade to the East Indies by way of the
Columbia and the Pacific Ocian.-. The mules in the possession of the
Inds. are principally Stolen from the Spaniards of New Mexico; Such as
we have Seen appear to be large with Spanish brands. among the Sosones
of the upper part of Lewis's river we Saw Several horses with Spanish
brands on them which the nativs informed us Came from the South most
probably from the Settlement in New Mexico, on the heads of the North
river or waters of the Bay of California.

[Lewis, February 16, 1806]
Sunday February 16th 1806.
By several trials made today in order to adjust my Octant and ascertain
her error in the direct observation, I found that it was 2° 1' 45" + or
additive beyond the fracture; this error was ascertained by a
comparison with my sextant the error of which had been previously
ascertained. the error of Octant in the direct observation on the
broken limb next to 0 or below 55° 20 inclusive is 2° additive only.- Sent
Shannon Labuish and Frazier this morning on a hunting excurtion up the
Kil-haw'-a-nak-kle river which discharges itself into the head of the
bay. no tidings yet of Sergt. Gass and party. Bratton is still very
weak and complains of a pain in the lower part of the back when he
moves which I suppose procedes from dability. I gave him barks.
Gibson's fever still continues obstenate tho not very high; I gave him
a doze of Dr. Rush's which in many instances I have found extreemly
efficatious in fevers which are in any measure caused by the presence
of boil. the nitre has produced a profuse perspiration this evening and
the pills operated late at night his fever after which abated almost
entirely and he had a good night's rest.

The Indian dog is usually small or much more so than the common cur.
they are party coloured; black white brown and brindle are the most
usual colours. the head is long and nose pointed eyes small, ears erect
and pointed like those of the wolf, hair short and smooth except on the
tail where it is as long as that of the curdog and streight. the
natives do not eat them nor appear to make any other use of them but in
hunting the Elk as has been before observed.- The brown white or grizly
bear are found in the rocky mountains in the timbered parts of it or
Westerly side but rarely; they are more common below the rocky Mountain
on the borders of the plains where there are copses of brush and
underwood near the watercouses. they are by no means as plenty on this
side of the rocky mountains as on the other, nor do I beleive that they
are found atall in the woody country, which borders this coast as far
in the interior as the range of mountains which, pass the Columbia
between the Great Falls and rapids of that river. the black bear
differs not any from those common to the United states and are found
under the rocky Mountains in the woody country on the borders of the
great plains of columbia and also in this tract of woody country which
lie between these plains and the Pacific Ocean. their oconimy and
habits are also the same with those of the United States.

[Clark, February 16, 1806]
Sunday February 16th 1806
Sent Shannon Labiesh and frazier on a hunting excurtion up the
Kilhaw-a-nak-kle river which discharges itself into the head of
Meriwethers Bay. no word yet of Sergt. Gass and party. Bratten is verry
weak and complains of a pain in the lower part of the back when he
moves which I suppose proceeds from debility. I gave him barks and Salt
peter. Gibsons fever Still Continues obstinate tho not verry high; we
gave him a dose of Dr. Rushes pills which in maney instancis I have
found extreamly efficasious in fevers which are in any measure Caused
by the presence of boil. the niter has produced a perfuse perspiration
this evening and the pils opperated late at night his feaver after
which abated almost intirely and he had a good nights rest.

The Indian Dogs are usually small or much more so than the common cur.
they are party coloured; black white brown and brindle are the more
usual colours. the head is long and nose pointed eyes Small, ears erect
and pointed like those of the wolf, hair Short and Smooth except on the
tail where it is as long as that of the Cur dog and streight. the
nativs do not eate them, or make any further use of them than in
hunting the Elk as has been before observed. Shannon an Labiesh brought
in to us to day a Buzzard or Vulture of the Columbia which they had
wounded and taken alive. I believe this to be the largest Bird of North
America. it was not in good order and yet it wayed 25 lbs had it have
been so it might very well have weighed 10 lbs. more or 35 lbs. between
the extremities of the wings it measured 9 feet 2 Inches; from the
extremity of the beak to that of the toe 3 feet 9 inches and a half.
from hip to toe 2 feet, girth of the head 9 inches 3/4. Girth of the
neck 71/2 inches; Girth of the body exclusive of the wings 2 feet 3
inches; girth of the leg 3 inches. the diameter of the eye 41/2 10ths
of an inch, the iris of a pale scarlet red, the puple of a deep Sea
green or black and occupies about one third of the diameter of the eye
the head and part of the neck as low as the figures 12 is uncovered
with feathers except that portion of it represented by dots foward and
under the eye. (See likeness on the other Side of this leaf) the tail
is Composed of twelve feathers of equal length, each 14 inches. the
legs are 43/4 inches in length and of a whitefish colour uncovered with
feathers, they are not entirely Smooth but not imbricated; the toes are
four in number three of which are foward and that in the center much
the longest; the fourth is Short and is inserted near the inner of the
three other toes and reather projecting foward. the thye is covered
with feathers as low as the Knee. the top or upper part of the toes are
imbricated with broad scales lying transversly; the nails are black and
in proportion to the Size of the bird comparitively with those of the
Hawk or Eagle, Short and bluntly pointed-- the under Side of the wing
is Covered with white down and feathers. a white Stripe of about 2
inches in width, also marks the outer part of the wing, imbraceing the
lower points of the feathers, which cover the joints of the wing
through their whole length or width of that part of the wing. all the
other feathers of whatever part are of a Glossy Shineing black except
the down, which is not glossy, but equally black. the Skin of the beak
and head to the joining of the neck is of a pale orrange Yellow, the
other part uncovered with feathers is of a light flesh Colour. the Skin
is thin and wrinkled except on the beak where it is Smooth. This bird
fly's very clumsily. nor do I know whether it ever Seizes it's prey
alive, but am induced to believe it does not. we have Seen it feeding
on the remains of the whale and other fish which have been thrown up by
the waves on the Sea Coast. these I believe constitute their principal
food, but I have no doubt but that they also feed on flesh. we did not
meet with this bird untille we had decended the Columbia below the
great falls; and have found them more abundant below tide water than
above. this is the Same Species of Bird which R. Field killed on the
18th of Novr. last and which is noticed on that day tho not fully
discribed then I thought this of the Buzzard Specis. I now believe that
this bird is reather of the Vulture genus than any other, tho it wants
Some of their characteristics particularly the hair on the neck, and
the feathers on the legs. this is a handsom bird at a little distance.
it's neck is proportionably longer than those of the Hawks or Eagle.
Shannon also brought a Grey Eagle which appeared to be of the Same kind
common to the U, States. it weighed 15 pds. and measured 7 feet 7
inches between the extremities of the wings

Shannon and Labiesh informed us that when he approached this Vulture
after wounding it, that it made a loud noise very much like the barking
of a Dog. the tongue is long firm and broad, filling the under Chap and
partakeing of its transvirs curvature, or its Sides forming a
longitudinal Groove; obtuse at the point, the margin armed with firm
cartelagenous prickkles pointed and bending inwards.

[Lewis, February 17, 1806]
Monday February 17th 1806.
Collins and Windsor were permited to hunt today towards the praries in
Point Adams with a view to obtain some fresh meat for the sick. a
little before noon Shannon LaBuishe & Frazier returned with the flesh
and hide of an Elk which had been wouded by Sergt. Gass's party and
took the water where they pursued it and caught it. they did not see
Sergt. Gass or any of his party nor learn what further success they had
had. continue the barks with Bratton, and commenced them with Gibson
his fever being sufficiently low this morning to permit the uce of
them. I think therefore that there is no further danger of his
recovery.- at 2 P.M. Joseph Fields arrived from the Salt works and
informed us that they had about 2 Kegs of salt on hand which with what
we have at this place we suppose will be sufficient to last us to our
deposits of that article on the Missouri. we there directed a party of
six men to go with Fields in the morning in order to bring the salt and
kettles to the fort. Shannon brought me one of the large carrion Crow
or Buzzads of the Columbia which they had wounded and taken alive. I
bleive this to be the largest bird of North America. it was not in good
order and yet it weighed 25 lbs. had it have been so it might very well
have weighed 10 lbs mor or 35 lbs. between the extremities of the wings
it measured 9 feet 2 inches; from the extremity of the beak to that of
the toe 3 F. 91/2 In. from hip to toe 2 feet, girth of head 93/4 In.
girth of the neck 71/2 Inches; do. of body exclusive of the wings 2
feet 3 Inches; do of leg 3 inches. diameter of the eye 41/2/toths of an
inch. the iris of a pale scarlet red, the puple of deep sea green or
black and occupyed about one third of the diameter of the eye. the head
and a part of the neck as low as the figures 12 is uncovered with
feathers except that portion of it represented by dots (see likeness).
the tail is composed of 12 feathers of equal length, each 14 inches.
the legs are 43/4 inches in length and of a white colour un covered
with feathers, they are not entirely smooth but not imbricated; the
toes are four in number three of which are forward and that in the
center much the longes; the fourth is short and is inserted near the
inner of the three other toes and reather projecting forward. the thye
is covered with feathers as low as the knee. the top or upper part of
the toes are imbricated with broad scales lying transversly; the nails
are blak and in proportion to the size of the bird comparitively with
those of the halk or Eagle, short and bluntly pointed. the under side
of the wing is covered with white down and feathers. a white stripe of
about two inches in width, also marks the outer part of the wing,
imbracing the lower points of the feathers, which cover the joints of
the wing through their whole length or width of that part of the wing.
all the other feathers of whatever part are glossey shining black
except the down which is not glossey but equally black. the skin of the
beak and head to the joining of the neck is of a pale orrange yellow
the other part uncovered with feathers is of a light flesh colour. the
skin is thin and wrinkled except on the beak where it is smooth. this
bird flys very clumsily nor do I know whether it ever seizes it's prey
alive, but am induced to beleive that it dose not. we have seen it
feeding on the remains of the whale & other fish which have been thrown
up by the waves on the sea coast. these I beleive constitute their
prinsipal food, but I have no doubt but they also feed on flesh; we did
not met with this bird untill we had decended the Columbia below the
great falls, and have found them more abundant below tide-water than
above. I beleive that this bird is reather of the Vulture genus than
any other, tho it wants some of their charactaristics particularly the
hair on the neck and feathers on the legs.- this is a handsome bird at
a little distance. it's neck is proportionably longer than those of the
hawks or Eagle. Shannon also brought me a grey Eagle which appeared to
be of the same kind common to the U States; it weighed 15 lb. and
measured 7 Feet 7 Inches between the extremities of the wings.- At 4
P.M. Sergt. Gass and party arrived; they had killed eight Elk. Drewyer
and Whitehouse also returned late in the evening, had killed one Elk.-
Labuishe informed me that when he approached this vulture, after
wounding it, that it made a loud noise very much like the barking of a
dog & the tongue is large firm and broad, filling the under chap and
partaking of it's transverse curvature, or it's sides colapsing upwards
forming a longitudinal groove; obtuse at the point, the margin armed
with firm cartelaginous prickkles pointed and bending inwards.

[Clark, February 17, 1806]
Monday February 17th 1806
Collins and Windser were permited to hunt to day towards the praries in
point Adams with a view to obtain Some fresh meat for the Sick. a
little before noon Shannon and Labiesh & frazier Came with the flesh
and hide of an Elk which had been wounded by Serjt. Gasses party and
took the water where they pursued it and cought it. they did not See
Sergt. Gass or any of his party or learn what further Sucksess they
have had. Continu the barks with Bratten, and Commenced them with
gibson his feaver being Sufficiently low this morning to permit the use
of them. I think therefore that there is no further danger of his
recovery.-- at 2 P.M. Joseph Field arrived from the Salt works and
informd us that they had about 2 Kegs of Salt on hand (say 3 bushels)
which with what we have at this place we suppose will be Sufficient to
last us to our deposit of that article on the Missouri. we directed a
party of Six men to go in the morning in order to bring the salt and
Kittles to the Fort. at 4 P.M. Serjt. Gass and party arrive; they had
killed 8 Elk. Drewyer and Whitehouse also return late in the evening,
they had killed one Elk, part of the meat of which they brought in with
them.

The Brown, White, or Grizly Bear are found in the rocky mountains in
the timbered part of it or Westerly Side but rarely; they are more
Common below or on the East Side of the Rocky Mountains on the borders
of the plains where there are Copses of bushes and underwood near the
water cources. they are by no means as plenty on this Side of the Rocky
Mountains as on the other, nor do I believe they are found at all in
the woody country which borders this coast as far in the interior as
the range of mountains which pass the Columbia between the enterance of
Clarks and the Quick sand Rivers or below the Great falls of Columbia.

The Black Bear differs not any from those Common to the U. States, and
are found under the Rocky Mountains in the woody country on the borders
of the Great Plain's of Columbia and also in this tract of woody
country which lie between these plains and the Pacific Ocian. their
econimy and habits are also the Same with those of the United States.-.

[Lewis, February 18, 1806]
Tuesday February 18th 1806.
This morning we dispatched a party to the Saltworks with Sergt. Ordway
and a second with Sergt. Gass after the Elk killed over the Netul. in
the evening Sergt. Ordway returned and reported that the waves ran so
high in the bay that he could not pass to the entrance of the creek
which we had directed him to assend with the canoe. Collins and Winsor
returned this evening with one deer which they had killed. the deer are
poor and their flesh by no means as good as that of the Elk which is
also poor but appears to be geting better than some weeks past.- in the
forenoon we were visited by eight Clasops and Chinnooks from whom we
purchased a Sea Otter's skin and two hats made of waytape and white
ceder bark. they remained untill late in the evening and departed for
their village. these people are not readily obstructed by waves in
their canoes.- Sergt. Ordway brought me a specemine of a species of
pine peculiar to the swamps and marshes frequently overflown by the
tide as this is a distinct species I shall call it No. 7. this tree
seldom rises to a greater hight than 35 feet and is from 21/2 to 4 feet
in diameter; the stem is simple branching diffuse and proliferous. the
bark the same with that of No. 1 only reather more rugged. the leaf is
acerose, 2/10ths of an inch in width and 3/4 in length. they are firm
stif and somewhat accuminated, ending in a short pointed hard tendril,
gibbous, thickly scattered on all sides of the bough but rispect the
three upper sides only. those which have there insersion on the
underside incline sidewise with their points upwards giving the leaf
the figure of a sythe. the others are perpendicular or pointing
upwards. is sessile growing as in No. 1 from small triangular pedestals
of a soft spungy elastic bark. the under disk of these leaves or that
which grows nearest towards the base of the bough is a deep glossey
green while the upper or opposite side is of a mealy whiteish pale
green; in this rispect differing from almost all leaves. the boughs
retain their leaves as far back as to the sixth years growth. the
peculiarity of the bud scales observed in No 1 is observed in this
species. The cone is 31/2 inches in length and 3 in circumpherence, of
an ovate figure being thickest in the middle and tapering and
terminating in two obtuse points. it is composes of small, flexible,
thin, obtusely pointed smooth and redish brown imbricated scales. each
scale covering two small winged seeds and being itself covered in the
center by a small thin inferior scale accutely pointed. the cone is
somewhat of this figure. they proceede from the side as well as the
extremities of the bough but in the former case always at or near the
commencement of some one years growth which is some instances are as
far back as the third year.

[Clark, February 18, 1806]
Tuesday February 18th 1806
This morning we dispatched a party to the Salt works with Sergt.
Ordway. and a Second party with Sergt. Gass after the Eight Elk killed
over the Netul. in the evening Sergt. Ordway returned and reported that
the waves ran So high in the Bay that he could not pass to the
enterance of a Creek which we had directed him to assend with the
Canoe. Collins & Windsir returned this evening with one Deer which they
had Killed. the deer are pore and their flesh by no means as good as
that of the Elk which is also poore but appears to be getting better
than Some weeks past. in the forenoon we were visited by a Clatsop &
Seven Chinnooks from whome I purchased a Sea otter's Skin and two hats
made of way tape and Silk grass and white cedar bark. they remained
untill late in the evening and departed for their village. those people
are not readily obstructed by waves in their Canoes. Since their
departure we have discovered that they have Stole an ax.- Whitehouse
brought me a roab which he purchased of the Indians formed of three
Skins of the Tiger Cat, this Cat differs from any which I have ever
Seen. it is found on the borders of the plains and the woody Country
lying along the Pacific Ocian. this animale is about the Size or
reather larger than the wild Cat of our Countrey and is much the Same
in form, agility and ferosity. the colour of the back, neck and Sides,
is a redish brown irrigular varigated with Small Spots of dark brown
the tail is about two inches long nearly white except the extremity
which is black; it termonates abruptly as if it had been cut off. the
belly is white with Small black spots. butifully varigated. the legs
are of the Same Colour with the Sides and back marked with transvers
stripes of black the ears are black on the outer Side Covered with fine
black hair, Short except at the upper point which is furnished with a
pencil of verry fine Streight black hair, 3/4 of an inch in length, the
fur of this animale is long and fine. much more So than the wild Cat of
the U States but less so than the Louserva of the N West. the nativs of
this Country make great use of the skins of this Cat, to form the robes
which they wear; three whole Skins is the complement usually employed,
and Sometimes four in each roab. Those Cats are not marked alike maney
of them have but fiew Spots of a darker Colour, particularly on the
Back.

[Lewis, February 19, 1806]
Wednesday February 19th 1806.
Sergt. Ordway set out again this morning with a party for the salt
works by land. in the evening Sergt. Gass returned with the flesh of
eight Elk, and seven skins; having left one skin with Shannon and
Labuishe who remained over the netul to continue the chase. we had the
Elk skins divided among the messes in order that they might be prepared
for covering our baggage when we set out in the spring. our sick are
recovering but they appear to strengthen but slowly. The common red
deer we found under the rocky mts. in the neighbourhood of the
Chopunnish, and about the great falls of the Columbia river and as low
down the same as the commencement of tide water. these do not appear to
differ essentially from those of our country being about the same size
shape and appearance in every rispect except their great length of tail
which is more than half as long again as our deer I measured one of
them which was 17 inches long. The Black tailed fallow deer are
peculiar to this coast and are a distinct species of deer partaking
equally of peculiarities of the mule deer and the common deer. their
ears are reather larger and their winter coat darker than the common
deer; the recepticle of the eye or drane is mor conspicuous; their legs
shorter and body thicker and larger than the common deer; their tail is
about the length of our deer or from 8 to 10 inches the hair on the
underside of which is white, and that of it's sides and top quite black
the horns resemble in form and colour those of the mule deer which it
also resembles in it's gate; that is bounding with all four feet off
the ground at the same time when runing at full speed and not loping as
the common deer or antelope do. they are sometimes found in the
woodlands but most frequently in the praries and open grounds. they may
be said generally to be a size larger than the common deer and that
less than the mule deer. they are very seldom found in good order, or
fat, even in the season which the common deer are so, and their flesh
is inferior to any species of deer which I have ever seen.-

[Clark, February 19, 1806]
Wednesday February 19th 1806.
Sergt. Ordway Set out again with a party to the Salt works by land. in
the evening Sergt. Gass returned with the flesh of Eight Elk, and Seven
Skins haveing left one Skin with Shannon and Labiche who remained over
the Netul to Continue the chase. we devided the Skins between the
messes in order that they might be prepared for Covering the baggage
when we Set out in the Spring. our Sick appear to Strengthen but Slowly
I gave Bratten 6 of Scotts pills which did not work him. he is very
weak and Complains of his back.

The black Fox or as they are more frequently Called by the N West
Trader Fisher is found in the woody country on this Coast. how this
Animal obtained the name of fisher I know not, but certain it is, that
the name is not appropriate, as it does not prey on or Seek it as a
prey-. they are extreeinly active Strong and made for climbing which
they do with great agility, and bound from tree to tree in pursute of
the squirel or Rackoon, their natural and most usual food. their Colour
is a jut Black except a Small Spot of white on the breast. the body is
long, legs Short and formed Something like the turnspit Dog, with a
remarkable long tail. it does not differ here from those of the United
States.

The Silver Fox this animale is very rare even in the Countrey where it
exists, I have never Seen more than the Skins of this Animal and those
were in the possession of the nativs of the woody Country below the
Great falls of the Columbia, from which I think it is most probably
they are the inhabitants of the woody country exclusively. from the
Skins, it appeard to be about the Size of the large red Fox of the
plains and much of its form with a large tail. the legs I think
somewhat longer it has a fine long deep fur poil. the poil is of a dark
lead colour and the long hairs intermixed with it, are either white or
black at the lower part, and white at top, the whole mixture forming a
butifull Silver Grey. I think this the handsomest of all the Fox
Species, except a Species of which I Saw one running, and Capt Lewis
had a good view of another of the Same Species on the Missouri near the
natural walls. The large red fox of the plains, and the Kit fox are the
Same which we met with on the Missouri and are the inhabitants almost
exclusively of the open plains, or of the copse of bushes within the
plain country. the Common red or grey fox of the United States is also
found in the woody country on this coast, nor does it appear to be
altered in respect to it's fur colour or any other particular. we have
Seen none of the large red fox.

[Lewis, February 20, 1806]
Thursday February 20th 1806.
Permited Collins to hunt this morning he returned in the evening
unsuccessfull as to the chase but brought with him some cranberries for
the sick. Gibson is on the recovery fast; Bratton has an obstenate
cough and pain in his back and still appears to be geting weaker.
McNeal from his inattention to his disorder has become worse.

This forenoon we were visited by Tdh-cum a principal Chief of the
Chinnooks and 25 men of his nation. we had never seen this cheif before
he is a good looking man of about 50 years of age reather larger in
statue than most of his nation; as he came on a friendly visit we gave
himself and party some thing to eat and plyed them plentifully with
smoke. we gave this cheif a small medal with which he seemed much
grati-fyed. in the evening at sunset we desired them to depart as is
our custom and closed our gates. we never suffer parties of such number
to remain within the fort all night; for notwithstanding their apparent
friendly disposition, their great averice and hope of plunder might
induce them to be treacherous. at all events we determined allways to
be on our guard as much as the nature of our situation will permit us,
and never place our selves at the mercy of any savages. we well know,
that the treachery of the aborigenes of America and the too great
confidence of our countrymen in their sincerity and friendship, has
caused the distruction of many hundreds of us. so long have our men
been accustomed to a friendly intercourse with the natives, that we
find it difficult to impress on their minds the necessity of always
being on their guard with rispect to them. this confidence on our part,
we know to be the effect of a series of uninterupted friendly
intercouse, but the well known treachery of the natives by no means
entitle them to such confidence, and we must check it's growth in our
own minds, as well as those of our men, by recollecting ourselves, and
repeating to our men, that our preservation depends on never loosing
sight of this trait in their character, and being always prepared to
meet it in whatever shape it may present itself.-

The Mule deer are the same with those of the plains of the Missouri so
frequently mentioned. we met with them under the Rocky mountains in the
Neighbourhood of the Chopunnish nation on the Kooskooske river, but
have not seen them since nor do we know whether they exist in the
interior of the great plains of Columbia or on their lower border near
the mountains which pass the river about the great falls. The Elk is
the same with that found in much the greatest portion of North America,
they are common to every part of this country, as well the timbered
lands as the plains, but are much more abundant in the former than the
latter The large brown woolf is like that of the Atlantic States and
are found only in the woody country on the Pacific Ocean imbracing the
mountains which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids of
the same. the large and small woolves of the plains are the inhabitants
principally of the open country and the woodlands on their borders and
resemble in their habits and appearance those of the plains of the
Missouri precisely. they are not abundant in the plains of Columbia
because there is but little game on which for them to subsist.

[Clark, February 20, 1806]
Thursday February 20th 1806.
Permited Collins to hunt this morning he returned in the evening
unsucksessfull as to the chase, but brought with him Some Cramberries
for the Sick. Gibson is on the recovery fast; Bratten has an obstinate
Cough and pain in his back and Still appears to be getting weaker. H.
McNeal from his inattention to his disorder has become worse. Willard
has a high fever and complains of the pain in his head and want of
appetite.

The forenoon we were visited by Tfih-cum a principal chief of the
Chinnooks and 25 men of his nation. we had never Seen this Chief before
he is a good looking man of about 50 years of age reather larger in
Statue than most of his nation; as he came on a friendly visit we gave
himself and party something to eate and plyed them plenty fully with
Smoke. we gave this chief a small Medal with which he Seamed much
pleased. in the evening at Sunset we desired them to depart as is our
custom and Close our gates. we never Suffer parties of Such numbers to
remain within the Fort all night; for not withstanding their apparent
friendly disposition, their great averis and hope of plunder might
induce them to be treacherous. at all events we are determined always
to be on our guard, as much as the nature of our Situation will permit
us, and never place our selves at the mercy of any Savages. we well
know, that the treachery of the Aborigenes of America and the too great
confidence of our country men in their friendship and fadility has
caused the distruction of maney hundreds of us. so long has our men
been accustomed to a friendly intercourse with the nativs, that we find
it dificult to impress on their minds the necessity of always being on
their Guard with respect to them. this confidence on our part we know
to be the effect of a serious of a friendly and unintorupted
intercourse. but the well Known treachery of the natives by no means
entitle them to Such confidence, and we must check it's groth in our
own minds as well as those of our men, by recollecting our selves, and
repeating to our men, that our preservation depends on our never
loseing Sight of this trate in their character, and being always
prepared to meet it in whatever Shape it may present itself

The Mule Deer are the Same with those of the Plains of the Missouri So
frequently mentioned. we met with them under the rocky mountains in the
neighbourhood of the Chopunnish Nation on the Koskooske river, but have
not Seen them Since nor do we know whether they exist in the interiors
of the great Plains of Columbia, or on the lower border near the
mountains which pass the river about the great falls. The Elk is the
Same with that found in much the greater portion of North America, they
are common to every part of this Country, as well the timbered lands as
the plains. but are much more abundant in the former than the latter

[Lewis, February 21, 1806]
Friday February 21st 1806.
Visited this morning by 3 Clatsop who remained with us all day; they
are great begers; I gave one of them a few nedles with which he
appeared much gratifyed. in the evening late they departed. Drewyer and
Collins went in pursuit of some Elk, the tracks of which Collins had
discovered yesterday; but it rained so hard that they could not pursue
them by their tracks and returned unsuccessfull. Drewyer saw a fisher
black fox but it escaped from him among the fallen timber. Sergt.
Ordway returned with the party from the salt camp which we have now
evacuated. they brought with them the salt and eutensils. our stock of
salt is now about 20 Gallons; 12 gallons of which we secured in 2 small
iron bound kegs and laid by for our voyage. gave Willard and bratton
each a doze of Scotts pills; on the former they operated and on the
latter they (lid not. Gibson still continues the barks three times a
day and is on the recovery fast.-

The tyger Cat is found on the borders of the plains and in the woody
country lying along the Pacific Ocean. this animal is about the size or
reather larger than the wild cat of our country and is much the same in
form, agility and ferosity. the colour of the back neck and sides is a
redish brown irregularly variegated with small spots of dark brown the
tail is about two inches long nearly white except the extremity which
is black; it terminates abruptly as if it had been cut off. the belly
is white with small black spots, beautifully variagated. the legs are
of the same colour with the sides and back marked with transverse
stripes of black the ears are black on the outer side covered with fine
short hair except at the upper point which furnished with a pensil of
fine, streight, black hair, = 3/4 of an inch in length. the fur of this
anamal is long and fine, much more so than the wild cat of the United
States but less so than that of Louservea of the N. West. the natives
in this quarter make great use of the skins of this Cat to form the
robes which they wear; four skins is the compliment usuly employed in
each robe. the Black fox, or as they most frequently called in the
neighbourhood of Detroit, Fisher is found in the woody country on this
coast. how this animal obtained the name of fisher I know not, but
certain it is, that the name is not appropriate, as it dose not prey on
fish or seek it as a prey. they are extreemly active strong and
prepared for climbing, which they do with great agility, and bound from
tree to tree in pursuit of the squirrel or Rackoon their natural and
most usual food. their colour is a jut black except a small spot of
white on the breast. the body is long, legs short and formed something
like the ternspit dog with a remarkable long tail. it dose not differ
here from those of the United States. The Silver fox this animal is
very rare even in the country where it exists; I have never seen more
than the Skins of this anamal and those were in the possession of the
natives of the woody Country below the great falls of the Columbia from
which I think that it is most probably the inhabtant of the woody
country exclusively. from the skin it appeared to be about the size of
the large red fox of the plains and much of it's form with a large
tail. the legs I think somewhat longer. it has a fine long deep fur
poll. the poil is of a dark lead colour and the long hairs intermixed
with it are either white or black at the lower part and white at the
top, the whole mixture forming a beatifull silver grey. I think this
the most beautifull of all the Foxes except species of which I saw one
only on the Missouri near the natural walls. the large red fox of the
plains and the Kit fox are the same which we met with on the Missouri
and are the inhabitants almost exclusively of the open plains, or of
the cops of brush within the pain country. The common red fox of the
United States is also found in the woody country on this coast nor dose
it appear to be altered in rispect to it's fur colour or any other
particular

[Clark, February 21, 1806]
Friday February 21st 1806
Visited this morning by three Clatsops, who remained with us all day;
they are great begers; Capt Lewis gave one of them a fiew nedles with
which he appeared much gratified, in the evening late they departed.

Drewyer and Collins went in pursute of Some Elk the tracks of which
Collins had discovered yesterday; but it rained So hard they Could not
pursue them by the tracks, and returned unsucksessfull. Drewyer Saw a
fisher but it escaped from him among the fallen timber. Sergt. Ordway
returned with the party from the Salt Camp which we have now avacuated.
they brought with them the Salt and utensels. our Stock of Salt is now
about 20 Gallons; 12 Gallons we had Secured in 2 Small iron bound Kegs
and laid by for our voyage. Gave Willard a dose of Scots pills; they
opperated very well. Gibson Still Continus the bark 3 times a day and
is on the recovery fast.

The large brown Wolf is like that of the atlantic States, and are found
only in the woody Country on the Pacific Ocean embraceing the mountains
which pass the Columbia between the Great Falls an Rapids of the same.
The large and Small Wolves of the inhabitents principally of the open
Country and the wood land on their borders, and resemble in their
habits those of the plains of Missouri presisely they are not abundant
in the Plains of Columbia because there is but little game on which for
them to subsist-

[Lewis, February 22, 1806]
Saturday February 22cd 1806.
We were visited today by two Clatsop women and two boys who brought a
parsel of excellent hats made of Cedar bark and ornamented with
beargrass. two of these hats had been made by measures which Capt Clark
and myself had given one of the women some time since with a request to
make each of us a hat; they fit us very well, and are in the form we
desired them. we purchased all their hats and distributed them among
the party. the woodwork and sculpture of these people as well as these
hats and their waterproof baskets evince an ingenuity by no means
common among the Aborigenes of America. in the evening they returned to
their village and Drewyer accompanied them in their canoe in order to
get the dogs which the Clatsops have agreed to give us in payment for
the Elk they stole from us some weeks since. these women informed us
that the small fish began to run which we suppose to be herring from
their discription. they also informed us that their Chief, Coma or
Comowooll, had gone up the Columbia to the valley in order to purchase
wappetoe, a part of which he in tended trading with us on his return.
one of our canoes brake the cord by which it was attatched and was
going off with the tide this evening; we sent Sergt. Pryor and a party
after her who recovered and brought her back. our sick consisting of
Gibson, Bratton, Sergt. Ordway, Willard and McNeal are all on the
recovery. we have not had as may sick at any one time since we left
Wood River. the general complaint seams to be bad colds and fevers,
something I beleive of the influenza.

The Antelope is found in the great plains of Columbia and are the same
of those on the Missouri found in every part of that untimbered
country. they are by no means as plenty on this side of the Rocky
Mountains as on the other. the natives here make robes of their skins
dressed with the hair on them. when the salmon begin to decline in the
latter end of the sunme and Autumn the natves leave the river, at least
a majority and remove to the plains at some distance for the purpose of
hunting the Antelope. they pursue them on horse back and shoot them
with their arrows. The sheep is found in various parts of the Rocky
mountains, but most commonly in those parts which are timbered and
steep. they are also found in greater abundance on the Chain of
mountains with form the commencement of the woody country on this coast
and which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids we have
never met with this anamal ourselves but have seen many of their skins
in possession of the natives dressed with the wooll on them and aso
seen the blankets which they manufacture of the wooll of this sheep.
from the skin the animal appears to be about the size of the common
sheep; of a white colour. the wooll is fine on most parts of the body
but not so long as that of our domestic sheep. the wooll is also curled
and thick. on the back and more particularly on the top of the neck the
wooll is intermixed with a considerable proportion of long streight
hairs. there is no wooll on a small part of the body behind the
sholders on each side of the brisquit which is covered with a short
fine hairs as in the domestic sheep. form the signs which the Indians
make in discribing this animal they have herect pointed horns, tho one
of our Engages La Page, assures us that he saw them in the black hills
where the little Missouri passes them, and that they were in every
rispect like the domestic sheep, and like them the males had lunated
horns bent backwards and twisted. I should be much pleased at meeting
with this animal, but have had too many proofs to admit a doubt of it's
existing and in considerable numbers in the mountains near this coast.
the Beaver and common Otter have before been mentioned in treating of
the occupations of the natives in hunting fishing &c. these do not
differ from those of other parts of the Continent.

[Clark, February 22, 1806]
Saturday February 22nd 1806
We were visited to day by two Clatsops women and two boys who brought a
parcel of excellent hats made of Cedar bark, and ornemented with bear
grass. two of those hats had been made by measure which Capt Lewis and
my Self had given a woman Some time Since, with a request to make each
of us a hat; they fit us very well, and are in the form we desired
them. we purchased the hats and distribeted them among the party. the
woodwork and sculpture of these people as well as those hats and the
water proof baskits evince an ingenuity by no means common among the
Aborigenes of America. in the evining they returned to their village
and Drewyer accompanied them in order to get Some dogs &c. These women
informed us that the Small fish began to run which we suppose to be
herring from their discription. they also informed us that their Chief
Conia Comawool, had gorn up the Columbia to the Vally in order to
purchase Wappatoe, a part of which he entended tradeing with us on his
return. our sick consisting of Gibson, Bratten, Willard McNeal and
Baptiest LaPage is Something better Serjt. Ordway is complaining of a
Coald & head ake. we have not had as many Sick at one time Since we
left the Settlements of the Illinois. the general Complaint appears to
be bad colds and fevers, with a violent pain in the head, and back,
something I believe of the influenza.

The Antelope is found in the great plains of Columbia and are the Same
with those of the Missouri found in every part of that untimbered
Country. they are by no means as plenty on this Side of the Rocky
Mountains as on the other. the nativs here make robes of their Skins
dressed withe the hair on them. when the Salmon begin to decline in the
latter end of Summer and autumn, the nativs leave the river, at least a
majority and move out into the plains at Some distance for the purpose
of hunting the Antelope. they pursue them on hors back and Shute them
with their arrows.

The Sheep is found in various parts of the Rocky Mountains, but most
Commonly on those parts which are timbered and Steep. they are also
found in greater abundance on the chain of mountains which forms the
Commencement of the woody country on this Coast and which pass the
Columbia between the great falls and rapids. we have never met with
this animal ourselves but have Seen maney of their Skins in the
possession of the nativs dressed with the wool on them and also Seen
and have the blankets which they manufacture of the wool of this Sheep.
from the Skin the animal appears to be about the Size of the common
Sheep; of a white colour. the wool is fine on most parts of the body,
but not so long as that of the domestic Sheep; the wool is also Curled
and thick. on the back and more particularly on the top of the neck the
wool is intermixed with a Considerable proportion of long Streight
hair. there is no wool on a Small part of the body behind the Sholders
on each Side of the brisquit which is covered with a Short fine hairs
as in the domestic Sheep. from the Signs which the Indians make in
discribing this animale they have herect pointed horns, tho one of our
Engages Lapage, assures us that he Saw them in the Black hills where
the Little Missouri river passes them, and that they were in every
respect like our domestic Sheep, and like them the mail had lunated
horns bent backwards and twisted. I should be much pleased at meeting
with this animal. but have had too maney proofs to admit a doubt of
it's existing and in considerable numbers in the mountains on this
Coast. The Beaver and Common Otter have before been mentioned in
treating of the Occupation of the nativs in hunting, fishing, &c. these
do not differ from those of other parts of the Continent-.-.

[Lewis, February 23, 1806]
Sunday February 23rd 1806.
not anything transpired during this day worthy of particular notice.
our sick are all on the recovery, except Sergt. Ordway who is but
little wose and not very ill tho more so than any of the others. the
men have provided themselves very amply with mockersons and leather
cloathing, much more so indeed than they ever have since they have been
on this voige.

The Sea Otter is found on the sea coast and in the salt water. this
anamal when fully grown is as large as a common mastive dog. the ears
and eyes are remarkaby small, particularly the former which is not an
inch in length thick fleshey and pointed covered with short hair. the
tail is about 10 inches in length thick where it joins the body and
tapering to a very sharp point; in common with the body it is covered
with a deep fir particularly on the upper side, on the under part the
fur is not so long. the legs are remarkably short and the feet, which
have five toes each are broad large and webbed. the legs are covered
with fur and the feet with short hair. the body of this animal is long
and nearly of the same thickness throughout. from the extremity of the
tail to that of the nose they will measure 5 feet or upwards. the
colour is a uniform dark brown and when in good order and season
perfectly black and glossey. it is the riches and I think the most
delicious fur in the world at least I cannot form an idea of any more
so. it is deep thick silkey in the extreem and strong. the inner part
of the fur when opened is lighter than the surface in it's natural
position. there are some fine black and shining hairs intermixed with
the fur which are reather longer and add much to it's beauty. the nose,
about the eyes ears and forehead in some of these otter is of a lighter
colour, sometimes a light brown. those parts in the young sucking Otter
of this species is sometimes of a cream coloured white, but always much
lighter than the other parts. the fur of the infant Otter is much
inferior in point of colour and texture to that of the full grown
otter, or even after it has been weaned. there is so great a difference
that I have for some time supposed it a different animal; the Indians
called the infant Otter Spuck, and the full grow or such as had
obtained a coat of good fur, E-luck'-ke. this still further confirmed
the opinion of their being distinct species; but I have since learned
that the Spuck is the young Otter. the colour of the neck, body, legs
and tail is a dark lead brown. The mink is found in the woody country
on this coast, and dose not differ in any particu from those of the
Atlantic coast. the seal are found here in great numbers, and as far up
the Columbia river as the great falls above which there are none. I
have reason to beleive from the information of the men that there are
several species of the seal on this coast and in the river but what the
difference is I am unable to state not having seen them myself
sufficiently near for minute inspection nor obtained the different
kinds to make a comparison. the skins of such as I have seen are
covered with a short coarse stiff and glossey hair of a redish hey
brown colour. tho the anamal while in the water or as we saw them
frequently in the river appear to be black and spoted with white
sometimes. when we first saw those animals at the great falls and
untill our arrival at this place we conseived they were the Sea Otter.
but the indians here have undeceived us.- I am not much acquainted with
the Seal but suppose that they are the same common also to the Atlantic
Ocean in the same parallel of latitude. the skins I have seen are
precisely such as our trunks are frequently covered with.

[Clark, February 23, 1806]
Sunday February 23rd 1806.
Not any thing transpired desering particular notice. our Sick are all
on the recovery. the men have provided themselves verry amply with
mockersons & leather clothing, much more So indeed than they have ever
been Since they have been on the voyage.

The Sea Otter is found only on the Sea Coast and in the Salt water.
Those animals which I took to be the Sea Otter from the Great Falls of
the Columbia to the mouth, proves to be the Phosia or Seal which at a
little distance has every appearance of the Sea Otters. The Sea otter
when fully grown is as large as the common mastif dog, the eail and
Eyes are remarkably Small, particularly the former which is not an inch
in length thick fleshey and pointed, Covered with short hair. the tail
is about 10 inches in length thick where it joins the body and tapering
to a very Sharp point; in common with the body it is covered with a
deep fur particularly on the upper Side, on the under part the fur is
not So long. the legs are remarkably Short and the feat which have five
toes each are broad large and webbed. the legs are covered with fur and
the feet with Short hair. the body of this Animal is long and nearly of
the Same thickness throughout. from the extremity of the tail to that
of the nose they will measure 5 feet or upwards. the colour is of a
uniform dark brown, and when in good order and Season perfectly Black
and Glossey. it is the richest and I think the most delightfull fur in
the world at least I cannot form an idea of any more so. it is deep
thick silky in the extream and Strong. the inner part of the fur when
open is lighter than the surface in its natural position. there are
Some fine black Shineing hairs intermixed with the fur which are
reather longer and add much to its beauty. the nose, about the eyes,
ears and forehead in Some of those otter is of a light Colour,
Sometimes a light brown. those parts in the young Suckling otters of
this Species is Sometimes of a creem colour'd white, but always much
lighter than the other parts. the fur of the infant otter is much
inferior in point of colour, and texture, to that of the full grown
otter, or even after it has been weened-. there is so great a
difference that I have for Some time Supposed it a different animal;
the Indians Call the infant otter Spuck, and the full grown or such as
had obtained a Coat of good fur, E luck'ko. this Still further
confirmed the opinion of their being distinct Species; but I have Since
lerned that the Spuck is the young otter. the Colour of the neck, body,
legs and tail is a dark lead brown. The Mink is found in the woody
Country on this Coast and does not differ in any particular from those
of the Atlantic Coasts.

The Seal or Phoca are found here in great numbers, and as far up the
Columbia as the great Falls, above which there are none. I have reasons
to believe from the information of the men that there are Several
Species of the Phoca on this Coast and in the river, but what the
difference is I am unable to State not haveing Seen them myself
Sufficiently near for manute inspection nor obtain the different kinds
to make a comparison. the Skins of Such as I have Seen are covered with
a Short thick Coarse Glossy hair of a redish bey brown Colour. tho the
animal while in the water, or as we saw them frequently in the river
appear to be black and Spoted with white sometimes. I am not much
acquainted with the Seal, but Suppose that they are the Same common
also to the atlantic Ocian in the Same parrelal of Latitude. the Skins,
or those which I have Seen are presisely Such as trunks are frequently
Covered with. the flesh of this animal is highly prised by the nativs
who Swinge the hair off and then roste the flesh on Sticks before the
fire.

[Lewis, February 24, 1806]
Monday February 24th 1806.
Our sick are still on the recovery. Shannon & Labuishe returned in the
forenoon; they had killed no Elk and reported that they beleived the
Elk have retired from their former haunts and gone further back in the
country to a considerable distance from this place. this is very
unwelcome information for poor and inferior as the flesh of this animal
is it is our principal dependance for subsistence.

This evening we were visited by Comowooll the Clatsop Chief and 12 men
women & children of his nation. Drewyer came a passenger in their
canoe, and brought with him two dogs. The chief and his party had
brought for sail a Sea Otter skin some hats, stergeon and a species of
small fish which now begin to run, and are taken in great quantities in
the Columbia R. about 40 miles above us by means of skiming or scooping
nets. on this page I have drawn the likeness of them as large as life;
it as perfect as I can make it with my pen and will serve to give a
general idea of the fish. the rays of the fins are boney but not sharp
tho somewhat pointed. the small fin on the back next to the tail has no
rays of bone being a thin membranous pellicle. the fins next to the
gills have eleven rays each. those of the abdomen have eight each,
those of the pinna-ani are 20 and 2 half formed in front. that of the
back has eleven rays. all the fins are of a white colour. the back is
of a bluish duskey colour and that of the lower part of the sides and
belley is of a silvery white. no spots on any part. the first bone of
the gills next behid the eye is of a bluis cast, and the second of a
light goald colour nearly white. the puple of the eye is black and the
iris of a silver white. the underjaw exceeds the uper; and the mouth
opens to great extent, folding like that of the herring. it has no
teeth. the abdomen is obtuse and smooth; in this differing from the
herring, shad anchovey &c of the Malacopterygious Order & Class Clupea,
to which however I think it more nearly allyed than to any other altho
it has not their accute and serrate abdomen and the under jaw exceeding
the upper. the scales of this little fish are so small and thin that
without minute inspection you would suppose they had none. they are
filled with roes of a pure white colour and have scarcely any
perceptable alimentary duct. I find them best when cooked in Indian
stile, which is by roasting a number of them together on a wooden spit
without any previous preperation whatever. they are so fat they require
no additional sauce, and I think them superior to any fish I ever
tasted, even more delicate and lussious than the white fish of the
lakes which have heretofore formed my standart of excellence among the
fishes. I have heard the fresh anchovey much extolled but I hope I
shall be pardoned for beleiving this quite as good. the bones are so
soft and fine that they form no obstruction in eating this fish. we
purchased all the articles which these people brought us; we suffered
these people to remain all night as it rained, the wind blew most
violently and they had their women and children with them; the latter
being a sure pledge of their pacific dispositions. the Sturgeon which
they brought us was also good of it's kind. we determine to send a
party up the river to procure some of those fish, and another in some
direction to hunt Elk as soon as the weather will permit.

[Clark, February 24, 1806]
Monday February 24th 1806
Our Sick are Still on the recovery. Shannon and Labiche returned in the
forenoon, they had killed no Elk, and reported that they believe the
Elk have returned from their former haunts and gorn further back in the
mountains to a considerable distance from this place. this is very
unwelcom information, for poore and inferior as the flesh of this
animale is, it is our principal dependance for Subsistance.

The Rackoon is found in the woody Country on the Coast in considerable
quantities. the nativs take a fiew of them in Snars, and deadfalls; tho
appear not to value their Skins much, and but Seldom prepare them for
robes. The large Grey Squirel appear to be a native of a narrow tract
of Country on the upper Side of the mountains below the Great falls of
Columbia which is pritty well covered in maney parts with a Species of
white oak. this animal is much larger than the Gray Squirel of our
Country, it resembles it much in form and colour. it is as large as the
Fox Squirel of the South Atlantic States. the tail is reather larger
than the whole of the body and head, the hair of which is long and tho
inserted on all Sides reispect the horozontal one. the eyes are black,
whiskers black and long. the back, Sides, head, tale and outer parts of
the legs are of a blue lead colour grey. the breast, belly, and inner
parts of the legs are of a pure white. the hair is Short as that of the
Fox Squirel but is much finer and intermixed with a propotion of fur.
the nativs make great use of those Skins in forming their robes. this
Squirel Subsists principally on the acorn and filburts, which last also
grow abundantly in the Oak Country-. The Small brown Squirel is a
butifull little animal about the size of the red Squirel of the E.
States or Something larger than the ground Squirel of the U States. the
tail is as long as the body and neck formed Somewhat Hat. the eyes
black, whiskers long and black but not abundant. the back, Sides, head,
neck and outer parts of the legs are of a redish dark brown. the
throat, breast, belly and inner parts of the legs are of a pale brick
red. the tail is a mixture of black and fox coloured red in which the
black prodomonates in the middle, and the other on the edges and
extremity. the hair of the body is about 1/2 inch long and So fine and
soft that it has the appearance of fur. the hair of the tail is coarser
and double as long. this animal Subsists principally on the Seeds of
various Species of pine and are always found in the piney Country. they
are common to the tract of woody country on this coast. they lodge in
Clefts of rocks, holes in the Ground, old Stumps of trees and the
hollow trunks of falling timber; in this respect resemble the rat
always haveing their habitation in or near the earth. The Small Grey
Squirel Common to every part of the Rocky Mountains which is timbered,
differ from the dark brown squirel just discribed only in its colour.

it's back, neck, Sides, head, tail and outer Sides of the legs are of
brown lead coloured Grey; the tail has a Slight touch of the fox colour
near the extremity of some of the hairs. the throat, belly, breast, and
inner part of the legs are of the Colour of tanners ooze and have a
narrow Stripe of black commencing behing each Sholder and extending
longitudinally for about 3 inches between the Colours of the Side &
belly. their habits are also the Same with the dark brown Squirel of
this neighbourhood, and like them are extreamly nimble and active. The
Ground Squirel is found in various parts of the Countrey as well the
Praries as wood lands, and is one of the fiew animals which we have
Seen in every part of our voy-age. it differs not at all from those of
the U, States.

The Barking Squirel and handsom Ground Squirel of the Plains on the
East Side of the Rocky Mountains are not found in the plains of the
Columbia.

This evening we were visited by Comowooll the Clatsop Chief and 14 men
women and Children of his nation. Drewyer came a pasinger in their
Canoe, and brought with him two dogs. the Chief and his party had
brought for Sale a Sea otter Skin, Some hats, Sturgeon and a Species of
fish which now begins to run and are taken in Great quantities in the
Columbia River about 40 miles above us by means of Skiming or scooping
nets. See likeness on the other Side of this leaf or page. Capt Lewis
gave an old Coat and Vest for a Sea otter Skin, we purchased Several
hads of the Indian manufactry and distributed them among the party. we
also purchased a fiew of the Small fish which we found deliciously fine.

[Lewis, February 25, 1806]
Tuesday February 25th 1806.
It continued to rain and blow so violently that there was no movement
of the party today. the Indians left us in the morning on their return
to their village. Willard somewhat worse the other Invalledes on the
ricovery. I am mortifyed at not having it in my power to make more
celestial observations since we have been at Fort Clatsop, but such has
been the state of the weather that I have found it utterly
impracticable.-

The Rackoon is found in the woody country on this coast in considerable
quantities. the natives take a few of them in snars and deadfalls; tho
appear not to vallue their skins much, and but seldom prepare them for
robes. The large grey squirrel appears to be a native of a narrow tract
of country on the upper side of the mountains just below the grand
falls of Columbia which is pretty well covered in many parts with a
species of white oak. in short I beleive this squirrel to be
coextensive with timber only, as we have not seen them in any part of
the country where pine forms the majority of the timber, or in which
the oak dose not appear. this animal is much larger than the grey
squirrel of our country it resembles it much in form and colours. it is
as large as the fox squirrel of the Southern Atlantic states. the tail
is reather longer than the whole length of the body and head. the hair
of which is long and tho inserted on all sides reispect the horizontal
ones only. the eyes are black. whiskers black and long. the back,
sides, head, tail and outer part of the legs are of a blue lead
coloured grey. the breast belley and inner part of the legs are of a
pure white. the hair is short as that of the fox-squirrel but is much
finer and intermixed with a proportion of fur. the natives make great
use of these skins in forming their robes. this squirrel subsists
principally on the acorn and filbird which last also grows abundantly
in the oak country.- The small brown squirrel is a beautifull little
animal about the size and form of the red squirrel of the Eastern
Atlantic states and western lakes. the tail is as long as the body and
neck, formed like that of the red squirrel or somewhat flat. the eyes
black. whiskers long and black but not abundant. the back, sides, head,
neck and outer part of the legs are of a redish dark brown. the throat,
breast, belley and inner part of the legs are of a pale brick red. the
tail is a mixture of black and fox coloured red in which the black
predominates in the midle and the other on the edges and extremity. the
hair of the body is about 1/2 an inch long and so fine and soft that it
has the appearance of fur. the hair of the tail is coarser and doubly
as long. this animal subsists principally on the seeds of various
species of pine, and are always found in the piny country they are
common to the tract of wooddy country on this coast. they lodge in
clifts of rocks, holes in the ground old stumps of trees and the hollow
trunks of fallen timber; in this rispect resembling the rat, always
having their habitatin in or near the earth. the small grey squirrel
common to every part of the rocky mountain which is timbered, difirs
from the dark brown squirrel just discribed only in it's colour. it's
back, sides, neck, head tail and outer side of the legs are of a brown
lead coloured grey; the tail has a slight touch of the fox colour near
the extremity of some of the hairs. the throat, breast, belley, and
inner parts of the legs are of the colour of tanner's ooze and have a
narrow stripe of black, commencing just behide each sholder and
extending longitudinaly for about 3 inches betwen the colours of the
sides and belley. their habids are also the same of the dark brown
squirrel of this neighbourhood and like them are extreemly nimble and
active. the ground squirrel is found in every part of the country, as
well the praries as woodlands, and is one of the few animals which we
have seen in every part of our voyage. it differs not at all from those
of the U States. the barking squirrel and handsome ground squirrel of
the plains on the East side of the rocky mountains are not found in the
plains of Columbia.

[Clark, February 25, 1806]
Tuesday February 25th 1806
It continued to rain and blow So violently that there was no movement
of the party to day. the Indians left us in the morning on their return
to their village. Willard Somewhat worse the others are on the
recovery. we are mortified at not haveing it in our power to make more
Celestial observations since we have been at Fort Clatsop, but Such has
been the State of the weather that we have found it utterly
impractiable-. I purchased of the Clatsops this morning about half a
bushel of Small fish which they had cought about 40 miles up the
Columbia in their scooping nets. as this is an uncommon fish to me and
one which no one of the party has ever Seen. on the next page I have
drawn the likeness of them as large as life; it's as perfect as I can
make it with my pen and will Serve to give a general idea of the fish.
the rays of the fins are boney but not Sharp tho Somewhat pointed. the
Small fin on the back next to the tail has no rays of bone being a thin
membranous pellicle. the fins next to the gills have eleven rays each.
those of the abdomen have Eight each, those of the pinna ani are 20 and
2 half formed in front. that of the back has eleven rays. all the fins
are of a white colour. the back is of a blueish duskey colour and that
of the lower part of the Sides and belly is of a Silvery White. no
Spots on any part. the first of the gills next behind the eye is of a
blueish cast, and the second of a light gold colour nearly white. the
puple of the eye is black and the iris of a silver white. the under jaw
exceeds the upper; and the mouth opens to great extent, folding like
that of the Herring. it has no teeth. the abdomen is obtuse and Smooth;
in this differing from the herring, Shad, anchovey &c. of the
Malacapterygious Order and Class Clupea, to which however I think it
more nearly allyed than to any other altho it has not their accute and
Serrate abdomen and the under jaw exceeding the upper. the scales of
this little fish are So small and thin that without manute inspection
you would Suppose they had none. they are filled with roes of a pure
white Colour and have Scercely any perceptable alimentary duct. I found
them best when cooked in Indian Stile, which is by rosting a number of
them together on a wooden spit without any previous preperation
whatever. they are so fat that they require no aditional sauce, and I
think them Superior to any fish I ever tasted, even more dilicate and
lussious than the white fish of the Lakes which have heretofore formed
my Standard of excellence among the fishes. I have herd the fresh
anchovey much extoll'd but I hope I shall be pardened for believeing
this quit as good. the bones are So Soft and fine that they form no
obstruction in eating this fish.

[Lewis, February 26, 1806]
Wednesday February 26th 1806.
This morning we dispatched Drewyer and two men in our Indian canoe up
the Columbia River to take sturgeon and Anchovey. or if they were
unsuccessfull in fishing we directed them to purchase fish from the
natives for which purpose we had furnished them with a few articles
such as the natives are pleased with. we also Sent Shields, Joseph
Fields and Shannon up the Netul to hunt Elk. and directed Reubin Fields
and some others to hunt in the point towards the praries of Point
Adams. thus we hope shortly to replenish our stock of provision which
is now reduced to a mere minnamum. we have three days provision only in
store and that of the most inferior dryed Elk a little tainted. a
comfortable prospect for good living. Sewelel is the Chinnook and
Clatsop name for a small animal found in the timbered country on this
coast. it is more abundant in the neighbourhood of the great falls and
rapids of the Columbia than immediately on the coast. the natives make
great use of the skins of this animal in forming their robes, which
they dress with the fur on them and attatch together with sinews of the
Elk or deer. I have never seen the animal and can therefore discribe it
only from the skin and a slight view which some of our hunters have
obtained of the living animal. the skin when dressed is from 14 to 18
inches in length and from 7 to 9 in width; the tail is always severed
from the skin in forming their robes I cannot therefore say what form
or length it is. one of the men informed me that he thought it reather
short and flat. that he saw one of them run up a tree like a squirrel
and that it returned and ran into a hole in the ground. the ears are
short thin pointed and covered with short fine hair. they are of a
uniform colour, a redish brown; tho the base of the long hairs, which
exceed the fur but little in length, as well as the fur itself is of a
dark colour for at least two thirds of it's length next to the skin.
the fur and hair are very fine, short, thickly set and silky. the ends
of the fur and tips of the hair being of the redish brown that colour
predominates in the ordinary appearance of the animal. I take this
animal to be about the size of the barking squirrel of the Missouri.
and beleive most probably that it is of the Mustela genus, or perhaps
the brown mungo itself. I have indeavoured in many instances to make
the indians sensible how anxious I was to obtain one of these animals
entire, without being skined, and offered them considerable rewards to
furnish me with one, but have not been able to make them comprehend me.
I have purchased several of the robes made of these skins to line a
coat which I have had made of the skins of the tiger cat. they make a
very pleasant light lining. the Braro so called by the French engages
is an animal of the civit genus and much resembles the common badger.
this is an inhabitant of the open plains of the Columbia as they are of
those of the Missouri but are sometimes also found in the woody
country. they burrow in the hard grounds of the plains with surprising
ease and dexterity an will cover themselves in the ground in a very few
minutes. they have five long fixed nails on each foot; those of the
forefeet are much the longest; and one of those on each hind foot is
double like those of the beaver. they weigh from 14 to 18 lbs. the body
is reather long in proportion to it's thickness. the forelegs
remarkably large and muscular and are formed like the ternspit dog.
they are short as are also the hind legs. they are broad across the
sholders and brest. the neck short. the head is formed much like the
common fist dog only that the skull is more convex. the mouth is wide
and furnished with sharp streight teeth both above and below, with four
sharp streight pointed tusks, two in the upper and two in the lower
jaw. the eyes are black and small. whiskers are plased in four points
on each side near the nose and on the jaws near the opening of the
mouth. the ears are very short wide and appressed as if they had ben
cut off. the apperture through them to the head is remarkably small.
the tail is about 4 inches long; the hair longest on it at it's
junction with the body and becoming shorter towards it's extremity
where it ends in an accute point. the hairs of the body are much longer
on the side and rump than any other part, which gives the body and
apparent flatness, particularly when the animal rests on it's belley.
this hair is upwards of 3 inches in length particularly on the rump
where it extends so far towards the point of the tail that it almost
conceals the shape of that part and gives to the whole of the hinder
part of the body the figure of an accute angled triangle of which the
point of the tail forms the accute angle. the small quantity of coarse
fur which is intermixed with the hair is of a redish pale yellow. the
hair of the back, sides, upper part of the neck and tail, are of a
redish light or pale yellow for about 2/3rds of their length from the
skin, next black, and then tiped with white; forming a curious mixture
of grey and fox coloured red with a yellowish hue. the belley flanks
and breast are of the foxcoloured redish yellow. the legs black. the
nails white the head on which the hair is short, is varia gated with
black and white. a narrow strip of white commences on the top of the
nose about 1/2 an inch from it's extremity and extends back along the
center of the forehead and neck nearly to the sholders- two stripes of
black succeed the white on either side imbracing the sides of the nose,
the eyes, and extends back as far as the ears. two other spots of black
of a ramboidal figure are placed on the side of the head near the ears
and between them and the opening of the mouth. two black spots also
immediately behind the ears. the other parts of the head white. this
animal feeds on flesh, roots, bugs, and wild fruits.- it is very clumsy
and runs very slow. I have in two instances out run this animal and
caught it. in this rispect they are not much more fleet than the
porcupine.

[Clark, February 26, 1806]
Wednesday February 26th 1806
This morning we dispatched Drewyer and two men in our indian canoe up
the Columbia River to take Sturgion and Anchovey. or if they were
unsucksessfull in fishing we directed them to purchase fish from the
nativs, for which purpose we had furnished them with a fiew articles
Such as the nativs are pleased with. we also Sent Shields Jo. Field and
Shannon up the Netul to hunt Elk. and directed Reubin Field and Some
other man to hunt in the point towards the Praries & point Adams. thus
we hope Shortly to replenish our Stock of provisions which is now
reduced to a mear minnamum. we have three days provisions only in Store
and that of the most inferior dried Elk a little tainted. what a
prospect for good liveing at Fort Clatsop at present.

Se we lel is the Clatsop and Chinnook name for a Small animal found in
the timbered Country on this Coast. it is more abundant in the
neighbourhood of the great falls and rapids of the Columbia than
imediately on the Coast. the nativs make great use of the Skins of this
animal in forming their robes, which they dress with the fur on them
and attached together with the sinears of the Elk or Deer. I have never
Seen the ammale and can therefore only discribe it from the Skin and a
Slight view which Some of our party have obtained of the liveing
animal. the Skin when dressed is from 14 to 18 inches in length, and
from 7 to 9 in width; the tail is always Severed from the body in
forming their robes, I cannot therefore Say in what form or length it
is. one of the men informed me that he thought it reather Short and
flat. that he saw one of them run up a tree like a squirel, and that it
returned and ran into a hole in the ground. the ears are Short, thin,
pointed and Covered with Short fine hair. they are of uniform Colour, a
redish brown; tho the base of the long hairs, exceed the fur but little
in length, as well as the fur itself is of a Dark colour for at least
2/3ds of it's length next to the Skin. the fur and hair are very fine,
Short, thickly Set, and Silky. the ends of the fur and tips of the hair
is of a redish brown, that colour prodominates in the ordinary
appearance of the Animate. I took this animal to be about the Size of
the barking Squirel of the Missouri. and believe most probably that it
is of the Mustela genus, or perhaps the brown mungo itself I have in
maney instances endeavured to make the nativs Sensiable how anxious I
was to obtain one of those animals entire, without being Skined, and
offered them rewards to furnish me with one, but have not been able to
make them Comprehend me. we have purchased Several of the roabs made of
those Skins to loin a westcoat of the Sea otter, which I have made and
Capt Lewis a Tiger Cat Skin Coat loined with them also, they make a
very pleasant light lighting.

The Rat in the rocky mountains on its west side are like those on the
upper part of the Missouri in and near those Mountains and have the
distingushing trait of possessing a tail covered with hair like other
parts of the body; one of these we caught at the white bear Islands in
the beginning of July last and then partially discribed.

There is rats in this neighbourhood but I have not seen them it is most
probable that they are like those of the Atlantic States, or at least
the native rat of our country which have no hair on their tail. this
Specis we found on the Missouri as far up it as the woody country
extended. it is as large as the Common European house rat or reather
larger is of a lighter Colour bordering more on the lead or drab
colour, the hair longer; and the female has only four tits which are
placed far back near the hinder legs. this rat I have Seen in the
Southern parts of the State of Kentucky & west of the Miami.

The Mouse and mole of this neighbourhood are the Same as those native
animals with us.

The Panther is found indifferently either in the great Plains of
Columbia the Western Side of the Rocky Mountains or on this coast in
the timbered country. it is precisily the Same animal common to the
Atlantic States, and most commonly met with on our frontiers or
unsettled parts of the Country. this animal is Scerce in the Country
where they exist and are So remarkable Shye and watchfull that it is
extreamly dificuelt to kill them.

The Polecat is found in every part of the Country. they are very
abundant on Some parts of the Columbia, particularly in the
neighbourhood of the Great falls & Narrows of that river, where they
live in the Clifts along the river & feed on the offal of the Indian
fishing Shores. they are the Same as those of other parts of North
America.

[Lewis, February 27, 1806]
Thursday February 27th 1806.
Reubin Fields returned this evening and had not killed anything. he
reports that there are no Elk towards point Adams. Collins who had
hunted up the Netul on this side returned in the evening having killed
a buck Elk. Willard still continues very unwell the other sick men have
nearly recovered. Gutridge and McNeal who have the pox are recovering
fast, the former nearly well.

The rat in the Rocky mountain on it's West side are like those on the
upper part of the Missouri in and near those mountains and have the
distinguishing trait of possessing a tail covered with hair like other
parts of the body; one of those we caught at the White bear Islands in
the beginning of July last and was then discribed. I have seen the
nests of those in this neighbourhood but not the animal. I think it
most probable that they are like those of the Atlantic states or at
least the native rat of our country which have no hair on the tail.
this species we found on the Missouri as far up it as the woody country
extended. it is as large as the common European house rat or reather
larger, is of a lighter colour bordering more on the lead or drab
colour, the hair longer; and the female has only four tits which are
placed far back near the hinder legs. this rat I have observed in the
Western parts of the State of Georgia and also in Madison's cave in the
state of Virginia the mouse and mole of this neighbourhood are the same
as those native animals with us. The Panther is found indifferently
either in the Great Plains of Columbia, the Western side of the rocky
mountains or on this coast in the timbered country. it is precisely the
same animal common to the Atlantic coast, and most commonly met with on
our frontiers or unsettled parts of the country. this animal is scarce
in the country where they exist and are so remarkable shye and
watchfull that it is extreemly difficult to kill them.

[Clark, February 27, 1806]
Thursday February 27th 1806
Reubin Field returned this evening and had not killed anything, he
reported that there were no Elk towards point Adams. Collins who had
hunted up the Netul on this Side returned in the evening haveing killed
a buck Elk. Willard Still Continue very unwell the other Sick men have
nearly recovered. Goodrich & McNeal who have the Pox are recovering
fast, the former nearly well. La Page complaining.

The Braro so called by the French engages is an animal of the Civit
genus and much resembles the common badger. this is an enhabitent of
the open plains of the Columbia as they are of those of the Missouri,
but are Sometimes also found in the woody country. they burrow in the
hard Grounds in the Plains with Surprising ease and dexterity and will
cover themselves in the Ground in a very fiew minits. they have five
long fixed nails on each foot; those of the fore feet are much the
longest; and one of those on each hind foot is double like those of the
beaver. they weigh from 14 to 20 lbs. the body is reather long in
perportion to its thickness. the fore legs remarkably large and
muscular and are formed like the turnspit dog. they are Short as also
the hind legs. they are broad across the Sholders and breast. the neck
Short, the head is formed much like the Common fist dog only that the
Skull is more Convex, the mouth is wide and furnishid with long Sharp
teeth, both above and below, and with four Sharp Streight Pointed
tushes, two in the upper and two in the lower jaw. the eyes are black
and Small. Whiskers are placed in four points on each Side near the
nose and on the jaws near the opening of the mouth. the ears are very
Short wide and appressed as if they had been cut off. the appertue
through them to the head is remarkably Small; the tail is about 4
inches long; the hair longest on it at it's junction, with the body and
becomeing Shorter towards it's extremity where it ends in an accute
point. the hairs of the body are much longer on the Sides and rump than
any other part, which givs the body an appearent flatness, particularly
when the animal rests on it's belly. this hair is upwards of 3 inches
in length, particularly on the rump where it extends so far towards the
point of the tail, that it almost conceals the Shape of that part and
givs to all the hinder part of the body an accute angled triangle, of
which the point of the tail forms the accute angle. the Small quantity
of fur which is intermixed with the hair is of a redish pale yellow.
the hair of the back, Sides upper part of the neck and tail, are of
redish light or pale yellow fox about two thirds of their length from
the Skin, next black, and then tiped with white; forming a curious
mixture of grey and fox colourd. red with a yellowish hue. the belly
flanks and breast are of the fox coloured redish yellow. the legs
black, the nails white. the head on which the hair is short is
varigated with black and white. a narrow Strip of white Commences on
the top of the nose about half an inch from its extremity and extends
back along the Center of the forehead and neck nearly to the Sholders-
two Stripes of black Suckceed the white on either Side, imbraceing the
Side of the nose, the eyes, and extends back as far as the ears. two
other Spots of black of a romboidal figure are placed on the Side of
the head near the ears and between them and the opening of the mouth.
two black Spots also imediately behind the ears. the other part of the
head white. this animal feeds on flesh, roots, bugs and wild fruits.-
it is very clumsy and runs very Slow, depending more on burring to
Secure it Self than running. I have in Several instances out run and
caught this animal. in this respect they are not much more fleet than
the porcupine.

[Lewis, February 28, 1806]
Friday February 28th 1806.
Reubin Fields and Collins set out this morning early on a hunting
excurtion. Kuskelar a Clatsop man and his wife visited us today. they
brought some Anchovies, Sturgeon, a beaver robe, and some roots for
sail tho they asked so high a price for every article that we purchased
nothing but a part of a Sturgeon for which we gave a few fishing hooks.
we suffered them to remain all night. Shields Jos. Fields and Shannon
returned late this evening having killed five Elk tho two of them ar on
a mountain at a considerable distance. we ordered these hunters to
return early in the morning and continue their hunt, and Sergt. Gass to
take a party and go in quest of the Elk which they had killed. the
hunters inform us that the Elk are tolerable plenty near the mountains
about 9 or ten miles distant. Kuskelar brought a dog which Cruzatte had
purchased.

The hare on this side of the Rocky mountains is exclusively the
inhabitant of the great Plains of Columbia, as they are of those of the
Missouri East of these mountains. they weigh from 7 to eleven pounds.
the measure of one which weighed ten lbs. was as follows. from the
extremity of the hinder, to that of the fore feet when extended 3 F.
length from nose to the extremity of the tail 2 F. 2 I. hight when
standing erect 1 F. 3 I. girth of the body 1 F. 4 I. length of tail
61/2 I. length of ear 51/2 I. width of do 3 1/8 I. from the hip to the
extremity of toe of the hind foot 1 F. 41/4 I.- the eye is large and
prominent. the pupil is circular, of a deep sea green and occupys one
third of the diameter of the eye, the iris is of a bright yellowish
silver colour. the ears are placed far back on the head and very near
each other, they are flexable and the animal moves them with great ease
and quickness, and can dilate and throw them forward, or contract and
fold them on his back at pleasure. the fold of the front of the ear is
of a redish brown colour, the inner folds or those which lie together
when the ears are thrown back, and which occupy 2/3ds of the width of
the ears are of a pure white except the tips of the ears for about an
inch. the hinder folds or those which lie on the back are of a light
grey. the head neck, back, sholders, sides, & outer part of the legs
and thyes are of a lead coloured grey; the sides as they approach the
belley become gradually more white. the belley, brest, and inner part
of the legs and thyes are white, with a slight shade of the lead
colour. the tail is round and blontly pointed, covered with fine soft
white fur not quite as long as on the other parts of the body. the body
is covered with a deep fine soft close fur. the colours here discribed
are those which the animal assumes from the middle of April to the
middle of November, the ballance of the year they are of a pure white,
except the black and redish brown of the ears which never changes. a
few redish brown spots are sometimes seen intermixed with the white, at
this season, on their heads and upper part of the neck and sholders.
the body of this animal is smaller and longer in proportion to it's
hight than the rabbit. when it runs it carrys it's tail streight behind
in the direction of it's body. they appear to run with more ease and
bound with greater agility than any animal I ever saw. they are
extreemly fleet and never burrow or take sheter in the ground when
pursued. it's teeth are like those of the rabbit as is also it's upper
lip which is divided as high as the nose. it's food is grass, herbs,
and in winter feeds much on the bark of several aromatic shrubs which
grow in the plains and the young willow along the rivers and other
wartercourses.- I have measured the leaps of this animal and find them
commonly from 18 to 21 feet. they are generally found seperate, and
never seen to asscociate in any number or more than two or three.- the
rabbit are the same of our country and are found indifferently either
in the praries or woodlands. they are not very abundant in this
country. The Pole-cat is also found in every part of the country. they
are very abundant on some parts of the columbia, particularly in the
neighbourhood of the great falls and narrows of that river, where they
live in the clifts along the river and feed on the offal of the Indian
fishing shores. these are the same as those of other parts of North
America.

[Clark, February 28, 1806]
Friday February 28th 1806
Reuben Field and Collins Set out this morning early on a hunting
excurtion up the Netul. Kus ke-lar a Clatsop man, his wife and a Small
boy (a Slave, who he informed me was his Cook, and offerd to Sell him
to me for beeds & a gun) visited us to day they brought Some anchovies,
Sturgeon, a beaver robe, and Some roots for Sale tho they asked Such
high prices for every article that we purchased nothing but a part of a
Sturgeon for which we gave a fiew fishing hooks. we Suffered them to
Stay all night. Shields Jos. Field and Shannon returned late this
evening haveing killed five Elk tho two of them are of a mountain at a
considerable distance. we ordered these hunters to return early in the
morning and continue the hunt, and Sergt. Gass to take a party and go
in quest of the Elk which they had killed. the hunters informed us that
the Elk is tolerable plenty near the mountains about nine or ten miles
distant. Kuskalaw brought a dog which Peter Crusat had purchased with
his Capo which this fellow had on.

The Hare on this Side of the Rocky Mountains is exclusively the
inhabitents of the Great Plains of Columbia, as they are of those of
the Missouri East of the mountains. they weigh from 7 to 12 pounds. the
measure of one which weighed 10 pounds, was as follows. from the
extremity of the hinder, to that of the fore feet when extended 3 Feet.
length from nose to the extremity of the tail 2 feet, 2 inches. Hight
when Standing erect 1 foot, 3 inches-. Girth of the body 1 foot, 4
inches-. length of tail 61/2 inches-. length of ear 51/2 inches-. width
of ear 3 inches and 1/8-. from the hip to the extremity of toe of the
hind foot 1 foot 41/4 inches-. The eye is large and prominent. the
pupil is circular, of a deep Sea Green and Occupies one third of the
diamiter of the eye, the iris is of a bright yellowish silver colour.
The ears are placed far back on the head and very near each other, they
are flexable and the animal moves them with great ease and quickness
and can dilate and throw them foward, or contract and fold them on his
back at pleasure. the fold of the front of the ear is of a redish brown
colour, the inner folds are those which lie together when the ears are
thrown back, and which occupies 2/3ds of the width of the ears of a
pure white except the tips of the ears for about an inch. the hinder
folds or those which lie on the back are of a light grey; the Sides as
they approach the belly become gradually more white, the belly brest,
and inner part of the legs and thyes are white, with a Slight Shade of
a lead Colour. The Head, neck, back Sholders, Sides, outer part of the
legs and thyes are of a Lead Coloured Grey. the tail is bluntly pointed
and round, covered with fine Soft white fur not quite as long as on the
other parts of the body. the body is covered with a deep fine Soft
close fur. the colours here discribed are those which the Animale
assumes from the middle of April to the middle of November, the
ballance of the year they are of a pure white, except the black and
redish brown of the ears which never changes. a fiew redish brown spots
are Sometimes Seen intermixed with the white, at this Season on the
heads and upper parts of the neck an Sholders. The body of this animal
is Smaller and longer in purpotion to it's hight than the Rabbit. when
it runs it carrys its tail Streight behind in the direction of it's
body. they appear to run with more ease and bound with greater agility
than any animal I ever saw. they are extreemly fleet and never burrow
or take Shelter in the grounds when pursued. it's teeth are like those
of the rabit, as is also its upper lip which is divided as high as the
nose. it's food is Grass, herbs, and in winter feeds much on the bark
of Several arematic Shrubs which grow in the plains and the young
willows along the rivers and other water courses.- I have measured the
leaps of this animal and find them commonly from 18 to 22 feet. they
are Generally found Seperate, and never Seen to associate in any number
or more than two or three.

[Lewis, March 1, 1806]
Saturday March 1st 1806.
This morning Sergt. Gass and a party set out in quest of the Elk which
had been killed by the hunters the day before yesterday. they returned
with the flesh of three of them late in the evening. Thompson was left
with the hunters in order to jurk and take care of the flesh of the
remaining two. Kuskelar and wife left us about noon. he had a good
looking boy of about 10 years of age with him who he informed us was
his slave. this boy had been taken prisoner by the Killamucks from some
nation on the Coast to the S. East of them at a great distance. like
other Indian nations they adopt their slaves in their families and
treat them very much as their own children. Reubin Fields and Collins
who have been absent since yesterday morning returned without having
killed any game. The birds of the Western side of the Rocky Mountain to
the Pacific Ocean, for convenience I shall divide into two classes,
which I shal designate from the habits of the birds, Terrestrial and
Aquatic.

The Grouse or Prarie hen is peculiarly the inhabitant of the Grait
Plains of Columbia they do not differ from those of the upper portion
of the Missouri, the tail of which is pointed or the feathers in it's
center much longer than those on the sides. this Species differs
essentially in the construction of this part of their plumage from
those of the Illinois which have their tails composed of fathers of
equal length. in the winter season this bird is booted even to the
first joint of it's toes. the toes are also curiously bordered on their
lower edges with narrow hard scales which are placed very close to each
other and extend horizontally about 1/8 of an inch on each side of the
toes thus adding to the width of the tread which nature seems
bountifully to have furnished them at this season for passing over the
snow with more ease. in the summer season those scales fall off. They
have four toes on each foot. Their colour is a mixture of dark brown
redish and yellowish brown and white confusedly mixed in which the
redish brown prevails most on the upper parts of the body wings and
tail and the white underneath the belley and lower parts of the breast
and tail. they associate in large flocks in autumn & winter and are
frequently found in flocks of from five to six even in summer. They
feed on grass, insects, the leaves of various shrubs in the plains and
on the seeds of several species of spelts and wild rye which grow in
the richer parts of the plains. in winter their food is the buds of the
willow & Cottonwood also the most of the native berries furnish them
with food.The Indians of this neighbourhood eat the root of the Cattail
or Cooper's flag. it is pleasantly taisted and appears to be very
nutricious. the inner part of the root which is eaten without any
previous preperation is composed of a number of capillary white
flexable strong fibers among which is a mealy or starch like substance
which readily desolves in the mouth and separate from the fibers which
are then rejected. it appears to me that this substance would make
excellent starch; nothing can be of a purer white than it is.-

[Clark, March 1, 1806]
Saturday March the 1st 1806
This morning we despatched Sergt. Gass with 12 men in two Canoes in
quest of the Elk which had been killed by the hunters the day before
yesterday. they returned with the flesh of three of them late in the
evening. Thompson was left with the hunters in order to jurk and take
care of the flesh of the remaining two. Kuskalar &c. left us about
noon. The boy which this Indian offered to Sell to me is about 10 years
of age. this boy had been taken prisoner by the Kit a mox from Some
Nation on the Coast to the S. East of them at a great distance. like
other Indian nations they adopt their Slaves in their famelies and
treat them very much like their own Children. Reuben Field and Collins
who had been absent Since yesterday morning returned without killing
any thing.

The birds on the western Side of the Rocky Mountain's to the Pacific
Ocian for Convenience I Shall devide into from the habit of the birds,
Terrestrial and Aquatic. i e Fowls of the air, and fowls of the water.

The Prarie Hen sometimes called the Grouse is peculiarly the inhabitent
of the Great Plains of Columbia. they do not differ from those of the
upper portion of the Missouri, the tails of which is pointed or the
feathers in its center much longer than those on the Sides. this
Species differ assentially in the construction of this part of their
plumage from those of the Illinois which have their tail composed of
feathers of equal length. in the winter Season this berd is booted even
to the first joint of it's toes. the toes are also curiously bordered
on their lower edges with narrow hard scales which are placed very
close to each other and extend horizontally about 1/8 of an inch on
each Side of the toe, thus adding to the width of the tread which
nature Seams bountifully to have furnished them with at this Season for
passing over the Snow with more ease. in the Summer Season those Scales
fall off. they have four toes on each foot. their colour is a mixture
of dark brown redish and yellowish brown and white confusedly mixed in
which the redish brown prevails most on the upper parts of the body
wings and tail. and the white underneath the belley and lower parts of
the breast and tail. they associate in large flocks in autumn & winter
and are frequently found in flocks of from five to Six even in Summer.
They feed on grass, insects, the leaves of various Shrubs in the
Praries, and on the Seeds of Several Species of Spelts and wild rye
which grow in the richer parts of the Plains. in the winter their food
is the buds of the willow and Cottonwood also the most of the native
berries furnish them with food. they cohabit in flock & the Cocks fight
verry much at those Seasons.

[Lewis, March 2, 1806]
Sunday March 2cd
The diet of the sick is so inferior that they recover their strength
but slowly. none of them are now sick but all in a state of
convalessence with keen appetites and nothing to eat except lean Elk
meat. late this evening Drewyer arrived with a most acceptable supply
of fat Sturgeon, fresh Anchovies and a bag containing about a bushel of
Wappetoe. we feasted on Anchovies and Wappetoe.

The Cock of the Plains is found in the plains of Columbia and are in
Great abundance from the entrance of the S. E. fork of the Columbia to
that of Clark's river. this bird is about 2/3rds the size of a turkey.
the beak is large short curved and convex. the upper exceeding the
lower chap. the nostrils are large and the beak black. the colour is an
uniform mixture of dark brown reather bordeing on a dove colour, redish
and yellowish brown with some small black specks. in this mixture the
dark brown prevails and has a slight cast of the dove colour at a
little distance. the wider side of the large feathers of the wings are
of a dark brown only. the tail is composed of 19 feathers of which that
in the center is the longest, and the remaining 9 on each side deminish
by pairs as they receede from the center; that is any one feather is
equal in length to one equa distant from the center of the tail on the
oposite side. the tail when foalded comes to a very sharp point and
appears long in proportion to the body. in the act of flying the tail
resembles that of a wild pigeon. tho the motion of the wings is much
that of the pheasant and Grouse. they have four toes on each foot of
which the hinder one is short. the leg is covered with feathers about
half the distance between the knee and foot. when the wing is expanded
there are wide opening between it's feathers the plumeage being so
narrow that it dose not extend from one quill to the other. the wings
are also proportionably short, reather more so than those of the
pheasant or grouse. the habits of this bird are much the same as those
of the grouse. only that the food of this fowl is almost entirely that
of the leaf and buds of the pulpy leafed thorn; nor do I ever recollect
seeing this bird but in the neighbourhood of that shrub. they sometimes
feed on the prickley pear. the gizzard of it is large and much less
compressed and muscular than in most fowls; in short it resembles a maw
quite as much as a gizzard. when they fly they make a cackling noise
something like the dunghill fowl. the following is a likeness of the
head and beak. the flesh of the cock of the Plains is dark, and only
tolerable in point of flavor. I do not think it as good as either the
Pheasant or Grouse.- it is invariably found in the plains.The feathers
about it's head are pointed and stif some hairs about the base of the
beak. feathers short fine and stif about the ears.

[Clark, March 2, 1806]
Sunday March 2nd 1806
The diet of the Sick is So inferior that they recover their Strength
but Slowly. none of them are now Sick but all in a State of
Covelessence with keen appetites and nothing to eate except lean Elk
meat.

The nativs of this neighbourhood eate the root of the Cattail or
Cooper's flag. it is pleasantly tasted and appears to be very
nutrecious. the inner part of the root which is eaten without any
previous preperation is Composed of a number of capellary white
flexable Strong fibers among which is a mealy or Starch like Substance
which readily disolves in the mouth and Seperates from the fibers which
are then rejected. it appears to me that this Substance would make
excellent Starch; nothing Can be of a pureer white than it is

This evening late Drewyer, Crusat & Wiser returned with a most
acceptable Supply of fat Sturgen, fresh anchoves and a bag Containing
about a bushel of Wappato. we feasted on the Anchovies and wappatoe.-.

The Heath Cock or cock of the Plains is found in the Plains of Columbia
and are in great abundance from the enterance of Lewis's river to the
mountains which pass the Columbia between the Great falls and Rapids of
that river. this fowl is about 3/4ths the Size of a turkey. the beak is
large Short Curved and convex. the upper exceeding the lower chap. the
nostrils are large and the back black. the Colour is a uniform mixture
of dark brown reather bordering on a dove colour, redish and yellowish
brown with Some Small black Specks. in this mixture the dark brown
provails and has a Slight cast of the dove colour at a little distance.
the wider side of the larger feathers of the wings are of a dark brown
only. the tail is composed of 19 feathers of which that in the center
is the longest, and the remaining 9 on each Side deminish by pairs as
they receede from the Center; that is any one feather is equal in
length to one of an equal distance from the Center of the tail on the
opposit Side. the tail when folded Comes to a very Sharp point and
appears long in perpotion to the body in the act of flying the tail
resembles that of a wild pigeon. tho the motion of the wings is much
that of the Pheasant and Grouse. they have four toes on each foot of
which the hinder one is Short. the leg is covered with feathers about
half the distance between the knee and foot. when the wings is expanded
there are wide opening between it's feathers, the plumage being So
narrow that it does not extend from one quill to another. the wings are
also propotionably Short, reather more So than those of the Pheasant or
Grouse. the habits of this bird is much the Same as those of the Prarie
hen or Grouse. only that the food of this fowl is almost entirely that
of the leaf and buds of the pulpy leafed thorn, nor do I ever recollect
Seeing this bird but in the neighbourhood of that Shrub. The gizzard of
it is large and much less compressed and muscular than in most fowls,
in Short it resembles a maw quite as much as a gizzard. When they fly
they make a cackling noise Something like the dunghill fowl. the flesh
of this fowl is dark and only tolerable in point of flavour. I do not
think it as good as wth the Pheasant or Prarie hen, or Grouse. the
feathers above it's head are pointed and Stiff Some hairs about the
base of the beak. feathers Short fine and Stiff about the ears, and
eye. This is a faint likeness of the Cock of the plains or Heath Cock
the first of those fowls which we met with was on the Missouri below
and in the neighbourhood of the Rocky Mountains and from to the
mountain which passes the Columbia between the Great falls and Rapids
they go in large gangues or Singularly and hide remarkably close when
pursued, make Short flights, &c.

The large Black & White Pheasant is peculiar to that portion of the
Rocky Mountains watered by the Columbia River. at least we did not See
them untill we reached the waters of that river, nor Since we have left
those mountains. they are about the Size of a well grown hen. the
contour of the bird is much that of the redish brown Pheasant common to
our country. the tail is proportionably as long and is composed of 18
feathers of equal length, of a uniform dark brown tiped with black. the
feathers of the body are of a dark brown black and white. the black is
that which most prodomonates, and white feathers are irregularly
intermixed with those of the black and dark brown on every part but in
greater perpotion about the neck breast and belly. this mixture gives
it very much the appearance of that kind of dunghill fowl, which the
henwives of our Countrey Call dommanicker. in the brest of Some of
those birds the white prodominates most. they are not furnished with
tufts of long feathers on the neck as other Pheasants are, but have a
Space on each Side of the neck about 21/2 inches long and one inch in
width on which no feathers grow, tho it is consealed by the feathers
which are inserted on the hinder and front part of the neck, this Space
Seams to Serve them to dilate or contract the feathers of the neck with
more ease. the eye is dark, the beak black, uncovered Somewhat pointed
and the upper exceeds the under chap. they have a narrow Strip of
vermillion colour above each eye which consists of a fleshey Substance
not protuberant but uneaven, with a number of minute rounded dots. it
has four toes on each foot of which three are in front, it is booted to
the toes. it feeds on wild fruits, particularly the berry of the
Sac-a-com-mis, and much also on the Seed of the pine & fir. this fowl
is usially found in Small numbers two and three & 4 together on the
ground. when Supprised flies up & lights on a tree and is easily Shot
their flesh is Superior to most of the Pheasant Species which we have
met with. they have a gizzard as other Pheasants &c. feed also on the
buds of the Small Huckleberry bushes

[Lewis, March 3, 1806]
Monday March 3rd 1806.
Two of our perogues have been lately injured very much in consequence
of the tide leaving them partially on shore. they split by this means
with their own weight. we had them drawn out on shore. our
convalessents are slowly on the recovery. Lapage is taken sick, gave
him a doze of Scots pills which did not operate. no movement of the
party today worthy of notice. every thing moves on in the old way and
we are counting the days which seperate us from the 1st of April and
which bind us to fort Clatsop.- The large black and white pheasant is
peculiar to that portion of the Rocky Mountain watered by the Columbia
river. at least we did not see them in these mountains until I we
reached the waters of that river nor since we have left those
mountains. they are about the size of a well grown hen. the contour of
the bird is much that of the redish brown pheasant common to our
country. the tail is proportionably as long and is composed of eighteen
feathers of equal length, of an uniform dark brown tiped with black.
the feathers of the body are of a dark brown black and white. the black
is that which most predominates, and white feathers are irregularly
intermixed with those of the black and dark brown on every part, but in
greater proportion about the neck breast and belley. this mixture gives
it very much the appearance of that kind of dunghill fowl which the
hen-wives of our country call dom-manicker. in the brest of some of
these birds the white predominates most. they are not furnished with
tufts of long feathers on the neck as our pheasants are, but have a
space on each side of the neck about 21/2 inches long and 1 In. in
width on which no feathers grow, tho tis concealed by the feathers
which are inserted on the hinder and front part of the neck; this space
seems to surve them to dilate or contract the feathers of the neck with
more ease. the eye is dark, the beak black, curved somewhat pointed and
the upper exceeds the under chap. they have a narrow stripe of
vermillion colour above each eye which consists of a fleshey substance
not protuberant but uneven with a number of minute rounded dots. it has
four toes on each foot of which three are in front. it is booted to the
toes. it feeds on wild fruits, particularly the berry of the
sac-a-commis, and much also on the seed of the pine and fir.

The small speckled pheasant found in the same country with that above
discribed, differs from it only in point of size and somewhat in
colour. it is scarcely half the size of the other; ascociates in much
larger flocks and is very gentle. the black is more predominant and the
dark bron feathers less frequent in this than the larger species. the
mixture of white is also more general on every part of this bird. it is
considerably smaller than our pheasant and the body reather more round.
in other particulars they differ not at all from the large black and
white pheasant. this by way of distinction I have called the speckled
pheasant. the flesh of both these species of party coloured phesants is
of a dark colour and with the means we had of cooking them not very
well flavored.

The small brown pheasant is an inhabitant of the same country and is of
the size and shape of the specled pheasant which it also resembles in
it's economy and habits. the stripe above the eye in this species is
scarcely perceptable, and is when closely examined of a yellow or
orrange colour instead of the vermillion of the outhers. it's colour is
an uniform mixture of dark and yellowish brown with a slight mixture of
brownish white on the breast belley and the feathers underneath the
tail. the whol compound is not unlike that of the common quail only
darker. this is also booted to the toes. the flesh of this is
preferable to either of the others and that of the breast is as white
as the pheasant of the Atlantic coast.the redish brown pheasant has
been previously discribed.- The Crow raven and Large Blackbird are the
same as those of our country only that the crow is here much smaller
yet it's note is the same. I observe no difference either between the
hawks of this coast and those of the Atlantic. I have observed the
large brown hawk, the small or sparrow hawk, and the hawk of an
intermediate size with a long tail and blewish coloured wings
remarkably swift in flight and very firce. sometimes called in the U
States the hen hawk. these birds seem to be common to every part of
this country, and the hawks crows & ravens build their nests in great
numbers along the high and inaccessable clifts of the Columbia river
and it's S. E. branch where we passed along them.- we also met with the
large hooting Owl under the Rocky mountain on the Kooskoskee river. it
did not appear to differ materially from those of our country. I think
it's colours reather deeper and brighter than with us, particularly the
redish brown. it is the same size and form.

[Clark, March 3, 1806]
Monday March 3rd 1806
Two of our Canoes have been lately injured very much in consequence of
the tide leaveing them partially on Shore. they Split by this means
with their own weight. we had them drawn out on Shore. our
convalessents are Slowly on the recovery. La page is taken Sick. gave
him Some of Scotts Pills which did not opperate. no movement of the
party to day worthey of notice. every thing moves on in the old way and
we are Counting the days which Seperate us from the 1st of April, &
which bind us to Fort Clatsop.-.-.

The Small Speckled Pheasant found in the Rocky Mountains, and differ
from the large black and white pheasant only in point of Size, and
Somewhat in colour. it is scercely half the Size of the other;
assosiates in much larger flocks and is also very gentle. the black is
more predominate and the dark brown feathers less frequent in this than
the larger Species. the mixture of white is also more general on every
part of this bird. it is considerably Smaller than our Pheasant and the
body reather more round. in other particulars they differ not at all,
from the large black and white Pheasant. this by way of distinction I
have called the Speckled Pheasant. the flesh of both these Species of
party coloured Pheasant is of a dark colour, and with the means we had
of cooking them were only tolerably flavoured tho these birds would be
fine well cooked.

The small Brown Pheasant is an inhabitant of the Same Country and is of
the Size and Shape of the Speckled Pheasant, which it also resembles in
it's economy and habits, the Stripe above the eye in this Species is
scercely preceptable and is when closely examined of a yellow or
orrange colour in Sted of the vermillion of the others. it's colour is
of a uniform mixture of dark and yellowish brown with a Slight mixture
of brownish white on the breast belley and the feathers under the tail.
the whole Compound is not unlike that of the Common quaile only darker.
this is also booted to the toes. the flesh is tolerable and that of the
breast is as white as the Pheasant of the atlantic coast. the redish
brown Pheasant has been previously discribed.-.

The Crow Ravin and large Blackbird are the Same as those of our
Country, only that the Crow here is much Smaller, yet its note is the
Same. I observe no difference between the Hawk of this Coast and those
of the Atlantic. I have observed the large brown Hawk, the Small or
Sparrow hawk, and a hawk of an intermediate Size with a long tail and
blewish coloured wings, remarkably Swift in flight and very ferce.
Sometimes called in the Un. States the hen Hawk. those birds Seam to be
common to every part of this Country in greater or smaller numbers, and
the Hawks, Crows, and ravins build their nests in great numbers along
the high & inaxcessable clifts of the Columbia, and Lewis's rivers when
we passd along them. we also met with the large hooting Owl under the
Rocky mountains on the Kooskooske R. it's Colour reather deeper than
with us, but differ in no other respect from those of the U States.

[Lewis, March 4, 1806]
Tuesday March 4th 1806.
Not any occurrence today worthy of notice. we live sumptuously on our
wappetoe and Sturgeon. the Anchovey is so delicate that they soon
become tainted unless pickled or smoked. the natives run a small stick
through their gills and hang them in the smoke of their lodges, or
kindle a small fire under them for the purpose of drying them. they
need no previous preperation of guting &c and will cure in 24 hours.
the natives do not appear to be very scrupelous about eating them when
a little feated.- the fresh sturgeon they keep for many days by
immersing it in water. they coock their sturgeon by means of vapor or
steam. the process is as follows. a brisk fire is kindled on which a
parcel of stones are lad. when the fire birns down and the stones are
sufficiently heated, the stones are so arranged as to form a tolerable
level surface, the sturgeon which had been previously cut into large
fletches is now laid on the hot stones; a parsel of small boughs of
bushes is next laid on and a second course of the sturgeon thus
repating alternate layers of sturgeon and boughs untill the whole is
put on which they design to cook. it is next covered closely with matts
and water is poared in such manner as to run in among the hot stones
and the vapor arrising being confined by the mats, cooks the fish. the
whole process is performed in an hour, and the sturgeon thus cooked is
much better than either boiled or roasted.

The turtle dove and robbin are the same of our country and are found as
well in the plain as open country. the Columbian robbin heretofore
discribed seems to be the inhabitant of the woody country exclusively.
the Magpy is most commonly found in the open country and are the same
with those formerly discribed on the Missouri. the large woodpecker or
log cock, the lark woodpeckers and the small white woodpecker with a
read head are the same with those of the Atlantic states and are found
exclusively in the timbered country. The blue crested Corvus and the
small white breasted do have been previously discribed and are the
natives of a piney country invariably, being found as well on the rocky
mountains as on this coast.- the lark is found in the plains only and
are the same with those before mentioned on the Missouri, and not very
unlike what is called in Virginia the old field lark.- The large
bluefish brown or sandhill Crain are found in the valley of the Rocky
mountains in Summer and Autumn where they raise their young, and in the
winter and begining of spring on this river below tidewater and on this
coast. they are the same as those common to the Southern and Western
States where they are most generally known by the name of the Sandhill
crain. The vulture has also been discribed. there are two species of
the flycatch, a small redish brown species with a short tail, round
body, short neck and short pointed beak. they have some fine black
specks intermixed with the uniform redish brown. this the same with
that which remains all winter in Virginia where it is sometimes called
the wren. the second species has lately returned and dose not remain
here all winter. it's colours are a yellowish brown on the back head
neck wings and tail the breast and belley of a yellowish white; the
tail is in proportion as the wren but it is a size smaller than that
bird. it's beak is streight pointed convex reather lage at the base and
the chaps of equal length. the first species is the smallest, in short
it is the smalest bird that I have ever seen in America except the
humming bird. both these species are found in the woody country only or
at least I have never seen them elsewhere.

[Clark, March 4, 1806]
Tuesday March 4th 1806
Not any accurrance to day worthy of notice. we live Sumptiously on our
wappatoe and Sturgeon. the Anchovey is so delicate that they Soon
become tainted unless pickled or Smoked. the nativs run a Small Stick
through their gills and hang them in the Smoke of their Lodges, or
Kindle Small fires under them for the purpose of drying them. they need
no previous preperation of gutting &c. and will Cure in 24 hours. the
nativs do not appear to be very Scrupilous about eating them a little
feated.

the fresh sturgeon they Keep maney days by immersing it in water. they
Cook their Sturgeon by means of vapor or Steam. the process is as
follows. a brisk fire is kindled on which a parcel of Stones are
Sufficiently heated, the Stones are So arranged as to form a tolerable
leavel Surface, the Sturgeon which had been previously cut into large
flaetches is now laid on the hot Stones; a parcel of Small boughs of
bushes is next laid on, and a Second course of the Sturgeon thus
repeating alternate layers of Sturgeon & boughs untill the whole is put
on which they design to Cook. it is next covered closely with mats and
water is poared in Such manner as to run in among the hot Stones, and
the vapor arriseing being confind by the mats, cooks the fish. the
whole process is performd in an hour and the Sturgeon thus Cooked is
much better than either boiled or roasted. in their usial way of
bolting of other fish in baskets with hot Stones is not so good.

The turtle doves and robin are the Same of those of our countrey and
are found as well as the plains as open countrey. the Columbia robin
heretofore discribed Seams to be the inhabitent of the woody Country
exclusively. the magpye is most commonly found in the open Country and
are the Same with those formerly discribed on the Missouri.

The large wood pecker or log cock the lark woodpecker and the common
wood pecker with a red head are the Same with those of the Atlantic
States, and are found exclusively in the timbered Country. The Blue
crested Corvus and the Small white brested corvus are the nativs of a
piney country invariably, being found as well on the Rocky Mountains as
on this coast-. The lark is found in the plains only and are the Same
with those on the Missouri and the Illinois and not unlike what is
Called in Virginia the old field Lark.

The large bluish brown or Sandhill Crain are found in the Vally's of
the Rocky Mountain in Summer and autumn when they raise their young and
in the winter and beginning of Spring on this river below tide water
and on this coast. they are the Same as those Common to the Southern
and Western States where they are most generally known by the name of
the Sand hill Crain. The Vulture has already been discribed.

There are two Species of fly Catch, a Small redish brown with a Short
tail, round body, Short neck, and Short pointed beak, and the Same as
that with us sometimes called the Wren. the 2d Species does not remain
all winter they have just returned and are of a Yellowish brown Colour.

[Lewis, March 5, 1806]
Wednesday March 5th 1806.
This morning we were visited by two parties of Clatsops. they brought
some fish a hat and some skins for sale most of which we purchased.
they returned to their village in the evening. late in the evening the
hunters returned from the kil-haw-a-nack-kle River which discharges
itself into the head of the bay. They had neither killed nor seen any
Elk. they informed us that the Elk had all gone off to the mountains a
considerable distance from us. this is unwelcome information and
reather allarming we have only 2 days provision on hand, and that
nearly spoiled. we made up a small assortment of articles to trade with
the Indians and directed Sergt. Pryor to set out early in the morning
in a canoe with 2 men, to ascend the Columbia to the resort of the
Indian fishermen and purchase some fish; we also directed two parties
of hunters to renew the Chase tomorrow early. the one up the Netul and
the other towards Point Adams. if we find that the Elk have left us, we
have determined to ascend the river slowly and indeavour to procure
subsistence on the way, consuming the Month of March in the woody
country. earlyer than April we conceive it a folly to attempt the open
plains where we know there is no fuel except a few small dry shrubs. we
shall not leave our quarters at fort Clatsop untill the first of April,
as we intended unless the want of subsistence compels us to that
measure. The common snipe of the marshes and the small sand snipe are
the same of those common to the Atlantic Coast tho the former are by no
means as abundant here. the prarrow of the woody country is also
similar to ours but not abundant. those of the plains of Columbia are
the same with those of the Missouri, tho they are by no means so
abundant. I have not seen the little singing lark or the large brown
Curloo so common to the plains of the Missouri, but I beleive that the
latter is an inhabitant of this country during summer from Indian
information. I have no doubt but what many species of birds found here
in Autumn and Summer had departed before our arrival.

[Clark, March 5, 1806]
Wednesday March 5th 1806.
This morning we were visited by two parties of Clatsops they brought
Some fish, a hat and Some Skins for Sale most of which we purchased,
they returned to their Village in the evening with the returning tide.
late in the evening the Hunters returned from the Kil-haw-d nack-kle
River which discharges itself into the head of the Bay. They had
neither killed nor Seen any Elk. they informed us that the Elk had all
gorn off to the mountains a considerable distance from us. this is
unwelcom information and reather alarming. we have only two days
provisions on hand and that nearly Spoiled. we made up a Small
assortment of Articles to trade with the Indians, and directed Sergt
Natl. Pryor to Set out early in the morning in a canoe with two men, to
assend the Columbia to the resort of the Indians fishermen and purchase
Some fish; we also derected two parties of hunters to renew the chase
tomorrow early. the one up the Netul, and the other towards point
Adams. If we find that the Elk have left us, we have determined to
assend the river slowly and endeaver to precure Subsistance on the way,
Consumeing the month of March in the woody Country, earlyer than april
we conceive it a folly to attempt the Open plains where we know there
is no fuel except a fiew Small dry Shrubs. we Shall not leave our
quarters at Fort Clatsop untill the 1st of April as we intended, unless
the want of Subsistance compels us to that measure.

The common Snipe of the marshes and the Small sand snipe are the same
of those Common to the atlantic coast tho the former are by no means as
abundant here.

The Sparrow of the woody country is also Similar to ours but not
abundant. those of the plains of Columbia are the Same with those of
the Missouri. tho they are by no means So Abundant. I have not Seen the
little Singing lark or the large brown Curloe So Common to the Plains
of the Missouri. but believe the Curloe is an inhabitent of this
Countrey dureing Summer from Indian information and their attemps to
mimick the notes of this fowl. I have no doubt but what maney Species
of birds found here in autumn and Summer had departed before our
arrival.

The Aquatic Birds of this country or such as obtain their Subsistence
from the water, are the large blue and brown heron, fishing Hawk, blue
crested fisher, Gulls of Several Species of the Coast, the large grey
Gull of the Columbia, Comorant, loons of two Species, white and the
brown brant, Small and large Geese, small and large Swans, the
Duckinmallard, canvis back Duck, red headed fishing Duck, black and
white duck, little brown Duck, Black Duck, two Species of Divers, blue
winged teal, 14 and Some other Species of Ducks, two Species of Plevers.

The hunters who were out last informed me that they discovered a very
Considerable fall in the Kit-haw-a-nack-kle River on its main western
fork at which place it falls abt. 100 feet from the Side of a mountain
S. E. about 6 miles from Fort Clatsop and nearly 15 from its enterance
into the bay by the Meanderings of this river a high mountain is
Situated S 60° W. about 18 miles from Fort Clatsop on which there has
been Snow Since Nov.

[Lewis, March 6, 1806]
Thursday March 6th 1806.
This morning the fishing and hunting parties set out agreeably to their
instructions given them last evening. at 11 A.M. we were visited by
Comowoll and two of his children. he presented us with some Anchovies
which had been well cured in their manner. we foud them excellent. they
were very acceptable particularly at this moment. we gave the old man
some small articles in return. this we have found much the most
friendly and decent savage that we have met with in this neighbourhood.
Hall had his foot and ankle much injured yesterday by the fall of a
large stick of timber; the bones were fortunately not broken and I
expect he will be able to walk again shortly. Bratton is now weaker
than any of the convalessants, all of whom recover slowly in
consequence of the want of proper diet, which we have it not in our
power to procure.-

The Aquatic birds of this country, or such as obtain their subsistence
from the water, are the large blue and brown heron, fishing hawk, blue
crested fisher, gulls of several species of the Coast, the large grey
gull of the Columbia, Cormorant, loons of two species, white, and the
brown brant, small and large geese, small and large Swan, the
Duckinmallard, canvis back duck, red headed fishing duck, black and
white duck, little brown duck, black duck, two speceis of divers, blue
winged teal, and some other speceis of ducks.

[Clark, March 6, 1806]
Thursday March 6th 1806
This morning, the fishing and hunting party's Set out agreeably to
their instructions given them last evening. At 11 a.m. we were visited
by Commowoll and two boys Sons of his. he presented us with Some
Anchovies which had been well Cured in their manner, we found them
excellent. they were very acceptable perticularly at this moment. we
gave the old mans Sones a twisted wire to ware about his neck, and I
gave him a par of old glovs which he was much pleased with. this we
have found much the most friendly and decent Indian that we have met
with in this neighbourhood.

Hall had his foot and ankle much injured yesterday by the fall of a log
which he had on his Sholder; the bones are fortunately not broken, I
expect he will be able to walk again Shortly. Bratten is now weaker
than any of the convalessants, and complains verry much of his back,
all of them recovering Slowly in consequence of the want of proper
diet, which we have it not in our power to precure.

The large Blue and brown Herons or crains as they are usialy called in
the U States are found below tide water. they are the Same of those of
the U, States. The Fishing Hawk with the Crown of the head white, and
back of a milkey white, and the blue crested or king fisher are found
on every part of the Columbia and its water Along which we passed and
are the Same with those of the U, States. the fishing hawk is not
abundant, particularly in the mountains. There are 4 Species of the
larus or gull on this coast and river. 1st a Small Species the Size of
a Pegion; white except some black spots about the head and the little
bone on the but of the wing. 2d a Species Somewhat larger of a light
brown colour, with a mealy coloured back. 3rd the large Grey Gull, or
white larus with a greyish brown back, and light grey belly and breast,
about the Size of a well grown pullet, the wings are remarkably long in
perpotion to the Size of the body and it's under chap towards the
extremity is gibbous and protuberant than in either of the other
Species. a White Gull about the Size of the Second with a remarkable
beak; adjoining the head and on the base of the upper Chap there is an
elivated orning of the Same Substance with the beak which forms the
nostriels at A; it is Somewhat in this form. the feet are webed and the
legs and feet of a yellow colour. the form of the wings body &c are
much that of the 2d Species this bird was Seen on Haleys bay.

The large Grey Gull is found on the Columbian waters as high as the
enterence of the Koos koos ke and in common with the other Species on
the coast; the others appear confined to the tidewater, and the 4th
Species not So common as either of the others. The Comorant is a large
black duck which feeds on fish; I proceive no difference between it &
these found in the rivers of the Atlantic Coasts. we met with as high
up the river as the enterance of the Chopunnish into the Kooskooske
river. they increased in numbers as we decended, and formed much the
Greatest portion of waterfowls which we saw on the Columbia untill we
reached tidewater, where they also abound but do not bear a Similar
proportion to the fowls found in this quarter. we found this bird fat
and tolerably flavoured as we decended the Columbia.

[Lewis, March 7, 1806]
Friday March 7th 1806.
The wind was so high that Comowol did not leave us untill late this
evening. Labuish and Drewyer returned at sunset having killed one Elk
only. they report that there are some scattering male Elk in the
neighbourhood of the place they killed this one or about 5 miles up the
Netul on this side.- Bratton is much wose today, he complains of a
violent pain in the small of his back and is unable in consequence to
set up. we gave him one of our flanel shirts, applyed a bandage of
flannel to the part and bathed and rubed it well with some vollatile
linniment which I prepared with sperits of wine, camphor, castile soap
and a little laudinum. he felt himself better in the evening.- the
large blue and brown herons, or Crams as they are usually called in the
U States are found on this river below tidewater. they are the same
with those of the U States. the fishing hawk with the crown of the head
White and back of a mealy white, and the blue crested or King fisher
are found on every part of the Columbia and it's waters and are the
same with those of the U States. the fishing hawk is not abundant
particularly in the mountains. there are four speceis of larus or gull
on this coast and river, 1st a small speceis about the size of a
pigeon; white except some black spots about the head and a little brown
on the but of the wings, 2nd a speceis somewhat larger of a light brown
colour with a whitish or mealy coloured back. 3rd the large grey gull,
or white larus with a greyish brown back and a light grey belley and
breast, about the size of a well grown pullet or reather larger. the
wings are remarkably long in proportion to the size of the body and
it's under chap towards the extremity is more gibbous and protuberant
than in either of the other speceis. 4th a white gull about the size of
the second with a remarkable beak; adjoining the head and at the base
of the uper Chap there is an elivated orning of the same substance with
the beak which forms the nostrils; it is some what in this forma the
feet are webbed and the legs and feet of a yellow colour. the form of
the wings body &c are much that of the second species. the large grey
gull is found on the river as high as the entrance of the Kooskooske
and in common with the other speceis on the coast; the others appear to
be confined to tidewater; and the fourth speceis not so common as
either of the others. the cormorant is a large black duck which feeds
on fish; I perceive no difference between it and those found in the
Potomac and other rivers on the Atlantic Coast. tho I do not recollect
seeing those on the atlantic so high up the rivers as those are found
here. we first met with them on the Kooskooske at the entrance of
Chopunnish river. they increased in quantity as we decended, and formed
much the greatest portion of the waterfowl which we saw on the Columbia
untill we reached tidewater where they also abound but do not bear a
similar proportion to the other fowls found in this quarter.

There are two speceis of loons. 1st the Speckled loon found on every
part of the rivers of this country. they are the same size colours and
form with those of the Atlantic coast. the second speceis we first met
with at the great falls of the Columbia and from thence down. this bird
is not more than half the size of the speckled loon, it's neck is long,
slender and white in front. the Colour of the body and back of the neck
and head are of a dun or ash colour, the breast and belley are white.
the beak is like that of the speckled loon and like them it cannot fly
but flutters along on the top of the warter or dives for security when
pursued.

[Clark, March 7, 1806]
Friday March 7th 1806
The wind was So high that Comowol did not leave us untill late this
evening. Drewyer & Labiesh returned at Sunset haveing killed one Elk
only. they report that there are Some Scattering mail Elk in the
neighbourhood of the place they killed this one or about 5 miles up the
Netul river on the west Side-. Bratten is much worst to day he
complains of a violent pain in the Small of his back, and is unable in
consequence of it to Set up. we gave him one of our flanel Shirts. I
applied a bandage of flanel to the part and rubed it well with Some
volatile linniment which was prepared with Sperits of wine, camphire,
Sastile Soap, and a little laudinum. he felt himself better in the
evening at which time I repeated the linnement and bathed his feet to
restore circulation which he complaind of in that part.

There are two Species of Loons. 1st the Speckled loon found on every
part of the rivers of this quarter, they are the Same Size Colour and
form with those of the Ohio, and atlantic coasts. the 2d Species we
first met with at the great falls of the Columbia and from thence down.
this bird is not more than half the Size of the Speckled loon, it's
neck is long, Slender and white in front. the colour of the body and
back of the neck and head are of a dun or ash Colour, the breast and
belly are white. the back is like that of the Speckled loon, and like
them it cannot fly, but flutters along on the top of the water or Dives
for Security when pursued.

John Shields Reubin Fields & Robert frasure measured 2 trees of the fur
kind one 37 feet around, appears sound, has but fiew limbs for 200 feet
it is East of the Netul abt 280 feet high.

[Lewis, March 8, 1806]
Saturday March 8th 1806.
Bratton is much better today, his back gives him but little pain.
Collins returned early in the morning and informed us that he had
killed three Elk about five miles distant on the edge of the prarie in
Point Adams. one of them fell in a deep pond of water and could not get
it, the other two he butcherd and secured. he saw two large herds of
Elk in that quarter. we sent Drewyer and Joseph Fields to hunt those
Elk. a party were also sent with Labuish for the flesh of the Elk which
Drewyer and himself had killed up the netul, they returned with it in
the evening. Shields, R. Fields and Frazier returned this evening from
the Kilhawanackkle unsuccessfull having seen no Elk. McNeal and
Goodrich having recovered from the Louis veneri I directed them to
desist from the uce of mercury. The white brant is very common in this
country particularly below tidewater where they remain in vast
quantities during the winter. they feed like the swan gees &c on the
grass roots and seeds which they find in the marshes. this bird is
about the size of the brown brant or a third less than the common
Canadian or wild goose. the head is proportionably with the goose
reather large; the beak also thicker shorter and of much the same form,
being of a yellowish white colour except the edges of the chaps, which
are frequently of a dark brown. the legs and feet are of the same form
of the goose and are of a redish white or pale flesh colour. the tail
is composed of sixteen feathers of equal length as those of the geese
and brown brant are and bears about the same proportion in point of
length. the eye is of a dark colour and nothing remarkable as to size.
the wings are rether longer compared with those of the goose but not as
much so as in the brown or pided brant. the colour of the plumage of
this bird is unifomly a pure white except the large feathers of the
extremities of the wings which are black. the large feathers of the 1st
joint of the wing next to the body are white. the note of this bird
differs essentially from that of the goose; it more resembles that of
the brown brant but is somewhat different. it is like the note of young
domestic goose which has not perfectly attained it's full note. the
flesh of this bird is exceedingly fine, preferable to either the goose
or pided brant.- The Brown or pided brant are much the same size and
form of the white only that their wings are considerably longer and
more pointed. the plumage of the upper part of the body neck head and
tail is much the colour of the canadian goose but reather darker in
consequence of som dark brown feathers which are distributed and
irregularly scattered throughout. they have not the white on the neck
and sides of the head as the goose has nor is the neck darker than the
body. like the goose there are some white feathers on the rump at the
joining of the tail. the beak is dark and the legs and feet also dark
with a greenish cast; the breast and belley are of a lighter colour
than the back and is also irregularly intermixed with dark brown and
black feathers which give it a pided appearance. the flesh of this bird
is dark and in my estimation reather better than that of the goose. the
habits of this bird are the same nearly with the goose and white brant
with this difference that they do not remain in this climate in such
numbers during the winter as the others, and that it sets out earlier
in the fall season on it's return to the south and arrives later in the
spring than the goose. I see no difference between this bird and that
called simply the brant, common to the lakes the Ohio and Mississippi
&c. The small goose of this country is reather less than the brant;
it's head and neck like the brant are reather larger than that of the
goose in proportion; their beak is also thicker and shorter. their
notes are more like those of our tame gees; in all other rispects they
are the same with the large goose with which, they so frequently
ascociate that it was some time after I first observed this goose
before I could determine whether it was a distinct speceis or not. I
have now no hesitation in declaring them a distinct speceis. the large
goose is the same of that common on the Atlantic coast, and known by
the appellation of the wild, or Canadian goose.

[Clark, March 8, 1806]
Saturday March 8th 1806
Bratten is much better this morning, his back givs him but little pain.
Collins returned early in the morning, and informed us that he had
killed three Elk about five miles distance on the edge of the prarie in
point Adams. one of them fell in a deep pond of water and he could not
git to it. the other two he butchered and Saved. he saw two large herds
of Elk in that quarter. we Sent Drewyer & Jos. Field to hunt these Elk,
a party was also Sent with Labiesh for the flesh of the Elk which
Drewyer and himself had killd up the Netul, they returned with it in
the evening. Shields, R. Field and Frasure returned this evening from
the Kilhawanackkle unsuccessfull haveing Seen no Elk. McNeal and
Goodrich haveing recovered from the Louis veneri I detected them to
desist from takeing the murcury or useing in future. willard is yet
complaining and is low Spirited.

The White Brant is very common in this country particularly below tide
water where they remain in vast quantities dureing the winter. they
feed like the Swan Goose &c. on the grass and roots & Seeds which they
find in the marshes this bird is a little larger than the brown brant
and a fourth less than the common wild or Canadian goose. the head is
proportionably with the goose reather large; the beak thicker Shorter
and of the Same form, being of a yellowish white colour except the
edges of the Chaps, which are frequently of a dark brown. the legs and
feet are of the Same form of the goose and are of a redish white or
pail flesh colour. the tail is composed of Sixteen feathers of equal
length as those of the geese and brown brant are, and bears about the
Same perpotion in point of length. the Eye is of a dark colour and
nothing remarkable as to Size. the wings are reather longer compared
with those of the goose, but not as much So as is the brown or pieded
brant. the colour of the plumage of this bird is uniformly a pure white
except the large feathers of the extremities of the wings which are
black. The large feathers of the 1st joint of the wing next to the body
are white. the note of this bird differs essentially from that of the
goose; it more resembles that of the brown brant but is Somewhat
different. it is like the note of a young domestic goose which has not
perfectly attained its full note. the flesh of this bird is exceedingly
fine, prefferable to either the goose or pieded brant. the neck is
Shorter in prpotion than that of the goose.

The Brown or pieded brant are nearly the Size and much the Same form of
the white brante only that their wings are considerably longer and more
pointed. the plumage of the upper part of the body, neck, head and tail
is much the Colour of the Common or Canadian Goose but rather darker in
consequence of Some dark brown feathers which are distributed and
irregularly scattered throughout. they have not the white on the neck
and Sides of the head as the goose has nor is the neck darker than the
body. like the goose there are Some white feathers on the rump at the
junction of the tail. the beak, legs and feet are dark, with a greenish
cast; the breast and belly are of a lighter colour than the back and is
also intermixed, irregularly, with dark brown and black feathers which
gives it a pieded appearance. the flesh of this bird is dark, and in my
estimation reather better than that of the goose. the habits of this
bird is nearly the same with the goose and white brant, with this
difference that they do not remain in this Climate in Such numbers
dureing the winter as the others. I See no difference between this bird
and that Called Simpilly the Brant Common to the Lakes and frequently
Seen on the Ohio and Mississippi in large flocks &c.

The Small Goose of this country is reather less than the Brant; it's
head and neck like the brant are reather larger than that of the goose
in purpotion; their beak is also thicker and Shorter. their notes are
more like those of our taim geese, in all other respect they are the
Same with the large Goose with which, they So frequently ascoiete, that
it was Some time after I first observed this goose before I could
whether it was a distinct Speces or not. I have no hesitation now in
declareing them a distinct Species. the large Goose is the Same as that
common to the Ohio, and atlantic coast, and known by the appellation of
the wild, or Canadian Goose.

[Lewis, March 9, 1806]
Sunday March 9th 1806. This morning the men set out at daylight to go
in gust of the Elk which Collins had killed, they returned with it at
eleven A.M. Bratton complains of his back being very painfull to him
today; I conceive this pain to be something of the rheumatism. we still
apply the linniment and flannel; in the evening he was much better.
Drewyer and Joseph Fields returned not having found any Elk. Sergt.
Pryor and the fishing party not yet arrived, suppose they are detained
by the winds. visited by 3 Clatsop men who brought a dog some fish and
a Sea Otter skin for sale. we suffered them to remain all night. we set
Shields at work to make some sacks of Elk skin to contain various
articles. The large Swan is precisely the same common to the Atlantic
States. the small swan differs only from the larger one in size and
it's note. it is about one fourth less and it's note entirely
different. the latter cannot be justly immetated by the sound of
letters nor do I know any sounds with which a comparison would be
pertinent. it begins with a kind of whistleing sound and terminates in
a round full note which is reather louder than the whistleing, or
former part; this note is as loud as that of the large swan. from the
peculiar whistleing of the note of this bird I have called it the
whistleing swan it's habits colour and contour appear to be precisely
those of the large Swan. we first saw them below the great narrows of
the Columbia near the Chilluckkittequaw nation. They are very abundant
in this neighbourhood and have remained with us all winter. in number
they are fully five for one of the large speceis. The duckinmallard or
common large duck wich resembles the domestic duck are the same here
with those of the U Sts. they are abundant and are found on every part
of the river below the mountains. they remain here all winter but I
beleive they do not continue during winter far above tidewater. a
beautifull duck and one of the most delicious in the world is found in
considerable quantities in this neighbourhood during the Autumn and
winter. this is the same with that known in the Delliware,
Susquehannah, and Potomac by the name of the Canvisback and in James
River by that of shell-Drake; in the latter river; however I am
informed that they have latterly almost entirely disappeared. to the
epicure of those parts of the union where this duck abounds nothing
need be added in praise of the exqusite flavor of this duck. I have
frequently eaten of them in several parts of the Union and I think
those of the Columbia equally as delicious. this duck is never found
above tide-water; we did not meet with them untill after we reached the
marshey Islands; and I beleive that they have already left this
neighbourhood, but whether they have gone northwardly or Southwardly I
am unable to determin; nor do I know in what part of the Continent they
raise their young.- The read headed fishing duck is common to every
part of the river and are found as well in the Rocky Mountains as
elsewhere; in short this was the only duck we saw on the waters of the
Columbia within the mountains. they feed principally on crawfish and
are the same in every rispect as those on the rivers in the mountains
of the Atlantic Ocean.

[Clark, March 9, 1806]
Sunday Mach 9th 1806
This morning the men Set out at day light to go in quest of the Elk
which Collins had killed, they returned at 11 A.M. Bratten complains of
his backs being very painfull to him to day. we Still apply the
linnement & flannel; in the evening he was much better. Jos. Field &
Drewyer returned not haveing found any Elk. Sergt. Pryor and the
fishing party not yet returned, Suppose they are detained by the winds.
we are visited by 3 Clatsop men who brought a Dog, Some fish and a Sea
otter Skin for Sale. we Suffered them to remain all night. we Set
Shields at work to make Some Sacks of Elk Skin to contain my papers,
and various articles which we wish kept Dry.

The large Swan is precisely the Same Common to the Missouri,
Mississippi and the Atlantic States &c. The Small Swan differ only from
the large one in Size and it's note. it is about 1/4th less, and its
notes entirely different. the latter cannot be justly immetated by the
Sound of letters nor do I know any Sound with which a comparison would
be perti-nent. it begins with a kind of whistling Sound and terminates
in a round full note which is reather louder than the whistling, or
former part; this note is as loud as that of the large Swan. from the
peculiar whistling of the note of this bird I have Called it the
Whistleing Swan. it's habits colour and contour appear to be precisely
those of the large swan. we first saw them below the great narrows of
the Columbia near the Chilluckkittequaw Nation. they are very abundant
in this neighbourhood and have remained with us all winter. in number
they are fully five for one of the large Species of the Swan's.

The Duckinmallard are the Same here with those of the U, States. they
are abundant and are found on every part of the river below the
mountains. they remain here all winter, but I believe they do not
remain all winter above tide water.- a butifull Duck and one of the
most delicious in the world is found in Considerable quantities in this
neighbourhood dureing the Autumn and winter. this is the Same as that
known in the Dilliwar, Susquehannah and Potomac by the name of the
Canvisback and James River by that of Shell-Drake; in the latter river
I am informed that they have latterly almost entirely disapeared. the
epicures of those parts of the Union where those Ducks abound nothing
need be added in prais of the exquisit flavor of this duck. I have
eaten of them in Several parts of the Union and I think those of the
Columbia equally as delicious. this duck is never found above tide
water; we did not meat with them untill after we reached the marshey
Islands; and I believe that they have already left this neighbourhood;
but whether they are gorn Northerly or Southerly, I am unable to
deturmine; nor do I know in what part of the Country they rais their
young

The red headed fishing duck is common to every part of the river and
are found as well in the Rocky Mountains as elsewhere; in short this
was the only duck we Saw within the Mountain on the Columbian waters.
they feed principally on Crawfish; and are the Same in every respects
as those on the Ohio and rivers in the mountains of the atlantic Ocian.

The black and white Duck are Small about the Size of the blue-winged
teal, or reather larger. the mail is butifully varigated with black and
white. the white occupies the Side of the head, breast and back. black
the tail, large feathers of the wing, two tufts of feathers which cover
the upper part of the wings when folded, the neck and head. the female
is darker or has much less white about her. I take this to be the Same
Species of duck common to the ohio, as also the atlantic Coast, and
Sometimes called the butter box. the back is wide and Short, and as
well as the legs of a dark Colour. the flesh of this duck is verry well
flavored I think Superior to the Duckinmallard.

[Lewis, March 10, 1806]
Monday March 10th 1806.
About 1 P.M. it became fair and we sent out two parties of hunters on
this side of the Netul the one below and the other above. we also
directed a party to set out early in the morning and pass the bay and
hunt beyond the Kilhowanackkle. from the last we have considerable hope
as we have as yet hunted but little in that quarter. it blew hard all
day. in the evening the Indians departed. The hunters who were over the
Netull the other day informed us that they measured a pine tree, (or
fir No 1) which at the hight of a man's breast was 42 feet in the girth
about three feet higher, or as high as a tall man could reach, it was
40 feet in the girth which was about the circumpherence for at least
200 feet without a limb, and that it was very lofty above the
commencement of the limbs. from the appearance of other trees of this
speceis of fir and their account of this tree, I think it may be safely
estimated at 300 feet. it had every appearance of being perfectly
sound. The black and white duck are small abut the size of the
blue-winged teal, or reather larger. the male is beautifully variagated
with black and white. the white occupys the sides of the head, breast
and back, black, the tail feathers of the wings two tufts of feathers
which cover the upper part of the wings when foalded, the neck and
head. the female is darker or has much less white about her. I take
this to be the same speceis of duck common to the Atlantic coast, and
frequently called the butterbox. the beak is wide and short, and as
well as the legs, of a dark colour. the flesh of this duck is very well
flavored. the brown duck is much in form like the duckinmallard, tho
not much more than half it's size. the colour is an uniform mixture of
yellowish and dark brown. there is nothing remarkable in the appearance
of this duck it generally resorts the same kind of grassey marshes with
the duckinmallard and feeds in a similar manner, on grass seed, and
roots. both these ducks are common to the river for some distance above
tide water as well as below. The black duck is about the size of the
bluewinged teal. their colour is a duskey black the breast and belley
somewhat lighter than the other parts, or a dark brown. the legs stand
longitudinally with the body, and the bird when on shore stands of
cours very erect. the legs and feet are of a dark brown, the toes are
four on each foot, a short one at the heel and three long toes in
front, which are unconnected with a web. the webs are attatched to each
sides of the several joints of the toe, and divided by deep sinuses at
each joint. the web assuming in the intermediate part an eliptical
figure. the beak is about two inches long, streight, flated on the
sides, and tapering to a sharp point. the upper chap somewhat longest,
and bears on it's base at the joining of the head, a little conic
protuberance of a cartelagenous substace, being redish brown at the
point. the beak is of an ivory white colour. the eye dark. these ducks
usually associate in large flocks, and are very noisey; their note
being a sharp shrill whistle. they are usually fat and agreeably
flavored; and feed principally on moss, and other vegitable productions
of the water. we did not meet with them untill we reached tide-water,
but I beleive them not exclusively confined to that district at all
seasons, as I have noticed the same duck on many parts of the Rivers
Ohio and Mississippi. the gizzard and liver are also remarkably large
in this fowl. the divers are the same with those of the Atlantic
States. the smaller species has some white feathers about the rump with
no perceptable tail and is very active and cluck in it's motion; the
body is of a redish brown. the beak sharp and somewhat curved like that
of the pheasant. the toes are not connected but webed like those
discribed of the black duck. the larger speceis are about the size of
the teal and can flye a short distance which the small one scarcely
ever attapts. they have a short tail. their colour is also an uniform
brickredish brown, the beak is streight and pointed. the feet are of
the same form of the other speceis and the legs are remarkably thin and
flat one edge being in front. the food of both speceis is fish, and the
flesh unfit for uce. the bluewinged teal are a very excellent duck, and
are the same with those of the Atlantic coast.- There are some other
speceis of ducks which shall be hereafter discribed as I may hereafter
have an opportunity to examine them.

[Clark, March 10, 1806]
Monday March 10th 1806
about 1 P.M. it became fair and we Sent out two parties of hunters on
this Side of the Netul, one above and the other below, we also derected
a party to Set out early in the morning and pass Meriwethers Bay and
hunt beyond the Kilhow anak kle. from the last we have considerable
hope, as we have as yet hunted but little in that quarter. it blew hard
all day, in the evening the Indians departed. The Hunters, S. R. F. &
F. who were over the netul the other day informed us that they measured
a 2d tree of the fir Speces (No. i) as high as a man Could reach, was
39 feet in the girth; it tapered but very little for about 200 feet
without any Considerable limbs, and that it was a very lofty above the
Commmencement of the limbs. from the appearance of other Species of
fir, and their account of this tree, I think it might safely estimated
at 300 feet. it had every appearance of being perfectly Sound in every
part

The brown Duck is much in form like the Duckinmallard, tho not much
more than half it's Size. the colour is one uniform mixture of
yellowish and dark brown. there is nothing remarkable in the colour of
this duck; it resorts the Same kind of grassy marshes with the
Duckinmallard, and feeds in a Similar manner, on grass, Seeds & roots.
both these ducks are common to the river for Some distance above tide
water as well as below. The black Duck is about the Size of the
bluewinged teel. their colour is a duskey black the breast and belly
Somewhat lighter than the other parts, or a dark brown. the legs Stand
longitudianally with the body, and the Bird when on Shore Stands very
erect. the legs and feet are of a dark brown, the toes are four on each
foot, a short one on the heel and three long toes in front which are
unconnected with a web. the web is atached to each Side of the Several
joints of the toes, and devided by deep Sinuses at each joint. the web
assumeing in the intermediate part an elipticle figure. the beak is
about two inches long, Streight, flated on the Sides, and tapering to a
Sharp point. the upper chap Somewhat longest and bears on its base at
the joining of the head, a little conic protuberance of a cartelagenous
Substance, being redish brown. the beak is of a ivery white colour. the
eye dark. these ducks usially associate in large flocks, and are very
noisey; their note being a Sharp shrill whistle. they are usially fat
and tolerably flavoured; and feed on moss and other vegitable
productions of the water. we did not meet with them untill we reached
tide water, I have noticed the Same duck on maney parts of the ohio an
Mississippi. the Gizzard and liver are also remarkably large in this
fowl-. The Divers are the Same with those of the atlantic States. the
Smaller Species has some white feathers about the rump and no
perceptable tail and is very active and quick in its motion; the body
is of a redish brown. the beak sharp and Somewhat curved like that of
the Pheasant the toes are not connected but webd. like those discribed
of the black duck. The large Species are about the Size of the teal &c.
the food of both those Species is fish. and their flesh is unfit for
use.

The bluewinged teal are a very excellent duck, and are the Same with
those of the atlantic coast.- There are some other Species of ducks
which Shall be hereafter discribd. as I may hereafter have an
oppertunity of exameneing them.

[Lewis, March 11, 1806]
Tuesday March 11th 1806.
Early this morning Sergt. Pryor arrived with a small canoe loaded with
fish which he had obtained from the Cathlahmah's for a very small part
of the articles he had taken with him. the wind had prevented his going
to the fisery on the opposite side of the river above the Wackiacums,
and also as we had suspected, prevented his return as early as he would
otherwise have been back.- The dogs at the Cathlahmahs had bitten the
trong assunder which confined his canoe and she had gone a drift. he
borrowed a canoe from the Indians in which he has returned. he found
his canoe on the way and secured her, untill we return the Indians
their canoe, when she can be brought back. Sent Sergt. Gass and a party
in surch of a canoe which was reported to have been sunk in a small
creek on the opposite side of the Netul a few miles below us, where she
had been left by Shields R. Fields and Frazier when they were lately
sent out to hunt over the Netul. They returned and reported that they
could not find the canoe she had broken the cord by which she was
attatched, and had been carried off by the tide. Drewyer Joseph Fields
and Frazier set out by light this morning to pass the bay in order to
hunt as they had been directed the last evening. we once more live in
clover; Anchovies fresh Sturgeon and Wappetoe. the latter Sergt. Pryor
had also procured and brought with him. The reptiles of this country
are the rattlesnake garter snake and the common brown Lizzard. The
season was so far advanced when we arrived on this side of the rocky
mountains that but few rattlesnakes were seen I did not remark one
particularly myself, nor do I know whether they are of either of the
four speceis found in the different parts of the United states, or of
that species before mentioned peculiar to the upper parts of the
Missouri and it's branches. The garter snake so called in the United
States is very common in this country; they are found in great numbers
on the open and sometimes marshey grounds in this neighbourhood. they
differ not at all from those of the U States. the black or dark brown
lizzard we saw at the rock fort Camp at the commencement of the woody
country below the great narrows and falls of the Columbia; they are
also the same with those of the United States. The snail is numerous in
the woody country on this coast; they are in shape like those of the
United States, but are at least five times their bulk. There is a
speceis of water lizzard of which I saw one only just above the grand
rapids of the Columbia. it is about 9 inches long the body is reather
flat and about the size of a mans finger covered with a soft skin of a
dark brown colour with an uneven surface covered with little pimples
the neck and head are short, the latter terminating in an accute
angular point and flat. the fore feet each four toes, the hinder ones
five unconnected with a web and destitute of tallons. it's tail was
reather longer than the body and in form like that of the Musk-rat,
first rising in an arch higher than the back and decending lower than
the body at the extremity, and flated perpendicularly. the belley and
under part of the neck and head were of a brick red every other part of
the colour of the upper part of the body a dark brown. the mouth was
smooth, without teeth.

[Clark, March 11, 1806]
Tuesday March 11th 1806
Early this morning Sergt. Pryor arrived with a Small Canoe loaded with
fish which he had obtained from the Cath-lah-mah's for a very Small
part of the articles he had taken with him. the wind had prevented his
going to the fishery on the opposit Side of the river above the
Waukiecum's, and also as we had suspected, prevented his return as
early as he otherwise would have been back. The dogs of the
Cathlahmah's had bitten the throng assunder which confined his canoe
and she had gorn adrift. he borrowed a Canoe from the Indians in which
he has returned. he found his canoe on the way and Secured her, untill
we return the Indians their Canoe- Sent Sergt. Gass and a party in
Serch of one of our Canoes which was reported to have been lost from a
hunting party of Shields R. Field & Frazier when they were last out on
the opposit Side of the Netul. they returned and reported that they
Could not find the Canoe which had broken the Cord with which it was
attached, and was caried off by the tide. Drewyer Jo. Field & Frazier
Set out by light this morning to pass the bay in order to hunt as they
had been directed last evening. we once more live in Clover; Anchovies
fresh Sturgeon and Wappatoe. the latter Sergt. Pryor had also procured
a fiew and brought with him. The Deer of this Coust differ from the
Common Deer, fallow Deer or Mule Deer as has beformentiond.

The Mule Deer we have never found except in rough Country; they prefer
the Open Grounds and are Seldom found in the wood lands near the river;
when they are met with in the wood lands or river bottoms and pursued,
they imediately run to the hills or open country as the Elk do, the
Contrary happens with the common Deer. there are Several differences
between the mule and common deer as well as in form as in habits. they
are fully a third larger in general, and the male is particularly
large; think there is Somewhat greater disparity of Size between the
Male and the female of this Species than there is between the male and
female fallow Deer; I am Convinced I have Seen a Buck of this Species
twice the volume a Buck of the Common Deer. the Ears are peculiarly
large, I measured those of a large Buck which I found to be eleven
inches long and 31/2 in width at the widest part; they are not so
delicately formed, their hair in winter is thicker longer and of a much
darker grey, in Summer the hair is Still coarser longer and of a paler
red, more like that of the Elk; in winter they also have a Considerable
quantity of very fine wool intermixed with the hair and lying next to
the Skin as the Antelope has. the long hair which grows on the outer
Side of the first joint of the hind legs, and which in the Common Deer
do not usially occupy more than 2 inches in them occupy from 6 to 8;
their horns also differ, those in the Common deer consist of two main
beams gradually deminishing as the points proceed from it, with the
mule deer the horns consist of two beams which at the distance of 4 or
6 inches from the head divide themselves into two equal branches which
again either divide into two other equal branches or terminate in a
Smaller, and two equal ones; haveing either 2, 4 or 6 points on a beam;
the horn is not so rough about the base as the common deer, and are
invariably of a much darker Colour. the most Strikeing difference of
all, is the white rump and tail. from the root of the tail as a center
there is a circular Spot perfectly white of about 31/2 inches radius,
which occupy a part of the rump and the extremities of buttocks and
joins the white of the belley underneath; the tail which is usially
from 8 to 9 inches long for the first 4 or 5 inches from its upper
extremity is covered with Short white hairs, much Shorter indeed than
those hairs of the body; from hence for about one inch further, the
hair is Still white but gradually becoms longer; the tail then
termonates in a tissue of Black hair of about 3 inches long. from this
black hair of the tail they have obtained among the French engages the
appelation of the black tailed Deer, but this I conceive by no means
Characteristic of the Animal as much the larger portion of the tail is
white. the Ears and the tail of this Animale when Compared with those
of the Common Deer, So well Comported with those of the Mule when
compared with the Horse, that we have by way of distinction adapted the
appellation of the mule Deer which I think much more appropriate. on
the inner corner of each eye there is a drane (like the Elk) or large
recepticle which Seams to Answer as a drane to the eye which givs it
the appearance of weeping, this in the Common Deer of the Atlantic
States is scercely proceptable but becoms more Conspicious in the
fallow Deer, and Still more So in the Elk; this recepticle in the Elk
is larger than any of the Pecora order with which I am acquainted.

I have Some reasons to believe that the Calumet Eagle is Sometimes
found on this Side of the Rocky mountains from the information of the
Indians in whose possession I have Seen their plumage. those are the
Same with those of the Missouri, and are the most butifull of all the
family of the Eagle of America it's colours are black and white with
which it is butifully varigated. the feathers of the tail which is so
highly prized by the Indians is composed of twelve broad feathers of
equal length those are white except about two inches at the extremity
which is of a jut black. their wings have each a large circular white
Spot in the middle when extended. the body is variously marked with
white and black. the form is much that of the Common bald Eagle, but
they are reather Smaller and much more fleet. this Eagle is feared by
all carnivarous birds, and on his approach all leave the carcase
instantly on which they were feeding. it breads in the inaccessable
parts of the Mountains where it Spends the Summer, and decends to the
plains and low country in the fall and winter when it is usially Sought
and taken by the nativs. two tails of this bird is esteemed by Mandans,
Minnetares, Ricaras, &c. as the full value of a good horse, or Gun and
accoutrements. with the Osage & Kanzas and those nations enhabiting
Countrys where this bird is more rare, the price is even double of that
mentioned. with these feathers the nativs deckerate the Stems of their
Sacred pipes or Calumets; whence the name of Calumet Eagle, which has
Generally obtained among the Engages. The Ricaras have domesticated
this bird in many instances for the purpose of obtaining its plumage.
the nativs in every part of the Continent who can precure those
feathers attach them to their own hair and the mains and tail of their
favorite horses by way of orniment. they also deckerate their own caps
or bonnets with those feathers. The Leather winged bat is found &c.

[Lewis, March 12, 1806]
Wednesday March 12th 1806
We sent a party again in surch of the perogue but they returned
unsuccessful) as yesterday. Sent one hunter out on this side of the
Netul, he did not return this evening. I beleive the Callamet Eagle is
sometimes found on this side of the rocky mountains from the
information of the Indians in whose possession I have seen their
plumage. these are the same with those of the Missouri, and are the
most beautiful) of all the family of the Eagles of America. it's
colours are black and white with which it is beautifully variagated.
the feathers of the tail which are so highly prized by the Indians is
composed of twelve broad feathers of equal length. these are white
except about 2 inches at the extremity which is of a jut black. there
wings have each a large circular white spot in the middle when
extended. the body is variously marked with white and black. the form
is much that of the common bald Eagle, but they are reather smaller and
much more fleet. this eagle is feared by all carnivorous birds, and on
his approach all leave the carcase instantly on which they were
feeding. it breads in the inaccessable parts of the mountains where it
spends the summer, and decends to the plains and low country in the
fall and winter when it is usually sought and taken by the natives. two
tails of this bird is esteemed by the Mandans Minetares Ricares, &c as
the full value of a good horse, or gun and accoutrements. with the
Great and little Osages and those nations inhabiting countries where
this bird is more rare the price is even double of that mentioned. with
these feathers the natives decorate the stems of their sacred pipes or
callamets; whence the name, of Callamet Eagle, which has generally
obtained among the Engages. the Ricares have domesticated this bird in
many instancies for the purpose of obtaining it's plumage. the natives
in every part of the con tinent who can procure these feathers attatch
them to their own hair and the mains and tails of their favorite horses
by way of ornament. they also decorate their war caps or bonnets with
those feathers.- The leather winged batt common to the United States is
also found on this side of the Rocky mountains.- Beside the fish of
this coast and river already mentioned we have met with the following
speceis viz. the Whale, Porpus, Skaite, flounder, Salmon, red charr,
two speceis of Salmon trout, mountain or speckled trout, and a speceis
similar to one of those noticed on the Missouri within the mountains,
called in the Eastern states, bottle-nose. I have no doubt but there
are many other speceis of fish, which also exist in this quarter at
different seasons of the year, which we have not had an oportunity of
seeing. the shell fish are the Clam, perrewinkle, common mussle,
cockle, and a speceis with a circular flat shell. The Whale is
sometimes pursued harpooned and taken by the Indians of this coast; tho
I beleive it is much more frequently killed by runing fowl on the rocks
of the coast in violent storms and thrown on shore by the wind and
tide. in either case the Indians preseve and eat the blubber and oil as
has been before mentioned. the whalebone they also carefully preserve
for sale.- Our party are now furnished with 358 pair of Mockersons
exclusive of a good portion of dressed leather.-

[Clark, March 12, 1806]
Wednesday March 12th 1806
We Sent a party again in Serch of the Canoe but they returned
unsucksessfull as yesterday Sent one hunter out on this Side of the
Netul he did not return this evening. Our party are now furnished with
358 par of Mockersons exclusive of a good portion of Dressed leather,
they are also previded with Shirts Overalls Capoes of dressed Elk Skins
for the homeward journey.

Besides the fish of this Coast and river already mentioned we have met
with the following Species. viz. the Whale, Porpus, Skaite, flounder,
Salmon, red-carr, two Specis of Salmon trout, mountain or Speckled
trout, and a Speceis Similar to one of those noticed on the Missouri
within the mountains, called in the Eastern States, bottle nose. I have
no doubt but there are many other Species of fish which also exist in
this quarter at different Seasons of the year, which we have not had an
oppertunity of seeing. the Shell fish are the Clam, perriwinkle, common
Muscle, cockle, and a Species with a circular flat Shell.

The Whale is Sometimes pursued harpooned and taken by the Indians of
this Coast; tho I believe it is much more frequently killed by running
on the rocks of the Coast to S. S. W. in violent Storms, and thrown on
different parts of the Coast by the winds and tide-. in either case the
Indians preserve and eat the blubber and Oil as has been before
mentioned. the whale bone they also carefully preserve for Sale.

The Reptiles of this Country are the rattle snake, garter Snake a
common brown Lizzard. The Season was so far advanced on this side of
the Rocky Mountains that but fiew rattle Snakes were Seen, I did not
remark one particularly my Self, nor do I know if they are of either of
the four Species found in different parts of the United States, or of
that Species before observed only on the upper parts of the Missouri &
its branches.

The Garter Snake So Called in the U States is very common in this
country, they are found in great numbers on the open and Sometimes
marshy grounds in this neighbourhood. they differ not at all from those
of the United States. the Black or Dark brown Lizzard we Saw at the
long narrows or Commencement of the woody country on the Columbia; they
are also the Same with those of the U, States. The Snail is noumerous
in the woodey Country on this Coast, they are in Shape like those of
the U, States, but are at least five times their bulk. there is a
Specis of water Lizzard of which I only Saw one just above the grand
rapid of the Columbia. it is about 9 inches long the body is reather
flat and about the Size of a mans finger, covered with a Soft Skin of
dark brown Colour with an uneaven sufice covered with little pimples,
the neck and head are Short, the latter termonateing in an accute
angular point and flat. the fore feet each have four toes, the hinder
ones five unconnected with a web and destitute of tallons. it's tail
was reather longer than the body, and in form like that of the muskrat,
first riseing in an arch higher than the back, and decending lower than
the body at the extremety, and flated perpindicularly. the belly and
under part of the neck and head were of a Brick red every other part of
the colour of the upper part of the body are dark brown. the mouth was
Smooth without teeth.

The horns of Some of the Elk have not yet fallen off and those of
others have Grown to the length of Six inches. the latter are in the
best order, from which it would Seem that the pore Elk retain their
horns longer.

[Lewis, March 13, 1806]
Thursday March 13th 1806.
This morning Drewyer Jos Feilds and Frazier returned; they had killed
two Elk and two deer. visited by two Cathlahmahs who left us in the
evening. we sent Drewyer down to the Clatsop village to purchase a
couple of their canoes if possible. Sergt. Pryor and a party made
another surch for the lost peroge but was unsuccessfull; while engaged
in surching for the perogue Collins one of his party killed two Elk
near the Netul below us. we sent Sergt. Ordway and a party for the
flesh of one of the Elk beyond the bay with which they returned in the
evening. the other Elk and two deer were at some distance. R. Fields
and Thompson who set out yesterday morning on a hunting excurtion
towards point Adams have not yet returned. The horns of some of the Elk
have not yet fallen off, and those of others have shotten out to the
length of six inches. the latter are in the best order, from which it
would seem that the poor Elk retain their horns longest.

The Porpus is common on this coast and as far up the river as the water
is brackish. the Indians sometimes gig them and always eat the flesh of
this fish when they can procure it; to me the flavor is disagreeable.
the Skaite is also common to the salt water, we have seen several of
them that had perished and were thrown out on the beach by the tide.
The flounder is also an inhabitant of the salt water, we have seen them
also on the beach where they had been left by the tide. the Indians eat
the latter and esteem it very fine. these several speceis are the same
with those of the Atlantic coast. the common Salmon and red Charr are
the inhabitants of both the sea and rivers. the former is usually
largest and weighs from 5 to 15 lbs. it is this speceis that extends
itself into all the rivers and little creeks on this side of the
Continent, and to which the natives are so much indebted for their
subsistence. the body of this fish is from 21/2 to 3 feet long and
proportionably broad. it is covered with imbricated scales of a
moderate size and is variegated with irregular black spots on it's
sides and gills. the eye is large and the iris of a silvery colour the
pupil black. the rostrum or nose extends beyond the under jaw, and both
the upper and lower jaws are armed with a single series of long teeth
which are subulate and infleted near the extremities of the jaws where
they are also more closely arranged. they have some sharp teeth of
smaller size and same shape placed on the tongue which is thick and
fleshey. the fins of the back are two; the first is plaised nearer the
head than the ventral fins and has ____ rays, the second is placed far
back near the tail is small and has no rays. the flesh of this fish is
when in order of a deep flesh coloured red and every shade from that to
an orrange yellow, and when very meager almost white. the roes of this
fish are much esteemed by the natives who dry them in the sun and
preserve them for a great length of time. they are about the size of a
small pea nearly transparent and of a redish yellow colour. they
resemble very much at a little distance the common currants of our
gardens but are more yellow. this fish is sometimes red along the sides
and belley near the gills particularly the male. The red Charr are
reather broader in proportion to their length than the common salmon,
the skales are also imbricated but reather large. the nostrum exceeds
the lower jaw more and the teeth are neither as large nor so numerous
as those of the salmon. some of them are almost entirely red on the
belley and sides; others are much more white than the salmon and none
of them are variagated with the dark spots which make the body of the
other. their flesh roes and every other particular with rispect to
their form is that of the Salmon. this fish we did not see untill we
decended below the grat falls of the Columbia; but whether they are
exclusively confined to this portion of the river or not at all
seasons, I am unable to determine.

[Clark, March 13, 1806]
Thursday March 13th 1806.
This morning Drewyer Jos. Fields and Frazer returned; they had killed
two Elk and two deer. Visited by two Cath-lah-mars who left us in the
evening. we Sent Drewyer down to the Clatsop Village to purchase a
couple of their canoes if possible. Sergt. Pryor and a party made
another Serch for the lost Canoe but was unsucksessfull; while engaged
in Serching for the Canoe, Collins one of his party killed two Elk near
the Netul below us. we Sent Sergt. Ordway and a party for the flesh of
one of the Elk beyond the Bay with which they returned in the evening;
the other Elk and 2 Deer were at Some distance- R. Field and Thompson
who Set out on a hunting excursion yesterday morning towards point
Adams have not yet returned. took equal altitudes to day this being the
only fair day for Sometime past.

The Porpus is common on this coast and as far up the river as the water
is brackish. the Indians Sometimes gig them and always eat the flesh of
this fish when they Can precure it; to me the flavour is disagreeable.
the Skaite is also common to the Salt water, I have Seen Several of
them that had perished and were thrown out on the beach by the tide.
The flounder is also an enhabitent of the Salt water. we have Seen them
also on the beach where they had been left by the tide. the nativs eate
the latter and esteem it very fine. these Several Species are the Same
of those of the atlantic Coasts. The Common Salmon and red charr are
the inhabitents of both the Sea and river. the former is usially
largest and weighs from 5 to 15 lbs. it is this Species that extends
itself into all the rivers and little creek on this Side of the
Continent, and to which the nativs are So much indebted for their
Subsistence. the body of this fish is from 21/2 to 3 feet long and
perpotionably broad. it is covered with imbricated scales of a moderate
Size and is varigated with errigular black Spots on its Side and gills.
the eye is large and the iris of a Silvery colour the pupil black. the
rostrum or nose extend beyond the under jaws, and both the upper and
the lower jaw are armed with a Single Series of long teeth which are
Subulate and infleted near the extremities of the jaws where they are
more closely arranged. they have Some Sharp teeth of Smaller Size and
Same Shape on the tongue which is thick and fleshey. the fins of the
back are two; the first is placed nearer the head than the Venteral
fins and has ____ rays, the Second is placed far back near the tail is
small and has no rays. The flesh of this fish when in order of a deep
flesh coloured red and every Shade from that to an orrange yellow, and
when very meager almost white. the Roe of this fish are much esteemed
by the nativs, who dry them in the Sun and preserve them for a great
length of time. they are about the Size of a Small pea nearly
transparrent and of a redish yellow colour. they resemble very much at
a little distance the Common Current of our gardens but are more
yellow. this fish is Sometimes red along the Sides and belly near the
gills; particularly the male of this Species.

The Red Charr are reather broader in proportion to their length than
the Common Salmon, the Skales are also embricated but reather large.
the nostrum exceeds the lower jaw more and the teeth are neither So
noumerous or large as those of the Salmon. Some of them are almost
entirely red on the belly and Sides; others are much more white than
the Salmon, and none of them are varigated with the dark Spots which
mark the body of the other. their flesh roe and every other particular
with respect to their is that of the Salmon. this fish we did not See
untill we had decended below the Great falls of the Columbia; but
whether they are exclusively confined to this portion of the river or
not at all Seasons, I am unable to determine.

The Salmon Trout are Seldom more than two feet in length, they are
narrow in purportion to their length, at least much more So than the
Salmon & red charr. their jaws are nearly of the Same length, and are
furnished with a Single Series of Subulate Streight teeth, not so long
or so large as those of the Salmon, the mouth is wide, and the tongue
is also furnished with Some teeth. the fins are placed much like those
of the Salmon. at the Great Falls are met with this fish of a Silvery
white colour on the belly and Sides, and a blueish light brown on the
back and head. in this neighbourhood we have met with another Species
which does not differ from the other in any particular except in point
of Colour. this last is of a dark colour on the back, and its Sides and
belley are yellow with transverse Stripes of dark brown. Sometimes a
little red is intermixed with these Colours on the belly and Sides
towards the head. the flesh & roe is like those described of the
Salmon. the white Species which we found below the falls were in
excellent order when the Salmon were entirely out of Season and not fit
for use. The Species which we found here early in november on our
arival in this quarter had declined considerably, reather more so than
the Red charr with which we found them asociated in the little
riverlets and creeks. I think it may be Safely asserted that the Red
Charr and both Species of the Salmon trout remain in Season longer in
the fall of the year than the common Salmon; but I have my doubt
whether of the Species of the Salmon trout ever pass the Great falls of
the Columbia. The Indians tell us that the Salmon begin to run early in
the next month; it will be unfortunate for us if they do not, for they
must form our principal dependance for food in assending the Columbia
above the Falls and it's S. E. branch Lewis's river to the Mountains.

The Speckled or Mountain Trout are found in the waters of the Columbia
within the Rocky mountains. they are the Same of those found in the
upper part of the Missouri, but are not So abundent in the Columbian
Waters as in that river. The bottle nose is also found on the waters of
the Columbia within the mountains.

[Lewis, March 14, 1806]
Friday March 14th 1806.
This morning we sent a party after the two Elk which Collins killed
last evening, they returned with them about noon. Collins, Jos. Fends
and Shannon went in quest of the flock of Elk of which Collins had
killed those two. this evening we heared upwards of twenty shot, and
expect that they have fallen in with and killed a number of them.
Reubin Fields and Thompson returned this evening unsuccessfull having
killed one brant only. late in the evening Drewyer arrived with a party
of the Clatsops who brought an indifferent canoe some hats and roots
for sale. the hats and roots we purchased, but could not obtain the
canoe without giving more than our stock of merchandize would lisence
us. I offered him my laced uniform coat but he would not exchange. The
Salmon Trout are seldom more than two feet in length they are narrow in
proportion to their length, at least much more so than the Salmon or
red charr. the jaws are nearly of the same length, and are furnished
with a single series of small subulate streight teeth, not so long or
as large as those of the Salmon. the mouth is wide, and the tongue is
also furnished with some teeth. the fins are placed much like those of
the salmon. at the great falls we met with this fish of a silvery white
colour on the belley and sides, and a bluish light brown on the back
and head. in this neighbourhood we have met with another speceis which
dose not differ from the other in any particular except in point of
colour. this last is of a dark colour on the back, and it's sides and
belley are yellow with transverse stripes of dark brown. sometimes a
little red is intermixed with these colours on the belley and sides
towards the head. the eye, flesh, and roes are like those discribed of
the Salmon. the white speceis which we found below the falls was in
excellent order when the salmon were entirely out of season and not fit
for uce. the speceis which we found here on our arrival early in
November had declined considerably, reather more so inded than the red
Charr with which we found them ascociated in the little rivulets and
creeks. I think it may be safely asserted that the red Charr and both
speceis of the salmon trout remain in season longer in the fall of the
year than the common Salmon; but I have my doubts whether either of
them ever pass the great falls of the Columbia. The Indians tell us
that the Salmon begin to run early in the next month; it will be
unfortunate for us if they do not, for they must form our principal
dependence for food in ascending the Columbia, above the falls and it's
S. E. branch to the mountains. The mountain or speckled trout are found
in the waters of the Columbia within the mountains. they are the same
of those found in the upper part of the Missouri, but are not so
abundant in the Columbia as on that river. we never saw this fish below
the mountains but from the transparency and coldness of the Kooskooske
I should not doubt it's existing in that stream as low as it's junction
with the S E. branch of the Columbia.- The bottle nose is the same with
that before mentioned on the Missouri and is found exclusively within
the mountains.

[Clark, March 14, 1806]
Friday March 14th 1806
This morning we dispatched a party after two Elk which Collins killed
last evening, they returned with them about noon. Jos. Field, Collins,
Go. Shannon & Labiesh went in quest of the Gang of Elk out of which
Collins had killed the 2 yesterday. this evening we herd upwards of
twenty Shot and expect they have fallen in with and killed Several of
them. Reuben Field and Thompson returned this evening unsuksessfull
haveing killed only one Brant. late in the evening Geo. Drewyer arrived
with a party of the Clatsops who brought an indifferent Canoe, three
hats and Some roots for Sale we could not purchase the Canoe without
giveing more than our Stock of merchandize would lisence us. Capt Lewis
offered his laced uniform Coat for a verry indiferent Canoe, agreeable
to their usial way of tradeing his price was double. we are informed by
the Clatsops that they have latterly Seen an Indian from the
Quin-na-chart Nation who reside Six days march to the N. W and that
four vessles were there and the owners Mr. Haley, Moore, Callamon &
Swipeton were tradeing with that noumerous nation, whale bone Oile and
Skins of various discription.

[Lewis, March 15, 1806]
Saturday March 15th 1806.
This morning at 11 OCk. the hunters arrived, having killed four Elk
only. Labuish it seems was the only hunter who fell in with the Elk and
having by some accedent lost the fore sight of his gun shot a great
number of times but killed only the number mentioned. as the elk were
scattered we sent two parties for them, they returned in the evening
with four skins and the flesh of three Elk, that of one of them having
become putrid from the liver and pluck having been carelessly left in
the animal all night. we were visited this afternoon by Delashshelwilt
a Chinnook Chief his wife and six women of his nation which the old
baud his wife had brought for market. this was the same party that had
communicated the venerial to so many of our party in November last, and
of which they have finally recovered. I therefore gave the men a
particular charge with rispect to them which they promised me to
observe. late this evening we were also visited by Catel a Clatsop man
and his family. he brought a canoe and a Sea Otter Skin for sale
neither of which we purchased this evening. The Clatsops who had
brought a canoe for sale last evening left us early this morning.-
Bratton still sick.

There is a third speceis of brant in the neighbourhood of this place
which is about the size and much the form of the pided brant. they
weigh about 81/2 lbs. the wings are not as long nor so pointed as those
of the common pided brant. the following is a likeness of it's head and
beak. a little distance around the base of the beak is white and is
suddonly succeeded by a narrow line of dark brown. the ballance of the
neck, head, back, wings, and tail all except the tips of the feathers
are of the bluish brown of the common wild goose. the breast and belly
are white with an irregular mixture of black feathers which give that
part a pided appearance. from the legs back underneath the tail, and
arond the junction of the same with the body above, the feathers are
white. the tail is composed of 18 feathers; the longest of which are in
the center and measure 6 Inches with the barrel of the quill; those
sides of the tail are something shorter and bend with their extremeties
inwards towards the center of the tail. the extremities of these
feathers are white. the beak is of a light flesh colour. the legs and
feet which do not differ in structure from those of the goose or brant
of the other speceis, are of an orrange yellow colour. the eye is
small; the iris is a dark yellowish brown, and pupil black. the note of
this brant is much that of the common pided brant from which in fact
they are not to be distinguished at a distance, but they certainly are
a distinct speis of brant. the flesh of this fowl is as good as that of
the common pided brant. they not remain here during the winter in such
numbers as the white brant do, tho they have now returned in
considerable quantities. first saw them below tide-water.

[Clark, March 15, 1806]
Saturday March 15th 1806
This morning at 11 oClock the hunters arived, haveing Killed four Elk
only. Labiesh it Seams was the only Hunter who fell in with the Elk and
haveing by some accident lost the foresight of his gun Shot a great
number of times and only killed four. as the Elk were scattered we Sent
two parties for them, they return in the evening with four Skins, and
the flesh of three Elk, that of one of them haveing become putred from
the liver and pluck haveing been carelessly left in the Animal all
night. We were visited this Afternoon in a Canoe 4 feet 2 I. wide by
De-lash-hel-wilt a Chinnook Chief his wife and Six women of his Nation,
which the Old Boud his wife had brought for Market. this was the Same
party which had communicated the venereal to Several of our party in
November last, and of which.they have finally recovered. I therefore
gave the men a particular Charge with respect to them which they
promised me to observe. late this evening we were also visited by
Ca-tel a Clatsop man and his family. he brought a Canoe and a Sea Otter
Skin for Sale neither of which we could purchase of him. the Clatsops
which had brought a Canoe for Sale last evening left us this morning.
Bratten is still very weak and unwell.

There is a third Species of Brant in the neighbourhood of this place
which is about the Size and much the form of the bided brant. they
weigh about 81/2 lbs. the wings are not as long nor So pointed as the
Common pided brant. the following is a likeness of its head and beak. a
little distance arround the base of the beak is white and is Suddenly
Succeeded by a narrow line of dark brown. the ballance of the neck,
head, back, wings and tail all except the tips of the feathers are of
the blueish brown of the Common wild goose, the breast and belly are
white with an irregular mixture of black feathers which give that part
a pided appearance. from the legs back underneath the tail, and around
the junction of the Same with the body above, the feathers are white.
the tail is composed of 18 feathers; the longest of which are in the
center and measure 6 inches with the barrel of the quill; those on the
Side of the tail are Something Shorter and bend with their extremities
inwards towards the center of the tail. the extremities of these
feathers are white. the beak is of a light flesh colour. the legs and
feet which do not differ in Structure from those of the Goose or brant
of the other Species, are of an orrange yellow Colour. the eye is
Small; the iris is of a dark yellowish brown, and puple black. the note
of this brant is much that of the common pided brant from which in fact
they are not to be distinguished at a distance, but they Certainly are
a distinct Species of brant. the flesh of this fowl is as good as that
of the Common pided brant. they do not remain here dureing the winter
in Such numbers as the white brant do, tho they have now returned in
Considerable quantities. we first met with this brant on tide water.

The Clams of this coast are very Small. the Shells consist of two
valves which open with a hinge, the Shell is Smooth thin and of an oval
form or like that of the Common Muscle and of a Skye blue colour; it is
of every Size under a Inch & 3/4 in length, and hangs in clusters to
the moss of the rocks, the nativs Sometimes eate them.- The Periwinkle
both of the river and Ocian are Similar to those found in the Same
Situation on the Atlantic.- there is also an Animal which inhabits a
Shell perfectly circular about 3 inches in diameetor, thin and entire
on the marjin, convex and Smooth on the upper Side, plain on the under
part and covered with a number of minute Capillary fibers by means of
which it attaches itself to the Sides of the rocks. the Shell is thin
and Consists of one valve. a Small circular opperture is formed in the
Center of the under Shell the Animal is Soft and boneless &c.-.

[Lewis, March 16, 1806]
Sunday March 16th 1806.
Not any occurrence worthy of relation took place today. Drewyer and
party did not return from the Cathlahmahs this evening as we expected.
we suppose he was detained by the hard winds of today. the Indians
remained with us all day, but would not dispose of their canoes at a
price which it was in our power to give consistently with the state of
our Stock of Merchandize. two handkercheifs would now contain all the
small articles of merchandize which we possess; the ballance of the
stock consists of 6 blue robes one scarlet do. one uniform
artillerist's coat and hat, five robes made of our large flag, and a
few old cloaths trimed with ribbon. on this stock we have wholy to
depend for the purchase of horses and such portion of our subsistence
from the Indians as it will be in our powers to obtain. a scant
dependence indeed, for a tour of the distance of that before us. the
Clam of this coast are very small. the shell consists of two valves
which open with a hinge. the shell is smooth thin of an oval form or
like that of the common mussle, and sky blue colour. it is about 11/2
inches in length, and hangs in clusters to the moss of the rocks. the
natives sometimes eat them. the perewinkle both of the river and Ocean
are similar to those found in the same situations on the Atlantic
coast. the common mussle of the river are also the same with those in
the rivers of the atlantic coast. the cockle is small and also much the
same of the Atlantic. there is also an animal which inhabits a shell
perfectly circular about 3 Inches in diameter, thin and entire on the
margin, convex and smooth on the upper side, plain on the under part
and covered with a number minute capillary fibers by means of which it
attatches itself to the sides of the rocks. the shell is thin and
consists of one valve. a small circular apperture is formed in the
center of the under shell. the animal is soft & boneless.

The white Salmon Trout which we had previously seen only at the great
falls of the Columbia has now made it's appearance in the creeks near
this place. one of them was brought us today by an Indian who had just
taken it with his gig. this is a likness of it; it was 2 feet 8 Inches
long, and weighed 10 lbs. the eye is moderately large, the puple black
and iris of a silvery white with a small addmixture of yellow, and is a
little terbid near it's border with a yellowish brown. the position of
the fins may be seen from the drawing, they are small in proportion to
the fish. the fins are boney but not pointed except the tail and back
fins which are a little so, the prime back fin and ventral ones,
contain each ten rays; those of the gills thirteen, that of the tail
twelve, and the small fin placed near the tail above has no bony rays,
but is a tough flexable substance covered with smooth skin. it is
thicker in proportion to it's width than the salmon. the tongu is thick
and firm beset on each border with small subulate teeth in a single
series. the teeth of the mouth are as before discribed. neither this
fish nor the salmon are caught with the hook, nor do I know on what
they feed.

[Clark, March 16, 1806]
Sunday March 16th 1806
Not any occurrence worthy of relation took place today. Drewyer and
party did not return from the Cath lah mah's this evening as we
expected. we Suppose he was detained by the hard winds today. the
Indians remain with us all day, but would not dispose of their Canoe at
a price which it was in our power to give consistently with the State
of our Stock of Merchandize. One handkerchief would contain all the
Small articles of merchandize which we possess, the ballance of the
Stock Consists of 6 Small blue robes or Blankets one of Scarlet. one
uniform Artillerist's Coat and hat, 5 robes made of our larg flag, and
a fiew our old Clothes trimed with ribon. on this Stock we have wholy
to depend for the purchase of horses and Such portion of our
Subsistence from the Indians as it will be in our power to obtain. a
scant dependence indeed for the tour of the distance of that before us.

The pellucid jelly like Substance, called the Sea nettle I found in
great abundance along the Strand where it has been thrown up by the
waves and tide, and adheres to the Sand.

There are two Species of the Fuci, or (Seawead) Seawreck which we also
found thrown up by the waves. the 1st Specie at one extremity consists
of a large sesicle or hollow vessale which would contain from one to 2
gallons, of a conic form, the base of which forms the extreem End and
is convex and Globelar bearing on its center Some Short broad and
irregular fibers. the Substance is about the consistancy of the rind of
a citron Mellon and 3/4 of an inch thick, yellow celindrick, and
regularly tapering the tube extends to 20 or 30 feet and is then
termonated with a number of branches which are flat 1/2 inch in width,
rough particularly on the edges, where they are furnished with a number
of little oval vesicles or bags of the Size of a Pigions egg. this
plant Seams to be calculated to float at each extremity, while the
little end of the tube from whence the branches proceed, lies deepest
in the water.

The white Salmon Trout which we had previously seen only at the Great
Falls of the Columbia, or a little below the Great Falls, has now made
its appearance in the creeks near this place. one of them was brought
us to day by an indian who had just taken it with his gig. This is a
likeness of it; it was 2 feet 8 inches long, and weighed ten pounds.
the eye is moderately large, the puple black with a Small admixture of
yellow and the iris of a Silvery white with a Small admixture of yellow
and a little tirbed near its border with a yellowish brown. the
position of the fins may be seen from the drawing, they are small in
perpotion to the fish. the fins are honey but not pointed except the
tail and back fins which are a little So, the prime back fin and
venteral ones, contain each ten rays; those of the gills twelve, and
the Small Finn placed near the tail above has no long rays, but is a
tough flexable Substance covered with Smooth Skin. it is thicker in
perpotion to it's width than the Salmons. the tongue is thick and firm
beset on each border with small subulate teeth in a Single Series. the
Teeth of the mouth are as before discribed. neither this fish nor the
Salmon are cought with the hook, nor do I know on what they feed.-now
begin to run &c. &c.

[Lewis, March 17, 1806]
Monday March 17th 1806.
Catel and his family left us this morning. Old Delashelwilt and his
women still remain they have formed a camp near the fort and seem to be
determined to lay close sege to us but I beleive notwithstanding every
effort of their wining graces, the men have preserved their constancy
to the vow of celibacy which they made on this occasion to Capt C. and
myself. we have had our perogues prepared for our departer, and shal
set out as soon as the weather will permit. the weather is so
precarious that we fear by waiting untill the first of April that we
might be detained several days longer before we could get from this to
the Cathlahmahs as it must be calm or we cannot accomplish that part of
our rout. Drewyer returned late this evening from the Cathlahmahs with
our canoe which Sergt. Pryor had left some days since, and also a canoe
which he had purchased from those people. for this canoe he gave my
uniform laced coat and nearly half a carrot of tobacco. it seems that
nothing excep this coat would induce them to dispose of a canoe which
in their mode of traffic is an article of the greatest value except a
wife, with whom it is equal, and is generally given in exchange to the
father for his daughter. I think the U States are indebted to me
another Uniform coat, for that of which I have disposed on this
occasion was but little woarn.- we yet want another canoe, and as the
Clatsops will not sell us one at a price which we can afford to give we
will take one from them in lue of the six Elk which they stole from us
in the winter.-

The pellucid jellylike substance, called the sea-nettle is found in
great abundance along the strad where it has been thrown up by the
waves and tide.

There are two speceis of the Fuci or seawreckwhich we also find thrown
up by the waves. the 1st speceis at one extremity consists of a large
vesicle or hollow vessell which would contain from one to two gallons,
of a conic form, the base of which forms the extreem end and is convex
and globelar bearing on it's center some short broad and irregular
fibers. the substance is about the consistence of the rind of a citron
mellon and 3/4 of an inch thick. the rihind is smooth. from the small
extremity of the cone a long, hollow, celindrick, and regularly
tapering tube extends to 20 or thirty feet and is then terminated with
a number of branches which are flat 1/2 an inch in width rough
particular on the edges where they are furnished with a number of
little ovate vesicles or bags of the size of a pigeon's egg. this plant
seems to be calculated to float at each extremity while the little end
of the tube from whence the branches proceed, lies deepest in the water.

The other speceis I have never seen but Capt. Clark who saw it on the
coast towards the Killamucks informed me that it resembled a large
pumpkin, it is solid and it's specific gravity reather greater than the
water, tho it is sometimes thrown out by the waves. it is of a yellowis
brown colour. the rhind smooth and consistence harder than that of a
pumpkin tho easily cut with a knife. there are some dark brown fibers
reather harder than any other part which pass longitudinally through
the pulp or fleshey substance wich forms the interior of this marine
production.The following is a list of the names of the commanders of
vessels who visit the entrance of the Columbia river in the spring and
autumn fror the purpose of trading with the natives or hunting Elk.
these names are spelt as the Indians pronounce them.

Mr. Haley, their favorite trader visits them in a vessel with three
masts, and continues some time

Youens,
visits in a
3
masted vessel-
Trader
Tallamon
do.
3
do.
no trader
Callallamet
do.
3
do.
Trader. has a wooden leg.
Swipton
do.
3
do.
Trader.
Moore
do.
4
do.
do.
Mackey
do.
3
do.
do.
Washington
do.
3
do.
do.
Mesship
do.
3
do.
do.
Davidson
do.
2

no trader hunts Elk
Jackson
do.
3
masted vessel
Trader
Bolch
do.
3
do.
do.
Skelley
do.
3
do.
do. tho he has been gone some years. he has one eye.

[Clark, March 17, 1806]
Monday March 17th 1806
Catel and his family left us this morning. Old Delashelwill and his
women still remain, they have formed a Camp near the fort and Seam
determined to lay Close Sege to us, but I believe notwithstanding every
effort of their wining graces, the men have preserved their constancy
to the vow of celibacy which they made on this Occasion to Capt L. and
my self. we have had our Canoes prepared for our departure, and Shall
Set out as Soon as the weather will permit. the weather is So
precarious that we fear by waiting untill the first of April that we
might be detained Several days longer before we could get from this to
the Cath-lah-mahs, as it must be Calm or we cannot accomplish that part
of the rout in our Canoes. Drewyer returned late this evening from the
Cath-lah-mahs with our Indian Canoe which Sergt. Pryor had left Some
days since, and also a Canoe, which he had purchased from those people.
for this canoe he gave Captn. Lewis's uniform laced coat and nearly
half a Carrot of to-bacco. it Seams that nothing except this Coat would
induce them to dispose of a Canoe which in their mode of traffic is an
article of the greatest value except a wife, with whome it is nearly
equal, and is generally given in exchange to the father for his
Daughter. I think that the United States are injustice indebted to
Captn Lewis another uniform Coat for that of which he has disposed of
on this ocasion, it was but little worn.

We yet want another Canoe as the Clatsops will not Sell us one, a
proposition has been made by one of our interpt and Several of the
party to take one in lieu of 6 Elk which they Stole from us this winter
&c.

[Lewis, March 18, 1806]
Tuesday March 18th 1806.
Drewyer was taken last night with a violent pain in his side. Capt.
Clark blead him. several of the men are complaining of being unwell. it
is truly unfortunate that they should be sick at the moment of our
departure. we directed Sergt. Pryor to prepare the two Canoes which
Drewyer brought last evening for his mess. they wanted some knees to
strengthen them and several cracks corked and payed. he completed them
except the latter operation which the frequent showers in the course of
the day prevented as the canoes could not be made sufficiently dry even
with the assistance of fire. Comowooll and two Cathlahmahs visited us
today; we suffered them to remain all night. this morning we gave
Delashelwilt a certificate of his good deportment &c. and also a list
of our names, after which we dispatched him to his village with his
female band. These lists of our names we have given to several of the
natives and also paisted up a copy in our room. the object of these
lists we stated in the preamble of the same as follows (viz) "The
object of this list is, that through the medium of some civilized
person who may see the same, it may be made known to the informed
world, that the party consisting of the persons whose names are
hereunto annexed, and who were sent out by the government of the U
States in May 1804 to explore the interior of the Continent of North
America, did penetrate the same by way of the Missouri and Columbia
Rivers, to the discharge of the latter into the Pacific Ocean, where
they arrived on the 14th November 1805, and from whence they departed
the ____ day of March 1806 on their return to the United States by the
same rout they had come out."- on the back of some of these lists we
added a sketch of the connection of the upper branches of the Missouri
with those of the Columbia, particularly of it's main S. E. branch, on
which we also delienated the track we had come and that we meant to
pursue on our return where the same happened to vary. There seemed so
many chances against our government ever obtaining a regular report,
though the medium of the savages and the traders of this coast that we
declined making any. our party are also too small to think of leaving
any of them to return to the U States by sea, particularly as we shall
be necessarily divided into three or four parties on our return in
order to accomplish the objects we have in view; and at any rate we
shall reach the United States in all human probability much earlier
than a man could who must in the event of his being left here depend
for his passage to the United States on the traders of the coast who
may not return immediately to the U States or if they should, might
probably spend the next summer in trading with the natives before they
would set out on their return. this evening Drewyer went inquest of his
traps, and took an Otter. Joseph Fields killed an Elk.- The Indians
repeated to us the names of eighteen distinct tribes residing on the S.
E. coast who spoke the Killamucks language, and beyound those six
others who spoke a different language which they did not comprehend.

[Clark, March 18, 1806]
Tuesday March 17th 1806
Drewyer was taken last night with a violent pain in his Side. I bled
him. Several of the men are complaining of being unwell. it is truly
unfortunate that they Should be Sick at the moment of our departure.
Derected Sergt. Pryor to prepare the two Indian Canoes which we had
purchased for his mess. they wanted Some knees to Strengthen them, and
Several cracks corked and payed. he compleated them except paying. the
frequent Showers of rain prevented the Canoes drying Sufficient to pay
them even with the assistance of fire.

Commorwool and two Cathlahmahs visited us to day; we Suffered them to
remain all night. this morning we gave Delashelwilt a certificate of
his good deportment &c. and also a list of our names, after which we
dispatched him to his village with his female band. Those list's of our
Names we have given to Several of the nativs, and also pasted up a Copy
in our room. the Object of these lists we Stated in the preamble of the
Same as follows Viz: "The Object of this list is, that through the
medium of Some civilized person who may See the Same, it may be made
known to the informed world, that the party consisting of the persons
whoes names are hereunto annexed, and who were Sent out by the
Government of the United States in May 1804, to explore the interior of
the Continent of North America, did penetrate the Same by way of the
Missouri and Columbia rivers, to the discharge of the latter into the
Pacific Ocian, where they arrived on the 14th of November 1805, and
from whence they departed the ____ day of March 1806 on their return to
the United States by the Same rout they had come out."

On the back of lists we added a Sketch of the continent of the upper
branches of the Missouri with those of the Columbia, particularly of
its upper N. E. branch or Lewis's River, on which we also delienated
the track we had Came and that we ment to pursue on our return, when
the Same happened to vary. There Seemes So many chances against our
governments ever obtaining a regular report, through the medium of the
Savages, and the traders of this Coast that we decline makeing any. Our
party are too small to think of leaveing any of them to return to the
Unt. States by Sea, particularly as we Shall be necessarily devided
into two or three parties on our return in order to accomplish the
Object we have in View; and at any rate we Shall reach the U, States in
all humain probabillity much earlier than a man Could who must in the
event of his being left here depend for his passage to the U, State on
the traders of the Coast, who may not return imediately to the U,
States. or if they should, might probably Spend the next Summer in
tradeing with the nativs before they would Set out on their return.
This evening Drewyer went in quest of his traps, and took an otter.
Joseph Field killd and Elk.- The Indians repeated to us Eighteen
distinct Nations resideing on the S S. E Coast who Speak the Kil a mox
language or understand it. and beyend those Six other Nations which
Speak a different language which they did not comprehend.

The 2d Species of Seawreck which I saw on the coast to the S. S. E.
near the Kil a mox nation. it resembles a large pumpkin, it is Solid
and it's Specific Gravity reather greater than the water, tho it is
Sometimes thrown out by the waves. it is of a pale yellowish brown
colour. the rhind Smooth and consistency harder than that of the
pumpkin, tho easily cut with a knife. there are Some fibers of a
lighter colour and much harder than any other part which pass
Longitudinally through the pulp or fleshey Substance which forms the
interior of this marine production--

[Lewis, March 19, 1806]
Wednesday March 19th 1806.
It continued to rain and hail today in such manner that nothing further
could be done to the canoes. a pratry were sent out early after the Elk
which was killed yesterday with which they returned in the course of a
few hours. we gave Comowooll alias Connia, a cirtificate of his good
conduct and the friendly intercourse which he has maintained with us
during our residence at this place; we also gave him a list of our
names.do not. The Killamucks, Clatsops, Chinnooks, Cathlahmahs and
Wac-ki-a-cums resemble each other as well in their persons and dress as
in their habits and manners.- their complexion is not remarkable, being
the usual copper brown of most of the tribes of North America. they are
low in statue reather diminutive, and illy shapen; possessing thick
broad flat feet, thick ankles, crooked legs wide mouths thick lips,
nose moderately large, fleshey, wide at the extremity with large
nostrils, black eyes and black coarse hair. their eyes are sometimes of
a dark yellowish brown the puple black. I have observed some high
acqualine noses among them but they are extreemty rare. the nose is
generally low between the eyes.- the most remarkable trait in their
physiognomy is the peculiar flatness and width of forehead which they
artificially obtain by compressing the head between two boards while in
a state of infancy and from which it never afterwards perfectly
recovers. this is a custom among all the nations we have met with West
of the Rocky mountains. I have observed the heads of many infants,
after this singular bandage had been dismissed, or about the age of 10
or eleven months, that were not more than two inches thick about the
upper edge of the forehead and reather thiner still higher. from the
top of the head to the extremity of the nose is one streight line. this
is done in order to give a greater width to the forehead, which they
much admire. this process seems to be continued longer with their
female than their mail children, and neither appear to suffer any pain
from the operation. it is from this peculiar form of the head that the
nations East of the Rocky mountains, call all the nations on this side,
except the Aliahtans or snake Indians, by the generic name of Flat
heads. I think myself that the prevalence of this custom is a strong
proof that those nations having originally proceeded from the same
stock. The nations of this neighbourhood or those recapitulated above,
wear their hair loosly flowing on the back and sholders; both men and
women divide it on the center of the crown in front and throw it back
behind the ear on each side. they are fond of combs and use them when
they can obtain them; and even without the aid of the comb keep their
hair in better order than many nations who are in other rispects much
more civilized than themselves.- the large or apparently swolen legs
particularly observable in the women are obtained in a great measure by
tying a cord tight around the ankle. their method of squating or
resting themselves on their hams which they seem from habit to prefer
to siting, no doubt contributes much to this deformity of the legs by
preventing free circulation of the blood. the dress of the man consists
of a smal robe, which reaches about as low as the middle of the thye
and is attatched with a string across the breast and is at pleasure
turned from side to side as they may have occasion to disencumber the
right or left arm from the robe entirely, or when they have occasion
for both hands, the fixture of the robe is in front with it's corners
loosly hanging over their arms. they sometimes wear a hat which has
already been discribed. this robe is made most commonly of the skins of
a small animal which I have supposed was the brown mungo, tho they have
also a number, of the skins of the tiger cat, some of those of the Elk
which are used principally on their war excursions, others of the skins
of the deer panther and bear and a blanket wove with the fingers of the
wool of the native sheep. a mat is sometimes temperarily thrown over
the sholders to protect them from rain. they have no other article of
cloathing whatever neither winter nor summer. and every part except the
sholders and back is exposed to view. they are very fond of the dress
of the whites, which they wear in a similar manner when they can obtain
them, except the shoe which I have never seen woarn by any of them.
they call us pah-shish'e-ooks, or cloth men. The dress of the women
consists of a robe, tissue, and sometimes when the weather is
uncommonly cold, a vest. their robe is much smaller than that of the
men, never reaching lower than the waist nor extending in front
sufficiently far to cover the body. it is like that of the men confined
across the breast with a string and hangs loosly over the sholders and
back. the most esteemed and valuable of these robes are made of strips
of the skins of the Sea Otter net together with the bark of the white
cedar or silk-grass. these strips are first twisted and laid parallel
with each other a little distance assunder, and then net or wove
together in such manner that the fur appears equally on both sides, and
unites between the strands. it make a warm and soft covering. other
robes are formed in a similar manner of the skin of the Rackoon, beaver
&c. at other times the skin is dressed in the hair and woarn without
any further preperation. in this way one beaver skin, or two of those
of the Raccoon or tiger catt forms the pattern of the robe. the vest is
always formed in the manner first discribed of their robes and covers
the body from the armpits to the waist, and is confined behind, and
destitute of straps over the sholder to keep it up. when this vest is
woarn the breast of the woman is concealed, but without it which is
almost always the case, they are exposed, and from the habit of
remaining loose and unsuspended grow to great length particularly in
aged women in many of whom I have seen the hubby reach as low as the
waist. The garment which occupys the waist, and from thence as low as
nearly to the knee before and the ham, behind, cannot properly be
denominated a petticoat, in the common acceptation of that term; it is
a tissue of white cedar bark, bruised or broken into small shreds,
which are interwoven in the middle by means of several cords of the
same materials, which serve as well for a girdle as to hold in place
the shreds of bark which form the tissue, and which shreds confined in
the middle hang with their ends pendulous from the waist, the whole
being of sufficient thickness when the female stands erect to conceal
those parts usually covered from formiliar view, but when she stoops or
places herself in many other attitudes, this battery of Venus is not
altogether impervious to the inquisitive and penetrating eye of the
amorite. This tissue is sometimes formed of little twisted cords of the
silk grass knoted at their ends and interwoven as discribed of the
bark. this kind is more esteemed and last much longer than those of
bark. they also form them of flags and rushes which are woarn in a
similar manner. the women as well as the men sometimes cover themselves
from the rain by a mat woarn over the sholders. they also cover their
heads from the rain sometimes with a common water cup or basket made of
the cedar bark and beargrass. these people seldom mark their skins by
puncturing and introducing a colouring matter. such of them as do mark
themselves in this manner prefer their legs and arms on which they
imprint parallel lines of dots either longitudinally or circularly. the
women more frequently than the men mark themselves in this manner.

The favorite ornament of both sexes are the common coarse blue and
white beads which the men wear tightly wound arond their wrists and
ankles many times untill they obtain the width of three or more inches.
they also wear them in large rolls loosly arond the neck, or pendulous
from the cartelage of the nose or rims of the ears which are purforated
for the purpose. the women wear them in a similar manner except in the
nose which they never purforate. they are also fond of a species of
wampum which is furnished them by a trader whom they call Swipton. it
seems to be the native form of the shell without any preperation. this
shell is of a conic form somewhat curved, about the size of a raven's
quill at the base, and tapering to a point which is sufficiently large
to permit to hollow through which a small thred passes; it is from one
to 11/2 Inches in length, white, smooth, hard and thin. these are woarn
in the same manner in which the beads are; and furnish the men with
their favorite ornament for the nose. one of these shells is passed
horizontally through the cartilage of the nose and serves frequently as
a kind of ring to prevent the string which suspends other ornaments at
the same part from chafing and freting the flesh. the men sometimes
wear collars of bears claws, and the women and children the tusks of
the Elk variously arranged on their necks arms &c. both males and
females wear braslets on their wrists of copper brass or Iron in
various forms. I think the most disgusting sight I have ever beheld is
these dirty naked wenches. The men of these nations partake of much
more of the domestic drudgery than I had at first supposed. they
collect and prepare all the fuel, make the fires, assist in cleansing
and preparing the fish, and always cook for the strangers who visit
them. they also build their houses, construct their canoes, and make
all their wooden utensils. the peculiar provence of the woman seems to
be to collect roots and manufacture various articles which are prepared
of rushes, flags, cedar bark, bear grass or waytape. the management of
the canoe for various purposes seems to be a duty common to both sexes,
as also many other occupations which with most Indian nations devolves
exclusively on the woman. their feasts which they are very fond are
always prepared and served by the men.

Comowool and the two Cathlahmahs left us this evening. it continued to
rain so constantly today that Sergt. Pryor could not pitch his canoes.

[Clark, March 19, 1806]
Wednesday March 19th 1806 Inds. Descd.
It continued to rain and hail in Such a manner that nothing Could be
done to the Canoes. a party were Sent out early after the Elk which was
killed last evening, with which they returned in the Course of a fiew
hours, we gave Commorwool alias Cania, a Certificate of his good
conduct and the friendly intercourse which he has maintained with us
dureing our residence at this place; we also gave him a list of our
names &c.- The Kilamox, Clatsops, Chinnooks, Cath lah mahs Wau ki a cum
and Chiltz I-resemble each other as well in their persons and Dress as
in their habits and manners.- their complexion is not remarkable, being
the usial Copper brown of the tribes of North America. they are low in
Statue reather diminutive, and illy Shaped, possessing thick broad flat
feet, thick ankles, crooked legs, wide mouths, thick lips, noses Stuk
out and reather wide at the base, with black eyes and black coarse hair.

I have observed Some high acqualine noses among them but they are
extreemly reare. the most remarkable trate in their physiognamy is the
peculiar flatness and width of the forehead which they Artificially
obtain by compressing the head between two boards while in a State of
infancy, and from which it never afterwards perfectly recovers. This is
a custom among all the nations, we have met with West of the Rocky
Mountains. I have observed the head of maney infants, after this
Singular Bandage had been dismissed, or about the age of 11 or 12
months, that were not more than two inches thick about the upper part
of the forehead and reather thiner Still higher. from the top of the
head to the extremity of the nose is one Streight line. this is done in
order to give a greater width to the forehead, which they much admire.
This process seams to be continued longer with their female than their
male children, and neither appears to Suffer any pain from the
opperation. it is from this peculiar form of the head that the nations
East of the Rocky Mountains, call all the nations on this Side, except
Aliahtans, So-so-ne, or Snake Indians by the General name of Flat
Heads. I think my Self that the provalence of this custom is a Strong
proof of those nations haveing originally proceeded from the Same
Stock. The nations of this neighbourhood or those recpitulated above,
ware their hair loosly flowing on their back and Sholders; both men and
women divide it on the Center of the Crown in front and throw it back
behind the ear on each Side. they are fond of Combs and use them when
they Can obtain them; and even without the aid of Combs keep their in
better order, than inaney nations who are in other respects much more
Civilized than themselves.

The large or apparently Sweled legs particularly observable in the
women, are obtained in a great measure by tying a cord tight around the
leg above the ancle bone. their method of Squating or resting
themselves on their hams which they Seam from habit to prefer to
Setting, no doubt contributes much to this deformity of the legs by
preventing free circulation of the blood. This is also the Custom of
the nations above.

The dress of the men like those above on the Columbia river Consists of
a Small robe, which reaches about as low as the middle of the thye and
is attatched with a String across the breast and is at pleasure turned
from Side to Side as they may have an occasion to disincumber the right
or left arm from the robe entirely, or when they have occasion for both
hands, the fixture of the robe is in front with it's corner loosly
hanging over their Arms. they Sometimes wear a hat which have already
been discribed (See 29th Jany.) Their Robes are made most commonly of
the Skins of a Small animal which I have Supposed was the brown mungo,
tho they have also a number of the Skins of the tiger Cat, Some of
those of the Elk which are used principally on their war excursions,
others of the Skins of Deer, panthor, Bear, and the Speckle Loon, and
blankets wove with the fingers of the wool of the native Sheep. and
Some of those on the Sea Coast have robes of Beaver and the Sea Otter.
a mat is Sometimes temperaly thrown over the Sholders to protect them
from rain. they have no other article of Cloathing whatever neither
winter nor Summer, and every part except the Sholders and back is
exposed to view. they are very fond of the dress of the whites, which
they ware in a Similar manner when they Can obtain them, except the
Shoe or mockerson which I have never Seen worn by any of them. They
Call us pah-shish-e-ooks or Cloath men. The dress of the women consists
of a roab, tissue, and Sometimes when the weather is uncommonly Cold, a
vest. their robe is much Smaller than that of the men, never reaching
lower than the waist nor extending in front Sufficiently far to cover
the body. it is like that of the men confined across the breast with a
String and hangs loosely over the Sholders and back. the most esteemed
& valuable of those robes are made of Strips of the Skin of the Sea
Otter net together with the bark of the white Cedar or Silk grass.
these fish are first twisted and laid parallel with each other a little
distance asunder, and then net or wove together in Such a manner that
the fur appears equally on both Sides, and united between the Strands.
it makes a worm and Soft covering. other robes are formed in a Similar
manner of the Skins of the rackoon, beaver &c. at other times the Skins
is dressed in the hair and worn without any further preperation. in
this way one beaver Skin or two of the rackoon or one of the tiger Cat
forms a vest and Covers the body from the Armpits to the waist, and is
confined behind, and destitute of Straps over the Sholder to keep it
up. when this vest is worn the breast of the woman in consealed, but
without it which is almost always the case, they are exposed, and from
the habit of remaining loose and unsuspended grow to great length,
particularly in aged women, on many of whome I have Seen the bubby
reach as low as the waist. The petticoat or tissue which occupies the
waiste has been already described (See 7th Novr. 1805) formd. of the
Bark of white cedar, Silk grass, flags & rushes. The women as well as
the men Sometimes cover themselves from the rain by a mat worn over the
Sholders. They also Cover their heads from the rain Sometimes with a
common water cup or basket made of Cedar bark and bear grass.

Those people Sometimes mark themselves by punctureing and introducing a
Colouring matter. Such of them as do mark themselves in this manner
prefur the legs and arms on which they imprint parallel lines of dots
either longitudinally or circularly. the woman more frequently than the
men mark themselves in this manner. The favorite orniments of both
Sexes are the Common coarse blue and white beads as before discribed of
the Chinnooks. Those beads the men wear tightly wound around their
wrists and Ankles maney times untill they obtain the width of three or
four inches. they also wear them in large rolls loosly around the neck,
or pendulous from the cartelage of the nose or rims of the ears which
are purfarated in different places round the extremities for the
purpose. the woman wear them in a Similar manner except in the nose
which they never purfarate. they are also fond of a Species of wompum,
which is furnished by a trader whome they call Swipton. it seams to be
the nativ form of the Shell without any preperation. this Shell is of a
conic form Somewhat curved about the Size of a ravens quill at the
base, and tapering to a point which is Sufficiently large to permit a
hollow through which a Small thread passes; it is from 1 to 11/2 inches
in length, white, Smooth, hard and thin these are worn in the Same
manner in which the beeds are; and furnish the men with their favorite
orniment for the nose. one of these Shells is passed horizontally
through cartilage of the nose and Serves frequently as a kind of ring
which prevents the string which Suspends other orniments at the Same
part from Chafing and freting the flesh. The men Sometimes wear Collars
of Bears Claws, and the women and children the tusks of the Elk
variously arranged on their necks arms &c. both male and female wear
bracelets on their wrists of Copper, Brass or Iron in various forms.
The women Sometimes wash their faces & hands but Seldom. I think the
most disgusting Sight I have ever beheld is those dirty naked wenches.

The men of those nations partake of much more of the domestic drudgery
than I had at first Supposed. they Collect and prepare all the fuel,
make the fires, cook for the Strangers who visit them, and assist in
Cleaning and prepareing the fish. they also build their houses,
construct their Canoes, and make all their wooden utensils. the
peculiar province of the woman Seams to be to collect roots and
manufacture various articles which are prepared of rushes, flags, Cedar
bark, bear grass or way tape, also dress and manufacture the Hats &
robes for Common use. the management of the Canoe for various purposes
Seams to be a duty common to both Sexes, as are many other occupations
which with most Indian nations devolve exclusively on the womin. their
feasts of which they are very fond are always prepared and Served by
the men.-.-.

it Continued to rain So constantly dureing the day that Sergt. Pryor
Could not Pay his Canoes. The Clatsop Chief Commowool and the two
Cath-lah-mahs left us this evening and returned to their village.

[Lewis, March 20, 1806]
Thursday March 20th 1806.
It continued to rain and blow so violently today that nothing could be
done towards forwarding our departure. we intended to have Dispatched
Drewyer and the two Fieldses to hunt near the bay on this side of the
Cathlahmahs untill we jounded them from hence, but the rain rendered
our departure so uncertain that we declined this measure for the
present. nothing remarkable happened during the day. we have yet
several days provision on hand, which we hope will be sufficient to
subsist us during the time we are compelled by the weather to remain at
this place.

Altho we have not fared sumptuously this winter and spring at Fort
Clatsop, we have lived quite as comfortably as we had any reason to
expect we should; and have accomplished every object which induced our
remaining at this place except that of meeting with the traders who
visit the entrance of this river. our salt will be very sufficient to
last us to the Missouri where we have a stock in store.- it would have
been very fortunate for us had some of those traders arrived previous
to our departure from hence, as we should then have had it our power to
obtain an addition to our stock of merchandize which would have made
our homeward bound journey much more comfortable. many of our men are
still complaining of being unwell; Willard and Bratton remain weak,
principally I beleive for the want of proper food. I expect when we get
under way we shall be much more healthy. it has always had that effect
on us heretofore. The guns of Drewyer and Sergt. Pryor were both out of
order. the first was repared with a new lock, the old one having become
unfit for uce; the second had the cock screw broken which was replaced
by a duplicate which had been prepared for the lock at Harpers ferry
where she was manufactured. but for the precaution taken in bringing on
those extra locks, and parts of locks, in addition to the ingenuity of
John Shields, most of our guns would at this moment been untirely unfit
for use; but fortunately for us I have it in my power here to record
that they are all in good order.

[Clark, March 20, 1806]
Thursday March 20th 1806
It continued to rain and blow so violently to day that nothing could be
done towards fowarding our departure. we intended to have dispatched
Drewyer & the 2 Field'es to hunt above Point William untill we joined
them from hense but the rain renders our departure So uncertain that we
decline this measure for the present. nothing remarkable happened
dureing the day. we have yet Several days provisions on hand, which we
hope will be Sufficient to Serve us dureing the time we are compell'd
by the weather to remain at this place.-.

Altho we have not fared Sumptuously this winter & Spring at Fort
Clatsop, we have lived quit as comfortably as we had any reason to
expect we Should; and have accomplished every object which induced our
remaining at this place except that of meeting with the traders who
visit the enterance of this river. our Salt will be very sufficient to
last us to the Missouri where we have a Stock in Store.- it would have
been very fortunate for us had Some of those traders arrived previous
to our departure from hence; as we Should then have had it in our power
to obtain an addition to our Stock of merchandize, which would have
made our homeward bound journey much more comfortable.

Maney of our men are Still Complaining of being unwell; Bratten and
Willard remain weak principally I believe for the want of proper food.
I expect when we get under way that we Shall be much more healthy. it
has always had that effect on us heretofore.

The Guns of Sergt. Pryor & Drewyer were both out of order. the first
had a Cock screw broken which was replaced by a duplicate which had
been prepared for the Locks at Harpers Ferry; the Second repared with a
new Lock, the old one becoming unfit for use. but for the precaution
taken in bringing on those extra locks, and parts of locks, in addition
to the ingenuity of John Shields, most of our guns would at this moment
been entirely unfit for use; but fortunate for us I have it in my power
here to record that they are in good order, and Complete in every
respect-

[Lewis, March 21, 1806]
Friday March 21st 1806.
As we could not set out we thought it best to send out some hunters and
accordingly dispatched Sheilds and Collins on this side the Netul for
that purpose with orders to return in the evening or sooner if they
were successfull. The hunters returned late in the evening
unsuccessfull. we have not now more than one day's provision on hand.
we directed Drewyer and the Feildses to set out tomorrow morning early,
and indevour to provide us some provision on the bay beyond point
William. we were visited to day by some Clatsop indians who left us in
the evening. our sick men Willard and bratton do not seem to recover;
the former was taken with a violent pain in his leg and thye last
night. Bratton is now so much reduced that I am somewhat uneasy with
rispect to his recovery; the pain of which he complains most seems to
be seated in the small of his back and remains obstinate. I beleive
that it is the rheumatism with which they are both afflicted.

[Clark, March 21, 1806]
Friday March 21st 1806
as we could not Set out we thought it best to Send out Some hunters and
accordingly dispatched Shields and Collins on this Side of the Netul
for that purpose with orders to return in the evening or Sooner if they
were Successfull. they returned late in the evening unsuccessfull. we
have not now more than two days provisions on hand. we derected Drewyer
and the two Fieldses to Set out tomorrow morning early, and indevour to
provide us Some provision on the Bay beyond point William. we were
visited to day by Some Clatsops who left us in the evening. our sick
men willard and Bratten do not Seem to recover; the former was taken
with a violent pain in his leg and thye last night. Bratten is now so
much reduced that I am Somewhat uneasy with respect to his recovery;
the pain of which he complains most Seems to be Settled in the Small of
his back and remains obstenate. I believe that it is the Rheumatism
with which they are both affected.-.

[Lewis, March 22, 1806]
Saturday March 22cd 1806.
Drewyer and the Feildses departed this morning agreably to the order of
the last evening. we sent out seven hunters this morning in different
directions on this side the Netul. about 10 A.M. we were visited by 4
Clatsops and a killamucks; they brought some dried Anchoveis and a dog
for sale which we purchased. the air is perefectly temperate, but it
continues to rain in such a manner that there be is no possibility of
geting our canoes completed.- at 12 OCk. we were visited by Comowooll
and 3 of the Clatsops. to this Cheif we left our houses and funiture.
he has been much more kind an hospitable to us than any other indian in
this neighbourhood. the Indians departed in the evening. the hunters
all returned except Colter, unsuccessfull. we determined to set out
tomorrow at all events, and to stop the canoes temperarily with Mud and
halt the first fair day and pay them. the leafing of the hucklebury
riminds us of spring.

[Clark, March 22, 1806]
Saturday March 22nd 1806
Drewyer and the two Fieldses departed this morning agreably to the
order of last evening. we Sent out Six hunters this morning in
different directions on both Sides of the Netul. about 10 A.M. we were
visited by Que-ne-o alias Commorwool 8 Clatsops and a Kil-a-mox; they
brought Some dried Anchovies, a common Otter Skin and a Dog for Sale
all of which we purchased. the Dog we purchased for our Sick men, the
fish for to add to our Small Stock of provision's, and the Skin to
cover my papers. those Indians left us in the evening. the air is
perfectly temperate, but it continues to rain in Such a manner that
there is no possibillity of getting our canoes completed in order to
Set out on our homeward journey. The Clatsops inform us that Several of
their nation has the Sore throat, one of which has laterly died with
this disorder. the Hunters Sent out to day all returned except Colter
unsessfull.

[Lewis, March 23, 1806]
Sunday March 23rd 1806.
Half after 9 A.M. Colter arrived, having killed one Elk but so distant
that we could not send for the meat and get arround Point William
today, we therefore prefered seting out and depending on Drewyer and
the hunters we have sent forward for meat. the wind is pretty high but
it seems to be the common opinion that we can pass point William. we
accordingly distributed the baggage and directed the canoes to be
launched and loaded for our departure.- at 1 P.M. we bid a final adieu
to Fort Clatsop. we had not proceeded more than a mile before we met
Delashelwilt and a party of 20 Chinnooks men and women. this Cheif
leaning that we were in want of a canoe some days past, had brought us
one for sale, but being already supplyed we did not purchase it. I
obtained one Sea Otter skin from this party. at a 1/4 before three we
had passed Meriwethers bay and commenced coasting the difficult shore;
at 1/2 after five we doubled point William, and at 7 arrived in the
mouth of a small creek where we found our hunters. they had killed 2
Elk, at the distance of a mile & 1/2. it was too late to send after it
this evening. we therefore encamped on the Stard side of the Creek. the
wind was not very hard.

[Clark, March 23, 1806]
Sunday 23rd March 1806
This morning proved So raney and uncertain that we were undeturmined
for Some time whether we had best Set out & risque the river which
appeared to be riseing or not. Jo. Colter returned haveing killed an
Elk about 3 miles towards Point Adams. the rained Seased and it became
fair about Meridean, at which time we loaded our Canoes & at 1 P.M.
left Fort Clatsop on our homeward bound journey. at this place we had
wintered and remained from the 7th of Decr. 1805 to this day and have
lived as well as we had any right to expect, and we can Say that we
were never one day without 3 meals of Some kind a day either pore Elk
meat or roots, not withstanding the repeeted fall of rain which has
fallen almost Constantly Since we passed the long narrows on the ____
of Novr. last indeed we have had only ____ days fair weather since that
time. Soon after we had Set out from Fort Clatsop we were met by De
lash el wilt & 8 men of the Chinnooks, and Delashelwilts wife the old
bond and his Six Girls, they had, a Canoe, a Sea otter Skin, Dried fish
and hats for Sale, we purchased a Sea otter Skin, and proceeded on,
thro Meriwethers Bay, there was a Stiff breese from the S. W. which
raised Considerable Swells around Meriwethers point which was as much
as our Canoes Could ride. above point William we came too at the Camp
of Drewyer & the 2 Field's. they had killed 2 Elk which was about 11/2
miles distant. here we Encampd. for the night having made 16 miles.

[Lewis, March 24, 1806]
Monday March 24th 1806.
This morning we sent out a party of 15, at light, for the meat, and
concluded to take breakfast before we set out. they soon returned. we
breakfasted and set out at 1/2 after 9 A.M. Saw a white woodpecker with
a red head of the small kind common to the United States; this bird has
but lately returned. they do not remain during the winter. the country
thick and heavily timbered. we saw very few waterfowl today, not a
single swan, white brant nor a small goose is to be seen. a few
Cormorant, duckinmallard, butterbox, and common large geese were only
to be found the tide being out this morning we found some difficulty in
passing through the bay below the Cathlahmah village; this side of the
river is very shallow to the distance of 4 miles from the shore tho
there is a channel sufficient for canoes near S. side. at 1 P.M. we
arrived at the Cathlahmah village where we halted and purchased some
wappetoe, a dog for the sick, and a hat for one of the men. on one of
the seal Islands opposite to the village of these people thy have
scaffolded their dead in canoes elivating them above tidewater mark.
these people are very fond of sculpture in wood of which they exhibit a
variety of specemines about their houses. the broad peices supporting
the center of the roof and those through which the doors are cut, seem
to be the peices on which they most display their taist. I saw some of
these which represented human figures setting and supporting the
burthen on their sholders. at half after 3 P.M. we set out and
continued our rout among the seal Islands; not paying much attention we
mistook our rout which an Indian perceiving pursued overtook us and put
us in the wright channel. this Cathlahmah claimed the small canoe which
we had taken from the Clatsops. however he consented very willingly to
take an Elk's skin for it which I directed should be given him and he
immediately returned. we continued our rout along the South side of the
river and encamped at an old village of 9 houses opposite to the lower
Wackkiacum village. the night was cold tho wood was abundant after dark
two Chinnook men came to us in a small canoe. they remained with us all
night. came 15 miles today.

[Clark, March 24, 1806]
Monday 24th of March 1806
Sent out 15 men verry early this morning for the flesh of the two Elk
killed by Drewyer and Fields yesterday. they returned at 8 oClock,
after taking a Slight brackfast we Set out at half past 9 a.m. and
proceeded to the Cath lah mah Village at 1 P.M. and remained untill 1/2
after 3 p.m.at this village we purchased a fiew wappato and a Dog for
our Sick men Willard and Bratten who are yet in a weak State. at this
Village I saw two very large elegant Canoes inlaid with Shills, those
Shills I took to be teeth at first View, and the nativs informed
Several of the men that they the teeth of their enemies which they had
killed in War. in examineing of them Closely haveing taken out Several
pices, we found that were Sea Shells which yet contained a part of the
iner ____ they also deckerate their Smaller wooden vessles with those
Shells which have much the appearance of humane teeth, Capt Cook may
have mistaken those Shills verry well for humane teeth without a Close
examination. The Village of these people is the dirtiest and
Stinkingest place I ever Saw in any Shape whatever, and the inhabitants
partake of the carrestick of the Village. we proceeded on through Some
difficult and narrow Channels between the Seal Islands, and the South
Side to an old village on the South Side opposit to the lower War ki a
com village, and Encamped. to this old villg. a very considerable
deposit of the dead at a Short distance below, in the usial and
Customary way of the nativs of this Coast in Canoes raised from the
ground as before described. Soon after we made our Camp 2 Indians
visited us from the opposit Side, one of them Spoke Several words of
English and repeeted the names of the traders, and maney of the Salors.
made 16 Miles

[Lewis, March 25, 1806]
Tuesday March 25th 1806.
The morning being disagreeably cold we remained and took break-fast. at
7 A.M. we set out and continued our rout along the South Coast of the
river against the wind and a strong current, our progress was of course
but slow. at noon we halted and dined. here some Clatsops came to us in
a canoe loaded with dryed anchovies, which they call Olthen, Wappetoe
and Sturgeon. they informed us that they had been up on a trading
voyage to the Skillutes.- I observe that the green bryer which I have
previously mentioned as being common on this river below tide water
retains it's leaves all winter.- the red willow and seven bark begin to
put fourth their leaves.- after dinner we passed the river to a large
Island 2 and continued our rout allong the side of the same about a
mile when we arrived at a Cathlahmah fishing cam of one lodge; here we
found 3 men 2 women and a couple of boys, who from appearances had
remained here some time for the purpose of taking sturgeon, which they
do by trolling. they had ten or douzen very fine sturgeon which had not
been long taken. we offered to purchase some of their fish but they
asked us such an extravegant price that we declined purchase. one of
the men purchased a sea Otterskin at this lodge, for which he gave a
dressed Elkskin and an handkercheif. near this lodge we met some
Cathlahmahs who had been up the river on a fishing excurtion. they had
a good stock of fish on board, but did not seem disposed to sell them.
we remained at this place about half an hour and then continued our
rout up the Island to it's head and passed to the south side. the wind
in the evening was very hard. it was with some difficulty that we could
find a spot proper for an encampment, the shore being a swamp for
several miles back; at length late in the evening opposite to the place
we had encamped on the 6th of November last; we found the entrance of a
small creek which afforded us a safe harbour from the wind and
encamped. the ground was low and moist tho we obtained a tolerable
encampment. here we found another party of Cathlahmahs about 10 in
number who had established a temperary residence for the purpose of
fishing and taking seal. they had taken a fine parcel of sturgeon and
some seal. they gave us some of the fleese of the seal which I found a
great improvement to the poor Elk. here we found Drewyer and the
Feildses who had been seperated from us since morning; they had passed
on the North side of the large Island which was much nearer. the bottom
lands are covered with cottonwood, the growth with a broad leaf which
resembles ash except the leaf. the underbrush red willow, broad leafed
willow, sevenbark, goosburry, green bryer & the larged leafed thorn;
the latter is now in bloom; the natives inform us that it bears a freut
about an inch in diameter which is good to eat.

[Clark, March 25, 1806]
Tuesday 25th of March 1806
Last night and this morning are cool wend hard a head and tide going
out, after an early brackfast we proceeded on about 4 miles and came
too on the South Side to worm and dry our Selves a little. Soon after
we had landed two Indians Came from a War kia cum village on the
opposit Side with 2 dogs and a fiew Wappato to Sell neither of which we
bought. Som Clatsops passed down in a Canoe loaded with fish and
Wappato. as the wind was hard a head and tide against us we Concluded
to delay untill the return of the tide which we expected at 1 oClock,
at which hour we Set out met two Canoes of Clatsops loaded with dried
anchovies and Sturgion which they had taken and purchased above we
crossed over to an Island on which was a Cath lahmah fishing Camp of
one Lodge; here we found 3 man two woman and a couple of boys who must
have for Some time for the purpose of taking Sturgeon which they do by
trolling. they had 10 or 12 very fine Sturgeon which had not been long
taken; we wished to purchase some of their fish but they asked Such
extravegent prices that we declined purchaseing. one of our Party
purchased a Sea otter Skin at this Lodge for which he gave a dressed
Elk Skin & a Handkerchief. we remained at this place about half an hour
and then Continued our rout. the winds in the evening was verry hard,
it was with Some dificuelty that we Could find a Spot proper for an
encampment, the Shore being a Swamp for Several miles back; at length
late in the evening opposit to the place we had encamped on the 6th of
Novr. last; we found the enterance of a Small Creek which offered us a
Safe harbour from the Winds and Encamped. the Ground was low and moist
tho we obtained a tolerable encampment. here we found another party of
Cathlahmahs about 10 in number, who had established a temporary
residence for the purpose of fishing and takeing Seal. they had taken
about 12 Sturgeon and Some Seal. they gave us Some of the flesh of the
Seal which I found a great improvement to the poor Elk. here we found
Drewyer and the 2 Fields who had been Seperated from us Since Morning;
they had passed on the North Side of the large Island which was much
nearest. the bottom lands are Covered with a Species of Arspine, the
Growth with a broad leaf which resembles ash except the leaf. the under
brush red willow, broad leafed Willow, Seven bark, Goose berry, Green
bryor, and the larged leaf thorn; the latter is Now in blume, the
nativs inform us that it bears a fruit about an Inch in diamieter which
is good to eate. the red willow and 7 bark begin to put foth their
leaves. The green bryor which I have before mentioned retains leaves
all winter. made 15 Miles

[Lewis, March 26, 1806]
Wednesday March 26th 1806.
The wind blew so hard this morning that we delayed untill 8 A.M. we
gave a medal of small size to a man by the name of Wal-lal'-le, a
principal man among the Cathlahmahs, he appeared very thankfull for the
honour conferred on him and presented us a large sturgeon. we continued
our rout up the river to an old village on the Stard. side where we
halted for dinner. we met on the way the principal Cheif of the
Cathlahmahs, Sah-hah-woh-cap, who had been up the river on a trading
voyage. he gave us some Wappetoe and fish; we also purchased some of
the latter. soon after we halted for dinner the two Wackiacums who have
been pursuing us since yesterday morning with two dogs for sale,
arrived. they wish tobacco in exchange for their dogs which we are not
disposed to give as our stock is now reduced to a very few carrots. our
men who have been accustomed to the use of this article Tobaco and to
whom we are now obliged to deny the uce of this article appear to
suffer much for the want of it. they substitute the bark of the wild
crab which they chew; it is very bitter, and they assure me they find
it a good substitute for tobacco. the smokers substitute the inner bark
of the red willow and the sacacommis. here our hunters joined us having
killed three Eagles and a large goose. I had now an oportunity of
comparing the bald with the grey Eagle; I found that the greay Eagle
was about 1/4 larger, it's legs and feet were dark while those of the
bald Eagle wer of a fine orrange yellow; the iris of the eye is also of
a dark yellowish brown while that of the other is of a bright silvery
colour with a slight admixture of yellow. after dinner we proceeded on
and passed an Elegant and extensive bottom on the South side and an
island near it's upper point which we call Fanny's Island and bottom.
the greater part of the bottom is a high dry prarie. near the river
towards the upper point we saw a fine grove of whiteoak trees; we saw
some deer and Elk at a distance in the prarie, but did not delay for
the purpose of hunting them. we continued our rout after dinner untill
late in the evening and encamped on the next island above fanny's
Island. we found it difficult to obtain as much wood as answered our
purposes. the hunters who had proceeded on before us after dinner did
not join us this evening. some Indians visited us after dark, but did
not remain long. agreeably to our estimate as we decended the river, we
came 16 m. 23rd, 16 m. the 24th, 15 the 25th, and 18 m. the 26th, tho I
now think that our estimate in decending the river was too short.

[Clark, March 26, 1806]
Wednesday March 26th 1806
The wind blew So hard untill 8 A M. that we detained, we gave a Medal
to a Man by the name of Wal-lal-le a principal man among the Cath lah
mahs, he appeared very thankfull for the honor Confured on him and
presented us with a large Sturgion. we Continued our rout up the river
to an old Village on the South Side where we halted for dinner. we met
on the way the principal Chief of the Cathlahmahs, Sah-hah-wah-cop, who
had been up the river on a trading voyage, he gave us some Wappato and
fish, we also purchased Some Wappato Soon after halted for dinner at an
Old Village on the South point opposit the lower pt. of Fannys Island.
The two Warkiacums who had been pursueing us Since yester day morning
with two dogs for Sale, arrived. they wish Tobacco in exchange for
their dogs which we are not disposed to give, as our Stock is now
reduced to 3 carrots. our men who have been acustomed to the use of
this article, and to Whome we are now obliged to deny the use of this
article appear to Suffer Much for the want of it. they Substitute the
bark of the wild Crab which they Chew; it is very bitter and they
assure me they find it a good Substitute for tobacco. the Smokers
Substitute the iner bark of the redwillow and the saccommis.

here our hunters joined us haveing killed 3 Eagles and a large Wild
goose. I had now an oppertunity of Comparing the bald with the grey
Eagle; I found the grey Eagle about 1/4 largest, its legs and feet were
dark which those of the bald eagle were of a fine orrange yellow; the
iris of the eye is also of a dark yellowish brown, while that of the
Grey is of a light Silvery colour with a Slight admixture of yellow.
after dinner I walked on Shore through an eligant bottom on the South
Side opposit to Fannys Island.

This bottom we also Call fannys bottom it is extensive and an open
leavel plain except near the river bank which is high dry rich oak
land. I saw Some deer & Elk at a distance in the Prarie. we continued
untill late in the evening and encamped on a Small Island near the
Middle of the river haveing made 18 Miles. 2 Indians Visited us this
evining

[Lewis, March 27, 1806]
Thursday March 27th 1806.
We set out early this morning and were shortly after joined by some of
the Skillutes who came along side in a small canoe for the purpose of
trading roots and fish. at 10 A.M. we arrived at two houses of this
nation on the Stard. side where we halted for breakfast. here we
overtook our hunters, they had killed nothing. the natives appeared
extreemly hospitable, gave us dryed Anchovies, Sturgeon, wappetoe,
quamash, and a speceis of small white tuberous roots about 2 inches in
length and as thick as a man's finger; these are eaten raw, are crisp,
milkey, and agreeably flavored. most of the party were served by the
natives with as much as they could eat; they insisted on our remaining
all day with them and hunting the Elk and deer which they informed us
were very abundant in their neighbourhood. but as the weather would not
permit us to dry our canoes in order to pitch them we declined their
friendly invitation, and resumed our voyage at 12 OCk. the principal
village of these Skillutes reside on the lower side of the
Cow-e-lis'-kee river a few miles from it's entrance into the columbia.
these people are said to be numer-ous. in their dress, habits, manners
and language they differ but little from the Clatsops Chinnooks &c.
they have latterly been at war with Chinnooks but peace is said now to
be restored between them, but their intercourse is not yet resumed. no
Chinnooks come above the marshey islands nor do the Skillutes visit the
mouth of the Columbia. the Clatsops, Cathlahmahs and Wackkiacums are
the carriers between these nations being in alliance with both.- The
Coweliskee is 150 yards wide, is deep and from indian Information
navigable a very considerable distance for canoes. it discharges itself
into the Columbia about three miles above a remarkable high rocky vole
which is situated on the N. side of the river by which it is washed on
the South side and is seperated from the Nothern hills of the river by
a wide bottom of several miles to which it is united. I suspect that
this river waters the country lying West of the range of mountains
which pass the columbia between the great falls and rapids, and north
of the same nearly to the low country which commences on the N. W.
coast about Latitude ____ North. above the Skillutes on this river
another nation by the name of the Hul-loo-et-tell reside, who are said
also to be numerous. at the distance Of 2 m. above the village at which
we breakfasted we passed the entrance of this river; we saw several
fishing camps of the Skillutes on both sides of the Columbia, and were
attended all the evening by parties of the natives in their canoes who
visited us for the purpose of trading their fish and roots; we
purchased as many as we wished on very moderate terms; they seemed
perfectly satisfyed with the exchange and behaved themselves in a very
orderly manner. late in the evening we passed our camp of the 5th of
November and encamped about 41/2 above at the commencement of the
bottom land on stard. below Deer Island. we had scarcely landed before
we were visited by a large canoe with eight men; from them we obtained
a dryed fruit which resembled the raspburry and which I beeive to be
the fruit of the large leafed thorn frequently mentioned. it is reather
ascid tho pleasently flavored. I preserved a specemine of this fruit I
fear that it has been baked in the process of drying and if so the seed
will not vegitate. saw the Cottonwood, sweet willow, oak, ash and the
broad leafed ash, the growth which resembles the beach &c. these form
the growth of the bottom lands while the hills are covered almost
exclusively with the various speceis of fir heretofore discribed. the
black Alder appears as well on some parts of the hills as the bottoms.
before we set out from the Skillute village we sent on Gibson's canoe
and Drewyers with orders to proceed as fast as they could to Deer
island and there to hunt and wait our arrival. we wish to halt at that
place to repair our canoes if possible. the indians who visited us this
evening remained but a short time, they passed the river to the oposite
side and encamped. the night as well as the day proved cold wet and
excessively disagreeable. we came 20 miles today.

[Clark, March 27, 1806]
Thursday March 27th 1806.
a rainey disagreeable night rained the greater part of the night we Set
out this morning verry early and proceeded on to two houses of the
Skil-lute Indians on the South Side here we found our hunters who had
Seperated from us last evening. the wind rose and the rain became very
hard Soon after we landed here we were very friendly receved by the
natives who gave all our party as much fish as they Could eate, they
also gave us Wappato and pashaquaw roots to eate prepared in their own
way. also a Species of Small white tuberous roots about 2 inches in
length and as thick as a mans finger, these are eaten raw, or crips,
milkey and agreeably flavoured; the nativs insisted on our remaining
all day with them and hunt the Elk and deer which they informed us was
very abundant in this neighbourhood. but as the weather would not
permit our drying our Canoes in order to pitch them, we declined their
friendly invertation, and resumed our voyage at 12 oClock. The
principal village of the Skil-lutes is Situated on the lower Side of
the Cow-e-lis kee river a fiew miles from it's enterance into the
Columbia. those people are Said to be noumerous, in their dress,
habits, manners and Language they differ but little from the Clatsops,
Chinnooks &c. they have latterly been at war with the Chinnooks, but
peace is Said to be now restored between them, but their inter Course
is not yet restored. no Chinnook Come above the Warkiacums, nor do the
Skillutes visit the Mouth of the Columbia. The Clatsops, Cath lahmahs &
War kia coms are the Carriers between those nations being in alliance
with both-. The Cow e lis kee river is 150 yards wide, is deep and from
Indian information navigable a very considerable distance for canoes.
it discharges itself into the Columbia about 3 miles above a remarkable
knob which is high and rocky and Situated on the North Side of the
Columbia, and Seperated from the Northern hills of the river by a Wide
bottom of Several Miles, to which it united. I Suspect that this river
Waters the Country lying west of a range of Mountains which passes the
Columbia between the Great falls and rapids, and North of the Same
nearly to the low country which Commences on the N W. Coast about
Latitude 4° ____ North. above the Skil lutes on this river another nation
by the name of the Hul-loo-et-tell reside who are Said also to be
numerous. at the distance of 2 miles above the village at which we
brackfast we passed the enterance of this river; we Saw Several fishing
camps of the Skillutes on both Sides of the Columbia, and also on both
Sides of this river. we were attended all the evening by parties of the
nativs in their Canoes who visited us for the purpose of tradeing their
fish and roots; we purchased as maney as we wished on very moderate
terms; they Seamed perfectly Satisfied with the exchange and behaved
themselves in a very orderly manner. late in the evening we passed the
place we Camped the 5th of Novr. and Encamped about 4 miles above at
the Commencement of the Columbian Vally on the Stard. Side below Deer
Island. we had Scercily landed before we were visited by a large Canoe
with 8 men; from them we obtained a dried fruit which resembled the
raspberry and which I beleave is the fruit of the large leafed thorn
frequently mentioned. it is reather ascide tho pleasently flavored. Saw
Cotton wood, Sweet Willow, white oake, ash and the broad leafed ash the
Growth which resembles the bark &c. these form the groth of the bottom
lands, whilst the Hills are almost exclusively Covered with the various
Species of fir heretofore discribed. the black alder appears on Maney
parts of the hills Sides as on the bottoms. before we Set out from the
2 houses where we brackfast we Sent on two Canoes with the best
hunters, with orders to pro ceed as fast as they Could to Deer island
and there to hunt and wait our arrival. we wish to halt at that place
and repare 2 of our Canoes if possible. the Indians that visited us
this evining remained but a Short time, they passed over to an Island
and encamped. the night as well as the day proved Cold wet and
excessively disagreeable. we Came 20 miles in the Course of this day.

[Lewis, March 28, 1806]
Friday March 28th 1806.
This morning we set out very early and at 9 A.M. arrived at the old
Indian Village on Lard side of Deer Island where we found our hunters
had halted and left one man with the two canoes at their camp; they had
arrived last evening at this place and six of them turned out to hunt
very early this morning; by 10 A.M. they all returned to camp having
killed seven deer. these were all of the common fallow deer with the
long tall. I measured the tail of one of these bucks which was upwards
of 17 Inches long; they are very poor, tho they are better than the
black tailed fallow deer of the coast. these are two very distinct
speceis of deer. the Indians call this large Island E-lal-lar or deer
island which is a very appropriate name. the hunters informed us that
they had seen upwards of a hundred deer this morning on this island.
the interior part of the island is praries and ponds, with a heavy
growth of Cottonwood ash and willow near the river. we have seen more
waterfowl on this island than we have previously seen since we left
Fort Clatsop, consisting of geese, ducks, large swan, and Sandhill
crams. I saw a few of the Canvisback duck. the duckinmallard are the
most abundant. one of the hunters killed a duck which appeared to be
the male, it was a size less than the duckinmallard. the head neck as
low as the croop, the back tail and covert of the wings were of a fine
black with a small addmixture of perple about the head and neck, the
belley & breast were white; some long feathers which lie underneath the
wings and cover the thye were of a pale dove colour with fine black
specks; the large feathers of the wings are of a dove colour. the legs
are dark, the feet are composed of 4 toes each of which there are three
in front connected by a web, the 4th is short Hat and placed high on
the heel behind the leg. the tail is composed of 14 short pointed
feathers. the beak of this duck is remarkably wide, and is 2 inches in
length, the upper chap exceeds the under one in both length and width,
insomuch that when the beak is closed the under is entirly concealed by
the upper chap. the tongue, indenture of the margin of the chaps &c.
are like those of the mallard. the nostrils are large longitudinal and
connected. a narrow strip of white garnishes the upper part or base of
the upper chap; this is succeeded by a pale skye blue colour which
occupys about one inch of the chap, is again succeeded by a transverse
stripe of white and the extremity is of a pure black. the eye is
moderately large the puple black and iris of a fine orrange yellow. the
feathers on the crown of the head are longer than those on the upper
part of neck and other parts of the head; these feathers give it the
appearance of being crested. at 1/2 after ten A.M. it became fair, and
we had the canoes which wanted repairing hailed out and with the
assistance of fires which we had kindled for the purpose dryed them
sufficiently to receive the pitch which was immediately put on them; at
3 in the evening we had them compleat and again launched and reloaded.
we should have set out, but as some of the party whom we had permitted
to hunt since we arrived have not yet returned we determined to remain
this evening and dry our beding baggage &c. the weather being fair.
Since we landed here we were visited by a large canoe with ten natives
of the quathlahpahtle nation who are numerous and reside about
seventeen miles above us on the lard. side of the Columbia, at the
entrance of a small river. they do not differ much in their dress from
those lower down and speak nearly the same language, it is in fact the
same with a small difference of accent. we saw a great number of snakes
on this island they were about the size and much the form of the common
garter snake of the Atlantic coast and like that snake are not
poisonous. they have 160 scuta on the abdomen and 71 on the tail. the
abdomen near the head, and jaws as high as the eyes, are of a bluefish
white, which as it receedes from the head becomes of a dark brown. the
field of the back and sides is black. a narrow stripe of a light yellow
runs along the center of the back, on each side of this stripe there is
a range of small transverse oblong spots of a pale brick ret which
gradually deminish as they receede from the head and disappear at the
commencement of the tail. the puple of the eye is black, with a narrow
ring of white bordering it's edge; the ballance of the iris is of a
dark yellowish brown.- the men who had been sent after the deer
returned and brought in the remnent which the Vultures and Eagles had
left us; these birds had devoured 4 deer in the course of a few hours.
the party killed and brought in three other deer a goose some ducks and
an Eagle. Drewyer also killed a tiger cat. Joseph Fields informed me
that the Vultures had draged a large buck which he had killed about 30
yards, had skined it and broken the back bone. we came five miles only
today.

[Clark, March 28, 1806]
Friday March 28th 1806
This morning we Set out verry early and at 9 A.M. arived at an old
Indian Village on the N E side of Deer island where we found our
hunters had halted and left one man with the Canoes at their Camp, they
arrived last evening at this place, and Six of them turned out very
early to hunt, at 10 A.M. they all returned to camp haveing killed
Seven Deer, those were all of the Common fallow Deer with a long tail.
I measured the tail of one of these bucks which was upwards of 17
inches long; they are very poor, tho they are better than the black
tail Species of the Sea coast. those are two very distinct Species of
Deer. the Indians call this large Island E-lal-lar, or Deer Island,
which is a very appropriate name. the hunters informed us that they had
Seen upwards of a hundred Deer this morning on this island. the
interior of this Island is a prarie & ponds, with a heavy growth of
Cotton wood, ash & willow near the river. we have Seen more water fowl
on this island than we have previously Seen Since we left Fort Clatsop,
Consisting of Geese, Ducks, large Swan & Sand Hill crains. I saw a fiew
of the Canvis back duck as I believe. at 1/2 after 10 A.M. it became
fair and we had the Canoes which wanted repareing hauled out and with
the assistance of fires which we had kindled for the purpose dryed them
Sufficiently to receve the pitch which was imedeately put on them; at 3
in the evening we had them Compleated and lanced and reloaded. we
should have Set out but some of the party whome we had permitid to hunt
Since we arrived heve not yet returned. we determined to remain here
this evening and dry our bedding &c. the weather being fair. Since we
landed here we were visited by a large Canoe with ten nativs of the
Quathlahpohtle nation who are numerous and reside about fourteen Miles
above us on the N E. Side of the Columbia above the Enterance of a
Small river which the Indians call Chfih-w&h-na-hi-ooks. we saw a great
number of Snakes on this island; they were about the Size and much the
form of the garter snake of the U. S. the back and Sides are black with
a narrow Stripe of light yellow along the Center of the back, with
small red spots on each Side they have ____ scuta on the abdomin & ____
on the tail and are not poisonous. The men who had been Sent after the
deer returned with four only, the other 4 haveing been eaten entirely
by the Voulturs except the Skin. The men we had been permitted to hunt
this evening killed 3 deer 4 Eagles & a Duck. the deer are remarkably
pore. Some rain in the after part of the day. we only made 5 miles to
day-.

[Lewis, March 29, 1806]
Saturday March 29th 1806.
We set out early this morning and proceeded along the side of Deer
Island; halted at 10 A.M. near its upper point and breakfasted. here we
were joined by three men of the Clan-nah-min-na-mun nation. the upper
point of this Island may be esteemed the lower side or commencement of
the Columbian valley. after breakfast we proceeded on and at the
distance of 14 miles from our encampment of the last evening we passed
a large inlet 300 yds in width. this inlet or arm of the river extends
itself to the South 10 or 12 M. to the hills on that side of the river
and receives the waters of a small creek which heads with killamucks
river, and that of a bayau which passes out of the Columbia about 20
miles above, the large Island thus formed we call wappetoe island. on
this inlet and Island the following nations reside, (viz)
Clan-nah-min-namun, Clacks-star, Cath-lah-cum-up, Clah-in-na-ta,
Cath-lah-nah-qui-ah, and Cath-lah-cam-mah-tup. the two first reside on
the inlet and the others on the bayau and island.- observed a speceies
of small wild onion growing among the moss on the rocks, they resemble
the shives of our gardens and grow remarkably close together forming a
perfect turf; they are quite as agreeably flavoured as the shives. on
the North side of the columbia a little above the entrance of this
inlet a considerable river discharges itself. this stream the natives
call the Cah-wah-na-hi-ooks. it is 150 yards wide and at present
discharges a large body of water, tho from the information of the same
people it is not navigable but a short distance in consequence of falls
and rappids a tribe called the Hul-lu-ettell reside on this river above
it's entr.- at the distance of three miles above the entrance of the
inlet on the N. side behind the lower point of an island we arrived at
the village of the Cath-lah-poh-tle with consists of 14 large wooden
houses. here we arrived at 3 P.M. the language of these people as well
as those on the inlet and wappetoe Island differs in some measure from
the nations on the lower part of the river. tho many of their words are
the same, and a great many others with the difference only of accent.
the form of their houses and dress of the men, manner of living habits
customs &c as far as we could discover are the same. their women wear
their ornaments robes and hair as those do below tho here their hair is
more frequently braded in two tresses and hang over each ear in front
of the body. in stead of the tissue of bark woarn by the women below,
they wear a kind of leather breech clout about the width of a common
pocket handkerchief and reather longer. the two corners of this at one
of the narrow ends are confined in front just above the hips; the other
end is then brought between the legs, compressed into a narrow foalding
bundel is drawn tight and the corners a little spread in front and
tucked at the groin over and arround the part first confind about the
waist. the small robe which dose not reach the waist is their usual and
only garment commonly woarn be side that just mentioned. when the
weather is a litte warm this robe is thrown aside and the leather truss
or breech-clout constitutes the whole of their apparel. this is a much
more indecent article than the tissue of bark, and bearly covers the
mons venes, to which it is drawn so close that the whole shape is
plainly perceived. the floors of most of their houses are on a level
with the surface of the earth tho some of them are sunk two or 3 feet
beneath. the internal arrangement of their houses is the same with
those of the nations below. they are also fond of sculpture. various
figures are carved and painted on the peices which support the center
of the roof, about their doors and beads. they had large quantities of
dryed Anchovies strung on small sticks by the gills and others which
had been first dryed in this manner, were now arranged in large sheets
with strings of bark and hung suspended by poles in the roofs of their
houses; they had also an abundance of sturgeon and wappetoe; the latter
they take in great quantities from the neighbouring bonds, which are
numerous and extensive in the river bottoms and islands. the wappetoe
furnishes the principal article of traffic with these people which they
dispose of to the nations below in exchange for beads cloth and various
articles. the natives of the Sea coast and lower part of the river will
dispose of their most valuable articles to obtain this root. they have
a number of large symeters of Iron from 3 to 4 feet long which hang by
the heads of their beads; the blade of this weapon is thickest in the
center tho thin even there. all it's edges are sharp and it's greatest
width which is about 9 inches from the point is about 4 inches. the
form is thus. this is a formidable weapon. they have heavy bludgeons of
wood made in the same form nearly which I presume they used for the
same purpose before they obtained metal. we purchased a considerable
quantity of wappetoe, 12 dogs, and 2 Sea otter skins of these people.
they were very hospitable and gave us anchovies and wappetoe to eat.
notwithstanding their hospitality if it deserves that appellation, they
are great begers, for we had scarcely finished our repast on the
wappetoe and Anchovies which they voluntarily set before us before they
began to beg. we gave them some small articles as is our custom on
those occasions with which they seemed perfectly satisfyed. we gave the
1st Cheif a small medal, which he soon transfered to his wife. after
remaining at this place 2 hours we set out & continued our rout between
this island, which we now call Cath-lah-poh-tle after the nation, and
the Lard shore. at the distance of 2 miles we encamped in a small
prarie on the main shore, having traveled 19 miles by estimate. the
river rising fast. great numbers of both the large and small swans,
gees and ducks seen today. the former are very abundant in the ponds
where the wappetoe is found, they feed much on this bulb. the female of
the duck which was described yesterday is of a uniform dark brown with
some yellowish brown intermixed in small specks on the back neck and
breast. the garter snakes are innumerable, & are seen entwined arround
each other in large bundles of forty or fifty lying about in different
directions through the praries. the frogs are croaking in the swams and
marhes; their notes do not differ from those of the Atlantic States;
they are not found in the salt marshes near the entrance of the river.
heared a large hooting owl hollowing this evening. saw several of the
crested fishers and some of the large and small black-birds.

[Clark, March 29, 1806]
Saturday March 29th 1806
we Set out very early this morning and proceeded to the head of deer
island and took brackfast. the morning was very cold wind Sharp and
keen off the rainge of Mountains to the East Covered with snow. the
river is now riseing very fast and retards our progress very much as we
are compelled to keep out at Some distance in the Curent to clear the
bushes, and fallin trees and drift logs makeing out from the Shore.
dureing the time we were at Brackfast a Canoe with three Indians of the
Clan-nar-min-na-mon Nation came down, one of those men was dressed in a
Salors jacket & hat & the other two had a blanket each, those people
differ but little either in their dress manners & Language from the
Clatsops & Chinnooks they reside on Wappato Inlet which is on the S W.
side about 12 miles above our encampment of the last night and is about
2 miles from the lower point, four other Tribes also reside on the
inlet and Since which passes on the South W. Side of the Island, the
first tribe from the lower point is the Clannarminamon, on the Island,
the Clackster Nation on the main S. W. Shore. the next Cath-lah-cum-up,
Clhh-in-na-ta, Cath-lah-nah-qui-ah and at Some distance further up is a
tribe called Cath-lah-com-mah-up Those tribes all occupie Single
Villages. we proceeded on to the lower point of the Said island
accompanied by the 3 Indians, & were met by 2 canoes of nativs of the
quath-lah-pah-tal who informed us that the chanel to the N E of the
Island was the proper one. we prosued their advice and Crossed into the
mouth of the Chahwah-na-hi-ooks River which is about 200 yards wide and
a great portion of water into the columbia at this time it being high.
The indians inform us that this river is crouded with rapids after Some
distance up it. Several tribes of the Hul-lu-et-tell Nation reside on
this river. at 3 oClock P.M. we arived at the Quath lah pah tie Village
of 14 Houses on main Shore to the N E. Side of a large island. those
people in their habits manners Customs and language differ but little
from those of the Clatsops and others below. here we exchanged our deer
Skins killed yesterday for dogs, and purchased others to the Number of
12 for provisions for the party, as the deer flesh is too poore for the
Men to Subsist on and work as hard as is necessary. I also purchased a
Sea Otter robe. we purchased wappatoe and Some pashaquar roots. gave a
Medal of the Small Size to the principal Chief, and at 5 oClock
reembarked and proceeded up on the N E. of an Island to an inlet about
1 mile above the village and encamped on a butifull grassy plat, where
the nativs make a portage of their Canoes and Wappato roots to and from
a large pond at a Short dis-tance. in this pond the nativs inform us
they Collect great quantities of pappato, which the womin collect by
getting into the water, Sometimes to their necks holding by a Small
canoe and with their feet loosen the wappato or bulb of the root from
the bottom from the Fibers, and it imedeately rises to the top of the
water, they Collect & throw them into the Canoe, those deep roots are
the largest and best roots. Great numbers of the whistling Swan, Gees
and Ducks in the Ponds. Soon after we landed 3 of the nativs came up
with Wappato to Sell a part of which we purchased. they Continued but a
Short time. our men are recoverey fast. Willard quit well & Bratten
much Stronger. we made 15 miles to day only.

[Lewis, March 30, 1806]
Sunday March 30th 1806.
We got under way very early in the morning, and had not reached the
head of the island before we were met by three men of the
Clan-nah-minna-mun nation one of whom we recognized being the same who
had accompanied us yesterday, and who was very pressing in his
entreaties that we should visit his nation on the inlet S. W. of
Wappetoe island. at the distance of about 2 M. or at the head of the
quathlahpahtle island we met a party of the Claxtars and Cathlahcumups
in two canoes; soon after we were met by several canoes of the
different nations who reside on each side of the river near this place.
Wappetoe Island is about 20 miles long and from 5 to 10 in width; the
land is high and extreemly fertile and intersected in many parts with
ponds which produce great quantities of the sagittaria Sagittifolia,
the bulb of which the natives call wappetoe. there is a heavy growth of
Cottonwood, ash, the large leafed ash and sweet willow on most parts of
this island. the black alder common on the coast has now disappeared.
we passed several fishing camps on wappetoe island and at the distance
of 5 miles above quathlahpotle Island on the N. E. side we halted for
breakfast near the place we had encamped on the evening of the 4th of
November last; here we were visited by several canoes which came off
from two towns situated a little distance above us on wappetoe Island.
the 1st of these tribes about 2 miles above us call themselves
Clan-nah-quah, the other about a mile above them call themselves
Mult-no-mah. from these visiters we purchased a sturgeon and some
wappetoe and pashequa, for which we gave some small fishinghooks. these
like the natives below are great higglers in dealing. at 10 A.M. we set
out and had not proceeded far before we came to a landing place of the
natives where there were several large canoes drawn out on shore and
several natives seting in a canoe apparently waiting our arrival; they
joined the fleet and continued with us some miles. we halted a few
minutes at this landing and the Indians pointed to a village which was
situated abut 2 miles from the river behid a pond lying parallel with
it on the N. E. side nearly opposite to the Clan-nah-quah town. here
they informed us that the Sho-toes resided. here we were joined by
several other canoes of natives from the Island. most of these people
accompanyed us untill 4 in the evening when they all returned; their
principal object I beive was merely to indulge their curiossity in
looking at us. they appeared very friendly, tho most had taken the
precaution to bring with them their warlike implements. we continued
our rout along the N. E. shore of the river to the place we had halted
to dine on the 4th of Novembr opposite to the center of Immage canoe
island where the Indians stole Capt. Clarks tomahawk. here we encamped
a little before sunset in a beautifull prarie above a large pond having
traveled 23 M. I took a walk of a few miles through the prarie and an
open grove of oak timber which borders the prarie on the back part. I
saw 4 deer in the course of my walk and much appearance of both Elk and
deer. Joseph feields who was also out a little above me saw several Elk
and deer but killed none of them; they are very shye and the annual
furn which is now dry and abundant in the bottoms makes so much nois in
passing through it that it is extreemly difficult to get within reach
of the game. Fends killed and brought with him a duck. about 10 P.M. an
indian alone in a small canoe arrived at our camp, he had some
conversation with the centinel and soon departed. The natives who
inhabit this valley are larger and reather better made than those of
the coast. like those people they are fond of cold, hot, & vapor baths
of which they make frequent uce both in sickness and in health and at
all seasons of the year. they have also a very singular custom among
them of baithing themselves allover with urine every morning. The
timber and apearance of the country is much as before discribed. the up
lands are covered almost entirely with a heavy growth of fir of several
speceis like those discribed in the neighbourhood of Fort Clatsop; the
white cedar is also found hereof large size; no white pine nor pine of
any other kind. we had a view of mount St. helines and Mount Hood. the
1st is the most noble looking object of it's kind in nature. it's
figure is a regular cone. both these mountains are perfectly covered
with snow; at least the parts of them which are visible. the highlands
in this valley are rolling tho by no means too steep for cultivation
they are generally fertile of a dark rich loam and tolerably free of
stones. this valley is terminated on it's lower side by the mountanous
country which borders the coast, and above by the rainge of mountains
which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids of the
Columbia river. it is about 70 miles wide on a direct line and it's
length I beleive to be very extensive tho how far I cannot determine.
this valley would be copetent to the mantainance of 40 or 50 thousand
souls if properly cultivated and is indeed the only desireable
situation for a settlement which I have seen on the West side of the
Rocky mountains.

[Clark, March 30, 1806]
Sunday March 30th 1806
we got under way verry early and had not proceeded to the head of the
island before we met with the three men of the Clan-nar-min-a-mon's who
met us yesterday brackfast at the upper point of the Island we met
Several of the Clackstar and Cath-lah-cum-up in two canoes. Soon after
we were overtaken by Several Canoes of different tribes who reside on
each Side of the river the three above Tribes and the Cldh-in-na-ta
cath-lahnah-qui-up & Cath-lah-com-mah-tup reside on each Side of
Wappato inlet and back of Wappato Island which Island is formed by a
Small Chanel which passes from the Lower part of Image Canoe Island
into an inlet which makes in from the S W. Side, and receves the water
of a Creek which heads with the Kil a mox River. this wappato Island is
about 18 or 20 Miles long and in places from 6 to 10 miles wide high &
furtile with ponds on different parts of it in which the nativs geather
Wappato. nearly opposit the upper point of the Isld. behing which we
encamped last night, or on the Wappato Isld. is Several Camps of the
nativs catching Sturgion. about 5 miles Still higher up and on the N E.
Side we halted for brackfast at the place which We had encamped the 4th
of November last. here we were visited by several canoes of Indians
from two Towns a Short distance above on the Wappato Island. the 1st of
those Tribes Call themselves Clan-nah-quah and Situated about 2 miles
above us, the other about a mile above Call themselves Mult-no-mah we
purchased of those visitors a Sturgion and Some Wappato & quarmarsh
roots for which we gave Small fishing hooks. at 10 a.m. we Set out and
had not proceeded far before we came to a landing place where there was
Several large canoes hauled up, and Sitting in a canoe, appearantly
waiting our arival with a view to join the fleet indian who was then
along Side of us. this man informed he was a Shoto and that his nation
resided a little distance from the river. we landed and one of the
indians pointed to the Shoto village which is Situated back of Pond
which lies parrelal with the river on the N E. Side nearly opposit the
Clan-nah quah village. here we were also joined by Several Canoes
loaded with the natives from the Island who Continued to accompany us
untill about 4 oClock when they all returned and we proceeded on to the
place the Indians Stole my Tomahawk 4th Novr. last and Encamped in a
Small Prarie above a large Pond on N. E and opposit the Center of image
Canoe Island. capt Lewis walked out and Saw Several deer. Jo. Field
Shot at Elk he killed and brought in a fine duck. Soon after I had got
into bead an Indian came up alone in a Small Canoe. Those tribes of
Indians who inhabit this vally differ but little in either their dress,
manners, habuts and language from the Clat Sops Chinnooks, and others
on the Sea coast. they differ in a fiew words and a little in the
accent. The men are Stouter and much better formed than those of the
Sea Coast. more of their womin ware their hair braded in two tresses
and hang over each ear. in Stead of the tissue of bark worn by the
women below, they ware a kind of leather breech clout as before
described as worn by the Womin at the enterance of Lewis's river-the
width of a Common pocket Handkerchief or Something Smaller and longer.
the two Corners of this at one of the narrow ends are confined in front
just above the hips; the other Side is then brought between their legs,
Compressed into a narrow folding bundle is drawn tight, and the Corners
a little Spred in front tucked at the ends over and around the part
first confined about the Waiste. a Small roab which does not reach the
Waiste is their usial and only garment commonly worn besides this just
mentioned. when the weather is a little worm the roab is thrown aside,
and the latter truss or breach clout constitutes the whole of their
apparreal. this is a much more indesant article than the tissue of
bark, and bearly covers the Mons versus, to which it is drawn So close
that the whole Shape is plainly perseived. The Houses are Similar to
those already descrbed. they are fond of Sculpture. various figures are
carved and painted on the pieces which Support the Center of the roof
about their dotes and beads. They are well Supplied with anchoves
Sturgion and Wappato. The latter furnishes the principal article of
traffic with those Tribes which they despose of to the nativs below in
exchange for beeds, Cloath and Various articles. the nativs of the Sea
coast and lower part of this river will dispose of their most valueable
articles to obtain this root. I saw in Several houses of the Cath lah
poh tie Village large Symeters of Iron from 3 to 4 feet long which
hangs by the heads of their beads; the blade of this weapon is thickest
in the Center tho thin even there, all it's edges are Sharp and its
greatest width which is about 9 inches from the point, is about 4
inches. the form is this this is a formable weapon. they have heavy
bludgeons of wood made in the Same form nearly which I prosume they use
for the Same purpose before they obtained metal. we made 22 Miles only
to day the wind and a Strong current being against us all day, with
rain. discovered a high mountain S E. Covered with Snow which we call
Mt. Jefferson.

[Lewis, March 31, 1806]
Monday March 31st 1806
We set out early this morning and proceeded untill 8 A.M. when we
Landed on the N. side opposite one large wooden house of the Shah-ha-la
nation and took breakfast. when we decended the river in November last
there were 24 other lodges formed of Straw and covered with bark near
this house; these lodges are now distroyed and the inhabitants as the
indians inform us have returned to the great rapids of this river which
is their permanent residence; the house which remains is inhabited;
soon after we landed two canoes came over from this house with 4 men
and a woman. they informed us that their relations who were with them
last fall usuly visit them at that season for the purpose of hunting
deer and Elk and collecting wappetoe and that they had lately returned
to the rapids I presume to prepare for the fishing season as the Salmon
will begin to run shortly.- this morning we overtook the man who had
visited our camp last night he had a fine sturgeon in his canoe which
he had just taken. the Sagittaria Sagittifolia dose not grow on this
river above the Columbian valley.- These indians of the rapids
frequently visit this valley at every season of the year for the
purpose of collecting wappetoe which is abundant and appears never to
be out of season at any time of the year. at 10 A.M. we resumed our
march accompanyed by three men in a canoe; one of these fellows
appeared to be a man of some note among them; he was dressed in a
salor's jacket which was decorated in his own fassion with five rows of
large and small buttons in front and some large buttons on the pocket
flaps. they are remarkably fond of large brass buttons. these people
speak a different language from those below tho in their dress habits
manners &c they differ but little from the quathlahpohtles. their women
wear the truss as those do of all the nations residing from the
quathlahpohtles to the entrance of Lewis's river. they differ in the
manner of intering their dead. they lay them horizontally on boards and
cover them with mats, in a valt formed with boards like the roof of a
hose supported by forks and a single pole laid horizontally on those
forks. many bodies are deposited in the same valt above ground. these
are frequently laid one on the other, to the hight of three or for
corps. they deposit with them various articles of which they die
possessed, and most esteem while living. their canoes are frequently
broken up to strengthen the vault.- these people have a few words the
same with those below but the air of the language is intirely
different, insomuch, that it may be justly deemed a different language.
their women wear longer and larger robes generally, than those below;
these are most commonly made of deer skins dressed with the hair on
them. we continued our rout along the N. side of the river passed
diamond Island and whitebrant island to the lower point of a handsom
prarie opposite to the upper entrance of the Quicksand river; here we
encamped having traveled 25 miles today. a little below the upper point
of the White brant Island Seal river discharges itself on the N. side.
it is about 80 yards wide, and at present discharges a large body of
water. the water is very clear. the banks are low and near the Columbia
overflow and form several large ponds. the natives inform us that it is
of no great extent and heads in the mountains just above us. at the
distance of one mile from the entrance of this stream it forks, the two
branches being nearly of the same size. they are both obstructed with
falls and innumerable rappids, insomuch that it cannot be navigated. as
we could not learn any name of the natives for this stream we called it
Seal river from the great abundance of those animals which we saw about
it's entrance. we determined to remain at our present encampment a day
or two for the several purposes of examining quicksand river making
some Celestial observations, and procuring some meat to serve us as far
as the falls or through the Western mountains where we found the game
scarce as we decended.- the three indians who accompanied us last
evening encamped a little distance above us and visited our camp where
they remained untill 9 P.M. in the entrance of Seal river I saw a
summer duck or wood duck as they are sometimes called. this is the same
with those of our country and is the first I have seen since I entered
the rocky mountains last summer.- our hunters who had halted a little
below Seal river in consequence of the waves being too high for their
small canoe did not join us untill after dark. Drewyer who was out
below Seal river informed us that game was very scarce in that quarter,
a circumstance which we did not expect.

[Clark, March 31, 1806]
Monday March 31st 1806
we Set out this morning and proceeded untill 8 oClock when we landed on
the N. Side opposit one large House of the Shah-ha-la Nation near this
house at the time we passed on the 4th of November last was Situated 25
houses, 24 of them were built of Straw & Covered with bark as before
mentioned. those of that description are all distroyed, the one built
of wood only remains and is inhabited. we overtook the man whome came
to our Camp last night and Soon after we landed two canoes Came over
from the opposit Side with 5 men & a woman those people informed us
that their relations who was with them last fall reside at the Great
rapids, and were down with them last fall gathering Wappato which did
not grow above, and also killing deer, that they Secured the bark of
the houses which they then lived in against their return next fall.
they also inform us that their relations also visit them frequently in
the Spring to collect this root which is in great quantities on either
Side of the Columbia. at 10 A. M we proceeded on accompanied by one
Canoe and three men, one of them appeared to be a man of Some note,
dressed in a Salors jacket which had 5 rows of large & Small buttons on
it. Those people Speak a differant language from those below, with Some
fiew Words the Same, the accent entirely different. their dress and
Manners appear very Similar. the women ware the truss or breach clout
and Short robes, and men roabs only passed up on the N. Side of White
brant Island near the upper point of Which a Small river falls in about
80 yards wide and at this time discharges a great quantity of water.
the nativs inform us that this river is very Short and heads in the
range of mountains to the N E of its enterance into the Columbia the
nativs haveing no name which we could learn for this little river we
Call it Seal river from the great number of those Animals which
frequents its mouth. this river forks into two nearly equal branches
about 1 mile up and each branch is crouded with rapids & falls. we
proceed on about 2 miles above the enterance of this Seacalf river and
imedeately opposit the upper mouth of the quick Sand river we formed a
Camp in a Small Prarie on the North Side of the Columbia where we
intend to delay one or two days to make Some Selestial observations, to
examine quick sand river, and kill Some meat to last us through the
Western Mountains which Commences a fiew miles above us and runs in a
N. N. W. & S. S. E. derection. The three Indians encamped near us and
visited our fire we entered into a kind of a Conversation by signs, of
the Country and Situation of the rivers. they informed us that Seal
river headed in the mountains at no great distance. quick Sand river
was Short only headed in Mt. Hood which is in view and to which he
pointed. this is a circumstance we did not expect as we had heretofore
deemed a considerable river. Mount Hood bears East from this place and
is distant from this place about 40 miles. this information if true
will render it necessary to examine the river below on the South Side
behind the image canoe and Wappato islands for some river which must
water the Country weste of the western mountains to the Waters of
California. The Columbia is at present on a Stand and we with
dificuelty made 25 miles to day-.

[Lewis, April 1, 1806]
Tuesday April 1st 1806.
This morning early we dispatched Sergt. Pryar with two men in a small
canoe up quicksand river with orders to proceed as far as he could and
return this evening. we also sent a party of three hunters over the
river to hunt a large bottom of woodland and prarie above the entrance
of the Quicksand river; the ballance of the hunters we sent out in
different directions on this side of the Columbia and employed those
about camp in making a rope of Elkskin. the Indians who encamped near
us last evening continued with us untill about midday. they informed us
that the quicksand river which we have heretofore deemed so
considerable, only extendes through the Western mountains as far as the
S. Western side of mount hood where it takes it's source. this mountain
bears E from this place and is distant about 40 miles. this information
was corroborated by that of sundry other indians who visited us in the
course of the day. we were now convinced that there must be some other
considerable river which flowed into the columbia on it's south side
below us which we have not yet seen, as the extensive valley on that
side of the river lying between the mountainous country of the Coast
and the Western mountains must be watered by some stream which we had
heretofore supposed was the quicksand river. but if it be a fact that
the quicksand river heads in Mount Hood it must leave the valley within
a few miles of it's entrance and runs nearly parallel with the Columbia
river upwards. we indeavoured to ascertain by what stream the southern
portion of the Columbian valley was watered but could obtain no
satisfactory information of the natives on this head. they informed us
that the quicksand river is navigable a short distance only in
consequence of falls and rapids; and that no nation inhabits it.-
Sergt. Pryar returned in the evening and reported that he had ascended
the river six miles; that above the point at which it divides itself
into two channels it is about 300 yds wide tho the channel is not more
than 50 yds and only 6 ft deep. this is a large vollume of water to
collect in so short a distance; I therefore think it probable that
there are some large creeks falling into it from the S. W. the bed of
this stream is formed entirely of quicksand; it's banks are low and at
preasent overflows. the water is turbid and current rapid.the following
are the courses taken by Sergt. Pryor. S. 10° W. 1 M. to a point on the
Lard. side passing a large Island on Stard. S. 24° E. 2 m. to the head of
an Island near the Lard. shore. S 33° E. 4 m. to a stard. point passing
several islands on the Lard. side and a creek 50 yds. wide on Stard at
11/2 miles. the river from hence appeared to bend to the East. he heard
falls of water. several different tribes informed us that it heads at
Mount Hood. We were visited by several canoes of natives in the course
of the day; most of whom were decending the river with their women and
children. they informed us that they resided at the great rapids and
that their relations at that place were much streightened at that place
for the want of food; that they had consumed their winter store of
dryed fish and that those of the present season had not yet arrived. I
could not learn wheather they took the Sturgeon but presume if they do
it is in but small quantities as they complained much of the scarcity
of food among them. they informed us that the nations above them were
in the same situation & that they did not expect the Salmon to arrive
untill the full of the next moon which happens on the 2d of May. we did
not doubt the varacity of these people who seemed to be on their way
with their families and effects in surch of subsistence which they find
it easy to procure in this fertile valley.- This information gave us
much uneasiness with rispect to our future means of subsistence. above
falls or through the plains from thence to the Chopunnish there are no
deer Antelope nor Elk on which we can depend for subsistence; their
horses are very poor most probably at this season, and if they have no
fish their dogs must be in the same situation. under these
circumstances there seems to be but a gloomy prospect for subsistence
on any terms; we therefore took it into serious consideration what
measures we were to pursue on this occasion; it was at once deemed
inexpedient to wait the arrival of the salmon as that would detain us
so large a portion of the season that it is probable we should not
reach the United States before the ice would close the Missouri; or at
all events would hazard our horses which we lelft in charge of the
Chopunnish who informed us that they intended passing the rocky
mountains to the Missouri as early as the season would permit them wich
is as we believe about the begining of May. should these people leave
their situation near kooskooske before our arrival we may probably find
much difficulty in recovering our horses; without which there will be
but little possibility of repassing the mountains; we are therefore
determined to loose as little time as possible in geting to the
Chopunnish Village. at 3 P.M. the hunters who were sent over the river
returned having killed 4 Elk and two deer; the Elk were in good order
but the deer extreemly poor. they informed us that game is very plenty
in that quarter. the hunters on this side of the river also returned
but had killed nothing; they saw a few Elk and deer. there was also
much sign of the black bear seen on the other side of the river. we
sent a party to bring in the flesh of the Elk and deer that were
killed. they did not return this evening. I purchased a canoe from an
Indian today for which I gave him six fathoms of wampum beads; he
seemed satisfyed with his bargain and departed in another canoe but
shortly after returned and canceled the bargain; took his canoe and
returned the beads. this is frequently the case in their method of
traiding and is deemed fair by them. The last evening and this morning
were so cloudy that I could neither obtain any Lunar observations nor
equal altitudes.-

[Clark, April 1, 1806]
Tuesday April 1st 1806
This morning early we dispatched Sergt. Pryor, with two men in a Small
canoe up quick sand river with orders to proceed as far as he Could and
return this evening. we also Sent a party of three hunters over the
river to hunt a large bottom of woodland and prarie above the enterance
of Q. Sand River; the ballance of the hunters we Sent out in different
directions on this Side of the Columbia, and employed those about Camp
in makeing a rope of Elk Skin.

The information given by the indians to us last night respecting quick
Sand river was corrobarated by Sundery other indians who visited us in
the Course of this day. we were now convinced that if there information
be just; that Some Considerable river which flowed into the Columbia on
it's South Side below us which we have not yet Seen, as the extensive
vally on that Side of the river lying between the mountanious Country
of the Coast, and the western mountains must be watered by Some Stream,
which we had heretofore Supposed was the quick Sand river. but if it be
a fact that Quick Sand river heads in Mount Hood it must leave the
vally within a fiew miles of it's enterance, and runs nearly parrilal
with the Columbia River upwards. we indeavered to assertained by what
Stream the South portion of the Columbian Vally was watered, but could
obtain no Satisfactory information of the waters on this head. they
inform us that the quick Sand river is not naviagable any distance in
consequence of falls and rapids; and that no nation inhabit it. Sergt.
Pryor returned in the evening and reported that he had assended the
river Six Miles; that above the point which it divides itself into two
Chanels, it is about 300 yards wide tho the Chanel is not more than 50
yards, and only 6 feet deep. the other part of the river from 2 to 4
inches water, the bead of this river is formed entirely of quick Sand;
its banks are low and at present overflown. the water is turbed and
current rapid.- The following are the Courses taken by Sergt. Pryor.-
"S. 10° W. 1 mile to a point on the Lard. Side passing a large island on
Stard Side. S 24° E. 2 m. to the head of the island near the Lard Shore.
S 33° E 4 m. to a Stard. point passing Several islands on the Lard Side
and a Creek 50 yards wide on the Stard. Side at 11/2 miles. the river
from hence upwards bend to the East. a fall of water heard at no great
distance up this river." Several diffirent tribes of indians inform us
that it heads at Mount Hood which is in view.

We were visited by Several Canoes of the nativs in the Course of this
day; most of whome were decending the river with their womin and
children. they inform us that they reside at the great rapids and that
their relations at that place were much Streightened for the want of
food; that they had consumed their winter Store of dryed fish and those
of the present Season had not yet arived. I could not lern whether they
took Sturgion but prosume if they do it is in but Small quantities as
they complain much of the Scercity of food among them, they informed us
that the nativs above them were in the Same Situation, and that they
did not expect the Salmon to arrive untill the full of the next moon
which happens on the 2nd of May. we did not doubt the veracity of those
people who Seamed to be on their way with their families and effects in
serch of Subsistence which they find it easy to precure in this fertile
Vally-. This information givs us much uneasiness with respect to our
future means of Subsistence, above the falls, on through the Plains
from thence to the Chopunnish there are no Deer Antilopes or Elk on
which we could depend for Subsistence; their horses are very poor most
probably at this Season, and if they have no fish their dogs must be in
the Same Situation. under these circumstances there Seams to be a
gloomey prospect for Subsistence on any terms; we therefore took it
into Serious Consideration what measure we were to pursue on this
Occasion; it was at once deemed inexpedient to waite the arival of the
Salmon as that would detain us So long a portion of the Season that it
is probable we Should not reach the U States before the ice would close
the Missouri; or at all events would hazard our horses which we left in
charge of the Chopunnish who informed us that they intended passing the
Rocky Mountains to the Missouri as early as the Season would permit
them which is about the first of May. Should these people leave their
Situation near Kooskooske before our arival we may probably find much
dificulty in recovering our horses; without which there will be but
little possibility of repassing the Mountains; we are therefore
determined to lose as little time as possible in getting to the Cho
punnish Village.

at 3 P.M. the hunters who were Sent over the river returned, haveing
Killed 4 Elk and 2 Deer; the Elk were in good order but the deer
extreemly poor. they informed us that game is very plenty in that
quarter. the hunters on this Side of the river also returned but had
killed nothing; they Saw a fiew Elk and Deer. there were also much Sign
of the black bear Seen on the other Side of the river. we Sent a party
to bring in the flesh of the Elk and Deer that were killed. they did
not return this evening. We purchased a Canoe from an Indian today for
Six fathoms of white wampom; he Seemed Satisfied with his bargin and
departed in another Canoe but Shortly after returned and canseled the
bargain, took his canoe and returned the beeds. this is frequently the
case in their method of tradeing and is deemed fair by them. The last
evening and this morning were So cloudy that we could neither obtain
any Lunar observations nor equal altitudes

[Lewis, April 2, 1806]
Wednesday April 2ed 1806.
This morning we came to a resolution to remain at our present
encampment or some where in this neighbourhood untill we had obtained
as much dryed meat as would be necessary for our voyage as far as the
Chopunnish. to exchange our perogues for canoes with the natives on our
way to the great falls of the columbia or purchase such canoes from
them for Elkskins and Merchandize as would answer our purposes. these
canoes we intend exchanging with the natives of the plains for horses
as we proceed untill we obtain as many as will enable us to travel
altogether by land. at some convenient point, perhaps at the entrence
of the S. E. branch of the Columbia, we purpose sending a party of four
or five men a head to collect our horses that they may be in readiness
for us by our arrival at the Chopunnish; calculating by thus acquiring
a large stock of horses we shall not only sucure the means of
transporting our baggage over the mountains but that we will also have
provided the means of subsisting; for we now view the horses as our
only certain resource for food, nor do we look forward to it with any
detestation or borrow, so soon is the mind which is occupyed with any
interesting object reconciled to it's situation. The men who were sent
in quest of the Elk and deer that were killed yesterday returned at 8
A.M. this morning. we now enformed the party of our intention of laying
in a store of meat at this place, and immediately dispatched two
parteis consisting of nine men to the opposite side of the river. five
of those we sent below the Quicksand river and 4 above. we also sent
out three others on this side, and those who remained in camp were
employed in collecting wood making a scaffoald and cuting up the meat
in order to dry it. about this time several canoes of the natives
arrived at our camp and among others one from below which had on board
eight men of the Shah-ha-la nation these men informed us that 2 young
men whom they pointed out were Cash-hooks and resided at the falls of a
large river which discharges itself into the Columbia on it's South
side some miles below us. we readily prevailed on them to give us a
sketch of this river which they drew on a mat with a coal. it appeared
that this river which they called Mult-no-mah discharged itself behind
the Island which we called the image canoe Island and as we had left
this island to the S. both in ascending and decending the river we had
never seen it. they informed us that it was a large river and run a
considerable distance to the South between the mountains. Capt. Clark
determined to return and examine this river accordingly he took a party
of seven men and one of the perogues and set out 1/2 after 11 A.M., he
hired one of the Cashhooks, for a birning glass, to pilot him to the
entrance of the Multnomah river and took him on board with him. in
their manners dress language and stature these people are the same with
the quathlahpohtle nation and others residing in the neighbourhood of
wappetoe Island. near the entrance of multnomah river a considerable
nation resides on the lower side of that stream by the same name. as
many as ten canoes with natives arrived at our camp in the course of
the day; most of them were families of men women and children decencing
the river. they all gave the same account of the scarcity of provision
above. I shot my air gun, with which they were much astonished. one
family consisting of ten or twelve persons remained near us all night.
they conducted themselves in a very orderly manner. the three hunters
on this side of the river returned in the evening they had killed two
deer, tho they were so poor and at such a distance from camp that they
brought in their skins only. the night and morning being cloudy I was
again disappointed in making the observations I wished.

Fir is the common growth of the uplands, as is the cottonwood, ash;
large leafed ash and sweet willow that of the bottom lands. the
huckleburry, shallon, and the several evergreen shrubs of that speceis
which bear burries have seased to appear except that speceis which has
the leaf with a prickly margin. among the plants of this prarie in
which we are encamped I observe the passhequo, Shannetahque, and
compound firn the roots of which the natives eat; also the water cress,
strawburry, flowering pea not yet in blume, the sinquefoil, narrow
dock, sand rush which are luxuriant and abundant in the river bottoms;
a speceis of the bearsclaw of which I preserved a specemine it is in
blume. the large leafed thorn has also disappeared. the red flowering
currant is found here in considerable quantities on the uplands. the
hunters inform me that there are extensive praries on the highlands a
few miles back from the river on this side. the land is very fertile.

[Clark, April 2, 1806]
Wednesday April 2nd 1806
This morning we came to a resolution to remain at our present
encampment or Some where in this neighbourhood untill we had obtained
as much dried meat as would be necessary for our voyage as far as the
Chopunnish. to exchange our large Canoes for Small ones with the nativs
on our way to the great Falls of the Columbia or purchase Such canoes
from them for Elk skins and Merchindize as would answer our purposes.
these canoes we intend exchangeing with the nativs of the Plains for
horses as we proceed untill we obtain as maney as will enable us to
travel altogether by land. at Some convenient point, perhaps at the
enterance of Lewis's River we intend Sending a party of 4 or 5 men
ahead to Collect our horses that they may be in readiness for us by our
arrival at the Chopunnish; Calculating by thus acquireing a large Stock
of horses we shall not only Secure the means of transporting our
baggage over the Mountains, but that we also have provided the means of
Subsisting; for we now view the horses as our only Certain resource for
food, nor do we look foward to it with any detestation or horrow, So
Soon is the Mind which is occupied with any interesting object,
reconsiled to it's Situation. The men who went in quest of the Elk and
Deer which were killed yesterday returned at 8 A.M. this morning. we
now informed the party of our intention of laying in a Store of meat at
this place, and imediately dispatched two parties Consisting of nine
men to the opposit Side of the river. 5 of them below and 4 above quick
Sand River. we also Sent out 3 others on this Side, and those who
remained in Camp were employd in Collecting wood makeing a Scaffold and
Cutting up the meat in order to dry it. about this time Several Canoes
of the nativs arived at our Camp among others two from below with Eight
men of the Shah-ha-la Nation those men informed us that they reside on
the opposit Side of the Columbia near Some pine trees which they
pointed to in the bottom South of the Dimond Island, they Singled out
two young men whome they informed us lived at the Falls of a large
river which discharges itself into the Columbia on it's South Side Some
Miles below us. we readily provailed on them to give us a Sketch of
this river which they drew on a Mat with a coal, it appeared that this
river which they Call Mult-no'-mah discharged itself behind the Island
we call the image Canoe island, and as we had left this Island to the
South both in decending & assending the river we had never Seen it.
they informed us that it was a large river and runs a Considerable
distance to the South between the Mountains. I deturmined to take a
Small party and return to this river and examine its Size and Collect
as much information of the nativs on it or near its enterance into the
Columbia of its extent, the Country which it waters and the nativs who
inhabit its banks &c. I took with me Six Men. Thompson J. Potts, Peter
Crusat, P. Wiser, T. P. Howard, Jos. Whitehouse & my man York in a
large Canoe, with an Indian whome I hired for a Sun glass to accompany
me as a pilot. at half past 11 A.M. I Set out, and had not proceeded
far eer I saw 4 large Canoes at Some distance above decending and
bending their Course towards our Camp which at this time is very weak
Capt. Lewis haveing only 10 men with him. I hisitated for a moment
whether it would not be advisable for me to return and delay untill a
part of our hunters Should return to add more Strength to our Camp. but
on a Second reflection and reverting to the precautions always taken by
my friend Capt Lewis on those occasions banished all apprehensions and
I proceeded on down. at 8 miles passed a village on the South side at
this place my Pilot informed me he resided and that the name of his
tribe is Ne-cha-co-lee, this village is back or to the South of Dimond
island, and as we passed on the North Side of the island both decending
& assending did not See or know of this Village. I proceeded on without
landing at this village. at 3 P.M. I landed at a large double house of
the Ne-er-choki-oo tribe of the Shah-ha-la Nation. at this place we had
Seen 24 aditional Straw Huts as we passed down last fall and whome as I
have before mentioned reside at the Great rapids of the Columbia. on
the bank at different places I observed Small Canoes which the women
make use of to gather Wappato & roots in the Slashes. those Canoes are
from 10 to 14 feet long and from 18 to 23 inches wide in the widest
part tapering from the center to both ends in this form and about 9
inches deep and So light that a woman may with one hand haul them with
ease, and they are Sufficient to Carry a woman an Some loading. I think
100 of those canoes were piled up and Scattered in different directions
about in the Woods in the vecinity of this house, the pilot informed me
that those Canoes were the property of the inhabitents of the Grand
rapids who used them ocasionally to gather roots. I entered one of the
rooms of this house and offered Several articles to the nativs in
exchange for Wappato. they were Sulkey and they positively refused to
Sell any. I had a Small pece of port fire match in my pocket, off of
which I cut a pece one inch in length & put it into the fire and took
out my pocket Compas and Set myself doun on a mat on one Side of the
fire, and a magnet which was in the top of my ink Stand the port fire
cought and burned vehemently, which changed the Colour of the fire;
with the Magnit I turned the Needle of the Compas about very briskly;
which astonished and alarmed these nativs and they laid Several parsles
of Wappato at my feet, & begged of me to take out the bad fire; to this
I consented; at this moment the match being exhausted was of course
extinguished and I put up the magnet &c. this measure alarmed them So
much that the womin and children took Shelter in their beads and behind
the men, all this time a very old blind man was Speaking with great
vehemunce, appearently imploreing his gode. I lit my pipe and gave them
Smoke & gave the womin the full amount of the roots which they had put
at my feet. they appeared Somewhat passified and I left them and
proceeded on on the South Side of Image Canoe Island which I found to
be two Islands hid from the opposit Side by one near the Center of the
river. the lower point of the upper and the upper point of the lower
cannot be Seen from the North Side of the Columbia on which we had
passed both decending and ascending and had not observed the apperture
between those islands. at the distance of 13 Miles below the last
village and at the place I had Supposed was the lower point of the
image Canoe island, I entered this river which the nativs had informed
us of, Called Mult no mah River so called by the nativs from a Nation
who reside on Wappato Island a little below the enterance of this
river. Multnomah discharges itself in the Columbia on the S. E. and may
be justly Said to be 1/4 the Size of that noble river. Multnomah had
fallen 18 inches from it's greatest annual height. three Small Islands
are situated in it's mouth which hides the river from view from the
Columbia from the enterance of this river, I can plainly See Mt.
Jefferson which is high and Covered with snow S. E. Mt. Hood East, Mt
St. Helians a high humped Mountain to the East of Mt St. Helians. I
also Saw the Mt. Raneer Nearly North. Soon after I arived at this river
an old man passed down of the Clark a'mos Nation who are noumerous and
reside on a branch of this river which receives it's waters from
Mt.,Jefferson which is emensely high and discharges itself into this
river one day and a half up, this distance I State at 40 Miles. This
nation inhabits 11 Villages their Dress and language is very Similar to
the Quath-lah-poh-tle and other tribes on Wappato Island.

The Current of the Multnomar is as jentle as that of the Columbia
glides Smoothly with an eavin surface, and appears to be Sufficiently
deep for the largest Ship. I attempted fathom it with a Cord of 5
fathom which was the only Cord I had, could not find bottom 1/3 of the
distance across. I proceeded up this river 10 miles from it's enterance
into the Columbia to a large house on the N E. Side and Encamped near
the house, the flees being So noumerous in the house that we could not
Sleep in it. this is the house of the Cush-hooks Nation who reside at
the falls of this river which the pilot informs me they make use of
when they Come down to the Vally to gather Wappato. he also informs me
that a number of other Smaller houses are Situated on two Bayous which
make out on the S. E. Side a little below the house. this house appears
to have been laterly abandoned by its inhabitants in which they had
left Sundery articles Such as Small Canoes mats, bladdles of Oil and
baskits bowls & trenchers. and as my pilot informed me was gorn up this
to the falls to fish which is 2 days or 60 miles up. this house is 30
feet wide & presisely 40 feet long. built in the usial form of broad
boads Covered with bark.

The course and distance assending the Molt no mar R from it's enterance
into the Columbia at the lower point of the 3rd Image Canoe island. viz.

S. 30°W. 2 Miles to the upper point of a Small island in the Middle of
Moltnomar river. thence

S. 10° W. 3 miles to a Sluce 80 yards wide which devides Wappato Island
from the Main Stard. Side Shore passing a Willow point on the Lard.
Side.

S. 60° E. 3 miles to a large Indian house on the Lard Side below Some
high pine land. high bold Shore on the Starboard Side. thence

S. 30° E 2 miles to a bend under the high lands on the Stard Side

miles 10 passing a Larborad point.

thence the river bends to the East of S East as far as I could See. at
this place I think the wedth of the river may be Stated at 500 yards
and Sufficiently deep for a Man of War or Ship of any burthen.

[Lewis, April 3, 1806]
Thursday April 3rd 1806.
Early this morning Joseph Feilds came over and informed me that Reubin
Feilds Drewyer and himself had killed four Elk. as the party with me
were now but weak and the Indians constantly crouding about our camp, I
thought it best to send a few men to dry the meat on the other side of
the river; accordingly Sergt Pryor and two men returned with Jos.
Fields for that purpose. the hunters were ordered to continue the
chase; while the others were employed in drying the meat. I have had no
account as yet from the party below the entrance of Quicksand river.
The Indians continued to visit us today in considerable numbers most of
them were decending the river with their families. these poor people
appeared to be almost starved, they picked up the bones and little
peices of refuse meat which had been thrown away by the party. they
confirm the report of the scarcity of provision among the natives
above. I observe some of the men among them who wear a girdle arround
the waist between which and the body in front they confine a small skin
of the mink or polecat which in some measure conceals the parts of
generation, they also frequently wear a cap formed of the skin of the
deer's head with the ears left on it, they have some collars of leather
wrought with porcupine quills after the method of the Shoshonees. From
this place Mount Hood bears S. 85 E. distant 40 miles. This evening we
completed drying the flesh of the Elk which had been brought to camp.
at 6 P.M. Capt. Clark returned, having completely succeeded in his
expedition. he found the entrance of the large river of which the
Indians had informed us, just at the upper part of wappetoe Island. the
following is a sketch of the rivers furnished Capt C. by an old and
inteligent Indian man.-

[Clark, April 3, 1806]
Thursday April 3rd 1806
The water had fallen in the course of last night five inches. I Set out
and proceeded up a Short distance and attempted a Second time to fathom
the river with my cord of 5 fathom but could find no bottom. the mist
was So thick that I could See but a Short distance up this river. where
I left it, it was binding to the East of S. E. being perfectly
Sati'fyed of the Size and magnitude of this great river which must
Water that vast tract of Country betwen the Western range of mountains
and those on the Sea coast and as far S. as the Waters of Callifornia
about Latd. 37° North I deturmined to return. at 7 oClock A.M. Set out on
my return. the men exirted themselves and we arived at the Ne er cho ki
oo house in which the nativs were So illy disposed yesterday at 11 A.M.
I entered the house with a view to Smoke with those people who
Consisted of about 8 families, finding my presence alarmed them So much
that the children hid themselves, womin got behind their men, and the
men hung their heads, I detained but a fiew minits and returnd on board
the canoe. My pilot who Continued in the Canoe informed me on my return
that those people as well as their relations were very illy disposed
and bad people. I proceeded on along the South Side met five canoes of
the Shah-ha-la Nation from the Great rapids with their wives and
Children decending the Columbia into this fertile Vally in pursute of
provi-sions. my Pilot informed me in a low voice that those people were
not good, and I did not Suffer them to come along Side of my Canoe
which they appeared anxious to do. their numbers in those canoes who
appeard anxious to come along Side was 21 men and 3 boys. at 3 P M. we
arived at the residence of our Pilot which consists of one long house
with Seven appartments or rooms in Square form about 30 feet each room
opening into a passage which is quit through the house those passages
are about 4 feet in width and formed of Wide boads Set on end in the
ground and reaching to the Ruff which Serves also as divisions to the
rooms. The ground plot is in this form 1 1 1 1 is the passages. 2 2 &c.
is the apartments about 30 feet square. this house is built of bark of
the White Cedar Supported on long Stiff poles resting on the ends of
broad boads which form the rooms &c. back of this house I observe the
wreck of 5 houses remaining of a very large Village, the houses of
which had been built in the form of those we first Saw at the long
narrows of the E-lute Nation with whome those people are connected. I
indeavored to obtain from those people of the Situation of their
nation, if scattered or what had become of the nativs who must have
peopled this great town. an old man who appeared of Some note among
them and father to my guide brought foward a woman who was badly marked
with the Small Pox and made Signs that they all died with the disorder
which marked her face, and which She was verry near dieing with when a
Girl. from the age of this woman this Distructive disorder I judge must
have been about 28 or 30 years past, and about the time the Clatsops
inform us that this disorder raged in their towns and distroyed their
nation. Those people Speak a different language from those below tho in
their dress habits and manners &c. they differ but little from the
Quathlahpohtles. theire women ware the truss as those do of all the
nations risideing from the quathlahpohtle to the enterance of Lewis's
river and on the Columbia above for Some distance. those people have
Some words the Same with those below but the air of their language is
entirely different, their men are Stouter and much better made, and
their womin ware larger & longer robes than those do below; those are
most commonly made of Deer Skins dressed with the hair on them. they
pay great attention to their aged Severall men and women whom I
observed in this village had arived at a great age, and appeared to be
helthy tho blind. I provailed on an old man to draw me a Sketch of the
Multnomar River ang give me the names of the nations resideing on it
which he readily done, See draft on the other Side and gave me the
names Of 4 nations who reside on this river two of them very noumerous.
The first is Clark a-mus nation reside on a Small river which takes its
rise in Mount Jefferson and falls into the Moltnomar about 40 miles up.
this nation is noumerous and inhabit 11 Towns. the 2d is the Cush-hooks
who reside on the N E. Side below the falls, the 3rd is the Char-cowah
who reside above the Falls on the S W. Side neether of those two are
noumerous. The fourth Nation is the Cal-lar-po-e-wah which is very
noumerous & inhabit the Country on each Side of the Multnomar from its
falls as far up as the knowledge of those people extend. they inform me
also that a high mountain passes the Multnomar at the falls, and above
the Country is an open plain of great extent.

I purchased 5 dogs of those people for the use of their Oil in the
Plains, and at 4 P M left the Village and proceeded on to Camp where I
joind Capt. Lewis

The enterance of Multnomah river is 142 miles up the Columbia river
from its enterance into the Pacific Ocean-. in my absence and Soon
after I left camp Several Canoes of men women and Children came to the
camp. and at one time there was about 37 of those people in Camp Capt
Lewis fired his Air gun which astonished them in Such a manner that
they were orderly and kept at a proper distance dureing the time they
Continued with him- as maney as 10 Canoes arrived at Camp in the Course
of this day. they all Seem to give the Same account of the Scercity of
Provisions above. one family Continued all night and behaved themselves
in a very orderly manner.

on the 3rd Joseph Field returned from the woods and informed the
Drewyer Rubin & himself had killed four Elk. Capt L. Sent Sergt. Pryor
and two men with Joseph Field to dry the flesh of the Elk in the woods
on Scaffolds with fire. the party bilow quick Sand river did not return
to day. The Indians continue to vist our Camp in Considerable number
from above with their families. these pore people appeared half
Starved. they picked up the bones and little refuse meat which had been
thrown away by the party. Capt L had the flesh of the 4 Elk which was
killed on the 1st inst. dried- Some of the men of the nativs who
visited Capt Lewis wore a girdle, with a Small Skin in front and a Cap
of the Skin of the deers head &c.

[Lewis, April 4, 1806]
Friday April 4th 1806.
This morning early we sent Sergt. Ordway in Surch of Sergt. Gass and
party below the entrance of the Quicksand river fom whom we have yet
had no report. in the course of a few hours both parties returned.
Sergt. Gass and party brought the flesh of a bear and some venison.
they informed us that they had killed an Elk and six deer tho the flesh
of the greater part of those animals was so meagre that it was unfit
for uce and they had therefore left it in the woods. Collins who had
killed the bear, found the bed of another in which there were three
young ones; and requested to be permitted to return in order to waylay
the bed and kill the female bear; we permitted him to do so; Sergt.
Gass and Windsor returned with him. Several parties of the natives
visit us today as usual both from above and below; those who came from
above were moving with their families, and those from below appeared to
be empeled mearly by curiossity to see us. About noon we dispatched
Gibson Shannon Howard and Wiser in one of the light canoes, with orders
to proceed up the Columbia to a large bottom on the South side about
six miles above us and to hunt untill our arrival. late in the evening
Joseph Fields and Drewyer returned. they had killed two deer yesterday,
and informed us that the meat would be dryed by midday tomorrow. we
directed Drewyer and the two Feildses to ascend the river tomorrow to
join Gibson and party, and hunt untill our arrival. this evening being
fair I observed time and distance of Ys Eastern Limb from regulus with
Sextant. k West.

[Clark, April 4, 1806]
Friday April 4th 1806.
Mouth of quick Sand River
This morning early we Sent Sergt. Ordway in Serch of Sergt. Gass and
party below the enterance of quick Sand river from whome we have yet
had no report. in the Course of a fiew hours both parties returned.
Sergt. Gass and party brought the Flesh of a Bear, and Some venison.
they informed us they had killed an Elk and Six Deer tho the flesh of
the greater part of those Animals were So Meagre that it was unfit for
uce, and they had therefore left it in the woods. Collins who had
killed the Bear, found the bead of another in which there was three
young ones; and requested to be permited to return in order to waylay
the bed and kill the female bear; we permited him to do So; Sergt. Gass
and Windser returned with him. Several parties of the nativs visit us
to day as usial both from above and below; those who came from above
were moveing with their families, and those from below appeared to be
impeled mearly by curiosity to See us. About noon we dispatched Gibson,
Shannon, Howard & Wiser in one of the light Canoes, with orders to
proceed up the Columbia to a large bottom on the South Side about Six
Miles above us and there to hunt untill our arrival. late in the
evening Jos Fields and Drewyer returned with a load of dried meat. they
had killed two deer yesterday and informed us that the meat would be
dryed by Mid-day tomorrow. We directed Drewyer and Field's to assend
the river tomorrow and join Gibson & party, and hunt untill our
arrival. this evening being fair observed time and distance of moon's
Eastern Limb from regulus with Sextant * West

[Lewis, April 5, 1806]
Saturday April 5th 1806.
This morning was so cloudy that I could not obtain any lunar
observations with a Aquila as I wished. Joseph Fields and Drewyer
departed this morning agreeably to their orders of last evening. at 9
A.M. we Sent Sergt. Ordway and a party to assist Sergt. Pryor in
bringing in the meat of four Elk which he had dryed. at 1 P. M the
party returned with the meat. it had been so illy dryed that we feared
it would not keep. we therefore directed it to be cut thinner and
redryed over a fire this evening, as we purpose setting out early in
the morning. the deerskins which we have had cased for the purpose of
containing our dryed meat are not themselves sufficiently dryed for
that purpose, we directed them to be dryed by the fire also. the
weather has been so damp that there was no possibility of pounding the
meat as I wished.- we were visited today by several parties of the
natives as usual; they behaved themselves in a very orderly manner.
Observed Magnetic Azimuth and altitude of the sun with Circumferenter
and Sextant.

Saw the Log cock, the hummingbird, gees ducks &c today. the tick has
made it's appearance it is the same with those of the Atlantic States.
the Musquetoes have also appeared but are not yet troublesome.- this
morning at 10 OClock Sergt. Gass returned with Collins and Windsor they
had not succeeded in killing the female bear tho they brought the three
cubs with them. the Indians who visited us today fancyed these petts
and gave us wappetoe in exchange for them. Drewyer informed me that he
never knew a female bear return to her young when they had been
allarmed by a person and once compelled to leave them. The dogwood
grows abundantly on the uplands in this neighbourhood. it differs from
that of the United States in the appearance of it's bark which is much
smoother, it also arrives here to much greater size than I ever
observed it elsewhere sometimes the stem is nearly 2 feet in diameter.
we measured a fallen tree of fir No 1 which was 318 feet including the
stump which was about 6 feet high. this tree was only about 31/2 feet
in diameter. we saw the martin, small gees, the small speckled
woodpecker with a white back, the Blue crested Corvus, ravens, crows,
eagles Vultures and hawks. the mellow bug and long leged spider have
appeared, as have also the butterfly blowing fly and many other
insects. I observe not any among them which appear to differ from those
of our country or which deserve particular notice.

[Clark, April 5, 1806]
Saturday April 5th 1806.
This morning was So Cloudy that we could not obtain any lunar
observations with a Aquila as we wished.

Joseph Field & Drewrey left us this morning agreeably to their orders
of last evening. at the Same time we Sent Sergt. Ordway and five men to
assist Sergt. Pryor in bringing in the meat of four Elk which he had
dried in the woods. at 1 p.m.the party returned with the meat. it was
not Sufficiently dryed to keep. we had it cut thiner and redryed over a
fire this evening, as we purpose Setting out early in the morning. the
dear skins which we had cased for the purpose of holding our dried meat
is not Sufficently dry for that purpose, we derected them to be dried
by the fire also. the weather being So damp that there was no
possibullity of pounding the meat as I wished.- We were visited by
Several parties of the nativs to day; they behaved themselves in a very
orderly manner.

Saw the Log cock, the humming bird, Geese, Ducks &c. to day. the tick
has made it's appearance it is the Same with those of the Atlantic
States. the Musquetors have also appeared, but are not yet much
troublesom.- this morning at 10 A M Sergt. Gass returned with Collins
and Windser they had not Succeeded in killing the female bear, tho they
brought the three cub's with them. the Indians who visited us to day
fancied those Petts and gave us wappato in exchange for them. Fir and
White Cedar is the common growth of the up lands, as is the Cotton
wood, ash, large leafed Ash and Sweet Willow that of the bottom lands.
The Huckleberry, shallon, and the Several evergreen Shrubs, of that
Speces that bears berries have Seased to appear, except that Species
which has the leaf with a prickley Margin. among the plants of this
prarie in which we are encamped I observe the pashequo, Shannetahque,
and Compound firn, the root of which the nativs eate; also the water
cress, Straw berry flowering pea not yet in blume, narrow dock, and
rush which are luxuriant and abundent in the river bottoms. the large
leafed thorn has also disappeard. The red flowering Current is found
here in considerable quantities on the upland, and the Common Dog wood
is found on either Side of the river in this neighbourhood and above
Multnomah river. The Country on either Side is fertile, the bottom on
the South Side is wide and inter sperced with Small ponds in which the
nativs gather their Wappato. back of this bottom the Country rises to
about 200 feet and the Soil is very rich as that also above q Sandy
river quite to the Mountains. the Country on the N. Side from a fiew
Miles above this place as low down as the enterance of
Cah-wah-na-ki-ooks River rises to the hight generally of 150 or 200
feet is tolerably leavel, thickly timbered with Fir and White Cedar.
the Soil of the richest quallity. Some Small Praries on the bank of the
river. That portion of Country below as low down as the enterance of
Cah-wah na ki ooks River is a broken rich Country. the hills are high,
the bottom lands as before mentioned and fertile &c.-The Country a fiew
miles up the Multnomah River rises from the river bottoms to the hight
of from 2 to 300 feet and is rich & fertile. Some Plains can be Seen to
the N. E. of our Camp of 10 or 12 miles in Secumference The Hunters &
Serjt Pryor informed us that they had Measured a tree on the upper Side
of quick Sand River 312 feet long and about 4 feet through at the Stump.

[Lewis, April 6, 1806]
Sunday April 6th 1806.
This morning we had the dryed meat secured in skins and the canoes
loaded; we took breakfast and departed at 9 A.M. we continued up the N.
side of the river nearly to the place at which we had encamped on the
3rd of Nov. when we passed the river to the south side in quest of the
hunters we had sent up yesterday and the day before. from the
appearance of a rock near which we had encamped on the 3rd of November
last I could judge better of the rise of the water than I could at any
point below. I think the flood of this spring has been about 12 feet
higher than it was at that time; the river is here about 11/2 miles
wide; it's general width from the beacon rock which may be esteemed the
head of tide water, to the marshey islands is from one to 2 miles tho
in many places it is still wider. it is only in the fall of the year
when the river is low that the tides are persceptable as high as the
beacon rock. this remarkable rock which stands on the North shore of
the river is unconnected with the hills and rises to the hight of seven
hundred feet; it has some pine or reather fir timber on it's nothern
side, the southern is a precipice of it's whole hight. it rises to a
very sharp point and is visible for 20 miles below on the river. at the
distance of ten miles from our encampment we met with our hunters in
the upper end of the bottom to which we had directed them on the South
side of the river. they had killed three Elk this morning and wounded
two others so badly that they expected to get them. we therefore
determined to encamp for the evening at this place in order to dry the
meat, in surch of which we sent a party immediately and employed others
in preparing scaffoalds and collecting firewood &c against their
return. we found some indians with our hunters when we arrived; these
people are constantly hanging about us.- As has been before mentioned
Capt C set out with a party of seven men on 2ed inst. in surch of the
entrance of the Multnomah river. he departed at 1/2 after 11 A. M and
directed his course along the Southern side of the river. at the
distance of 8 miles he passed the village of the Na-cha-co-lee tribe of
the E-lute Nation; this village is not large and being situated on the
main shore opposite to and S. of the Diamond Island it was concealed by
that island from our view both ascending and decending the Columbia as
we passed near the Northern shore. Capt C. passed this village without
halting and continued his rout untill 3 P.M. when he arrived at a large
double house of the Ne-er-cho-ki-oo tribe of the Shah'ha-la nation; at
this place we had seen 24 additional straw and bark huts as we passed
down last fall, the inhabitants of which as I have before mentioned
reside at the great rapids of the Columbia river. about this place in
different directions Capt C. saw a great number of small canoes lying
scattered on the bank. these small canoes are employed by the women in
collecting wappetoe; with one of these a woman enters a pond where the
Sagitaria Sagittifolia grows frequently to her breast in water and by
means of her toes and feet breakes the bulb of this plant loos from the
parent radicle and disincumbering it from the mud it immediately rises
to the surface of the water when she seizes it and throws it into her
canoe which she always keeps convenient to her. they will remain in the
water for hours together in surch of this bulb in middle of winter.
those canoes are from 10 to 14 feet in length, from 18 to 23 inches in
width near the middle tapering or becoming narrower towards either
extremity and 9 inches deep their form is thus. they are so light that
a woman can draw them over land or take them with ease through the
swamps in any direction, and are sufficient to carry a single person
and several bushells of roots. Capt. Clarks pilot informed him that the
small canoes which he saw in the vicinity of this lodge were the
property of the Shah-ha-las who used them occasionally when they visit
this neighbourhood for the purpose of collecting roots. while at this
place Capt C. entered one of the appartments of the house and offered
several articles to the natives in exchange for wappetoe, they appeared
to be in an ill humour and positively refused to let him have any.
Capt. C. sat himself down near the fire and having a part of a portfire
match in his pocket cut of a small peice of it and threw it in the
fire; at the same time he took out his pocket compass and by means of a
magnet which he had in the top of his inkstand he turned the nedle of
the compass about very briskly; the match took fire and birned
vehemently; the indians astonished and allarmed at these exhibitions,
ran and brought several parcels of wappetoe and laid at his feet and
begged that he would put out the bad fire; to this he consented; at
this moment the match being exhausted was of course extenguished and he
put up his compass & magnet. they were now much more complisant, tho
the women and children were yet so much allarmed that they took refuge
in their beads and behing the men who were seting opposite to Capt. C.
during the whole of this farcical seen an old man who was seting by
continued to speak with great vehemence apparently imploring his god
for protection. Capt. C. gave them an adiquate compensation for their
roots and having lighted his pipe smoaked with the men. they appeared
in a great measure to get the better of their allarm and he left them
and continued his rout along the south side of Image canoe Island which
he found to be three islands, the one in the center concealing the
apperture between the two others in such manner that from the north
side of the river where we have previously passed they all appeared to
form one island only. at the distance of 13 miles below the village
just mentioned, and at the lower point of what we have heretofore
deemed the image canoe Island, Capt C. entered the Multnomah river so
called by the natives from a nation of that name who reside on wappetoe
island a little below the entrance of this river? Multnomah river
discharges itself on the S. side of the Columbia 140 miles above the
entrance of the latter into the Pacific Ocean, and may be justly
esteemed one fourth of that noble river. Capt. C. found that this river
had attained it's greatest annual hight and had now fallen about 18
inches. it has three small islands in it's mouth which conceal the
river from the view of those who pass with the stream of the Columbia.
from the Columbia at the entrance of the Multonomah river Mount
Jefferson bears S. E. this is a noble mountain. I think equally as high
as Mount St. Helines but it's distance being much greater than that of
the latter, so great a portion of it dose not appear above the range of
mountains which lie betwen boath those stupendious mountains and this
point of view. like mount St. Heleans it's figure is a regular cone and
is covered with eternal snow. M. St. Heleans from the same point boar N
____, Mount Hood due East, and Mount Raniei nearly North. there is also
a very high humped mountain a little to the East of Mount St. Heleans
which appears to lie in the same chain with those conic pointed
mountains before mentioned. soon after Capt Clark entered the Multnomah
river he was met by an old Indian man alone in a canoe decending the
river, the pilot had some conversation with him and informed Capt. C.
that this was a man of the Clark-a'-mas nation who are numerous and
inhabit eleven vilages on either side of a river of the same name which
has it's source in Mount Jefferson and after tranversing a woody and
fertile country discharges itself into the Multnomah river on it's E.
side at the distance of about 40 miles from it's junction with the
Columbia. the Clarkamas river is navigable for canoes a great distance,
from the Indian account almost to the foot of mount, Jefferson. the
nation who inhabit it's borders live principally on fish with which
this stream abounds and also on roots which they procure on it's
borders. they sometimes also come down to the Multnomah and Columbia in
surch of Wappatoe. they do not differ essentially in their language
dress &c from the Quathlahpohtles and others in the vicinity of
wappetoe island. The current of the Multnomah river is as gentle as
that of the Columbia, glides smoothly with an even surface, and appears
to possess sufficient debth for the largest ship. Capt. C. attempted to
sound it with a cord of 5 fathoms which was the longest in his
possession but could not find bottom at this debth for at least one
third of the width of the river. Capt. C. ascended this river ten miles
to a large wood house on the East side of the river, near which he
encamped for the evening; the house being infested with such swarms of
flees that they could not remain in it. this his guide informed him was
the house of the Cush-hooks nation who reside just below the falls of
the Multnomah river and who occasionally reside at this place for the
purpose of collecting wappetoe. at present this house appeared to have
been lately abandoned by the natives who had left therein exposed to
every visiter various articles such as small canoes, mats, bladders of
train oil, baskets, bowls and trenchers. this is a strong evidence of
the honesty of the natives with rispect to the property of each other,
but they have given us several evidences that they do not pay the same
rispect to the property of white men. his guide further informed him
that there were a number of small houses belonging to the last
mentioned nation situated on two bayous which make out of the river a
little above this large hose on the East side; that the inhabitants of
these as well as those of the large house had gone up to the falls of
the Multnomah river for the purpose of taking fish. these falls are
situated at the distance of 2 days travel from the junction of the
Multnomah and Columbia rivers agreeably to the Indian account which we
have estimated at 60 miles or 20 m. above the entrance of Clarkamus
river. Capt C. took the dementions of the hose of the Ne-mal-quin-ner
tribe of the Cushhooks nation near which he encamped on the 2ed inst.
and found it presisely thirty feet by 40 squar constructed with broad
boards and covered with the bark of the white cedar or arborvita; the
floor is on a level with the surface of the earth and the internal
arrangement is similar to those of the natives of the Sea coast.- these
people carry on a trafic with the Killamucks of the coast across the
mountains and by way of the Killamucks river from the Killamucks they
obtain their train oil. The courses and distances taken by Capt. Clark
in ascending the Multnomah river from it's junction with the Columbia
river, commencing at the lower extremity of the Image canoe Islands are
as follows. (viz) S. 30° W. 4 m. to the upper point of a small island in
the center of Multnomah river. thence S 10° W. 3 m. to a sluce 80 yds.
wide on Stard. which dividing wappetoe Island from the main land
discharges itself into wappetoe inlet passed a willow point on Lard. S.
60° W. 3 ms. to a large indian house on the Lard. side, just below some
high fir land the shore is bold and high on Stard. side. S 30° E. 2 ms.
to the center of a bend under The highlands on Stard. side, passing a
Lard. point; from hence the river directed it's course to the E. of S.
E. as far as Capt. C. could perceive it.- at this place the Multnomah
river is 500 yds. wide and sufficiently deep to admit the largest ship.
the river appears to be washing away it's banks in some places, and has
more sandbars and willow points than the Columbia.On the morning of the
3rd inst. Capt. Clark observed that the water had fallen in the course
of the night about 5 inches. he set out early and proceeded up the
river a short distance few miles and attempted a second time to fathom
it but with the same success as before he could nt find bottom with his
cord of 5 fathoms for the distance of half the width of the stream.
Capt C. having fully satisfyed himself of the magnitude of this great
river he set out on his return at 7 A.M. I have but little doubt but
that this river waters a vast tract of country lying between the
Western mountains and the mountainous country of the sea coast
extending as far south as the waters of the gulph of Callifornia or
about Latitude 37° North. at 11 A.M. Capt. C. arrived at the
Ne-er-cho-ki-oo house where he had allarmed the inhabtants yesterday.
he halted here a few minutes to smoke with these people who consisted
of eight families. he found that his presents excited fresh allarm
particularly among the women and children who hid themselves and took
refuge behind the men as yesterday; the men held down their heads and
seemed much conserned; he therefore remained in the house but a few
minutes, returned to his canoe and pursued his rout. his pilot now
informed him that these people as well as their relations at the falls
of the Columbia were illy disposed bad men. soon after he set out he
met five canoes on board of which there were as many families of the
Shah-ha-la nation decending the river in surch of subsistence. they
were extreemly anxious to come along side, but he forbid their doing so
as their number was too considerable there being 21 men on board these
canoes. his pilot told him that they were mischevous bad men. at 3 P.M.
he arrived at the present residence of his pilot on the South side of
the river opposite the Diamond Island. here he halted about an hour he
found this house very large; it consisted of seven appartments in one
range above ground each about 30 feet square. the entrances to these
appartments were from passages which extended quite across the house,
about 4 feet wide and formed like the walls of the hose of broad boards
set on end extending from beneath the floor to the roof of the house.
the apperture or hole through which they enter all those wooden houses
are remarkably small not generally more than 3 feet high and about 22
inches wide. the ground plot of the Nechecolee house is thus 1 1 1 1
the passages of 4 feet and 2 2 &c. the appartments of 30 feet square.
this house is covered with the bark of the white cedar, laid on in a
double course, supported by rafters and longitudinal round poles
attatched to the rafters with cores of this bark. the peices of the
cedar bark extend the whole length of the side of the roof and jut over
at the eve about 18 inches. at the distance of 18 inches transverse
splinters of dry fir is inserted through the cedar bark in order to
keep it smooth and prevent it's edges from colapsing by the heat of the
sun; in this manner the natives make a very secure light and lasting
roof of this bark. in the vicinity of this house Capt. Clark observed
the remains of five other large houses which appeared to have been sunk
in the ground several feet and built after the method of those of the
Elutes nation at the great narrows of the columbia with whom these
people claim affinity. their language is the same with the Elutes, tho
in their habits, dress manners &c they differ but little from the
Quathlahpohtles and others in this neighborhood. they make use of some
words common to their neighbours but the air of their language is
entirely different. they are much better formed and their men larger
than the nations below. their women wear larger and longer robes which
are made principally of deerskins dressed in the hair. they pay great
rispect to their aged persons. Capt. C. observed several persons of
both sexes who appeared to have arrived to great age yet they appeared
perfectly healthy tho most of them perfectly blind. the loss of sight I
have observed to be more common among all the nations inhabiting this
river than among any people I ever observed. they have almost
invariably soar eyes at all stages of life. the loss of an eye is very
common among them; blindness in perdsons of middle age is by no means
uncommon, and it is almost invariably a concommitant of old age. I know
not to what cause to attribute this prevalent deficientcy of the eyes
except it be their exposure to the reflection of the sun on the water
to which they are constantly exposed in the occupation of fishing.
Capt. C. enquired of the Nechecole the cause of the decline of their
village. an old man who appeared to be of some note among them and the
father of his guide brought forward a woman who was much marked with
the small pox, and made signs that the inhabitants of those houses
which he saw in ruins had all died with the disorder which marked the
face of the woman and with which this woman was very near dying when a
girl. from the apparent age of the woman Capt. C. supposed that it was
about 28 or 30 years since this disorder had prevailed among these
people. this is about the time which we have supposed that it prevailed
among the Clatsops and others of the coast. Capt C. now prevailed on
this old man to give him a sketch of the Multnomah river it's branches
and the position and names of the Indian nations residing thereon this
the old man son executed with his finger in the dust. (see scetch
inserted on the 3rd inst.). he informed that the Cush-hooks and
Char-cow-ah nations who reside at the falls of that river were not
numerous; but that the Cal-lah-po-e-wah nation who inhabited both sides
of this river above the falls as far as it was known to himself or his
nation were very numerous. that the country they inhabited was level
and wholy destitute of timber. that a high range of mountains passed
the Multnomah river at the falls, on the upperside of which the country
was one vast plain. the nations who inhabit this country reside on the
rivers and subsist like those of the Columbia on fish and roots
principally. Capt C. bought five dogs of these people and set out for
my camp at 5 P.M. where he arrived a little before dark, on the evening
of the third.- the party whom we sent for the flesh of the Elk which
Shannon had killed returned in the evening with that of four, one had
by some mistake been omitted. Drewyer and shannon found the two wounded
Elk and had killed them. we set all hands at work to prepare the meat
for the saffoald they continued their operations untill late at night.
we directed Shannon to go out early in the morning with a party to
bring in the Elk which had been left last evening in mistake. we also
directed Drewyer and the two Feildses to ascend the river early in the
morning to a small bottom a few miles above and hunt untill our
arrival.-

[Clark, April 6, 1806]
Sunday April 6th 1806.
Two Indians Came last night very late to our Camp and continued all
night. early we had all the meat packed up and our Canoes loaded ready
for to Set out and after an early brackfast at which time all things
were ready and we Set out and proceeded to the Camp of Gibson & party
about 9 miles, they had killed 3 Elk at no great distance and Wounded
two others so badly that we expect to precure them. Sent a party of Six
men with Shannon who had killed the Elk to bring in the Elk, and formed
a Camp, near which we had a Scaffold made ready to dry the meat as Soon
as it Should arive. Reubin Field killed a bird of the Quail kind or
Class which was whistleing near our Camp it is larger than the quail or
partridge as they are Called Kentucky and Virginia. it's form is
presisely that of our partridge tho its plumage differs in every part.
the upper part of the head, Sides and back of the neck, including the
Croop and about of the under part of the body is of a bright dove
coloured blue, under neath the under beak, as high as the lower edge of
the eye, and back as far as the hinder part of the eyes and thence
comeing down to a point in the front of the neck about 2/3rd of it's
length downwards, is of a fine dark brick red. between this brick red
and the dove colour there runs a narrow Stripe of pure white. the ears
are covered with some coarse dark brown feathers. just at the base of
the under chap there is a narrow transvirce Stripe of white. from the
crown of the head two long round feathers extend backwards nearly in
the direction of the beak and are of a black Colour. the length of
these feathers is 21/2 inches. one overlais and Conseals the other
which is Somewhat Shorter and Seems to be raped in the plumage of that
in front which folding backwards colapses behing and has a round
appearance. the tail is composed of 12 dark brown feathers of nearly
equal length. the large feathers of the wings are of a dark brown & are
reather Short in purpotion to the body of the bird. in this respect
very Similar to the partridge. the covert of the wings and back are of
a dove Colour with a Slight admixture of redish brown. a wide Stripe
which extends from Side to Side of the body and occupies the lower
region of the breast is beautifully varigated with the brick red white
& black which perdominates in the order they are mentioned and the
Colours mark the feathers transversely. the legs are covered with
feathers as low as the Knee; these feathers are of dark brown tiped
with a dark brick red as are also those between and about the joining
of the legs with the body. the foot is presisely that of the Common
partridge except that they are as also the legs white. the upper beak
is Short, wide at it's base, black, convex, curved downwards and
reather obtusely pointed. it exceeds the under chap considerably which
is of a white colour, also convex under neath and obtusely pointed. the
nostrils are remarkably Small, placed far back and low down on the
Sides of the beak. they are covered by a thin proterant elastic, black
leather like Substance. the eyes are of a uniform pierceing black
colour. this is a most butifull bird I preserved the Skin of this bird
retaining the wings feet & head which I hope will give a just Idea of
the bird. it's loud note is Single and Consists of a loud Squall,
intirely different from the whistling of our partridge or quailes. it
has a chiping note when allarmed like our partridge.- to day there was
a Second of those birds killed which presisely resembles that just
discribed. I believe those to be the mail bird the female, if so, I
have not yet Seen.-.

at 6 P.M. Shannon and party returned with the flesh of five Elk. the
two he had wounded in the morning he found dead near the place he had
Shot them. we had the meat cut into thin pices and Scaffored with a
fire under it to dry out, which we expect in the course of the night
Can be effected. four Indians from the great rapids visited us to day
and Continued all day. they give the Same account of the Scercity of
provisions above the falls as has already been given by others. This
Supply of Elk I think by useing economey and in addition of roots and
dogs which we may probably precure from he Nativs on Lewis's river will
be Sufficient to last us to the Chopunnish where we Shall Meet with our
horses-. and near which place there is Some deer to be precured.

Frazer killed a pheasent of the Common kind. Jos. Field killed a
vulture of that Speces already discribed. in the evening late the
Indians left us and returned to their village. we detected that fires
be kept under the meat all night. and tha Drewyer and the two Fields
proceed on to the next bottom and hunt untill we Should arive. 9 miles

[Lewis, April 7, 1806]
Monday April 7th 1806.
This morning early the flesh of the remaining Elk was brought in and
Drewyer with the Feildses departed agreeably to the order of the last
evening. we employed the party in drying the meat today which we
completed by the evening, and we had it secured in dryed Elkskins and
put on board in readiness for an early departure. we were visited today
by several parties of indians from a village about 8 miles above us of
the Sahhalah nation. I detected one of them in steeling a peice of lead
and sent him from camp. I hope we have now a sufficient stock of dryed
meat to serve us as far the Chopunnish provided we can obtain a few
dogs horses and roots by the way. in the neighbourhood of the
Chopunnish we can procure a few deer and perhaps a bear or two for the
mountains. last evening Reubin Fields killed a bird of the quail kind
it is reather larger than the quail, or partridge as they are called in
Virginia. it's form is precisely that of our patridge tho it's plumage
differs in every part. the upper part of the head, sides and back of
the neck, including the croop and about 1/3 of the under part of the
body is of a bright dove coloured blue, underneath the under beak, as
high as the lower edge of the eyes, and back as far as the hinder part
of the eyes and thence coming down to a point in front of the neck
about two thirds of it's length downwards, is of a fine dark brick red.
between this brick red and the dove colour there runs a narrow stripe
of pure white. the ears are covered with some coarse stiff dark brown
feathers. just at the base of the under chap there is narrow transverse
stripe of white. from the crown of the head two long round feathers
extend backwards nearly in the direction of the beak and are of a black
colour. the longest of these feathers is two inches and an half, it
overlays and conceals the other which is somewhat shorter and seems to
be raped in the plumage of that in front which folding backwards
colapses behind and has a round appearance. the tail is composed of
twelve dark brown feathers of nearly equal length. the large feathers
of the wings are of a dark brown and are reather short in proportion to
the body of the bird in that rispect very similar to our common
partridge. the covert of the wings and back are of a dove colour with a
slight admixture of redish brown. a wide stripe which extends from side
to side of the body and occupyes the lower region of the breast is
beautifully variagated with the brick red white and black which
pedominate in the order they are mentioned and the colours mark the
feathers transversely. the legs are covered with feathers as low as the
knee; these feathers are of a dark brown tiped with the dark brick red
as are also those between and about the joining of the legs with the
body. they have four toes on each foot of which three are in front and
that in the center the longest, those one each side nearly of a length;
that behing is also of good length and are all armed with long and
strong nails. the legs and feet are white and imbrecated with
proportionably large broad scales. the upper beak is short, wide at
it's base, black, convex, curved downwards and reather obtusely
pointed. it exceeds the under chap considerably which is of a white
colour, also convex underneath and obtusely pointed. the nostrils are
remarkably small placed far back and low down on the sides of the beak.
they are covered by a thin protuberant elastic, black leatherlike
substance. the eyes are of a uniform piercing black colour. this is a
most beautifull bird. I preserved the skin of this bird retaining the
wings feet and head which I hope will give a just idea of the bird.
it's loud note is single and consists of a loud squall, intirely
different from the whistling of our quales or partridge. it has a
cherping note when allarmed something like ours.- today there was a
second of these birds killed by Capt C. which precisely resembled that
just discribed. I believe these to be the male bird the female, if so,
I have not yet seen.- the day has been fair and weather extreemly
pleasant. we made our men exercise themselves in shooting today and
regulate their guns found several of them that had their sights moved
by accedent, and others that wanted some little alterations all which
were compleatly rectifyed in the course of the day. in the evening all
the Indians departed for their village.

[Clark, April 7, 1806]
Monday April 7th 1806
This morning Drewyer & the two Fields Set out agreeably to their orders
of last evening, the remainder of the party employed in drying the
flesh of the five Elk killed by Shannon yesterday. which was completed
and we had it Secured in dried Shaved Elk Skins and put on board in
readiness for our early departure. we were visited by Several parties
of Indians from a Village about 12 miles above us of the Sahhalah
nation. one of them was detected in Stealing a piece of Lead. I Sent
him off imedeately. I hope now we have a Sufficient Stock of dryed meat
to Serve us as far as the Chopunnish provided we can obtain a fiew
dogs, horses and roots by the way. in the neighbourhood of the
Chopunnish under the Rocky Mountains we can precure a fiew deer, and
perhaps a Bear or two for the Mountains.

The day has been fair and weather exceedingly pleasent. we made our men
exersise themselves in Shooting and regulateing their guns, found
Several of them that had their Sights moved by accident, and others
that wanted Some little alterations all which were compleated rectified
in the Course of the day except my Small rifle, which I found wanted
Cutting out. about 4 oClock P M all the Indians left us, and returned
to their Village. they had brought with them Wappato, & pashequa roots
Chapellel cakes, and a Species of Raspberry for Sale, none of which
they disposed of as they asked Such enormous prices for those articles
that we were not able to purchase any. Drewyer returned down the river
in the evening & informed us that the nativs had Sceared all the Elk
from the river above. Joseph & reuben Fields had proceeded on further
up the river in the canoe, he expected to the village.

I provaled on an old indian to mark the Multnomah R down on the Sand
which hid and perfectly Corisponded with the Sketch given me by sundary
others, with the addition of a circular mountain which passes this
river at the falls and connects with the mountains of the Seacoast. he
also lais down the Clark a mos passing a high Conical Mountain near
it's mouth on the lower Side and heads in Mount Jefferson which he lais
down by raiseing the Sand as a very high mountain and Covered with
eternal Snow. the high mountain which this Indian lais down near the
enterance of Clark a mos river, we have not Seen as the hills in it's
diretion from this vally is high and obscures the Sight of it from us.
Mt Jefferson we Can plainly See from the enterance of Multnomah from
which place it bears S. E. this is a noble Mountain and I think equally
as high or Something higher than Mt. St. Heleansa but its distance
being much greater than that of the latter, So great a portion of it
does not appear above the range of mountains which lie between both
those Stupendious Mountains and the Mouth of Multnomah. like Mt. St.
Heleans its figure is a regular Cone and is covered with eturnial Snow.
that the Clarkamos nation as also those at the falls of the Multnomah
live principally on fish of which those Streams abound and also on
roots which they precure on it's borders, they also Sometimes Come down
to the Columbia in Serch of Wappato. they build their houses in the
Same form with those of the Columbian Vally of wide Split boads and
Covered with bark of the White Cedar which is the entire length of the
one Side of the roof and jut over at the eve about 18 inches. at the
distance of about 18 inches transvers Spinters of dried pine is
inserted through the Ceder bark inorder to keep it Smooth and prevent
it's edge from Colapsing by the heat of the Sun; in this manner the
nativs make a very Secure light and lasting roof of this bark. which we
have observed in every Vilege in this Vally as well as those above.
this Indian also informed me the multnomah above the falls was Crouded
with rapids and thickly inhabited by indians of the Callah-po-e-wah
Nation. he informed he had himself been a long way up that river &c.

[Lewis, April 8, 1806]
Tuesday April 8th 1806.
The wind blew so violently this morning that we were obliged to unlode
our perogues and canoes, soon after which they filled with water. being
compelled to remain during the day at our present station we sent out
some hunters in order to add something to our stock of provision; and
exposed our dryed meat to the sun and the smoke of small fires. in the
evening the hunters returned having killed a duck only; they saw two
bear and some of the blacktailed jumping or fallow deer, such as are
found about Fort Clatsop; this kind of deer are scarce in this
neighbourhood, the common longtailed fallow deer being most abundant.
we have seen the black bear only in this quarter. the wind continued
without intermission to blow violently all day. I took a walk today of
three miles down the river; in the course of which I had an opportunity
to correct an errow which I have heretofore made with rispect to the
shrub I have hithertoo called the large leafed thorn. the leaf of this
thorn is small being only abut 21/2 inches long, is petiolate,
conjugate; the leafets are petiolate accutely pointed, having their
margins cut with unequal angular insissures. the shrub which I have
heretofore confounded with this grows in similar situations, has a stem
precisely like it except the thorn and bears a large three loabed leaf.
this bryer is of the class Polyandria and order Polygynia. the flowers
are single, the peduncle long and celindric. the calix is a perianth,
of one leaf, five cleft, & accutely pointed. the perianth is proper,
erect, inferior with rispect to both petals and germen, and equal. the
corolla consists of five accute pale scarlet petals, insirted in the
recepticle with a short and narrow claw. the Corolla is smooth,
moderately long, situated at the base of the germen, permanent, and cup
shaped. of the stamens the filaments are subulate, inserted into the
recepticle, unequal and bent inwards concealing the pistillum; anther
two loabed and inflected situated on the top of the fillaments of the
pistillum the germ is conical, imbricated, superior, sessile and short.
the styles are short with rispect to the stamen, capillary smooth,
obtuse, distributed over the serface of the germ and decid-uous. no
perseptable stigma.- late at night the centinel detected an old indian
man in attempting to creep into camp in order to pilfer; he allarmed
the indian very much by presenting his gun at him; he gave the fellow a
few stripes with a switch and sent him off. this fellow is one of a
party of six who layed incamped a few hundred yards below us, they
departed soon after this occurrence.

[Clark, April 8, 1806]
Tuesday April 8th 1806
This morning about day light I heard a Considerable roreing like wind
at a distance and in the Course of a Short time ways rose very high
which appeared to come across the river and in the Course of an hour
became So high that we were obliged to unload the canoes, at 7 oClock
A.M. the winds Suelded and blew So hard and raised the Waves So
emensely high from the N. E and tossed our Canoes against the Shore in
Such a manner as to render it necessary to haul them up on the bank.
finding from the appearance of the winds that it is probable that we
may be detained all day, we Sent out Drewyer, Shannon Colter & Collins
to hunt with derections to return if the Wind Should lul, if not to
Continue the hunt all day except they killed Elk or bear Sooner &c. we
had the dried meat which was cured at our last encampment below exposed
to the Sun. John Shields Cut out my Small rifle & brought hir to Shoot
very well. the party ows much to the injenuity of this man, by whome
their guns are repared when they get out of order which is very often.

I observed an Indian Woman who visited us yesterday blind of an eye,
and a man who was nearly blind of both eyes. the loss of Sight I have
observed to be more Common among all the nations inhabiting this river
than among any people I ever observed. they have almost invariably Sore
eyes at all Stages of life. the loss of an eye is very Common among
them; blindness in persons of middle age is by no means uncommon, and
it is almost invariably a concammitant of old age. I Know not to what
cause to attribute this prevalent deficientcy of the eye except it be
their exposure to the reflection of the Sun on the water to which they
are constantly exposed in the Occupation of fishing. about 1 P M
Collins Shannon and Colter returned. Collins Saw 2 bear but could not
get a Shot at them. neither Shannon nor Colter Saw any thing worth
Shooting. Soon after Drewyer returned haveing only a Summer Duck. the
Elk is gorn to the mountains as the hunters Suppose. in the evening
late an old man his Son & Grand Son and their Wives &c. Came down
dureing the time the waves raged with great fury. the wife of the Grand
Son is a woman of differant appearance from any we have Seen on this
river, she has a very round head and pierceing black eyes. Soon after
those people arived the Old man was detected in Stealing a Spoon and he
was ordered away, at about 200 yards below our Camp they built
themselves a fire and did not return to our fires after-. The Wind
Continued violently hard all day, and threw our Canoes with Such force
against the Shore that one of them Split before we Could get it out.

[Lewis, April 9, 1806]
Wednesday April 9th 1806.
This morning early we commenced the operation of reloading our canoes;
at 7 A.M. we departed and proceeded on to the Camp of Reubin and Joseph
Fields they had not killed any game; we made no halt at this place but
continued our rout to the Wah-clel-lah Village which is situated on the
North side of the river about a mile below the beacon rock; here we
halted and took breakfast. John Colter one of our party observed the
tomehawk in one of the lodges which had been stolen from us on the 4th
of November last as we decended this river; the natives attempted to
wrest the tomahawk from him but he retained it. they indeavoured
afterwards to exculpate themselves from the odium of having stolen it,
they alledged that they had bought it from the natives below; but their
neighbours had several days previously, informed us that these people
had stolen the Tommehawk and then had it at their village. this village
appears to be the winter station of the Wah-clel-lahs and Clahclellars,
the greater part of the former have lately removed to the falls of the
Multnomah, and the latter have established themselves a few miles above
on the North side of the river opposite the lower point of brant
island, being the commencement of the rapids, here they also take their
salmon; they are now in the act of removing, and not only take with
them their furniture and effects but also the bark and most of the
boards which formed their houses. 14 houses remain entire but are at
this time but thinly inhabited, nine others appear to have been lately
removed, and the traces of ten or twelve others of ancient date were to
be seen in the rear of their present village. they sometimes sink their
houses in the earth, and at other times have their floors level with
the surface of the earth; they are generally built with boards and
covered with Cedar bark. most of them have a devision in their houses
near the entrance wich is at the end or in the event of it's bing a
double house is from the center of a narrow passage. several families
inhabit one appartment. the women of these people pierce the cartelage
of the nose in which they wear various ornaments in other rispects they
do not differ from those in the neighbourhood of the Diamond island;
tho most of the women brad their hair which hanges in two tresses one
hanging over each ear. these people were very unfriendly, and seemed
illy disposed had our numbers not detered them any acts of violence.
with some difficuly we obtained five dogs from them and a few wappetoe.
on our way to this village we passed several beautifull cascades which
fell from a great hight over the stupendious rocks which cloles the
river on both sides nearly, except a small bottom on the South side in
which our hunters were encamped. the most remarkable of these casscades
falls about 300 feet perpendicularly over a solid rock into a narrow
bottom of the river on the south side. it is a large creek, situated
about 5 miles above our encampment of the last evening. several small
streams fall from a much greater hight, and in their decent become a
perfect mist which collecting on the rocks below again become visible
and decend a second time in the same manner before they reach the base
of the rocks. the hills have now become mountains high on each side are
rocky steep and covered generally with fir and white cedar. we saw some
turkey buzzards this morning of the speceis common to the United states
which are the first we have seen on this side the rocky mountains.
during our halt at this village the grand Cheif and two inferior Cheifs
of the Chil-luck-kit-to-quaw nation arrived with several men and women
of their nation in two large canoes. these people were on their return
up the river, having been on a trading voyage to the Columbean vally,
and were loaded with wappetoe dryed anchovies, with some beads &c which
they had received in exchange for dryed and pounded salmon shappelell
beargrass &c. These people had been very kind to us as we decended the
river we therefore smoked with them and treated them with every
attention. at 2 P.M. we renewed our voyage; passed under the beacon
rock on the north side, to the left of two small islands situated near
the shore. at four P.M. we arrived at the Clah-clel-lah village; here
we found the natives busily engaged in erecting their new habitations,
which appear to be reather of a temperary kind; it is most probable
that they only reside here during the salmon season. we purchased two
dogs of these people who like those of the village blow were but sulky
and illy disposed; they are great rogues and we are obliged to keep
them at a proper distance from our bag-gage. as we could not ascend the
rapid by the North side of the river with our large canoes, we passed
to the oposite side and entered the narrow channel which seperates
brant Island from the South shore; the evening being far spent and the
wind high raining and very cold we thought best not to attempt the
rapids this evening, we therefore sought a safe harbour in this narrow
channel and encamped on the main shore. our small canoe with Drewer and
the two feildses was unable to pass the river with us in consequence of
the waves they therefore toed her up along the N. side of the river and
encamped opposite the upper point of brant Island. after halting this
evening I took a turn with my gun in order to kill a deer, but was
unsuccessfull. I saw much fresh sign. the fir has been lately injured
by a fire near this place and many of them have discharged considerable
quantities of rozin. we directed that Collins should hunt a few hours
tomorrow morning and that Gibson and his crew should remain at his
place untill we returned and employ themselves in collectng rozin which
our canoes are now in want of.

[Clark, April 9, 1806]
Wednesday April 9th 1806
last night at a late hour the old amsiated Indian who was detected in
Stealing a Spoon yesterday, Crept upon his belley with his hands and
feet, with a view as I Suppose to take Some of our baggage which was in
Several defferent parcels on the bank. the Sentinal observed the
motions of this old amcinated retch untill he got with a fiew feet of
the baggage at he hailed him and approached with his gun in a possion
as if going to Shoote which allarmed the old retch in Such a manner
that he ran with all his power tumbleing over brush and every thing in
his way. at 7 A.M. we Set out and proceeded on to the Camp of Joseph &
Reubin Fields. they had killed nothing. here we did not delay but
proceeded on to Wah-clel-lah Village on the North Side and brackfast
here one the men Colter observed the Tomahawk which was Stolen from on
the 4th of Novr. last as we decended the Columbia, he took the tomahawk
the natives attempted to wrest it from him, he held fast the Tomahawk.
Those people attempted to excuse themselves from odium of Stealing it,
by makeing Signs that they had purchased the Tomahawk, but their
nighbours informed me otherwise and made Signs that they had taken it.
This Village appears to be the wintering Station of two bands of the
Shah-ha-la Nation. One band has already moved the Falls of the
Multnomah which is the place they take their Salmon. The other band is
now moveing a fiew miles above to the foot of the first rapid on this
river, at which place they take their Salmon. 14 houses only appear
occupied and the inhabitants of those moveing off hourly, they take
with them in their Canoes independent of all their houshold effects the
bark of their houses, and boards. 9 houses has been latterly abandened
and 14 others is yet is thinly inhabited at present, and the remains of
10 or 12 others are to be Seen and appears to have been enhabited last
fall. those people were not hospital and with Some dificuelty we
precured 5 dogs and a fiew Wappato of them. Soon after we arived at
this Village the Grand Cheif and two others of the
Chee-luck-kit-le-quaw Nation arived from below. they had with them 11
men and 7 womin and had been trading in the Columbia Vally for Wappato,
beeds and dried Anchovies &c in exchange for which they had given
pounded fish Shappalell, bear grass, acorns boiled berries &c. &c. and
are now on their return to their village. as those people had been very
Kind to us as we decended the river we gave them Smoke. at 2 oClock P.
M we Set out and passed under the Beacon rock on the North Side of two
Small Islds. Situated nearest the N. side. at 4 P.M. we arived at the
first rapid at the head of Straw berry island at which place on the N
W. Side of the Columbia here we found the nativs from the last village
rebuilding their habitations of the bark of their old Village 16 Huts
are already Compleated and appear only temporrary it is most probable
that they only reside here dureing the Season of the Salmon. as we
Could not pass with the large Canoes up the N. W. Side for the rocks,
the wind high and a rainey disagreeable evining. our Smallest Canoe
being too low to cross through the high waves, we Sent her up on the N
W. Side with Drewyer and the two Fields and after purchaseing 2 dogs
Crossed and into the Sluce of a large high Island seperated from the S.
E Side by a narrow chanel, in this chanel we found a good harbor and
encamped on the lower Side. We Saw Some deer Sign and Collins to hunt
in the mornig untill the Canoes were toed above the rapids. made 16
Miles to day. evening wet & disagreeable.

[Lewis, April 10, 1806]
Thursday April 10th 1806.
We set out early and droped down the channel to the lower end of brant
Island from whence we drew them up the rapid by a cord about a quarter
of a mile which we soon performed; Collins and Gibson not having yet
come over we directed Sergt. Pryor to remain with the cord on the
Island untill Gibson arrived and assist him with his crew in geting his
canoe up the rapid, when they were to join us on the oposite side at a
small village of six houses of the Clah-clah'lahs where we halted for
breakfast. in passing the river which is here about 400 yds. wide the
rapidity of the currant was such that it boar us down a considerable
distance notwithstanding we employed five oars. on entering one of
these lodges, the natives offered us a sheepskin for sail, than which
nothing could have been more acceptable except the animal itself. the
skin of the head of the sheep with the horns remaining was cased in
such manner as to fit the head of a man by whom it was woarn and highly
prized as an ornament. we obtained this cap in exchange for a knife,
and were compelled to give two Elkskins in exchange for the skin. this
appeared to be the skin of a sheep not fully grown; the horns were
about four inches long, celindric, smooth, black, erect and pointed;
they rise from the middle of the forehead a little above the eyes. they
offered us a second skin of a full grown sheep which was quite as large
as that of a common deer. they discovered our anxity to purchase and in
order to extort a great plrice declared that they prized it too much to
dispose of it. in expectation of finding some others of a similar kind
for sale among the natives of this neighbourhood I would not offer him
a greater price than had been given for the other which he refused.
these people informed us that these sheep were found in great abundance
on the hights and among the clifts of the adjacent mountains. and that
they had lately killed these two from a herd of 36, at no great
distance from their village. we could obtain no provision from those
people except four white salmon trout. at ten oclock Sergt. Pryor and
Gibson joined us with Collins who had killed 3 deer. these were all of
the blacktailed fallow kind. we set out and continued our rout up the
N. side of the river with great difficulty in consequence of the
rapidity of the current and the large rocks which form this shore; the
South side of the river is impassable. as we had but one sufficient
toerope and were obliged to employ the cord in geting on our canoes the
greater part of the way we could only take them one at a time which
retarded our progress very much. by evening we arrived at the portage
on the North side where we landed and conveyed our bagage to the top of
the hill about 200 paces distant where we formed a camp. we had the
canoes drawn on shore and secured. the small canoe got loose from the
hunters and went a drift with a tin vessel and tommahawk in her; the
Indians caught her at the last village and brought her up to us this
evening for which service we gave them a couple of knives; the canoe
overset and lost the articles which were in her.- Saw the white pine at
this place.

[Clark, April 10, 1806]
Thursday April 10th 1806
Collins went out in the bottom to hunt agreeable to the order of last
evening, and gibsons Crew was derected to delay for Collins dureing
which time they were derected to Collect rozin from the pines in the
bottom near our Camp at 6 A M. we Set out and proceeded to the lower
point of the Island from whence we were Compelled to draw our Canoes up
a rapid for about 1/4 mile which we Soon performed. Collins & gibson
haveing not yet Come over we derected Serjt. Pryor to delay on the
Island untill Gibson Came over & assist him with the large toe roap
which we also left and to join us at a village of four houses of the
Clah-lah-lar Tribe which is opposit to this Island on North Side at
which place we intened to brackfast. in crossing the River which at
this place is not more than 400 yards wide we fell down a great
distance owing to the rapidity of the Current. I entered one of the
houses of those people and was Scercely Seated before they offered me a
Sheep Skin for Sale nothing could be more acceptable except the Animal
itself in examoning this Skin I found it was a young one, the Skin of
the head was Cased So as to fit the head of a man and was esteemed as a
great orniment and highly prised by them. we precured this Cased head
for a knife and, the Skin we were obliged to give two Raw Elk Skins
for. Soon after they offered a large one for Sall. after finding us
anxious to purchase they declined silling this Skin. those people
informed us that they killed those Animals among the rocks in the
mountains under which they live; and that great numbers of those
animals inhabit those mountains & that the lamb was killed out of a
gange of 36 at a Short distance from their village. The wool of the
full grown Sheep, or that on the Skin which we Saw was much Corser than
that of the one which we purchased, the Skin was about the Size of that
of a Common deer. The Skin we obtained appeared to be the Skin of a
Sheep not fully grown, the wool fine, the Horns were abought 4 inches
long, Celindric, Smooth, black, a little bending backwards and pointed;
they rise from the Middle of the foeheard, and a little above the eyes,
and appeared to possess all the marks of the Common Sheep as already
discribed. We could precure no provisions from those people except four
white Salmon trout. at 10 oClock Sergt. Pryor and Gibson joined us with
Collins who had killed 3 deer. these were all of the blacktailed fallow
kind. We Set out and Continued up on the N. Side of the river with
great dificuelty in Consequence of the Rapidity of the Current and the
large rocks which forms this Shore; the South Side of the river is
impassable.

As we had but one Sufficent toe roap and were obliged to employ the
Cord in getting on our Canoes the greater part of the way we could only
take them one at a time which retarded our progress very much. by
evening we arived at the portage on the N. Side where we landed and
Conveyed our baggage to the top of the hill about 200 paces distant
where we found a Camp. we had the Canoes drawn on Shore and Secured.
the Small Canoe got loose from the hunters and went adrift with a tin
cup & a tomahawk in her; the Indians Caught her at the last Village and
brought her up to us this evening for which we gave them two knives;
the Canoe overset and lost the articles which were in her.-.

[Lewis, April 11, 1806]
Friday April 11th 1806.
As the tents and skins which covered both our men and baggage were wet
with the rain which fell last evening, and as it continued still
raining this morning we concluded to take our canoes first to the head
of the rapids, hoping that by evening the rain would cease and afford
us a fair afternoon to take our baggage over the portage. this portage
is two thousand eight hundred yards along a narrow rough and slipery
road. the duty of getting the canoes above the rapid was by mutual
consent confided to my friend Capt. C. who took with him for that
purpose all the party except Bratton who is yet so weak he is unable to
work, three others who were lamed by various accedents and one other to
cook for the party. a few men were absolutely necessary at any rate to
guard our baggage from the War-clel-lars who crouded about our camp in
considerable numbers. these are the greates theives and scoundrels we
have met with. by the evening Capt. C. took 4 of our canoes above the
rapids tho with much difficulty and labour. the canoes were much
damaged by being driven against the rocks in dispite of every
precaution which could be taken to prevent it. the men complained of
being so much fatiegued in the evening that we posponed taking up our
5th canoe untill tomorrow. these rapids are much worse than they were
fall when we passed them, at that time there were only three difficult
points within seven miles, at present the whole distance is extreemly
difficult of ascent, and it would be impracticable to decend except by
leting down the empty vessels by a cord and then even the wrisk would
be greater than in taking them up by the same means. the water appears
to be upwards of 20 feet higher than when we decended the river. the
distance by way of the river between the points of the portage is 3
Msmany of the natives crouded about the bank of the river where the men
were engaged in taking up the canoes; one of them had the insolence to
cast stones down the bank at two of the men who happened to be a little
detatched from the party at the time. on the return of the party in the
evening from the head of the rapids they met with many of the natives
on the road, who seemed but illy disposed; two of these fellows met
with John Sheilds who had delayed some time in purchasing a dog and was
a considerable distance behind the party on their return with Capt. C.
they attempted to take the dog from him and pushed him out of the road.
he had nothing to defend himself with except a large knife which he
drew with an intention of puting one or both of them to death before
they could get themselves in readiness to use their arrows, but
discovering his design they declined the combat and instantly fled
through the woods. three of this same tribe of villains the
Wah-clel-lars, stole my dog this evening, and took him towards their
village; I was shortly afterwards informed of this transaction by an
indian who spoke the Clatsop language, and sent three men in pursuit of
the theives with orders if they made the least resistence or difficulty
in surrendering the dog to fire on them; they overtook these fellows or
reather came within sight of them at the distance of about 2 miles; the
indians discovering the party in pursuit of them left the dog and fled.
they also stole an ax from us, but scarcely had it in their possession
before Thompson detected them and wrest it from them. we ordered the
centinel to keep them out of camp, and informed them by signs that if
they made any further attempts to steal our property or insulted our
men we should put them to instant death. a cheif of the Clah-clel-lah
tribe informed us that there were two very bad men among the
Wah-clel-lahs who had been the principal actors in these seenes of
outradge of which we complained, and that it was not the wish of the
nation by any means to displease us. we told him that we hoped it might
be the case, but we should certainly be as good as our words if they
presisted in their insolence. I am convinced that no other
consideration but our number at this moment protects us. The Cheif
appeared mortified at the conduct of his people, and seemed friendly
disposed towards us. as he appeared to be a man of consideration and we
had reason to beleive much rispected by the neighbouring tribes we
thought it well to bestoe a medal of small size upon him. he appeared
much gratifyed with this mark of distinction, and some little attention
which we shewed him. he had in his possession a very good pipe tomahawk
which he informed us he had received as a present from a trader who
visited him last winter over land pointing to the N. W., whome he
called Swippeton; he was pleased with the tommahawk of Capt. C. in
consequence of it's having a brass bowl and Capt. C. gratified him by
an exchange. as a further proof of his being esteemed by this white
trader, he gave us a well baked saylor's bisquit which he also informed
us he had received from Swippeton. from these evidences I have no doubt
but the traders who winter in some of the inlets to the N. of us visit
this part of the Columbia by land at certain seasons, most probably
when they are confined to their winter harbour. and if so some of those
inlets are probably at no great distance from this place, as there
seems to be but little inducement to intice the trader hither from any
considerable distance particularly as the difficulty in traveling on
the borders of this mountainous country must be great at that season as
the natives informed me their snows were frequently breast deep. I
observe snowshoes in all the lodges of the natives above the Columbean
vally. I hope that the friendly interposition of this chief may prevent
our being compelled to use some violence with these people; our men
seem well disposed to kill a few of them. we keep ourselves perefectly
on our guard. This evening we send Drewyer and the two Feildses on a
few miles up the river to the entrance of Cruzatt's river to hunt
untill our arrival. The inhabitants of the Y-eh-huh Village on the
North side immediately above the rapids have lately removed to the
opposite side of the river, where it appears they usually take their
salmon. like their relations the Wah-Clel-lars they have taken their
houses with them. I observe that all the houses lately established have
their floors on the surface of the earth, are smaller and of more
temperary structure than those which are sunk in the ground. I presume
the former are their spring and Summer dwellings and the latter those
of the fall and winter. these houses are most generally built with
boards and covered with bark. some of an inferior ore more temperary
cast are built entirely of cedar bark, which is kept smooth and
extended by inserting small splinters of wood through the bark
crosswise at the distance of 12 or 14 inches assunder. several families
inhabit the same appartment. their women as well as those of the 3
villages next below us pierce the cartelage of the nose and insert
various ornaments. they very seldom imprint any figures on their skins;
a few I observed had one or two longitudinal lines of dots on the front
of the leg, reaching from the ankle upwards about midleg. most of their
women braid their hair in two tresses as before mentioned. the men
usually cew their hair in two parsels which like the braded tresses of
the female hang over each ear in front of the sholder, and gives an
additional width to the head and face so much admired by them. these
cews are usually formed with throngs of dressed Otterskin crossing each
other and not roled in our manner arrond the hair. in all other
rispects I observe no difference in their dress habits manners &c. from
those in the Neighbourhood of the diamond Island. today we recognized a
man of the Elute nation who reside at the long narrows of the Columbia,
he was on his return from a trading voyage to the Columbean valley with
10 or 12 others of his nation. many other natives from the villages
above were employed in taking their roots &c over the portage on their
return. I observed that the men equally with the women engage in the
labour of carrying. they all left their canoes below the rapids and
took others above which they had left as they decended. those which
were left below were taken down the river by the persons from whom they
had been hired or borrowed. the natives from above behaved themselves
in a very orderly manner. The salmon have not yet made their
appearance, tho the natives are not so much distressed for food as I
was induced to believe. I walked down today about 3/4 of a mile below
our encampment to observe the manner in which these people inter their
dead. I found eight sepulchers near the north bank of the river built
in the following manner. four strong forks are first sunk several feet
in the ground and rise about six feet high, froming a parrallelogram of
8 by 10 feet. the intervals between these upright forks, on which four
poles are laid, are filled up with broad erect boards with their lower
ends sunk in the ground and their upper ends confined to the horizontal
poles. a flat roof is formed of several layers of boards; the floors of
these sepulchres are on a level with the surface of the earth. the
human bodies are well rolled in dressed skins and lashed securely with
chords and laid horizontaly on the back with the head to the west. in
some of these sepulchres they are laid on each other to the debth of
three or four bodies. in one of those sepulchres which was nearly
decayed I observed that the human bones filled it perfectly to the
hight of about three feet. many articles appear to be sacreficed to the
dead both within and without the sepulcres. among other articles, I
observed a brass teakettle, some scollep shells, parts of several robes
of cloth and skins, with sticks for diging roots &c.- this appears to
be the burying ground of the Wahclellahs, Clahclellahs and Yehhuhs.

[Clark, April 11, 1806]
Friday April 11th 1806
rained the greater part of the last night and continued to rain this
morning, as the Skins and the Covering of both the mend and loading
were wet we determined to take the Canoes over first in hopes that by
the evening the rain would Sease and afford us a fair afternoon to
Carry our baggage over the portage which is 2 miles by land and a
Slipery road. I therefore took all the men except three who had Sore
feet and two to cook, and who were with the baggage; and with great
dificuelty and much fatigue we drew up 4 of our canoes above the Rapids
3 miles in extent. the men became So fatigued that we deturmined to
puspone takeing the 5th Canoe untill tomorrow. Those rapids are much
worse than they were at the time we passed last fall at that time there
was only three bad places in the distance of 7 miles. at this time the
whole distance is a rapid and dificuelt of assent; and would be very
dangerous at this Stage of the water (which is ____ feet higher than
when we passed down) to decent in any kind of Craft. Great numbers of
the nativs visited us and viewed us from the banks as we passed on with
the Canoes, maney of those people were also about our baggage and on
the portage road. two of those fellows insulted John Shields who had
delayed in purchaseing a dog at the upper part of the rapids and was
Some distance behind myself and the party on our return to camp. they
attempted to take his dog and push him out of the road. he had nothing
to defend himself except a large knife which he drew with a full
deturmination to put one of them to death before he had an oppertunity
of dischargeing his arrow. the nativs obseveing his motion ran off. one
other Indn. Stold an ax and was not in possession before he was
detected by Thompson and the ax taken from him. one other fellow
attempted to Steal Capt. Lewis's dog, and had decoyed him nearly half a
mile we were informed of it by a man who Spoke the Clatsop language and
imediately Sent three men with their guns who over took the Indians,
who on their approach ran off and lift the dog- we informed the nativ's
by Signs that if the indians insulted our men or Stold our property we
Should Certainly put them to death a Chief of the Clah-clal-lahs Tribe
informed us that there was two very bad men who had been guilty of
those mischevious acts. that it was not the wish of their tribe that
any thing should be done which might displese the white people. this
Chief had a large fine pipe tomahawk which he informed me he got from a
Trader he called Swippeton. I exchanged tomahawks with this Chief, and
as he appeared to be a man of consideration among the tribes of this
neighbourhood and much conserned for the ingiries offered us, we gave
him a Medal of the Small Size which appeard. to please him verry much;
and will I hope have a favourable tendincy, in as much as it will
attach him to our interest, and he probably will harang his people in
our favour, which may prevent any acts of violence being Commited, on
either Side. nothing but the Strength of our party has prevented our
being robed before this time. Sent Drewyer & 2 Fields on a head to
hunt. The inhabitents of the Wyach-hich Tribe Village imediately above
those rapids on the N W. Side have latterly moved their village to the
opposit Side of the river, where they take their Salmon; they are now
in the act of removeing and not only take their furniture and effects
but also the bark and most of the boards which formed their houses.
Those like the tribes below Sometimes Sink their houses in the earth,
and at other times have their flowrs leavil with the Surface of the
earth; they are Generally built of boards and Covered with bark. those
which appear intended for temporary use are most generally built of the
White Cedar bark. Most of those have a division in the houses near the
enterance which is at the end, or in the event of it's being a double
house is from the center of a narrow passage. Several families enhabit
one appartment. the women of those people as well as those in the 3
villages below pierce the cartilage of the nose in which they ware
Various orniments. in other respects they do not deffer from those of
the Dimond Island. tho most of the women brad their hair which hangs in
two tresses, one hanging over each ear. The yound men of all those
tribes ware their hair plated, in two plats anging over each Sholder,
maney of them also Cew their hair with otter Skin divided on the crown
of the head and hanging over each ear. to day I recognised a man of the
Elute nation who reside at the Long narrows, he was on his return from
a tradeing voyage to the Columbian Vally with 10 or 12 of his tribe.
maney others from the villages above this were takeing their roots &c.
over the portage to day on their return home.

vegitation is rapidly progressing. Sarvis berry, Sackacommis and the
large leafed ash is in blume. also fir N. ____ in bloom

[Lewis, April 12, 1806]
Saturday April 12th 1806.
It rained the greater part of last night and still continued to rain
this morning. I therefore determined to take up the remaining perogue
this morning for which purpose I took with me every man that could be
of any service. a small distance above our camp there is one of the
most difficult parts of the rapid. at this place the current sets with
great violence against a projecting rock. in hawling the perogue
arround this point the bow unfortunately took the current at too great
a distance from the rock, she turned her side to the stream and the
utmost exertions of all the party were unable to resist the forse with
which she was driven by the current, they were compelled to let loose
the cord and of course both perogue and cord went a drift with the
stream. the loss of this perogue will I fear compell us to purchase one
or more canoes of the indians at an extravegant price. after breakfast
all hands were employed in taking our baggage over the portage. we
caused all the men who had short rifles to carry them, in order to be
prepared for the natives should they make any attempts to rob or injure
them. I went up to the head of the rapids and left Capt. C. below.
during the day I obtained a vocabulary of the language of the
War-clel-lars &c. I found that their numbers were precisely those of
the Chinnooks but the other parts of their language essentially
different. by 5 P.M. we had brought up all our baggage and Capt. C.
joined me from the lower camp with the Clahclellah cheif. there is an
old village situated about halfway on the portage road the fraim of the
houses, which are remarkably large one 160 by 45 feet, remain almost
entire. the covering of the houses appears to have been sunk in a pond
back of the village. this the chief informed us was the residence
occasionally of his tribe. these houses are fraimed in the usual manner
but consist of a double set as if oune house had been built within the
other. the floors are on a level with the ground. the natives did not
croud about us in such numbers today as yesterday, and behaved
themselves much better; no doubt the precautions which they observed us
take had a good effect. I employed sergt. Pryor the greater part of the
day in reparing and corking the perogue and canoes. it continued to
rain by showers all day. about 20 of the Y-eh-huhs remained with me the
greater part of the day and departed in the evening. they conducted
themselves with much propryety and contemned the conduct of their
relations towards us. We purchased one sheepskin for which we gave the
skin of an Elk and one of a deer. this animal was killed by the man who
sold us the skin near this place; he informed us that they were
abundant among the mountains and usually resorted the rocky parts. the
big horned animal is also an inhabitant of these mountains. I saw
several robes of their skins among the natives.as the evening was rainy
cold and far advanced and ourselves wet we determined to remain all
night. the mountains are high steep and rocky. the rock is principally
black. they are covered with fir of several speceis and the white
cedar. near the river we find the Cottonwood, sweet willow, broad
leafed ash, a species of maple, the purple haw, a small speceis of
cherry; purple currant, goosberry, red willow, vining and white burry
honeysuckle, huckkle burry, sacacommis, two speceis of mountain holley,
&common ash. for the three last days this inclusive we have made only 7
miles.

[Clark, April 12, 1806]
Saturday April 12th 1806.
rained the greater part of the last night and this morning untile 10
A.M. we employed all hands in attempting to take up the lost Canoe. in
attempting to pass by a rock against which the Current run with emence
force, the bow unfortunately took the Current at too great a distance
from the rock, She turned broad Side to the Stream, and the exertions
of every man was not Sufficient to hold her. the men were Compelled to
let go the rope and both the Canoe and rope went with the Stream. the
loss of this Canoe will I fear Compell us to purchase another at an
extravigent price. after brackfast all hands who were employed in
Carrying the baggage over the portage 11/2 miles which they performed
by 4 P.M. the nativs did not visit us in Such Crouds to day as
yesterday. we Caused all the men of the party who ha Short guns to
carry them on the portage for fear of Some attempt on the part of the
nativs to rob the party. The rain Continued at intervales all day. in
the evening after everry thing was taken from the lower Camp I Set out
myself accompanied by the Cheif of the Clah-clal lars to the head of
the portage. as we passed the remains of an old Village about half way
the portage, this Cheif informed me that this old Village had been the
residence of his Tribe dureing the last Salmon Season. this village I
mentiond in decending this river, but did not know the Tribes that had
inhabited it that time. Capt. Lewis took a vocabulary of the languge of
those people whilst I had all the baggage taken across the portage & we
formed a Camp at the place we had encamped on our way down.

at my arival at the head of the portage found about 20 of the natives
of the Wy ach hich tribe who reside above the rapids, with Capt Lewis.
those people appeared much better disposed towards us than either the
Clahclallah or Wahclellah and Condemn their Conduct much. Those tribes
I believe to be all the Same Nation their Language habits manners dress
&c. are presisely alike and differ but little from those below the
Great Narrows of this river. I observed a woman with a Sheep Skin robe
on which I purchased for one Elk and one deer Skin. the father of this
woman informed me that he had killed the animal off of which he had
taken this Skin on the mountains imediately above his village, and that
on those mountains great numbers of those animals were to be found in
large flocks among the Steep rocks. I also purchased 2 pieces of
Chapellell and Some roots of those people. as the evening was rainey
and ourselves and party wet we Concluded to delay untill the morning
and dry our selves. The Indians left us about 6 P M and returned to
their Village on the opposit Side. mountains are high on each Side and
Covered with Snow for about 1/3 of the way down. the growth is
principally fir and White Cedar. the bottoms and low Situations is
Covered with a variety Such as Cotton, large leafed ash, Sweet willow a
Species of beech, alder, white thorn, cherry of a Small Speces, Servis
berry bushes, Huckleberries bushes, a Speces of Lorel &c. &c. I saw a
turkey buzzard which is the 3rd which I have Seen west of the rocky
mountains. the 1st was on the 7 inst. above quick Sand river. for the
three last days this inclusive we have made 7 miles only.

[Lewis, April 13, 1806]
Sunday April 13th 1806.
The loss of one of our perogues rendered it necessary to distribute her
crew and cargo among the 2 remaining perogues and 2 canoes, which being
done we loaded and set out 8 A.M. we passed the village immediately
above the rapids where only one house at present remains entire, the
other 8 having been taken down and removed to the oposite side of the
river as before mentioned. we found the additional laiding which we had
been compelled to put on board rendered our vessels extreemly
inconvenient to mannage and in short reather unsafe in the event of
high winds; I therefore left Capt. C. with the two perogues to proceede
up the river on the N. side, and with the two canoes and some
additional hands passed over the river above the rapids to the Y-eh-huh
village in order to purchase one or more canoes. I found the village
consisting of 11 houses crouded with inhabitants; it appeared to me
that they could have mustered about 60 fighting men then present. they
appeared very friendly disposed, and I soon obtained two small canoes
from them for which I gave two robes and four elkskins. I also
purchased four paddles and three dogs from them with deerskins. the dog
now constitutes a considerable part of our subsistence and with most of
the party has become a favorite food; certain I am that it is a healthy
strong diet, and from habit it has become by no means disagreeable to
me, I prefer it to lean venison or Elk, and is very far superior to the
horse in any state. after remaining about 2 hours at this Village I
departed and continued my rout with the four canoes along the S. side
of the river the wind being too high to pass over to the entrance of
Cruzatts river where I expected to have overtaken Capt. C. not seing
the perogues on the opposite side I ascended the river untill one
oclock or about 5 ms. above the entrance of Cruzat's river. being
convinced that the perogues were behind I halted and directed the men
to dress the dogs and cook one of them for dinner; a little before we
had completed our meal Capt. C. arrived with the perogues and landed
opposite to us. after dinner I passed the river to the perogues and
found that Capt. C. had halted for the evening and was himself hunting
with three of the party. the men in formed me that they had seen
nothing of the hunters whom we had sent on the 11th ints. to the
Entrance of Cruzatt's Riv. I directed Sergt. ordway to take the two
small canoes for his mess and the loading which he had formerly carried
in the perogue we lost yesterday, and to have them dryed this evening
and payed with rozin. Capt. Clark returned in about an hour and being
convinced that the hunters were yet behind we dispatched Sergt. Pryor
in surch of them with two men and an empty canoe to bring the meat they
may have killed. John Sheilds returned a little after six P.M. with two
deer which he had killed. these were also of the blacktailed fallow
deer; there appears to be no other speceis of deer in these mountains.
Capt. C. informed me that the wind had detained him several hours a
little above Cruzatt's river; that while detained here he sent out some
men to hunt; one of them wounded two deer but got neither of them. the
wind having lulled in the evening and not seing anything of Drewyer and
the Feildses he had proceeded on to this place where he intended
waiting for me, and as he did not see my canoes when he landed had
taken a hunt with some of the men as before mentioned.

[Clark, April 13, 1806]
Sunday April 13th 1806
The loss of one of our large Canoes rendered it necessary to divide the
loading and men of that Canoe between the remaining four, which was
done and we loaded and Set out at 8 oClock A.M. passed the village
imediately above the rapids, where only one house remains entire the
other 8 haveing been taken down and moved to the opposit Side of the
Columbia as already mentioned. the additional men and baggage in each
Canoe renders them Crouded and unsafe. Capt. Lewis with 2 of the
Smallest Canoes of Sergt. Pryor & gibson and Crossed above the Rapids
to the Village on the S E Side with a view to purchase a Canoe of the
nativs if possible. he took with him Some Cloth and a fiew Elk skins
and Deer Skins. I with the two large Canoes proceeded on up the N. W.
Side with the intention of gitting to the Encampment of our hunters who
was derected to hunt in the bottom above Crusats River, and there wait
the arival of Capt. Lewis. I proceeded on to the bottom in which I
expected to find the hunters but Could See nothing of them. the wind
rose and raised the ways to Such a hight that I could not proceed any
further. we landed and I sent out Shields and Colter to hunt; Shields
Shot two deer but Could get neither of them. I walkd. to Crusats river
and up it 1/2 a mile on my return to the party found that the wind had
lulled and as we Could See nothing of our hunters. I deturmined to
proceed on to the next bottom where I thought it probable they had
halted at 1/2 passed 2 P M Set out and proceeded on to the bottom 6
miles and halted at the next bottom formed a Camp and Sent out all the
hunters. I also walked out my self on the hills but saw nothing. on my
return found Capt. Lewis at Camp with two canoes which he had purchased
at the Y-ep-huh village for two robes and four elkskins. he also
purchased 4 paddles and three Dogs from the nativs with deer Skins. the
dogs now constitutes a considerable part of our Subsistance & with most
of the party has become a favourable food. Certain I am that is a
helthy Strong diet, derected Serjt. ordway to take the 2 Small Canoes
purchased by Capt. Lewis for his mess and the loading he had in his
Canoe which we lost yesterday, and drawed up and paid with rozin.

I was convinced that the hunters must have been up River Cruzatt.
despatched Sergt. Pryor with 2 men in a Canoe, with directions to
assend Crusats River and if he found the hunters to assist them in with
the meat. Jo. Shields returned about Sunset with two deer which he had
killed, those were of the Black tail fallow Deer. there appears to be
no other Species of Deer in those mountains. We proceeded on 12 miles.

[Lewis, April 14, 1806]
Monday April 14th 1806.
This morning at seven oCk. we were joined by Sergt. Pryor and the three
hunters they brought with them 4 deer which Drewyer had killed
yesterday. we took breakfast and departed. at 9 A.M. the wind arrose
and continued hard all day but not so violent as to prevent our
proceeding. we kept close along the N. shore all day. the river from
the rapids as high as the commencement of the narrows is from 1/2 to
3/4 of a mile in width, and possesses scarcely any current. the bed is
principally rock except at the entrance of Labuish's river which heads
in Mount hood and like the quicksand river brings down from thence vast
bodies of sand. the mountains through which the river passes nearly to
the sepulchre rock, are high broken, rocky, partially covered with fir
white cedar, and in many places exhibit very romantic seenes. some
handsome cascades are seen on either hand tumbling from the stupendious
rocks of the mountains into the river. near the border of the river I
observed today the long leafed pine. this pine increases in quantity as
you ascend the river and about the sepulchre rock where the lower
country commences it superceedes the fir altogether. throughout the
whole course of this river from the rapids as high as the
Chilluckkittequaws, we find the trunks of many large pine trees sanding
erect as they grew at present in 30 feet water; they are much doated
and none of them vegetating; at the lowest tide of the river many of
these trees are in ten feet water. certain it is that those large pine
trees never grew in that position, nor can I account for this
phenomenon except it be that the passage of the river through the
narrow pass at the rapids has been obstructed by the rocks which have
fallen from the hills into that channel within the last 20 years; the
appearance of the hills at that place justify this opinion, they appear
constantly to be falling in, and the apparent state of the decayed
trees would seem to fix the era of their decline about the time
men-tioned. at 1 P.M. we arrived at a large village situated in a
narrow bottom on the N. side a little above the entrance of canoe
creek. their houses are reather detatched and extent for several miles.
they are about 20 in number. These people call themselves We-ock-sock,
Wil-lacum. they differ but litte in appeance dress &c. from those of
the rapids. Their men have some leging and mockersons among them. these
are in the stile of Chopunnish. they have some good horses of which we
saw ten or a douzen. these are the fist horses we have met with since
we left this neighbourhood last fall, in short the country below this
place will not permit the uce of this valuable animal except in the
Columbian vally and there the present inhabitants have no uce for them
as they reside immediately on the river and the country is too thickly
timbered to admit them to run the game with horses if they had them. we
halted at this village and dined. purchased five dogs some roots,
shappalell, filberds and dryed burries of the inhabitants. here I
observed several habitations entirely under grownd; they were sunk
about 8 feet deep and covered with strong timber and several feet of
earth in a conic form. these habitations were evacuated at present.
they are about 16 feet in diameter, nearly circular, and are entered
through a hole at the top which appears to answer the double purpose of
a chimney and a door. from this entrance you decend to the floor by a
ladder. the present habitations of these people were on the surface of
the ground and do not differ from those of the tribes of the rapids.
their language is the same with that of the Chilluckkittequaws. these
people appeared very friendly. some of them informed us that they had
lately returned from a war excurtion against the snake indians who
inhabit the upper part of the Multnomah river to the S. E. of them.
they call them To-wannah'-hi'-ooks. that they had been fortunate in
their expedition and had taken from their enimies most of the horses
which we saw in their possession. after dinner we pursued our voyage;
Capt. Clark walked on shore with Charbono. I ascended the river about
six miles at which place the river washed the base of high clifts on
the Lard. side, here we halted a few minutes and were joined by Capt.
C. and Charbono and proceeded on to the entrance of a small run on N.
side a little below a large village on the same side opposite the
sepulchre rock. this village can raise about an hundred fighting men
they call themselves. they do not differ in any rispect from the
village below. many of them visited our camp this evening and remained
with us untill we went to bed. they then left us and retired to their
quarters.-

[Clark, April 14, 1806]
Monday April 14th 1806
This morning at 7 oClock we were joined by Sgt. Pryor and they three
hunters they brought with them 4 deer which drewyer had killed
yesterday. we took brackfast and departed at 9 A.M. the wind rose and
Continued to blow hard all day but not so violent as to prevent our
proceeding. we kept Close allong the N. Shore all day. the river from
the rapids to the Commencement of the narrows is from 1/2 to 3/4 of a
Mile in wedth, and possesses but little Current. the bead is rock
except at the enterence of Labiech's river which heads in Mt. Hood and
like the quick Sand River brings down from thence Vast bodies of Sand
the Mountains through which the river passes nearly to Cataract River
are high broken rocky, particularly Covered with fir and white Cedar,
and in maney places very romantic scenes. Some handsom Cascades are
Seen on either Side tumbling from the Stupendious rocks of the
mountains into the river. I observe near the river the long leafed Pine
which increas as we assend and Superseeds the fir altogether about the
Sepulchre rock. We find the trunks of maney large pine trees Standing
erect as they grew, at present in 30 feet water; they are much doated
and none of them vegitateing. at the lowest water of the river maney of
those trees are in 10 feet water. the Cause I have attempted to account
for as I decended. at 1 P M. we arrived at a large village Situated in
a narrow bottom on the N. Side a little above the enterance of Canoe
Creek. their houses are reather detached, and extend for Several Miles.
they are about 20 in number. those people Call themselves Wil-la-cum.
they differ but little in appearance dress &c. from those of the
rapids. their men have Some legins and mockersons among them. those are
in the Stile of Chopunnish. they have Some good horss of which we Saw
10 or 12 these are the first horses we have met with Since we left this
neighbourhood last fall in Short the Country below this place will not
permit the use of this valuable animal except in the Columbian vally,
and there the present inhabitents have no use for them as they reside
imediately on the river and the Country is too thickly timbd. We halted
at this village Dined and purchased five dogs, Some roots Chappalell,
Philberds and dried berries of the inhabitents. here I observed Several
habitations under ground; they were Sunk about 8 feet deep and covered
with Strong timber and Several feet of earth in a conic form. those
habitations are avacuated at present. they are about 16 feet diamieter,
nearly Circular, and are entered through a hole at top which appears to
answer the double purpose of a Chimney and a dore. from this enterance
you decend to the flore by a ladder. the present habitations of those
people were on the Surface of the ground and do not differ from those
of the tribes about the Rapids. their language is the Same with the Che
luck kit to quaws. these people appeared very friendly. Some of them
informed us that they had latterly returned from the War excurtion
against the Snake Indians who inhabit the upper part of the Multnomah
river to the S. E. of them they Call them To wan nah hi ooks. that they
had been fortunate in the expidition and had taken from their enimies
most of the horses which we Saw in their possession. after dinner we
proceeded on our voyage. I walked on Shore with Shabono on the N. Side
through a handsom bottom. met Several parties of women and boys in
Serch of herbs & roots to Subsist on maney of them had parcels of the
Stems of the Sunflower. I joined Capt Lewis and the party at 6 miles,
at which place the river washed the bottom of high Clifts on the N.
Side. Several Canoes over take us with families moveing up. we passed 3
encampments and came too in the mouth of a Small Creek on the N. Side
imediately below a village and opposit the Sepulchar rock. this village
Consists of about 100 fighting men of Several tribes from the plains to
the North Collected here waiting for the Salmon. they do not differ in
any respect from those below. many of them visited our Camp this
evening and remaind. with us untill we went to bead. they then left us
and returned to their quarters. made ____ miles.

[Lewis, April 15, 1806]
Tuesday April 15th 1806
We delayed this morning untill after breakfast in order to purchase
some horses of the Indians; accordingly we exposed some articles in
exchange for horses the natives were unwilling to barter, we therefore
put up our merchandize and at 8 A.M. we set out. we halted a few
minutes at the sepulchre rock, and examined the deposits of the ded at
that place. these were constructed in the same manner of those already
discribed below the rapids. some of them were more than half filled
with dead bodies. there were thirteen sepulchres on this rock which
stands near the center of the river and has a surface of about 2 acres
above highwater mark.- from hence we returned to the nothern shore and
continued up it about four miles to another village of the same nation
with whom we remained last night. here we halted and informed the
natives of our wish to purchase horses; the produced us several for
sale but would not take the articles which we had in exchange for them.
they wanted an instrumet which the Northwest traders call an eye-dag
which we had not. we procured two dogs of them and departed. a little
below the entrance of Cataract river we halted at another village of
the same people, at which we were equally unsuccessful) in the purchase
of horses. we also halted at the two villages of the Chilluckkittequaws
a few miles above with no better success. at three in the evening we
arrived at the entrance of Quinnette creek which we ascended a short
distance and encamped at the place we have called rockfort camp. here
we were visited by some of the people from the villages at the great
narrows and falls. we informed them of our wish to purchase horses, &
agreed to meet them on the opposite or North side of the river tomorrow
for the purpose of bartering with them. most of them returned to their
villages this evening three only remained with us all night. these
people are much better clad than any of the nations below; their men
have generally leging mockersons and large robes, many of them wear
shirts of the same form those of the Chopunnish and Shoshonees highly
ornamented with the quills of the porcupine as are also their
mockersons and legings. they conceal the parts of generation with the
skin of a fox or some other small animal drawn underneath a girdle and
hanging loosly in front of them like a narrow apron. the dress of their
women differs very little from those about the rapids. both men and
women cut their hair in the forehead which comes down as low as the
eyebrows, they have long earlocks cut square at the end. the other part
of their hair is dressed in the same manner as those of the rapids.
after we landed and formed our camp this evening Drewyer and some
others took a hunt and killed a deer of the longtailed kind. it was a
buck and the young horns had shot fourth about 2 inches.

[Clark, April 15, 1806]
Tuesday April 15th 1806
We delayed this morning untill after brackfast in order to purchase
Some horses of the Indians; accordingly we exposed Some articles in
exchange for horses the nativs were unwilling to exchange their horses,
we put up our merchindize and at 8 A M. Set out. we halted a fiew
minits at the Sepulchar rock and examined the deposit of the dead at
that place. those were Constructed in the Same manner of those already
described below the rapids. Some of them were more than half filled
with dead bodies. there were 13 Sepulchers on this rock which Stands
near the Center of the river, and has a Cerface of about two acres
above the water.-. from hence we returned to the Northern Shore and
Continued up it about 4 miles to a Village at the enterance of Cateract
River, here we halted and informed the nativs of our wish to purchase
horses; the produced Several for Sale but would not take the articles
we had in exchange for them. they wanted an instriment which the Northw
Traders call an eye dag which we had not. we precured two dogs and
departed we also halted at the two villages of the Chil luck kitequaws
a fiew Ms. above with no better Sucksess. at 3 in the evening we
arivied at the enterance of Quinnett Creek which we assended a Short
distance and Encamped at the place we had Called rock fort Camp. here
we were visited by Some of the people from the Villages at the long
Narrows & Falls. we informed them of our wish to purchase horses, and
agreed to meet them on the opposit or north Side on tomorrow for the
purpose of bartering with them. most of them returned to their village
this evening three only remained with us all night. those people are
much better Clad than the nativs below. their men have generaly Legins
mockersons & large robes. Maney of them were Shirts of the Same form of
those of the Chopunnish & Shoshonees highly ornamented with the quils
of the purcupine, as are also their mockersons & Legins. they Conseal
the parts of generation with the Skins of the Fox or Some other Small
animal drawn under neath a girdle and hanging loosely in front of them
like a narrow apron. The dress of their women differ verry little from
those about the rapids. both men & women Cut their hair in the forehead
which comes down as low as the Eyebrows, they have long ear locks Cut
Square at the end. The other parts of their hair is dressed in the Same
Manner as those of the rapids. after we landld and formed our Camp this
evening Drewyer and some oths took a hunt and killed a Deer of the log
tailed kind. it was a Buck and the young deer horns had Shot foth about
two inches made ____ miles to day.

[Lewis, April 16, 1806]
Wednesday April 16th 1806.
About 8 A.M. Capt. Clark passed the river with the two interpreters,
the indian woman and nine men in order to trade with the natives for
their horses, for which purpose he took with him a good part of our
stock of merchandize. I remained in camp; sent out the hunters very
early in the morning, and set Sergts. Gass and Pryor with some others
at work to make a parsel of packsaddles. twelve horses will be
sufficient to transport our baggage and some pounded fish which we
intend taking with us as a reserved store for the rocky mountains. I
was visited today by several of the natives, and amused myself in
making a collection of the esculent plants in the neighbourhood such as
the Indians use, a specemine of which I preserved. I also met with
sundry other plants which were strangers to me which I also preserved,
among others there is a currant which is now in blume and has yellow
blossom something like the yellow currant of the Missouri but is a
different speceis. Reubin Feilds returned in the evening and brought
with him a large grey squrrel and two others of a kind I had never
before seen. they are a size less than the grey squirrel common to the
middle atlantic states and of a pided grey and yellowish brown colour,
in form it resembles our grey squrrel precisely. I had them skined
leaving the head feet and tail to them and placed in the sun to dry.
Joseph Feilds brought me a black pheasant which he had killed; this I
found on examination to be the large black or dark brown pheasant I had
met with on the upper part of the Missouri. it is as large as a well
grown fowl the iris of the eye is of a dark yellowish brown, the puple
black, the legs are booted to the toes, the tail is composed of 18
black feathers tiped with bluish white, of which the two in the center
are reather shorter than the others which are all of the same length.
over the eye there is a stripe of a 1/4 of an inch in width uncovered
with feathers of a fine orrange yellow. the wide spaces void of
feathers on the side of the neck are also of the same colour. I had
some parts of this bird preserved. our present station is the last
point at which there is a single stick of timber on the river for a
great distance and is the commencement of the open plains which extend
nearly to the base of the rocky Mts. Labuish returned this evening
having killed two deer I sent and had them brought in. this evening
Capt. C. informed me by some of the men whom he sent over that that he
had obtained no horses as yet of the natives. that they promised to
trade with him provided he would remove to their vil-lage. to this he
had consented and should proceede to the Skillute village above the
long narrows as soon as the men returned whom he had sent to me for
some other articles. I dispatched the men on their return to capt. C.
immediately with these articles and he set out with his party
accompanyed by the natives to their village where he remained all
night.- the natives who had spent the day with me seemed very well
disposed, they left me at 6 in the evening and returned to their
rispective villages. the hunters informed me that they saw some
Antelopes, & the tracks of several black bear, but no appearance of any
Elk. we were informed by the Indians that the river which falls in on
the S. side of the Columbia just above the Eneshur village heads in
Mount hood and dose not water the extensive country which we have
heretofore calculated on. a great portion of that extensive tract of
country to the S. and S. W. of the Columbia and it's S. E. branch, and
between the same and the waters of Callifornia must be watered by the
Multnomah river.-

[Clark, April 16, 1806]
April 16th 1806
Crossed the river and Sent Drewyer & Goodrich to the Skil lute village
to envite the Indians to trade horses with us, also sent Frazer &
Shabono to the Che-luck-kit-ti-quar village for the same purpose a
number of Indians came of both nations and delayed the greater part of
the day without tradeing a Single horse the Great Chief of the
Skillutes also came with Drewyer. he was lame and Could not walk he
told me if I would go to his Town his people would trade with me. I Set
out late and arrived at Sunset and informd. the natives that in the
morning I would trade with them. he gave me onions to eate which had
been Sweated. Peter played the violin and the men danced. Saw abt. 100
Stacks of fish. maney nations visit this place for trade. the
discription of the houses, their dress habits &c. Smoked &c. I saw
great numbers of horses

[Clark, April 16, 1806]
Wednesday April 16th 1806
about 8 oClock this morning I passed the river with the two
interpreters, and nine men in order to trade with the nativs for their
horses, for which purpose I took with me a good part of our Stock of
merchindize. Capt L. Sent out the hunters and Set Several men at work
makeing pack Saddles. twelve horses will be Sufficient to trans port
our baggage and Some pounded fish with our dried Elk. which we intend
takeing with us as a reserved Store for the Plains & rocky mountains. I
formed a Camp on the N. Side and Sent Drewyer & Goodrich to the
Skillute Village, and Shabono & Frazer down to the Chilluckkitequaw
Villages with derections to inform the nativs that I had Crossed the
river for the purpose of purchaseing horses, and if they had horses to
Sell us to bring them to my Camp. Great numbers of Indians came from
both Villages and delayed the greater part of the day without tradeing
a Single horse. Drewyer returned with the principal Chief of the
Skillutes who was lame and Could not walk. after his arival Some horses
were offered for Sale, but they asked nearly half the merchindize I had
with me for one horse. this price I could not think of giveing. the
Chief informed me if I would go to his town with him, his people would
Sell me horses. I therefore Concluded to accompany him to his Village 7
miles distant. we Set out and arrived at the Village at Sunset. after
Some Serimony I entered the house of the Chief. I then informed them
that I would trade with them for their horses in the morning for which
I would give for each horse the articles which I had offered yestered.
The Chief Set before me a large platter of Onions which had been
Sweeted. I gave a part of those onions to all my party and we all eate
of them, in this State the root is very Sweet and the tops tender. the
nativs requested the party to dance which they very readily consented
and Peter Cruzat played on the Violin and the men danced Several dances
& retired to rest in the houses of the 1st and Second Cheif.

this village is moved about 300 yards below the Spot it Stood last fall
at the time we passed down. they were all above grown and built in the
Same form of those below already discribed. We observed maney stacks of
fish remaining untouched on either Side of the river. The Inhabitents
of this Village ware the robe of deer Elk Goat &c. and most of the men
ware Legins and mockersons and Shirts highly ornimented with Porcupine
quills & beeds. the women were the Truss most Commonly. tho Some of
them have long Shirts all of those articles they precure from other
nations who visit them for the purpose of exchangeing those articles
for their pounded fish of which they prepare great quantities. This is
the Great Mart of all this Country. ten different tribes who reside on
Taptate and Catteract River visit those people for the purpose of
purchaseing their fish, and the Indians on the Columbia and Lewis's
river quite to the Chopunnish Nation Visit them for the purpose of
tradeing horses buffalow robes for beeds, and Such articles as they
have not. The Skillutes precure the most of their Cloth knivs axes &
beeds from the Indians from the North of them who trade with white
people who come into the inlets to the North at no great distance from
the Tapteet. their horses of which I saw great numbers, they precure
from the Indians who reside on the banks of the Columbia above, and
what fiew they take from the To war ne hi ooks or Snake Indians. I
smoked with all the principal men of this nation in the house of their
great Cheif and lay my Self down on a Mat to Sleep but was prevented by
the mice and vermin with which this house abounded and which was very
troublesom to me.

[Lewis, April 17, 1806]
Thursday April 17th 1806.
This morning early I sent out the hunters, and set several additional
hands about the packsaddles. I find that the sturgeon is not taken by
any of the natives above the Columbean vally. the inhabitants of the
rapids at this time take a few of the white salmon trout and
considerable quantities of a small indifferent mullet on which they
principally subsist. I have seen none except dryed fish of the last
season in the possession of the people above that place, they subsist
on roots principally with some dryed and pounded fish. the salmon not
having made their appearance proves a serious inconvenience to us. but
few of the natives visited my camp today and those only remained a few
hours. even at this place which is merely on the border of the plains
of Columbia the climate seems to have changed the air feels dryer and
more pure. the earth is dry and seems as if there had been no rain for
a week or ten days. the plain is covered with a rich virdure of grass
and herbs from four to nine inches high and exhibits a beautiful) seen
particularly pleasing after having been so long imprisoned in mountains
and those almost impenetrably thick forrests of the seacoast. Joseph
Feilds brought me today three eggs of the party coloured corvus, they
are about the size and shape of those of the pigeon. they are bluish
white much freckled with dark redish brown irregular spots, in short it
is reather a mixture of those colours in which the redish brown
predominates, particularly towards the larger end.- This evening
Willard and Cruzatte returned from Capt. Clark and brought me a note in
which Capt. C. informed me that he had sill been unsuccessful) having
not obtained a single horse as yet from the natives and the state of
our stores are so low that I begin to fear we shall not be enabled to
obtain as many horses at this place as will convey our baggage and
unless we do obtain a sufficient number for that purpose we shall not
hasten our progress as a part of our baggage must still be conveyed by
water. Capt. C. informed me that he should proceed as far as the
Eneshur village today and would return tomorrow and join me at the
Skillute village to which place I mean to proceed with the party
tomorrow. I dispatched Shannon with a note to Capt. Clark in which I
requested him to double the price we have heretofore offered for horses
and if possible obtain as many as five, by this means we shall be
enabled to proceed immediately with our small canoes and those horses
to the villages in the neighbourhood of the mussel shell rapid where
horses are more abundant and cheaper; with the remainder of our
merchandize in addition to the canoes we can no doubt obtain as many
horses there as will answer our purposes. delay in the villages at the
narrows and falls will be expensive to us inasmuch as we will be
compelled to purchase both fuel and food of the indians, and might the
better enable them to execute any hostile desighn should they meditate
any against us.- all the hunters returned in the evening. Sheilds had
killed one deer which he brought with him. the packsaddles were
completed this evening. I had some Elkskins put in the water today make
harnes for the packhorses but shall not cut them untill I know the
number we can obtain.- there is a species of hiasinth in these plains
the bulb of which the natives eat either boiled baked or dryed in the
sun. this bulb is white, not entirely solid, and of a flat form; the
bulb of the present year overlays, or crowns that of the last, and
seems to be pressed close to it, the old bulb is withered much thiner
equally wide with that of the present year and sends fourth from it's
sides a number of small radicles.- this hiasinth is of a pale blue
colour and is a very pretty flower. I preserved a specemine of it.

[Clark, April 17, 1806]
April 17th 1806
I rose early and took a position near to the village and exposed the
artiles I had for Sale Great numbers of Indians Came from different
derections, Some from below Some above and others across the Countrey
from the Tapteet river See description of the Nations &c.- I obtained a
Sketch of the Columbia as also Clarks river. See sketch I made a bargin
with the Chief who has more horses than all the village besides for 2
horses. Soon after he Canseled his bargin, and we again bargined for 3
horses, they were brought forward, and only one fit for Service, the
others had Such intolerable backs as to render them entirely unfit for
Service. as I would not take the 3 he would not Sell the good one to
me, and we were off the bargin. I then packed up and was about Setting
out for the Falls when one Indian Sold me 2 horses and one other one
horse, and Some others Said they wished to trade which caused me to
conclude to delay here one other night. Maney of the natives from above
Come and Said they would trade, but asked a higher price than I thought
I could give or reather more than this nation asked.- Great numbers of
Men.- I hed to purchase 3 dogs for the men to eate & Some
Shap-per-lell. I Sent Crusat, Wiser, Willard and McNeal back to Capt
Lewis informing him of my ill Suck'sess, and adviseing him to proceed
on to this place as Soon as possible, and my intention of proceededing
on to the falls to purchase horses if possible Several Indians arived
late this evening. Capt. Lewis Sent me a note by Shannon informing me
that he would Set early on tomorrow morning early &c. &c. I sleped in
house of the 2d Chief and they had not any thing except fish to eate
and no wood for fire. those people have a number of buffalow robes.
They have great number of Skimming nets

[Clark, April 17, 1806]
Thursday 17th of April 1806
I rose early after bad nights rest, and took my merchindize to a rock
which afforded an elegable Situation for my purpose, and at a Short
distance from the houses, and divided the articles of merchindize into
parsels of Such articles as I thought best Calculated to pleas the
Indians, and in each parcel I put as many articles as we could afford
to give, and thus exposed them to view, informing the Indians that each
parcel was intended for a horse. they tanterlised me the greater part
of the day, Saying that they had Sent out for their horses and would
trade as Soon as they Came. Several parcels of merchindize was laid by
for which they told me they would bring horses. I made a bargin with
the Chief for 2 horses, about an hour after he canseled the bargin and
we again bargained for 3 horses which were brought foward, only one of
the 3 could be possibly used the other two had Such intolerable backs
as to render them entirely unfit for Service. I refused to take two of
them which displeased him and he refused to part with the 3rd. I then
packed up the articles and was about Setting out for the Village above
when a man Came and Sold me two horses, and another man Sold me one
horse, and Several others informed me that they would trade with me if
I would Continue untill their horses could be drove up. this induced me
to Continue at this Village another day. Maney of the nativs from
different villages on the Columbia above offered to trade, but asked
Such things as we had not and double as much of the articles which I
had as we could afford to give. this was a very unfavourable
circumstance as my dependance for precureing a Sufficiency of horses
rested on the Suckcess above where I had reasons to believe there were
a greater abundance of those animals, and was in hopes of getting them
on better terms. I purchased 3 dogs for the party with me to eate and
Some Chap-pa-lell for my Self. before precureing the 3 horses I
dispatched Crusat, Willard & McNeal and Peter Wiser to Capt Lewis at
the Rock fort Camp with a note informing him of my ill Suckcess in
precureing horses, and advised him to proceed on to this place as Soon
as possible. that I would in the mean time proceed on to the Enesher
Nation above the Great falls and try to purchase Some horses of that
people. Soon after I had dispatched this party the Chief of the
Enesher's and 15 or 20 of his people visited me and appeared to be
anxious to See the articles I offered for the horses. Several of them
agreeed to let me have horses if I would add Sundery articles to those
I offered which I agreeed to, and they lay'd those bundles by and
informed me they would deliver me the horses in the morning. I proposed
going with them to their Town. the Chief informed me that their horses
were all in the plains with their womin gathering roots. they would
Send out and bring the horses to this place tomorrow. this entiligence
was flattering, tho I doubted the Sincerity of those people who had
Several times disapointed me in a Similar way. however I deturmined to
Continue untill tomorrow. in the mean time industously employd. our
Selves with the great multitude of indians of differant Nations about
us trying to purchase horses. Shabono purchased a verry fine Mare for
which he gave Hurmen, Elks Teeth, a belt and Some other articles of no
great value. no other purchase was made in the Course of this day. in
the evening I recved a note from Capt L- by Shannon informing me that
he Should Set out early on tomorrow morning and Should proceed up to
the bason 2 miles below the Skillute Village. and adviseing me to give
double the prices which we had first agreed on for each horse. I
observe at every house Scooping Nets with which they take the Salmon.

I was envited into the house of the 2nd Chief where Concluded to Sleep.
this man was pore nothing to eat but dried fish, and no wood to burn.
altho the night was Cold they Could not rase as much wood as would make
a fire

[Lewis, April 18, 1806]
Friday April 18th 1806.
Late last evening we were visited by the principal cheif of
Chilluckkittaquaws and 12 of his nation they remained with us untill 9
OC. when they all departed except the Cheif and two others who slept at
my feet. we loaded our vessels and set out after an early breakfast
this morning. we gave the indians a passage to the N. shore on which
they reside and pursued our rout to the foot of the first rapid at the
distance of 4 ms. here we found it necessary to unload the perogues and
canoes and make a portage of 70 paces over a rock; we then drew our
vessels up by a cord and the assistance of setingpoles. from hence we
proceeded to the bason below the long narrows 5 ms. further and landed
on the Lard. side at 1/2 after 3. the Cheif when he left me this
morning promised to bring some horses to barter with me at the bason.-
the long narrows are much more formidable than they were when we
decended them last fall there would be no possibility of passind either
up or down them in any vessel.- after unloading the canoes and
arranging the camp I walked up to the Skillute Village and jouined
Capt. he had procured four horses only for which a high price had been
given, at least more than double that which we had formerly given for
those which we purchased from the Shoshonees and the first band of
Flatheads. they have a great abundance of horses but will not dispose
of them. we determined to make the portage to the head of the long
narrows with our baggage and five small canoes. the 2 perogues we could
take no further and therefore cut them up for fuel. in the evening
Capt. C. and myself returned to the camp at the bason and left Drewyer
and three others with the merchandize at the village, three parsels of
which had been laid by at the request of individuals who promised to
give us horses for them in the morning.- I shot my airgun in the
presents of the natives at the village which excited great astonishment.

[Clark, April 18, 1806]
April 18th 1806
early this morning I was awoke by a Indian from the nieghbourhood of
our horses, he had he arived here yesterday & this morning found a
Small bag of powder and ball which had been left when we exposed our
goods yesterday and brought it to me. I had a fire made out and exposed
the articles &c. having increased the articles for each horse, and Sent
out 2 men to hunt the horses bought yesterday. after Colecting them
Sent Shabono and Frazer with the 4 I had purchased down to Capt Lewis.
and was tanterlised with the expectation of purchaseing more
imediately. Great numbers of the Indians from the falls and both above
and below. none of them appeared anxious to part with their horses but
told me that Several were Comeing from the plains about 1 or 2 P M. and
laid by 2 parcels of merchindize and told me that they had Sent for
their horses. among other Tribes was those of the Skad-datts who
bantered the Skillutes to play with them at a Singular Kind of game
which was Soon Made up and 9 of aside Sat down they were Some time
making up their bets of Beeds, brass thimbles or tubes robes &c. &c.
when the bets were all made up the nine on each Side took opposides
faceing each other at the distance of about 12 feet. in front of each
party was placed a long pole on which they Struck with a Stick and
Sung. they made use of 2 Small pices of bone in this form and Size a
bone was given to 2 men of the Same party who changed it from hand to
hand with great dexterity one hand above the other looking down, and
when he was ready for the opposit party to guess he Seperated his hands
Swinging them around the breast looking at the opposit party who waved
their hand to the Side the bone was in. if the opposit party guessed
the hand of each man the bone was given to them. if neither it was
nothing. if they guessed one which they might single out if they
pleased they recived his bone, and lost on the other as they hapened to
fail in guessing the also lose one if they fail guessing both The game
is plaid at different numbers & each party has 5 sticks. Several of
those games were played to day in which the Skillute won, indeed the
won all the beeds and Som robes of the Skad datts which they _____ one
other game which they also played _____ 2 by men with 4 Sticks. 2 black
& 2 White under a kind of hat made of bark. as this is a very intrecut
game I cannot describe it: the one who holds the Sticks places them in
different positions, and the opposit party, guess the position of the
black Sticks by a motion of either one or both of the hands. each man
has 4 Sticks. this as also the other is accompanied with a kind of
Song. This hat is about 12 inches diamuter and the Sticks about 5
inches long-- at 3 P M Sergt Ordway arived with 3 men from Capt Lewis
with elk skins and Some fiew articles Such as a Coat & robes. I had 3
dogs purchased, Soon after Capt. Lewis Came up with J. Fields he had
assended the river with much dificuelty to the bason 2 Miles below. I
left Drewyer, Warner, Shannon & Goodrich with the articles and went
down with Capt Lewis to the bason, Cut up 2 of our canoes for fire wood
no horses more maney nations resort here for trade

[Clark, April 18, 1806]
Friday 18th April 1806
Early this Morning I was awoke by an indian man of the Chopunnish
Nation who informed me that he lived in the neighbourhood of our
horses. this man delivered me a bag of powder and ball which he had
picked up this morning at the place the goods were exposed yesterday I
had a fire made of Some poles purchased of the nativs at a Short
distance from the houses and the articles exposed as yesterday.
Collected the 4 horses purchased yesterday and Sent Frazier and Shabono
with them to the bason where I expected they would meet Cap L-s and
Commence the portage of the baggage on those horses. about 10 A.M. the
Indians Came down from the Eneesher Villages and I expected would take
the articles which they had laid by yesterday. but to my estonishment
not one would make the exchange to day-. two other parcels of good were
laid by and the horses promised at 2 P.M. I payed but little attention
to this bargain however Suffered the bundles to lye. I dressed the
Sores of the principal Chief gave Some Small things to his children and
promised the Chief Some Medicine for to Cure his Sores. his wife who I
found to be a Sulky Bitch and was Somewhat efflicted with pains in her
back. this I thought a good oppertunity to get her on my Side giveing
here Something for her back. I rubed a little Camphere on her temples
and back, and applyed worm flannel to her back which She thought had
nearly restored her to her former feelings. this I thought a favourable
time to trade with the Chief who had more horses than all the nation
besides. I accordingly made him an offer which he excepted and Sold me
two horses. Great numbers of Indians from defferent derections visited
me at this place to day, none of them appeared willing to part with
their horses, but told me that Several were Comeing from the plains
this evening. among other Nations who visit this place for the purpose
of trade is the Skad-datt's. those people bantered the Skillutes to
play at a Singular kind of game. in the Course of the day the Skillutes
won all their beeds Skins arrows &c. This game was Composed of 9 men on
a Side. they Set down opposit to each other at the distance of about 10
feet. in front of each party a long pole was placed on which they
Struck with a Small Stick to the time of their Songs. after the bets
were made up which was nearly half an hour after they Set down, two
round bones was producd about the Size of a mans little finger or
Something Smaller and 21/4 inches in length. which they held in their
hand Changeing it from one hand to the other with great dexterity. 2
men on the Same Side performed this part, and when they had the bone in
the hand they wished, they looked at their advosarys Swinging arms
around their Sholders for their advosary Guess which they pirformed by
the motion the hand either to the right or left. if the opposit party
guessed the hand of both of the men who had the bone, the bones were
given to them. if neither the bones was retained and nothing Counted.
if they guessed one and not the other, one bone was dilivered up and
the party possessing the other bone Counted one. and one for every time
the advosary miss guessed untill they guessed the hand in which the
bone was in-in this game each party has 5 Sticks. and one Side wins all
the Sticks, once twice or thrice as the game may be Set. I observed
another game which those people also play and is played by 2 persons
with 4 Sticks about the Size of a mans finger and about 7 inches in
length. two of those Sticks are black and the other 2 White and
Something larger than the black ones. those Sticks they place in
defferent positions which they perform under a kind of trencher made of
bark round and about 14 inches diamieter. this is a very intricate game
and I cannot Sufficiently understand to discribe it. the man who is in
possession of the Sticks &c places them in defferent positions, and the
opposit party tels the position of the black Sticks by a motion of
either or both of his hands &c. this game is Counted in the Same way as
the one before mentioned. all their games are accompanied with Songs
and time. at 3 P. M Sergt. Ordway & three men arived from Cap Lewis
they brought with them Several Elk Skins, two of my Coats and 4 robes
of the party to add to the Stores I had with me for the purchase of
horses. Sgt. O. informed me that Cap L. had arived with all the Canoes
into the bason 2 miles below and wished Some dogs to eate. I had 3 dogs
purchased and Sent down. at 5 P.M. Capt. Lewis Came up. he informed me
that he had the river to the bason with much difecuelty and danger,
haveing made one portage. as I had not Slept but very little for the
two nights past on account of mice & virmen with which those indian
houses abounded, and haveing no blanket with me, and the means of
keeping a fire Sufficent to keep me worm out was too Expensive I
deturmined to proceed with Capt L. down to Camp at the bason. I left
the Articles of Merchendize &c. with Drewyer, Werner, Shannon &
Goodrich untill the morning-- at the bason we Cut up two of our Canoes
for fire wood verry much to the Sagreen of the nativs not with standing
they would give us nothing for them. In my absence Several Inds.
visited Capt. Lewis at his camp among others was the great Cheif of the
Chilluckkitquaw who Continued with him untill he left Rock fort Camp.
Capt L. had 12 pack Saddles Completed and Strings prepared of the Elk
skins for Lashing the loads he also kept out all the hunters who killed
just deer enough for the party with him to Subsist on. The Cheif who
had Visited Capt Lewis promised him that he would bring Some horses to
the bason and trade with him. but he was not as good as his word. Capt
Lewis gave a large Kittle for a horse which was offered to him at the
bason this evening.

[Lewis, April 19, 1806]
Saturday Aprl. 19th 1806.
This morning early we had our small canoes drawn out, and employed all
hands in transporting our baggage on their backs and by means of the
four pack horses, over the portage. This labour we had accomplished by
3 P.M. and established our camp a little above the present Skil-lute
village which has been removed a few hundred yards lower down the river
than when we passed them last fall and like others below have the
floors of their summer dwellings on the surface of the earth instead of
those cellars in which they resided when we passed them. there was
great joy with the natives last night in consequence of the arrival of
the salmon; one of those fish was caught; this was the harbinger of
good news to them. they informed us that these fish would arrive in
great quantities in the course of about 5 days. this fish was dressed
and being divided into small peices was given to each child in the
village. this custom is founded in a supersticious opinon that it will
hasten the arrival of the salmon. with much difficulty we obtained four
other horses from the Indians today, we wer obliged to dispence with
two of our kettles in order to acquire those. we have now only one
small kettle to a mess of 8 men. in the evening Capt. Clark set out
with four men to the Enesher village at the grand falls in order to
make a further attempt to procure horses. these people are very
faithless in their contracts. they frequently receive the merchandize
in exchange for their horses and after some hours insist on some
additional article being given them or revoke the exchange. they have
pilfered several small articles from us this evening.- I directed the
horses to be hubbled & suffered to graize at a little distance from our
camp under the immediate eye of the men who had them in charge. one of
the men Willard was negligent in his attention to his horse and
suffered it to ramble off; it was not to be found when I ordered the
others to be brought up and confined to the picquits. this in addition
to the other difficulties under which I laboured was truly provoking. I
repremanded him more severely for this peice of negligence than had
been usual with me. I had the remaining horses well secured by
picquits; they were extreemly wrestless and it required the attention
of the whole guard through the night to retain them notwithstanding
they were bubbled and picquted. they frequently throwed themselves by
the ropes by which they were confined. all except one were stone horse
for the people in this neighbourhood do not understand the art of
gelding them, and this is a season at which they are most vicious. many
of the natives remained about our camp all night.

[Clark, April 19, 1806]
April 19th 1806
this morning early Some rain had the Small Canoes hauled out to dry
every man Capable of Carrying a load Comencd the portage and by 5 P. M
had every part of our baggage and canoes across the portage. I then
took Sgt. Pryor, G. Shannon & Crusat & Labiech and went up to the falls
at which place I arivd. about 8 P.M. in the Course of this day I
purchased 4 horses at the town & Capt Lewis purchased one. the nativs
finding that we were about to proceed on by water Sold us those fiew
horses for which we were Compd. to pay them emence prices and the
horses were indefferent. Several Showers of rain this day. description
of those people &c narrows bad

[Clark, April 19, 1806]
Saturday 19th April 1806.
We deturmined to make the portage to the head of the long narrows with
our baggage and 5 Small Canoes, the 2 large Canoes we Could take no
further and therefore Cut them up for fuel. we had our Small Canoes
drawn up very early and employed all hands in transporting our baggage
on their backs and by means of 4 pack horses, over the portage. This
labour we had accomplished by 3 P.M. and established our Camp a little
above the present Skillute village which has been removed as before
observed a fiew hundred yards lower down the river than when we passed
it last fall. I left Capt L. at the bason and proceeded to the village
early this morning with a view to recive the horses which were promised
to be brought this morning for articles laid by last evining. in the
Course of this day I purchased four horses at the Village, and Capt
Lewis one at the bason before he left it. after the baggage was all
Safely landed above the portage, all hands brought over the Canoes at 2
lodes which was accomplished by 5 P.M. as we had not a Sufficiency of
horses to transport our baggage we agreed that I should proceed on to
the Enesher villages at the great falls of the Columbia and if possible
purchase as maney horses as would transport the baggage from that
place, and rid us of the trouble and dificuelty of takeing our Canoes
further. I set out with Serjt Pryor, Geo Shannon Peter Crusat & Labiech
at half past 5 P.M. for the Enesher Village at which place I arrived at
8 P.M. Several Showers of rain in the after part of to day, and the S W
wind very high. there was great joy with the nativs last night in
consequence of the arrival of the Salmon; one of those fish was cought,
this was the harbenger of good news to them. They informed us that
those fish would arive in great quantities in the Course of about 5
days. this fish was dressed and being divided into Small pieces was
given to each Child in the village. this Custom is founded on a
Supersticious opinion that it will hasten the arrival of the Salmon.

we were oblige to dispence with two of our kitties in order to acquire
two of the horses purchasd. to day. we have now only one Small kittle
to a mess of 8 men. These people are very fathless in Contracts; they
frequently reive the merchindize in exchange for their horses and after
Some hours insist on Some additional article being given them or revoke
the exchange.

The long narrows are much more formadable than they were when we
decended them last fall, there would be no possibility of passing
either up or down them in any vessle at this time.

I entered the largest house of the Eneeshers village in which I found
all the enhabitents in bead. they rose and made a light of Straw, they
haveing no wood to burn. many men Collected. we Smoked and I informed
them that I had come to purchase a fiew horses of them. they promused
to Sell me Some in the morning.

[Lewis, April 20, 1806]
Sunday April 20th 1806.
some frost this morning. The Enesher an Skillutes are much better clad
than they were last fall, there men have generally legings mockersons
and large robes; many of them wear shirts of the same form with those
of the Shoshone Chopunnish &c highly ornamented with porcupine quills.
the dress of their women differs very little from those of the great
rapids and above. their children frequently wear robes of the large
grey squirrel skins, those of the men and women are principally deer
skins, some wolf, elk, bighorn and buffaloe; the latter they procure
from the nations who sometimes visit the Missouri. indeed a
considerable poportion of their wearing apparel is purchased from their
neighbours to the N. W. in exchange for pounded fish copper and beads.
at present the principal village of the Eneshur is below the falls on
the N. side of the river. one other village is above the falls on the
S. side and another a few miles above on the N. side. the first
consists of 19, the 2cd of 11, and the 3rd of 5 lodges. their houses
like those of the Skillutes have their floors on the surface of the
ground, but are formed of sticks and covered with mats and straw. they
are large and contain usually several families each for fuel they use
straw, small willows and the southern wood. they use the silk grass in
manufacturing their fishing nets and bags, the bear grass and cedar
bark are employed in forming a variety of articles. they are poor,
dirty, proud, haughty, inhospitable, parsimonious and faithless in
every rispect, nothing but our numbers I beleive prevents their
attempting to murder us at this moment.

This morning I was informed that the natives had pilfered six
tommahawks and a knife from the party in the course of the last night.
I spoke to the cheif on this subject. he appeared angry with his people
and addressed them but the property was not restored. one horse which I
had purchased and paid for yesterday and which could not be found when
I ordered the horses into close confinement yesterday I was now
informed had been gambled away by the rascal who had sold it to me and
had been taken away by a man of another nation. I therefore took the
goods back from this fellow. I purchased a gun from the cheif for which
I gave him 2 Elkskins. in the course of the day I obtained two other
indifferent horses for which I gave an extravigant price. I found that
I should get no more horses and therefore resolved to proceed tomorrow
morning with those which I had and to convey the baggage in two small
canoes that the horses could not carry. for this purpose I had a load
made up for seven horses, the eighth Bratton was compelled to ride as
he was yet unable to walk. I barted my Elkskins old irons and 2 canoes
for beads. one of the canoes for which they would give us but little I
had cut up for fuel. These people have yet a large quantity of dryed
fish on hand yet they will not let us have any but for an exorbitant
price. we purchased two dogs and some shappellel from them. I had the
horses graized untill evening and then picquited and bubbled within the
limits of our camp. I ordered the indians from our camp this evening
and informed them that if I caught them attempting to perloin any
article from us I would beat them severely. they went off in reather a
bad humour and I directed the party to examine their arms and be on
their guard. they stole two spoons from us in the course of the day.
The Scaddals, Squan-nan-os, Shan-wah-purrs and Shallattas reside to the
N. W. of these people, depend on hunting deer and Elk and trade with
these people for ther pounded fish.

[Clark, April 20, 1806]
April 20th 1806
This morning very Cold hills covered with Snow. I Showed the nativs
what I had to give for their horses and attempted to purchase them.
they informed me that they would not Sell any horses to me, that their
horses were at a long ways off and they would not trade them. my offer
was a blue robe, Callico Shirt, a handkerchef, 5 parcels of paint a
Knife, a wampom moon 4 braces of ribin, a pice of Brass and about 6
braces of yellow heeds; and to that amount for what I had I also
offered my large blue blanket for one, my Coat Sword & Plume none of
which Seem to entice those people to give horses if they had any. they
Set in their huts which is of mats Supported on poles without fire. at
night when they wish a light they burn dry Straw & Some fiew Small dry
willows. they Speak defferent from those below, have but little to
eate. Some roots & Dryed fish is to be found in their houses. I am half
frozed at this inhospitable Village which is moved from its position
above the falls to one below and Contains 19 large houses, a village is
also established on the other Side imedeately above the falls. all the
natives who was established above the Falls for Some distance has
removed Those people are much better dressed than they were at the time
we went down the river. They have all new, Deer, Elk, Ibex Goat & wolf
Skin robes, their Children also the large squirel Skin robes, maney of
them have Legins and mockersons, all of which they precure of the
Indians at a distance in exchange for their pounded fish & Beeds, they
also purchase Silk grass, of which they make their nets & Sales for
takeing fish they also purchase Bear grass and maney other things for
their fish. those people gave me roots and berries prepared in
different ways for which I gave some Small articles in return.-Great
numbers of Skiming knets on their houses. Those people are Pore and
Kind durty & indolt. They ware their hair loose flowing the men cut in
the foward which the Skilloots do not &c. &c.

I could not precure a Single horse of those people, dureing this day at
any price, they offered me 2 for 2 kittles of which we Could not spear.
I used every artifice decent & even false Statements to enduce those
pore devils to Sell me horses. in the evening two different men offered
to Sell me three horses which they informed me was a little distance
off and they would bring them imediately. those two persons as I found
went imediately off up the river to their tribe without any intention
to find or Sell their horses. a little before Sunset 3 men arived from
Some distance above and informed me that they Came to See me. at Sunset
finding no probability of Capt Lewis arival, packed up the articles and
took them into the lodge in which I lay last night. Great numbers of
those people geathered around me to Smoke. I gave them 2 pipes and lay
down in the back part of the house with Sgt. P. & the men with our arms
in a Situation as to be ready in case of any alarm. those pore people
appear entirely harmless- I purchased a dog and Some wood with a little
pounded fish and Chappaless. made a fire on the rocks and Cooked the
dogs on which the men breckfast & Dined. wind hard all day cold from N
W.

[Clark, April 20, 1806]
Sunday 20th April 1806
a very cold morning the western mountains Covered with Snow I Shewed
the Eneshers the articles I had to give for their horses. they without
hezitation informed me that they would not Sell me any for the articles
I had, if I would give them Kitties they would let me have horses, and
not without. that their horses were at a long ways off in the planes
and they would not Send for them &c. my offer was a blue robe, a
Calleco Shirt, a Silk handkerchief, 5 parcels of paint, a knife, a
Wampom moon, 8 yards of ribon, Several pieces of Brass, a mockerson awl
and 6 braces of yellow beeds; and to that amount for each horse which
is more than double what we gave either the Sohsohne or first flat
heads we met with on Clarks river I also offered my large blue blanket,
my Coat Sword & plume none of which Seamed to entice those people to
Sell their horses. not with standing every exertion not a Single horse
Could be precured of those people in the Course of the day. Those
people are much better Clad than they were last fall, their men have
generally legins mockersons and large robes. maney of them ware Shirts
of the Same form of those of the Chopunnish and Shoshone highly
ornimented with porcupine quills. the dress of their winen differs
verry little from those above the great rapids. their Children have
Small robes of the Squirel Skins. those of the men & women are
principally deer, Some elk, wolf, Ibix & buffalow which they precure
from distant nations who purchase their Pounded fish in exchange for
those robes & Beeds. The principal village of the Enesher nation is
imedeately below the falls on the N. Side. one other village of the
Same nation above the falls on the opposit Side and one other a few
miles above on the North Side.- The Houses of those people like the
Skillutes have the flores of their Summer dwelling on the Surface of
the earth in Sted of those Sellers in which they resided when we passed
them last fall. those houses are Covered with mats and Straw are large
and Contain Several families each. I counted 19 at this Village & 11 on
the opposit Side. those people are pore durty haughty. they burn Straw
and Small willows. have but little to eate and deer with what they
have. they precure the Silk grass of which they make their nets, the
bear grass for makeing their mats and Several other necessary of the
Indians of the following nations who trade with them as also the
Skillutes for their pounded fish. Viz. Skad-dats, Squan-nun-os,
Shan-wappoms, Shall-lat-tos, who reside to the north and Several bands
who reside on the Columbia above.- I precured a Sketch of the Columbia
and its branches of those people in which they made the river which
falls into the Columbia imediately above the falls on the South Side to
branch out into 3 branches one of which they make head in Mt.jefferson,
one in mount Hood and the other in the S W. range of Mountains and does
not water that extensive Country we have heretofore Calculated on. a
great portion of that extensive tract of Country to the S. and S. W. of
the Columbia and Lewis's river and between the Same and the waters of
Callifornia must be watered by the Multnomah river.- See Sketch in the
latter part of this book (No. 5). Those people are great jokies and
deciptfull in trade.

at Sunset finding that Capt Lewis would not arrive this evening as I
expected, I packed up all the articles which I had exposed, at a
Situation I had pitched on to Encamp, and at which place we had bought
as maney fishing poles as made a fire to Cook a dog which I had
purchased for the men to eate, and returned to the lodge which I had
Slept in last night. great number gathered around me to Smoke, I gave
them two pipes, and then lay my self down with the men to Sleep,
haveing our merchendize under our heads and guns &c in our arms, as we
always have in Similar Situations

[Lewis, April 21, 1806]
Monday April 21st 1806.
Notwithstanding all the precautions I had taken with rispect to the
horses one of them had broken his cord of 5 strands of Elkskin and had
gone off spanseled. I sent several men in surch of the horse with
orders to return at 10 A.M. with or without the horse being determined
to remain no longer with these villains. they stole another tomahawk
from us this morning I surched many of them but could not find it. I
ordered all the spare poles, paddles and the ballance of our canoe put
on the fire as the morning was cold and also that not a particle should
be left for the benefit of the indians. I detected a fellow in stealing
an iron socket of a canoe pole and gave him several severe blows and
mad the men kick him out of camp. I now informed the indians that I
would shoot the first of them that attempted to steal an article from
us. that we were not affraid to fight them, that I had it in my power
at that moment to kill them all and set fire to their houses, but it
was not my wish to treat them with severity provided they would let my
property alone. that I would take their horses if I could find out the
persons who had stolen the tommahawks, but that I had reather loose the
property altogether than take the hose of an inosent person. the chiefs
were present hung their heads and said nothing. at 9 A.M. Windsor
returned with the lost horse, the others who were in surch of the horse
soon after returned also. the Indian who promised to accompany me as
far as the Chopunnish country produced me two horses one of which he
politely gave me the liberty of packing. we took breakfast and departed
a few minutes after 10 OClock. having nine horses loaded and one which
Bratton rode not being able as yet to march; the two canoes I had
dispatched early this morning. at 1 P.M. I arrived at the Enesher
Village where I found Capt Clark and party; he had not purchased a
single horse. he informed me that these people were quite as unfriendly
as their neighbours the Skillutes, and that he had subsisted since he
left me on a couple of platters of pounded roots and fish which an old
man had the politeness to offer him. his party fared much better on
dogs which he purchased from those people. the man resided here from
whom I had purchased the horse which ran off from me yesterday. I had
given him a large kettle and a knife in exchange for that horse which I
informed him should be taken from him unles he produced me the lost
horse or one of equal value in his stead, the latter he prefered and
produced me a very good horse which I very cheerfully received. we soon
made the portage with our canoes and baggage and halted about 1/2 a
mile above the Village where we graized our horses and took dinner on
some dogs which we purchased of these people. after dinner we proceeded
on about four miles to a village of 9 mat lodges of the Enesher a
little below the entrance of Clark's river and encamped; one of the
canoes joined us the other not observing us halt continued on. we
obtained two dogs and a small quantity of fuel of these people for
which we were obliged to give a higher price than usual. our guide
continued with us, he appears to be an honest sincere fellow. he tells
us that the indians a little above will treat us with much more
hospitality than those we are now with. we purchased another horse this
evening but his back is in such a horid state that we can put but
little on him; we obtained him for a trifle, at least for articles
which might be procured in the U States for 10 shillings Virga Cory.-
we took the precaution of piquting and spanseling our horses this
evening near our camp.

[Clark, April 21, 1806]
April 21st 1806
a fair Cold morning. I find it useless to offer any articles or attempt
to trade at this village and therefore deturmine to ____ before I rose
the house was Crouded with Indians to Smoke I gave them none. they are
well Supplied with Straw & bark bags ready to hold their pounded fish.
at 12 oClock the advance of the party from below arived and Soon after
the Canoes all things were taken above the falls & 2 Canoes, turned out
the horss and Cooked & Eat 2 dogs which we purchased of the nativs,
purchased one horse for Which we are to give a Kittle which was given
by us to a man for a horse 3 days past &c. the horse was either taken
or Strayed off. The Chief from below Came up and appeared Concerned for
what had been done at his Village (See Journal)

a 4 P M loaded up & Set out the Canoes also proceed on about 3 miles
opposit to the Mouth of Clarks river, and an Indian man who has
attached himself to us and who has lent us a horse to pack & lives near
the Rocky mountains. he told us that as the day was far Spent we had
better Camp at a village of 9 Lodges a little off the road opsd. the
River CClarks This river has a great falls above 2 forks on its West
Side. we formed a Camp purchased Some wood & 3 dogs for which we gave
pewter buttons which buttons we had made &c. but fiew Indians with us
this evining purchased an old horse and tied up all the horses when we
went to bed

Those are the Same people with those below at the falls. See journal
for the next day-

Skad data ill looking people reside to the N about 18 or 20 miles they
played against the Skillutes a game they Call ____ 9 of a Side and lost
all the beeds & other articles

also a Single game with 2 black & 2 white Sticks under a kind of hat. 2
men played this game is intricit and each party has 4 pegs to count it

The former game is played with 2 bones or Sticks about the Size of a
large quill and 2 inches long passing from one hand to the other and
the adverse party guess. See description before mentioned. The nations
abov at the falls also play this game and bet high

[Clark, April 21, 1806]
Monday 21st April 1806
A fair Cold morning I found it useless to make any further attempts to
trade horses with those unfriendly people who only Crouded about me to
view and make their remarks and Smoke, the latter I did not indulge
them with to day. at 12 oClock Capt Lewis and party Came up from the
Skillutes Village with 9 horses packed and one which bratten who was
yet too weak to walk, rode, and Soon after the two Small Canoes also
loaded with the residue of the baggage which Could not be taken on
horses. we had everry thing imedeately taken above the falls, in the
mean time purchased 2 Dogs on which the party dined- whilst I remained
at the Enesher Village I Subsisted on 2 platters of roots, Some pounded
fish and Sun flour Seed pounded which an old man had the politeness to
give me. in return for which I gave him Several Small articles-.

