Mary's demeanour had hitherto been resolute.  Here a brightness and
look of thankful joy came over her, as she raised her eyes to Heaven
and joined her hands, saying, "I thank you, my lord; you have made it
all gladness to me, by declaring me to be an instrument in the cause
of my religion, for which, unworthy as I am, I shall rejoice to shed
my blood."

"Saint and martyr, indeed!" broke out Paulett.  "That is fine! when
you are dying for plotting treason and murder!"

"Nay, sir," gently returned Mary, "I am not so presumptuous as to
call myself saint or martyr; but though you have power over my body,
you have none over my soul, nor can you prevent me from hoping that
by the mercy of Him who died for me, my blood and life may be
accepted by Him, as offerings freely made for His Church."

She then begged for the restoration of her Almoner De Preaux.  She
was told that the request would be referred to the Queen, but that
she should have the attendance of an English Bishop and Dean.
Paulett was so angered at the manner in which she had met the doom,
that he began to threaten her that she would be denied all that could
serve to her idolatries.

"Yea, verily," said she calmly, "I am aware that the English have
never been noted for mercy."

Lord Buckhurst succeeded in getting the knight away without any more
bitter replies.  Humfrey and Cavendish had, of course, to leave the
room in their train, and as it was the hour of guard for the former,
he had to take up his station and wait with what patience he could
until it should please Master William to carry him the packet.  He
opened it eagerly, standing close beneath the little lamp that
illuminated his post, to read it: but after all, it was somewhat
disappointing, for Mr. Talbot did not feel that absolute confidence
in the consciences of gentlemen-in-place which would make him certain
of that of Master Cavendish, supposing any notion should arise that
Cicely's presence in London could have any purpose connected with the
prisoner.


"To my dear son Humfrey, greeting--

"I do you to wit that we are here safely arrived in London, though we
were forced by stress of weather to tarry seven days in Hull, at the
house of good Master Heatherthwayte, where we received good and
hospitable entertainment.  The voyage was a fair one, and the old
Mastiff is as brave a little vessel as ever she was wont to be; but
thy poor sister lay abed all the time, and was right glad when we
came into smooth water.  We have presented the letters to those whom
we came to seek, and so far matters have gone with us more towardly
than I had expected.  There are those who knew Cicely's mother at her
years who say there is a strange likeness between them, and who
therefore received her the more favourably.  I am lying at present at
Shrewsbury House, where my young Lord makes me welcome, but it hath
been judged meet that thy sister should lodge with the good Madame de
Salmonnet, a lady of Scottish birth, who is wife to one of the
secretaries of M. de Chateauneuf, the French Ambassador, but who was
bred in the convent of Soissons.  She is a virtuous and honourable
lady, and hath taken charge of thy sister while we remain in London.
For the purpose for which we came, it goeth forward, and those who
should know assure me that we do not lose time here.  Diccon
commendeth himself to thee; he is well in health, and hath much
improved in all his exercises.  Mistress Curll is lodging nigh unto
the Strand, in hopes of being permitted to see her husband; but that
hath not yet been granted to her, although she is assured that he is
well in health, and like ere long to be set free, as well as Monsieur
Nau.

"We came to London the day after the Parliament had pronounced
sentence upon the Lady at Fotheringhay.  I promise you there was
ringing of bells and firing of cannon, and lighting of bonfires, so
that we deemed that there must have been some great defeat of the
Spaniards in the Low Countries; and when we were told it was for joy
that the Parliament had declared the Queen of Scots guilty of death,
my poor Cicely had well-nigh swooned to think that there could be
such joy for the doom of one poor sick lady.  There hath been a
petition to the Queen that the sentence may be carried out, and she
hath answered in a dubious and uncertain manner, which leaves ground
for hope; and the King of Scots hath written pressingly and sent the
Master of Gray to speak in his mother's behalf; also M. de
Chateauneuf hath both urged mercy on the Queen, and so written to
France that King Henry is sending an Ambassador Extraordinary, M. de
Bellievre, to intercede for her.

"I send these presents by favour of Master Cavendish, who will tell
thee more than I have here space to set down, and can assure thee
that nothing hasty is like to be done in the business on which he
hath come down with these gentlemen.  And so no more at present from
thy loving father,

                                       "Richard Talbot."


Humfrey had to gather what he could from this letter, but he had no
opportunity of speech with the prisoner on the remainder of that day,
nor on the next, until after Lord Buckhurst and his followers had
left Fotheringhay, bearing with them a long and most touching letter
from the prisoner to Queen Elizabeth.

On that day, Paulett worked himself up to the strange idea that it
was for the good of the unfortunate prisoner's soul, and an act of
duty to his own sovereign, to march into the prison chamber and
announce to Queen Mary that being a dead woman in the eye of the law,
no royal state could be permitted her, in token of which he commanded
her servants to remove the canopy over her chair.  They all flatly
refused to touch it, and the women began to cry "Out upon him," for
being cowardly enough to insult their mistress, and she calmly said,
"Sir, you may do as you please.  My royal state comes from God, and
is not yours to give or take away.  I shall die a Queen, whatever you
may do by such law as robbers in a forest might use with a righteous
judge."

Intensely angered, Sir Amias came, hobbling and stumbling out to the
door, pale with rage, and called on Talbot to come and bring his men
to tear down the rag of vanity in which this contumacious woman put
her trust.

"The men are your servants, sir," said Humfrey, with a flush on his
cheek and his teeth set; "I am here to guard the Queen of Scots, not
to insult her."

"How, sirrah?  Do you know to whom you speak?  Have you not sworn
obedience to me?"

"In all things within my commission, sir; but this is as much beyond
it, as I believe it to be beyond yours."

"Insolent, disloyal varlet!  You are under ward till I can account
with and discharge you.  To your chamber!"

Humfrey could but walk away, grieved that his power of bearing
intelligence or alleviation to the prisoner had been forfeited, and
that he should probably not even take leave of her.  Was she to be
left to all the insults that the malice of her persecutor could
devise?  Yet it was not exactly malice.  Paulett would have guarded
her life from assassination with his own, though chiefly for his own
sake, and, as he said, for that of "saving his poor posterity from so
foul a blot;" but he could not bear, as he told Sir Drew Drury, to
see the Popish, bloodthirsty woman sit queening it so calmly; and
when he tore down her cloth of state, and sat down in her presence
with his hat on, he did not so much intend to pain the woman, Mary,
as to express the triumph of Elizabeth and of her religion.  Humfrey
believed his service over, and began to occupy himself with putting
his clothes together, while considering whether to seek his father in
London or to go home.  After about an hour, he was summoned to the
hall, where he expected to have found Sir Amias Paulett ready to give
him his discharge.  He found, however, only Sir Drew Drury, who thus
accosted him--"Young man, you had better return to your duty.  Sir
Amias is willing to overlook what passed this morning."

"I thank you, sir, but I am not aware of having done aught to need
forgiveness," said Humfrey.

"Come, come, my fair youth, stand not on these points.  'Tis true my
good colleague hath an excess of zeal, and I could wish he could have
found it in his heart to leave the poor lady these marks of dignity
that hurt no one.  I would have no hand in it, and I am glad thou
wouldst not.  He knoweth that he had no power to require such service
of thee.  He will say no more, and I trust that neither wilt thou;
for it would not be well to change warders at this time.  Another
might not be so acceptable to the poor lady, and I would fain save
her all that I can."

Humfrey bowed, and thanked "him of milder mood," nor was any further
notice taken of this hasty dismissal.

When next he had to enter the Queen's apartments, the absence of all
the tokens of her royal rank was to him truly a shock, accustomed as
he had been, from his earliest childhood, to connect them with her,
and knowing what their removal signified.

Mary, who was writing, looked up as, with cap in hand, he presented
himself on one knee, his head bowed lower than ever before, perhaps
to hide the tear that had sprung to his eye at sight of her pale,
patient countenance.

"How now, sir?" she said.  "This obeisance is out of place to one
already dead in law.  Don your bonnet.  There is no queen here for an
Englishman."

"Ah! madam, suffer me.  My reverence cannot but be greater than
ever," faltered Humfrey from his very heart, his words lost in the
kiss he printed on the hand she granted him.

Mary bent "her gray discrowned head," crowned in his eyes as the
Queen of Sorrows, and said to Marie de Courcelles, who stood behind
her, "Is it not true, ma mie, that our griefs have this make-weight,
namely, that they prove to us whose are the souls whose generosity is
above all price!  And what saith thy good father, my Humfrey?"

He had not ventured on bringing the letter into the apartments, but
he repeated most of the substance of it, without, however, greatly
raising the hopes of the Queen, though she was gratified that her
cause was not neglected either by her son or by her brother-in-law.

"They, and above all my poor maid, will be comforted to have done
their utmost," she said; "but I scarcely care that they should
prevail.  As I have written to my cousin Elizabeth, I am beholden to
her for ending my long captivity, and above all for conferring on me
the blessings and glories of one who dies for her faith, all unworthy
as I am!" and she clasped her hands, while a rapt expression came
upon her countenance.

Her chief desire seemed to be that neither Cicely nor her foster-
father should run into danger on her account, and she much regretted
that she had not been able to impress upon Humfrey messages to that
effect before he wrote in answer to his father, sending his letter by
Cavendish.

"Thou wilt not write again?" she asked.

"I doubt its being safe," said Humfrey.  "I durst not speak openly
even in the scroll I sent yesterday."

Then Mary recurred to the power which he possessed of visiting Sir
Andrew Melville and the Almoner, the Abbe de Preaux, who were shut up
in the Fetterlock tower and court, and requested him to take a billet
which she had written to the latter.  The request came like a blow to
the young man.  "With permission--" he began.

"I tell thee," said Mary, "this concerns naught but mine own soul.
It is nothing to the State, but all and everything to me, a dying
woman."

"Ah, madam!  Let me but obtain consent."

"What! go to Paulett that he may have occasion to blaspheme my faith
and insult me!" said the Queen, offended.

"I should go to Sir Drew Drury, who is of another mould," said
Humfrey--

"But who dares not lift a finger to cross his fellow," said Mary,
leaning back resignedly.

"And this is the young gentleman's love for your Grace!" exclaimed
Jean Kennedy.

"Nay, madam," said Humfrey, stung to the quick, "but I am sworn!"

"Let him alone, Nurse Jeanie!" said Mary.  "He is like the rest of
the English.  They know not how to distinguish between the spirit and
the letter!  I understand it all, though I had thought for a moment
that in him there was a love for me and mine that would perceive that
I could ask nothing that could damage his honour or his good faith.
I--who had almost a mother's love and trust in him."

"Madam," cried Humfrey, "you know I would lay down my life for you,
but I cannot break my trust."

"Your trust, fule laddie!" exclaimed Mrs. Kennedy.  "Ane wad think
the Queen speired of ye to carry a letter to Mendoza to burn and
slay, instead of a bit scart of the pen to ask the good father for
his prayers, or the like!  But you are all alike; ye will not stir a
hand to aid her poor soul."

"Pardon me, madam," entreated Humfrey.  "The matter is, not what the
letter may bear, but how my oath binds me!  I may not be the bearer
of aught in writing from this chamber.  'Twas the very reason I would
not bring in my father's letter.  Madam, say but you pardon me."

"Of course I pardon you," returned Mary coldly.  "I have so much to
pardon that I can well forgive the lukewarmness and precision that
are so bred in your nature that you cannot help them.  I pardon
injuries, and I may well try to pardon disappointments.  Fare you
well, Mr. Talbot; may your fidelity have its reward from Sir Amias
Paulett."

Humfrey was obliged to quit the apartment, cruelly wounded, sometimes
wondering whether he had really acted on a harsh selfish punctilio in
cutting off the dying woman from the consolations of religion, and
thus taking part with the persecutors, while his heart bled for her.
Sometimes it seemed to him as if he had been on the point of earning
her consent to his marriage with her daughter, and had thrown it
away, and at other moments a horror came over him lest he was being
beguiled as poor Antony had been before him.  And if he let his faith
slip, how should he meet his father again?  Yet his affection for the
Queen repelled this idea like a cruel injury, while, day by day, it
was renewed pain and grief to be treated by her with the gentlest and
most studied courtesy, but no longer as almost one of her own inner
circle of friends and confidants.

And as Sir Andrew Melville was in a few days more restored to her
service, he was far less often required to bear messages, or do
little services in the prison apartments, and he felt himself
excluded, and cut off from the intimacy that had been very sweet, and
even a little hopeful to him.


CHAPTER XLI. HER ROYAL HIGHNESS.


Cicely had been living in almost as much suspense in London as her
mother at Fotheringhay.  For greater security Mr. Talbot had kept her
on board the Mastiff till he had seen M. d'Aubepine Chateauneuf, and
presented to him Queen Mary's letter.  The Ambassador, an exceedingly
polished and graceful Frenchman, was greatly astonished, and at first
incredulous; but he could not but accept the Queen's letter as
genuine, and he called into his counsels his Secretary De Salmonnet,
an elderly man, whose wife, a Scotswoman by birth, preferred her
husband's society to the delights of Paris.  She was a Hamilton who
had been a pensionnaire in the convent at Soissons, and she knew that
it had been expected that an infant from Lochleven might be sent to
the Abbess, but that it had never come, and that after many months of
waiting, tidings had arrived that the vessel which carried the babe
had been lost at sea.

M. de Chateauneuf thereupon committed the investigation to her and
her husband.  Richard Talbot took them first to the rooms where Mrs.
Barbara Curll had taken up her abode, so as to be near her husband,
who was still a prisoner in Walsingham's house.  She fully confirmed
all that Mr. Talbot said of the Queen's complete acceptance of Cis as
her daughter, and moreover consented to come with the Salmonnets and
Mr. Talbot, to visit the young lady on board the Mastiff.

Accordingly they went down the river together in Mr. Talbot's boat,
and found Cicely, well cloaked and muffled, sitting under an awning,
under the care of old Goatley, who treated her like a little queen,
and was busy explaining to her all the different craft which filled
the river.

She sprang up with the utmost delight at the sight of Mrs. Curll, and
threw herself into her arms.  There was an interchange of inquiries
and comments that--unpremeditated as they were--could not but
convince the auditor of the terms on which the young lady had stood
with Queen Mary and her suite.

Afterwards Cicely took the two ladies to her cabin, a tiny box, but
not uncomfortable according to her habits, and there, on Barbara's
persuasion, she permitted Madame de Salmonnet to see the monograms on
her shoulders.  The lady went home convinced of her identity, and
came again the next day with a gentleman in slouched hat, mask, and
cloak.

As Cicely rose to receive him he uttered an exclamation of
irrepressible astonishment, then added, "Your Highness will pardon
me.  Exactly thus did her royal mother stand when I took leave of her
at Calais."

The Ambassador had thus been taken by storm, although the resemblance
was more in figure and gesture than feature, but Mrs. Curll could
aver that those who had seen Bothwell were at no loss to trace the
derivation of the dark brows and somewhat homely features, in which
the girl differed from the royal race of Scotland.

What was to be done?  Queen Mary's letter to him begged him so far as
was possible to give her French protection, and avoid compromising
"that excellent Talbot," and he thought it would be wisest for her to
await the coming of the Envoy Extraordinary, M. de Pomponne
Bellievre, and be presented by him.  In the meantime her remaining on
board ship in this winter weather would be miserably uncomfortable,
and Richmond and Greenwich were so near that any intercourse with her
would be dangerous, especially if Langston was still in England.
Lodgings or inns where a young lady from the country could safely be
bestowed were not easily to be procured without greater familiarity
with the place than Mr. Talbot possessed, and he could as little
think of placing her with Lady Talbot, whose gossiping tongue and
shrewish temper were not for a moment to be trusted.  Therefore M de
Chateauneuf's proposal that the young lady should become Madame de
Salmonnet's guest at the embassy was not unwelcome.  The lady was
elderly, Scottish, and, as M. de Chateauneuf with something of a
shudder assured Mr. Talbot, "most respectable."  And it was hoped
that it would not be for long.  So, having seen her safely made over
to the lady's care, Richard ventured for the first time to make his
presence in London known to his son, and to his kindred; and he was
the more glad to have her in these quarters because Diccon told him
that there was no doubt that Langston was lurking about the town, and
indeed he was convinced that he had recognised that spy entering
Walsingham's house in the dress of a scrivener.  He would not alarm
Cicely, but he bade her keep all her goods in a state ready for
immediate departure, in case it should be needful to leave London at
once after seeing the Queen.

The French Ambassador's abode was an old conventual building on the
river-side, consisting of a number of sets of separate chambers, like
those of a college, opening on a quadrangle in the centre, and with
one side occupied by the state apartments and chapel.  This
arrangement eminently suited the French suite, every one of whom
liked to have his own little arrangements of cookery, and to look
after his own marmite in his own way, all being alike horrified at
the gross English diet and lack of vegetables.  Many tried
experiments in the way of growing salads in little gardens of their
own, with little heed to the once beautiful green grass-plot which
they broke up.

Inside that gate it was like a new country, and as all the shrill
thin intonations of the French rang in her ears, Cicely could hardly
believe that she had--she said--only a brick wall between her and old
England.

M. de Salmonnet was unmistakably a Scot by descent, though he had
never seen the land of his ancestors.  His grandfather bad been
ennobled, but only belonged to the lesser order of the noblesse,
being exempted from imposts, but not being above employment,
especially in diplomacy.  He had acted as secretary, interpreter, and
general factotum, to a whole succession of ambassadors, and thus his
little loge, as he called it, had become something of a home.  His
wife had once or twice before had to take charge of young ladies,
French or English, who were confided to the embassy, and she had a
guest chamber for them, a small room, but with an oriel window
overhanging the Thames and letting in the southern sun, so as almost
to compensate for the bareness of the rest, where there was nothing
but a square box-bed, a chest, and a few toilette essentials, to
break upon the dulness of the dark wainscoted walls.  Madame herself
came to sleep with her guest, for lonely nights were regarded with
dread in those times, and indeed she seemed to regard it as her duty
never to lose sight of her charge for a moment.

Madame de Salmonnet's proper bed-chamber was the only approach to
this little room, but that mattered the less as it was also the
parlour!  The bed, likewise a box, was in the far-off recesses, and
the family were up and astir long before the November sun.  Dressed
Madame could scarcely be called--the costume in which she assisted
Babette and queer wizened old Pierrot in doing the morning's work,
horrified Cicely, used as she was to Mistress Susan's scrupulous
neatness.  Downstairs there was a sort of office room of Monsieur's,
where the family meals were taken, and behind it an exceedingly small
kitchen, where Madame and Pierrot performed marvels of cookery,
surpassing those of Queen Mary's five cooks.

Cicely longed to assist in them, and after a slight demur, she was
permitted to do so, chiefly because her duenna could not otherwise
watch her and the confections at the same time.  Cis could never make
out whether it was as princess or simply as maiden that she was so
closely watched, for Madame bristled and swelled like a mother cat
about to spring at a strange dog, if any gentleman of the suite
showed symptoms of accosting her.  Nay, when Mr. Talbot once brought
Diccon in with him, and there was a greeting, which to Cicely's mind
was dismally cold and dry, the lady was so scandalised that Cicely
was obliged formally to tell her that she would answer for it to the
Queen.  On Sunday, Mr. Talbot always came to take her to church, and
this was a terrible grievance to Madame, though it was to Cicely the
one refreshment of the week.  If it had been only the being out of
hearing of her hostess's incessant tongue, the walk would have been a
refreshment.  Madame de Salmonnet had been transported from home so
young that she was far more French than Scottish; she was a small
woman full of activity and zeal of all kinds, though perhaps most of
all for her pot au feu.  She was busied about her domestic affairs
morning, noon, and night, and never ceased chattering the whole time,
till Cicely began to regard the sound like the clack of the mill at
Bridgefield.  Yet, talker as she was, she was a safe woman, and never
had been known to betray secrets.  Indeed, much more of her
conversation consisted of speculations on the tenderness of the
poultry, or the freshness of the fish, than of anything that went
much deeper.  She did, however, spend much time in describing the
habits and customs of the pensioners at Soissons; the maigre food
they had to eat; their tricks upon the elder and graver nuns, and a
good deal besides that was amusing at first, but which became rather
wearisome, and made Cicely wonder what either of her mothers would
have thought of it.

The excuse for all this was to enable the maiden to make her
appearance before Queen Elizabeth as freshly brought from Soissons by
her mother's danger.  Mary herself had suggested this, as removing
all danger from the Talbots, and as making it easier for the French
Embassy to claim and protect Cis herself; and M. de Chateauneuf had
so far acquiesced as to desire Madame de Salmonnet to see whether the
young lady could be prepared to assume the character before eyes that
would not be over qualified to judge.  Cis, however, had always been
passive when the proposal was made, and the more she heard from
Madame de Salmonnet, the more averse she was to it.  The only
consideration that seemed to her in its favour was the avoidance of
implicating her foster-father, but a Sunday morning spent with him
removed the scruple.

"I know I cannot feign," she said.  "They all used to laugh at me at
Chartley for being too much of the downright mastiff to act a part."

"I am right glad to hear it," said Richard.

"Moreover," added Cicely, "if I did try to turn my words with the
Scottish or French ring, I wot that the sight of the Queen's Majesty
and my anxiety would drive out from me all I should strive to
remember, and I should falter and utter mere folly; and if she saw I
was deceiving her, there would be no hope at all.  Nay, how could I
ask God Almighty to bless my doing with a lie in my mouth?"

"There spake my Susan's own maid," said Richard.  "'Tis the joy of my
heart that they have not been able to teach thee to lie with a good
grace.  Trust my word, my wench, truth is the only wisdom, and one
would have thought they might have learnt it by this time."

"I only doubted, lest it should be to your damage, dear father.  Can
they call it treason?"

"I trow not, my child.  The worst that could hap would be that I
might be lodged in prison a while, or have to pay a fine; and liefer,
far liefer, would I undergo the like than that those lips of thine
should learn guile.  I say not that there is safety for any of us,
least of all for thee, my poor maid, but the danger is tenfold
increased by trying to deceive; and, moreover, it cannot be met with
a good conscience."

"Moreover," said Cicely, "I have pleadings and promises to make on my
mother-queen's behalf that would come strangely amiss if I had to
feign that I had never seen her!  May I not seek the Queen at once,
without waiting for this French gentleman?  Then would this weary,
weary time be at an end!  Each time I hear a bell, or a cannon shot,
I start and think, Oh! has she signed the warrant?  Is it too late?"

"There is no fear of that," said Richard; "I shall know from Will
Cavendish the instant aught is done, and through Diccon I could get
thee brought to the Queen's very chamber in time to plead.  Meantime,
the Queen is in many minds.  She cannot bear to give up her
kinswoman; she sits apart and mutters, 'Aut fer aut feri,' and 'Ne
feriare feri.'  Her ladies say she tosses and sighs all night, and
hath once or twice awoke shrieking that she was covered with blood.
It is Burghley and Walsingham who are forcing this on, and not her
free will.  Strengthen but her better will, and let her feel herself
secure, and she will spare, and gladly."

"That do I hope to do," said Cicely, encouraged.  The poor girl had
to endure many a vicissitude and heart-sinking before M. de Bellievre
appeared; and when he did come, he was a disappointment.

He was a most magnificent specimen of the mignons of Henri's court.
The Embassy rang with stories of the number of mails he had brought,
of the milk baths he sent for, the gloves he slept in, the valets who
tweaked out superfluous hairs from his eyebrows, the delicacies
required for his little dogs.

M. de Salmonnet reported that on hearing the story of "Mademoiselle,"
as Cicely was called in the Embassy, he had twirled the waxed ends of
his moustaches into a satirical twist, and observed, "That is well
found, and may serve as a last resource."

He never would say that he disbelieved what he was told of her; and
when presented to her, he behaved with an exaggerated deference which
angered her intensely, for it seemed to her mockery of her
pretensions.  No doubt his desire was that Mary's life should be
granted to the intercession of his king rather than to any other
consideration; and therefore once, twice, thrice, he had interviews
with Elizabeth, and still he would not take the anxious suppliant,
who was in an agony at each disappointment, as she watched the gay
barge float down the river, and who began to devise setting forth
alone, to seek the Queen at Richmond and end it all!  She would have
done so, but that Diccon told her that since the alarm caused by
Barnwell, it had become so much more difficult to approach the Queen
that she would have no hope.

But she was in a restless state that made Madame de Salmonnet's
chatter almost distracting, when at last, far on in January, M. de
Salmonnet came in.

"Well, mademoiselle, the moment is come.  The passports are granted,
but Monsieur the Ambassador Extraordinary has asked for a last
private audience, and he prays your Highness to be ready to accompany
him at nine of the clock to-morrow morning."

Cicely's first thought was to send tidings to Mr. Talbot, and in this
M. de Salmonnet assisted her, though his wife thought it very
superfluous to drag in the great, dull, heavy, English sailor.  The
girl longed for a sight and speech of him all that evening in vain,
though she was sure she saw the Mastiff's boat pass down the river,
and most earnestly did she wish she could have had her chamber to
herself for the prayers and preparations, on which Madame's tongue
broke so intolerably that she felt as if she should ere long be wild
and senseless, and unable to recollect anything.

She had only a little peace when Madame rose early in the morning and
left her, thinking her asleep, for a brief interval, which gave her
time to rally her thoughts and commend herself to her only Guide.

She let Madame dress her, as had been determined, in perfectly plain
black, with a cap that would have suited "a novice out of convent
shade."  It was certainly the most suitable garb for a petitioner for
her mother's life.  In her hand she took the Queen's letter, and the
most essential proofs of her birth.  She was cloaked and hooded over
all as warmly as possible to encounter the cold of the river: and
Madame de Salmonnet, sighing deeply at the cold, arranged herself to
chaperon her, and tried to make her fortify herself with food, but
she was too tremulous to swallow anything but a little bread and
wine.  Poor child!  She felt frightfully alone amongst all those
foreign tongues, above all when the two ambassadors crossed the court
to M. de Salmonnet's little door.  Bellievre, rolled up in splendid
sables from head to foot, bowed down to the ground before her, almost
sweeping the pavement with his plume, and asked in his deferential
voice of mockery if her Royal Highness would do him the honour of
accepting his escort.

Cicely bent her head and said in French, "I thank you, sir," giving
him her hand; and there was a grave dignity in the action that
repressed him, so that he did not speak again as he led her to the
barge, which was covered in at the stern so as to afford a shelter
from the wind.

Her quick eye detected the Mastiff's boat as she was handed down the
stairs, and this was some relief, while she was placed in the seat of
honour, with an ambassador on each side of her.

"May I ask," demanded Bellievre, waving a scented handkerchief, "what
her Highness is prepared to say, in case I have to confirm it?"

"I thank your Excellency," replied Cicely, "but I mean to tell the
simple truth; and as your Excellency has had no previous knowledge of
me, I do not see how you can confirm it."

The two gentlemen looked at one another, and Chateauneuf said, "Do I
understand her Royal Highness that she does not come as the
pensionnaire from Soissons, as the Queen had recommended?"

"No, sir," said Cicely; "I have considered the matter, and I could
not support the character.  All that I ask of your Excellencies is to
bring me into the presence of Queen Elizabeth.  I will do the rest
myself, with the help of God."

"Perhaps she is right," said the one ambassador to the other.  "These
English are incomprehensible!"


CHAPTER XLII. THE SUPPLICATION.


In due time the boat drew up at the stairs leading to the palace of
Richmond.  Cicely, in the midst of her trepidation, perceived that
Diccon was among the gentlemen pensioners who made a lane from the
landing to receive them, as she was handed along by M. de Bellievre.
In the hall there was a pause, during which the mufflings were thrown
off, and Cicely appeared in her simple black, a great contrast to her
cavalier, who was clad from neck to knee in pale pink satin, quilted,
and with a pearl at each intersection, earrings in his ears, perfumed
and long-fringed gloves in his hand--a perfect specimen of the
foppery of the Court of France.  However, he might have been in
hodden gray without her perceiving it.  She had the sensation of
having plunged into deep, unknown waters, without rope or plank, and
being absolutely forced to strike out for herself; yet the very
urgency of the moment, acting on her high blood and recent training,
made her, outwardly, perfectly self-possessed and calm.  She walked
along, holding her head in the regal manner that was her inheritance,
and was so utterly absorbed in the situation that she saw nothing,
and thought only of the Queen.

This was to be a private audience, and after a minute's demur with
the clerk of the chamber, when Chateauneuf made some explanation, a
door was opened, a curtain withdrawn, and the two ambassadors and the
young lady were admitted to Elizabeth's closet, where she sat alone,
in an arm-chair with a table before her.  Cicely's first glance at
the Queen reminded her of the Countess, though the face was older,
and had an intellect and a grandeur latent in it, such as Bess of
Hardwicke had never possessed; but it was haggard and worn, the
eyelids red, either with weeping, or with sleeplessness, and there
was an anxious look about the keen light hazel eyes which was
sometimes almost pathetic, and gave Cicely hope.  To the end of her
days she never could recollect how the Queen was arrayed; she saw
nothing but the expression in those falcon eyes, and the strangely
sensitive mouth, which bewrayed the shrewish nose and chin, and the
equally inconsistent firmness of the jaw.

The first glance Cicely encountered was one of utter amazement and
wrath, as the Queen exclaimed, "Whom have you brought hither,
Messieurs?"

Before either could reply, she, whom they had thought a raw, helpless
girl, moved forward, and kneeling before Elizabeth said, "It is I, so
please your Majesty, I, who have availed myself of the introduction
of their Excellencies to lay before your Majesty a letter from my
mother, the Queen of Scots."

Queen Elizabeth made so vehement and incredulous an exclamation of
amazement that Cicely was the more reminded of the Countess, and this
perhaps made her task the easier, and besides, she was not an
untrained rustic, but had really been accustomed to familiar
intercourse with a queen, who, captive as she was, maintained full
state and etiquette.

She therefore made answer with dignity, "If it will please your
Majesty to look at this letter, you will see the proofs of what I
say, and that I am indeed Bride Hepburn, the daughter of Queen Mary's
last marriage.  I was born at Lochleven on the 20th of February of
the year of grace 1567," (footnote - 1568 according to our calendar)
"and thence secretly sent in the Bride of Dunbar to be bred up in
France.  The ship was wrecked, and all lost on board, but I was, by
the grace of God, picked up by a good and gallant gentleman of my
Lord of Shrewsbury's following, Master Richard Talbot of Bridgefield,
who brought me up as his own daughter, all unknowing whence I came or
who I was, until three years ago, when one of the secret agents who
had knowledge of the affairs of the Queen of Scots made known to her
that I was the babe who had been embarked in the Bride of Dunbar."

"Verily, thou must be a bold wench to expect me to believe such a
mere minstrel's tale," said Elizabeth.

"Nevertheless, madam, it is the simple truth, as you will see if you
deign to open this packet."

"And who or where is this same honourable gentleman who brought you
up--Richard Talbot?  I have heard that name before!"

"He is here, madam.  He will confirm all I say."

The Queen touched a little bell, and ordered Master Talbot of
Bridgefield to be brought to her, while, hastily casting her eyes on
the credentials, she demanded of Chateauneuf, "Knew you aught of
this, sir?"

"I know only what the Queen of Scotland has written and what this
Monsieur Talbot has told me, madam," said Chateauneuf.  "There can be
no doubt that the Queen of Scotland has treated her as a daughter,
and owns her for such in her letter to me, as well as to your
Majesty."

"And the letters are no forgery?"

"Mine is assuredly not, madam; I know the private hand of the Queen
of Scots too well to be deceived.  Moreover, Madame Curll, the wife
of the Secretary, and others, can speak to the manner in which this
young lady was treated."

"Openly treated as a daughter!  That passes, sir.  My faithful
subjects would never have left me uninformed!"

"So please your Majesty," here the maiden ventured, "I have always
borne the name of Cicely Talbot, and no one knows what is my real
birth save those who were with my mother at Lochleven, excepting Mrs.
Curll.  The rest even of her own attendants only understood me to be
a Scottish orphan.  My true lineage should never have been known,
were it not a daughter's duty to plead for her mother."

By this time Mr. Talbot was at the door, and he was received by the
Queen with, "So ho! Master Talbot, how is this?  You, that have been
vaunted to us as the very pink of fidelity, working up a tale that
smacks mightily of treason and leasing!"

"The truth is oft stranger than any playwright can devise," said
Richard, as he knelt.

"If it be truth, the worse for you, sir," said the Queen, hotly.
"What colour can you give to thus hiding one who might, forsooth,
claim royal blood, tainted though it be?"

"Pardon me, your Grace.  For many years I knew not who the babe was
whom I had taken from the wreck, and when the secret of her birth was
discovered, I deemed it not mine own but that of the Queen of Scots."

"A captive's secrets are not her own, and are only kept by traitors,"
said Elizabeth, severely.

At this Cicely threw herself forward with glowing cheeks.  "Madam,
madam, traitor never was named in the same breath with Master
Talbot's name before.  If he kept the secret, it was out of pity, and
knowing no hurt could come to your Majesty by it."

"Thou hast a tongue, wench, be thou who thou mayst," said Elizabeth
sharply.  "Stand back, and let him tell his own tale."

Richard very briefly related the history of the rescue of the infant,
which he said he could confirm by the testimony of Goatley and of
Heatherthwayte.  He then explained how Langston had been present when
she was brought home, and had afterwards made communications to the
Queen of Scots that led to the girl, already in attendance on her,
being claimed and recognised; after which he confessed that he had
not the heart to do what might separate the mother and daughter by
declaring their relationship.  Elizabeth meanwhile was evidently
comparing his narrative with the letters of the Queen of Scots,
asking searching questions here and there.

She made a sound of perplexity and annoyance at the end, and said,
"This must be further inquired into."

Here Cicely, fearing an instant dismissal, clasped her hands, and on
her knees exclaimed, "Madam! it will not matter.  No trouble shall
ever be caused by my drop of royal blood; no one shall ever even know
that Bride of Scotland exists, save the few who now know it, and have
kept the secret most faithfully.  I seek no state; all I ask is my
mother's life.  O madam, would you but see her, and speak with her,
you would know how far from her thoughts is any evil to your royal
person!"

"Tush, wench! we know better.  Is this thy lesson?"

"None hath taught me any lesson, madam.  I know what my mother's
enemies have, as they say, proved against her, and I know they say
that while she lives your Grace cannot be in security."

"That is what moves my people to demand her death," said Elizabeth.

"It is not of your own free will, madam, nor of your own kind heart,"
cried Cicely.  "That I well know!  And, madam, I will show you the
way.  Let but my mother be escorted to some convent abroad, in France
or Austria, or anywhere beyond the reach of Spain, and her name
should be hidden from everyone!  None should know where to seek her.
Not even the Abbess should know her name.  She would be prisoned in a
cell, but she would be happy, for she would have life and the free
exercise of her religion.  No English Papist, no Leaguer, none should
ever trace her, and she would disquiet you no more."

"And who is to answer that, when once beyond English bounds, she
should not stir up more trouble than ever?" demanded Elizabeth.

"That do I," said the girl.  "Here am I, Bride Hepburn, ready to live
in your Majesty's hands as a hostage, whom you might put to death at
the first stirring on her behalf."

"Silly maid, we have no love of putting folk to death," said
Elizabeth, rather hurt.  "That is only for traitors, when they
forfeit our mercy."

"Then, O madam, madam, what has been done in her name cannot forfeit
mercy for her!  She was shut up in prison; I was with her day and
night, and I know she had naught to do with any evil purpose towards
your Majesty.  Ah! you do not believe me!  I know they have found her
guilty, and that is not what I came to say," she continued, getting
bewildered in her earnestness for a moment.  "No.  But, gracious
Queen, you have spared her often; I have heard her say that you had
again and again saved her life from those who would fain have her
blood."

"It is true," said Elizabeth, half softened.

"Save her then now, madam," entreated the girl.  "Let her go beyond
their reach, yet where none shall find her to use her name against
you.  Let me go to her at Fotheringhay with these terms.  She will
consent and bless and pray for you for ever; and here am I, ready to
do what you will with me!"

"To hang about Court, and be found secretly wedded to some base
groom!"

"No, madam.  I give you my solemn word as a Queen's daughter that I
will never wed, save by your consent, if my mother's life be granted.
The King of Scots knows not that there is such a being.  He need
never know it. I will thank and bless you whether you throw me into
the Tower, or let me abide as the humblest of your serving-women,
under the name I have always borne, Cicely Talbot."

"Foolish maid, thou mayest purpose as thou sayest, but I know what
wenches are made of too well to trust thee."

"Ah madam, pardon me, but you know not how strong a maiden's heart
can be for a mother's sake.  Madam! you have never seen my mother.
If you but knew her patience and her tenderness, you would know how
not only I, but every man or woman in her train, would gladly lay
down life and liberty for her, could we but break her bonds, and win
her a shelter among those of her own faith."

"Art a Papist?" asked the Queen, observing the pronoun.

"Not so, an't please your Majesty.  This gentleman bred me up in our
own Church, nor would I leave it."

"Strange--strange matters," muttered Elizabeth, "and they need to be
duly considered."

"I will then abide your Majesty's pleasure," said Cicely, "craving
license that it may be at Fotheringhay with my mother.  Then can I
bear her the tidings, and she will write in full her consent to these
terms.  O madam, I see mercy in your looks.  Receive a daughter's
blessing and thanks!"

"Over fast, over fast, maiden.  Who told thee that I had consented?"

"Your Majesty's own countenance," replied Cicely readily.  "I see
pity in it, and the recollection that all posterity for evermore will
speak of the clemency of Elizabeth as the crown of all her glories!"

"Child, child," said the Queen, really moved, "Heaven knows that I
would gladly practise clemency if my people would suffer it, but they
fear for my life, and still more for themselves, were I removed, nor
can I blame them."

"Your Majesty, I know that.  But my mother would be dead to the
world, leaving her rights solemnly made over to her son.  None would
know where to find her, and she would leave in your hands, and those
of the Parliament, a resignation of all her claims."

"And would she do this?  Am I to take it on thy word, girl?"

"Your Majesty knows this ring, sent to her at Lochleven," said
Cicely, holding it up.  "It is the pledge that she binds herself to
these conditions.  Oh! let me but bear them to her, and you shall
have them signed and sealed, and your Majesty will know the sweet
bliss of pardoning.  May I carry the tidings to her?  I can go with
this gentleman as Cis Talbot returning to her service."

Elizabeth bent her head as though assenting thoughtfully.

"How shall I thank you, gracious Queen?" cried Cicely, joining hands
in a transport, but Elizabeth sharply cut her short.

"What means the wench?  I have promised nothing.  I have only said I
will look into this strange story of thine, and consider this
proposal--that is, if thy mother, as thou callest her, truly intend
it--ay, and will keep to it."

"That is all I could ask of your Majesty," said Cicely.  "The next
messenger after my return shall carry her full consent to these
conditions, and there will I abide your pleasure until the time comes
for her to be conducted to her convent, if not to see your face,
which would be best of all.  O madam, what thanks will be worthy of
such a grace?"

"Wait to see whether it is a grace, little cousin," said Elizabeth,
but with a kiss to the young round cheek, and a friendliness of tone
that surprised all.  "Messieurs," she added to the ambassadors, "you
came, if I mistake not, to bring me this young demoiselle."

"Who has, I hope, pleaded more effectually than I," returned
Bellievre.

"I have made no promises, sir," said the Queen, drawing herself up
proudly.

"Still your Majesty forbids us not to hope," said Chateauneuf.

Wherewith they found themselves dismissed.  There was a great
increase of genuine respect in the manner in which Bellievre handed
the young lady from the Queen's chamber through the gallery and hall,
and finally to the boat.  No one spoke, for there were many standing
around, but Cicely could read in a glance that passed between the
Frenchmen that they were astonished at her success.  Her own brain
was in a whirl, her heart beating high; she could hardly realise what
had passed, but when again placed in the barge the first words she
heard were from Bellievre.

"Your Royal Highness will permit me to congratulate you."  At the
same time she saw, to her great joy, that M. de Chateauneuf had
caused her foster-father to enter the barge with them.  "If the Queen
of Scotland were close at hand, the game would be won," said
Bellievre.

"Ah!  Milord Treasurer and M. le Secretaire are far too cunning to
have let her be within reach," said Chateauneuf.

"Could we but have bound the Queen to anything," added Bellievre.

"That she always knows how to avoid," said the resident ambassador.

"At least," said Cicely, "she has permitted that I should bear the
terms to my mother at Fotheringhay."

"That is true," said Chateauneuf, "and in my opinion no time should
be lost in so doing.  I doubt," he added, looking at Richard,
"whether, now that her Highness's exalted rank is known, the embassy
will be permitted to remain a shelter to her, in case the Queen
should demand her of me."

"Your Excellency speaks my thought," said Richard.  "I am even
disposed to believe that it would be wiser to begin our journey this
very day."

"I grieve for the apparent inhospitality and disrespect to one whom I
honour so highly," said Chateauneuf, but I verily believe it would be
the wiser plan.  Look you, sir, the enemies of the unfortunate Queen
of Scotland have done all in their power to hinder my colleague from
seeing the Queen, but to-day the Lord Treasurer is occupied at
Westminster, and Monsieur le Secretaire is sick.  She sent for us in
one of those wilful moods in which she chooses to assert herself
without their knowledge, and she remains, as it were, stunned by the
surprise, and touched by her Royal Highness's pleading.  But let
these gentlemen discover what has passed, or let her recover and send
for them, and bah! they will inquire, and messengers will go forth at
once to stop her Highness and yourself.  All will be lost.  But if
you can actually be on the way to this castle before they hear of it-
-and it is possible you may have a full day in advance--they will be
unable to hinder the conditions from being laid before the Queen of
Scots, and we are witnesses of what they were."

"Oh, let us go! let us go at once, dear sir," entreated Cicely.  "I
burn to carry my mother this hope."

It was not yet noon, so early had been the audience, and dark and
short as were the days, it was quite possible to make some progress
on the journey before night.  Cicely had kept the necessaries for her
journey ready, and so had Mr. Talbot, even to the purchase of horses,
which were in the Shrewsbury House stables.

The rest of the mails could be fetched by the Mastiff's crew, and
brought to Hull under charge of Goatley.  Madame de Salmonnet was a
good deal scandalised at Son Altesse Royale going off with only a
male escort, and to Cicely's surprise, wept over her, and prayed
aloud that she might have good success, and bring safety and
deliverance to the good and persecuted Queen for whom she had
attempted so much.

"Sir," said Chateauneuf, as he stood beside Richard, waiting till the
girl's preparations were over, "if there could have been any doubts
of the royal lineage of your charge, her demeanour to-day would have
disproved them.  She stood there speaking as an equal, all undaunted
before that Queen before whom all tremble, save when they can cajole
her."

"She stood there in the strength of truth and innocence," said
Richard.

Whereat the Frenchman again looked perplexed at these
incomprehensible English.

Cicely presently appeared.  It was wonderful to see how that one
effort had given her dignity and womanhood.  She thanked the two
ambassadors for the countenance they had given to her, and begged
them to continue their exertions in her mother's cause.  "And," she
added, "I believe my mother has already requested of you to keep this
matter a secret."

They bowed, and she added, "You perceive, gentlemen, that the very
conditions I have offered involve secrecy both as to my mother's
future abode and my existence.  Therefore, I trust that you will not
consider it inconsistent with your duty to the King of France to send
no word of this."

Again they assured her of their secrecy, and the promise was so far
kept that the story was reserved for the private ear of Henri III. on
Bellievre's return, and never put into the despatches.

Two days later, Cicely enjoyed some of the happiest hours of her
life.  She stood by the bed where her mother was lying, and was
greeted with the cry, "My child, my child! I thought I never should
see thee more.  Domine, nunc dimittis!"

"Nay, dearest mother, but I trust she will show mercy.  I bring you
conditions."

Mary laid her head on her daughter's shoulder and listened.  It might
be that she had too much experience of Elizabeth's vacillations to
entertain much hope of her being allowed to retire beyond her grasp
into a foreign convent, and she declared that she could not endure
that her beloved, devoted child should wear away her life under
Elizabeth's jealous eye, but Cis put this aside, saying with a smile,
"I think she will not be hard with me.  She will be no worse than my
Lady Countess, and I shall have a secret of joy within me in thinking
of you resting among the good nuns."

And Mary caught hope from the anticipations she would not damp, and
gave herself to the description of the peaceful cloister life,
reviewing in turn the nunneries she had heard described, and talking
over their rules.  There would indeed be as little liberty as here,
but she would live in the midst of prayer and praise, and be at rest
from the plots and plans, the hopes and fears, of her long captivity,
and be at leisure for penitence.  "For, ah! my child, guiltless
though I be of much that is laid to my charge, thy mother is a sinful
woman, all unworthy of what her brave and innocent daughter has dared
and done for her."

Almost equally precious with that mother's greeting was the grave
congratulating look of approval which Cicely met in Humfrey's eyes
when he had heard all from his father.  He could exult in her, even
while he thought sadly of the future which she had so bravely risked,
watching over her from a distance in his silent, self-restrained,
unselfish devotion.

The Queen's coldness towards Humfrey had meantime diminished daily,
though he could not guess whether she really viewed his course as the
right one, or whether she forgave this as well as all other injuries
in the calm gentle state into which she had come, not greatly moved
by hope or fear, content alike to live or die.

Richard, in much anxiety, was to remain another day or two at
Fotheringhay, on the plea of his wearied horses and of the Sunday
rest.

Meantime Mary diligently wrote the conditions, but perhaps more to
satisfy her daughter than with much hope of their acceptance.


CHAPTER XLIII. THE WARRANT


"Yea, madam, they are gone!  They stole away at once, and are far on
the way to Fotheringhay, with these same conditions."  So spoke
Davison, under-secretary, Walsingham being still indisposed.

"And therefore will I see whether the Queen of Scots will ratify
them, ere I go farther in the matter," returned Elizabeth.

"She will ratify them without question," said the Secretary,
ironically, "seeing that to escape into the hands of one of your
Majesty's enemies is just what she desires."

"She leaves her daughter as a pledge."

"Yea, a piece of tinsel to delude your Majesty."

Elizabeth swore an oath that there was truth in every word and
gesture of the maiden.

"The poor wench may believe all she said herself," said Davison.
"Nay, she is as much deluded as the rest, and so is that honest,
dull-pated sailor, Talbot.  If your Majesty will permit me to call in
a fellow I have here, I can make all plain."

"Who is he?  You know I cannot abide those foul carrion rascals you
make use of," said Elizabeth, with an air of disgust.

"This man is gentleman born.  Villain he may be, but there is naught
to offend your Majesty in him.  He is one Langston, a kinsman of this
Talbot's; and having once been a Papist, but now having seen the
error of his ways, he did good service in the unwinding of the late
horrible plot."

"Well, if no other way will serve you but I must hear the fellow,
have him in."

A neatly-dressed, small, elderly man, entirely arrayed in black, was
called in, and knelt most humbly before the Queen.  Being bidden to
tell what he knew respecting the lady who had appeared before the
Queen the day before, calling herself Bride Hepburn, he returned for
answer that he believed it to be verily her name, but that she was
the daughter of a man who had fled to France, and become an archer of
the Scottish guard.

He told how he had been at Hull when the infant had been saved from
the wreck, and brought home to Mistress Susan Talbot, who left the
place the next day, and had, he understood, bred up the child as her
own.  He himself, being then, as he confessed, led astray by the
delusions of Popery, had much commerce with the Queen's party, and
had learnt from some of the garrison of Dunfermline that the child on
board the lost ship was the offspring of this same Hepburn, and of
one of Queen Mary's many namesake kindred, who had died in childbirth
at Lochleven.  And now Langston professed bitterly to regret what he
had done when, in his disguise at Buxton, he had made known to some
of Mary's suite that the supposed Cicely Talbot was of their country
and kindred.  She had been immediately made a great favourite by the
Queen of Scots, and the attendants all knew who she really was,
though she still went by the name of Talbot.  He imagined that the
Queen of Scots, whose charms were not so imperishable as those which
dazzled his eyes at this moment, wanted a fresh bait for her victims,
since she herself was growing old, and thus had actually succeeded in
binding Babington to her service, though even then the girl was
puffed up with notions of her own importance and had flouted him.
And now, all other hope having vanished, Queen Mary's last and ablest
resource had been to possess the poor maiden with an idea of being
actually her own child, and then to work on her filial obedience to
offer herself as a hostage, whom Mary herself could without scruple
leave to her fate, so soon as she was ready to head an army of
invaders.

Davison further added that the Secretary Nau could corroborate that
Bride Hepburn was known to the suite as a kinswoman of the Queen, and
that Mr. Cavendish, clerk to Sir Francis Walsingham, knew that
Babington had been suitor to the young lady, and had crossed swords
with young Talbot on her account.

Elizabeth listened, and made no comment at the time, save that she
sharply questioned Langston; but his tale was perfectly coherent, and
as it threw the onus of the deception entirely on Mary, it did not
conflict either with the sincerity evident in both Cicely and her
foster-father, or with the credentials supplied by the Queen of
Scots.  Of the ciphered letter, and of the monograms, Elizabeth had
never heard, though, if she had asked for further proof, they would
have been brought forward.

She heard all, dismissed Langston, and with some petulance bade
Davison likewise begone, being aware that her ministers meant her to
draw the moral that she had involved herself in difficulties by
holding a private audience of the French Ambassadors without their
knowledge or presence.  It may be that the very sense of having been
touched exasperated her the more.  She paced up and down the room
restlessly, and her ladies heard her muttering--"That she should
cheat me thus!  I have pitied her often; I will pity her no more!  To
breed up that poor child to be palmed on me!  I will make an end of
it; I can endure this no longer!  These tossings to and fro are more
than I can bear, and all for one who is false, false, false, false!
My brain will bear no more.  Hap what hap, an end must be made of it.
She or I, she or I must die; and which is best for England and the
faith?  That girl had well-nigh made me pity her, and it was all a
vile cheat!"

Thus it was that Elizabeth sent for Davison, and bade him bring the
warrant with him.

And thus it was that in the midst of dinner in the hall, on the
Sunday, the 5th of February, the meine of the Castle were startled by
the arrival of Mr. Beale, the Clerk of the Council, always a bird of
sinister omen, and accompanied by a still more alarming figure a
strong burly man clad in black velvet from head to foot.  Every one
knew who he was, and a thrill of dismay, that what had been so long
expected had come at last, went through all who saw him pass through
the hall.  Sir Amias was summoned from table, and remained in
conference with the two arrivals all through evening chapel time--an
event in itself extraordinary enough to excite general anxiety.  It
was Humfrey's turn to be on guard, and he had not long taken his
station before he was called into the Queen's apartments, where she
sat at the foot of her bed, in a large chair with a small table
before her.  No one was with her but her two mediciners, Bourgoin and
Gorion.

"Here," she said, "is the list our good Doctor has writ of the herbs
he requires for my threatened attack of rheumatism."

"I will endeavour, with Sir Amias's permission, to seek them in the
park," said Humfrey.

"But tell me," said Mary, fixing her clear eyes upon him, "tell me
truly.  Is there not a surer and more lasting cure for all my ills in
preparation?  Who was it who arrived to-night?"

"Madame," said Humfrey, bowing his head low as he knelt on one knee,
"it was Mr. Beale."

"Ay, and who besides?"

"Madam, I heard no name, but"--as she waited for him to speak
further, he uttered in a choked voice--"it was one clad in black."

"I perceive," said Mary, looking up with a smile.  "A more effectual
Doctor than you, my good Bourgoin.  I thank my God and my cousin
Elizabeth for giving me the martyr's hope at the close of the most
mournful life that ever woman lived.  Nay, leave me not as yet, good
Humfrey.  I have somewhat to say unto thee.  I have a charge for
thee."  Something in her tone led him to look up earnestly in her
face.  "Thou lovest my child, I think," she added.

The young man's voice was scarcely heard, and he only said, "Yea,
madam;" but there was an intensity in the tone and eyes which went to
her heart.

"Thou dost not speak, but thou canst do.  Wilt thou take her,
Humfrey, and with her, all the inheritance of peril and sorrow that
dogs our unhappy race?"

"Oh"--and there was a mighty sob that almost cut off his voice--"My
life is already hers, and would be spent in her service wherever,
whatever she was."

"I guessed it," said the Queen, letting her hand rest on his
shoulder.  "And for her thou wilt endure, if needful, suspicion,
danger, exile?"

"They will be welcome, so I may shield her."

"I trust thee," she said, and she took his firm strong hand into her
own white wasted one.  "But will thy father consent?  Thou art his
eldest son and heir."

"He loves her like his own daughter.  My brother may have the lands."

"'Tis strange," said Mary, "that in wedding a princess, 'tis no
crown, no kingdom, that is set before thee, only the loss of thine
own inheritance.  For now that the poor child has made herself known
to Elizabeth, there will be no safety for her between these seas.  I
have considered it well.  I had thought of sending her abroad with my
French servants, and making her known to my kindred there.  That
would have been well if she could have accepted the true faith, or
if--if her heart had not been thine; but to have sent her as she is
would only expose her to persecution, and she hath not the mounting
spirit that would cast aside love for the sake of rising.  She lived
too long with thy mother to be aught save a homely Cis.  I would have
made a princess of her, but it passes my powers.  Nay, the question
is, whether it may yet be possible to prevent the Queen from laying
hands on her."

"My father is still here," said Humfrey, "and I deem not that any
orders have come respecting her.  Might not he crave permission to
take her home, that is, if she will leave your Grace?"

"I will lay my commands on her!  It is well thought of," said the
Queen.  "How soon canst thou have speech with him?"

"He is very like to come to my post," said Humfrey, "and then we can
walk the gallery and talk unheard."

"It is well.  Let him make his demand, and I will have her ready to
depart as early as may be to-morrow morn.  Bourgoin, I would ask thee
to call the maiden hither."

Cicely appeared from the apartment where she had been sitting with
the other ladies.

"Child," said the Queen, as she came in, "is thy mind set on wedding
an archduke?"

"Marriage is not for me, madam," said Cicely, perplexed and shaken by
this strange address and by Humfrey's presence.

"Nay, didst not once tell me of a betrothal now many years ago?  What
wouldst say if thine own mother were to ratify it?"

"Ah! madam," said Cicely, blushing crimson however, "but I pledged
myself never to wed save with Queen Elizabeth's consent."

"On one condition," said the Queen.  "But if that condition were not
observed by the other party--"

"How--what, mother!" exclaimed Cicely, with a scream.  "There is no
fear--Humfrey, have you heard aught?"

"Nothing is certain," said Mary, calmly.  "I ask thee not to break
thy word.  I ask thee, if thou wert free to marry, if thou wouldst be
an Austrian or Lorraine duchess, or content thee with an honest
English youth whose plighted word is more precious to him than gold."

"O mother, how can you ask?" said Cicely, dropping down, and hiding
her face in the Queen's lap.

"Then, Humfrey Talbot, I give her to thee, my child, my Bride of
Scotland.  Thou wilt guard her, and shield her, and for thine own
sake as well as hers, save her from the wrath and jealousy of
Elizabeth.  Hark, hark!  Rise, my child.  They are presenting arms.
We shall have Paulett in anon to convey my rere-supper."

They had only just time to compose themselves before Paulett came in,
looking, as they all thought, grimmer and more starched than ever,
and not well pleased to find Humfrey there, but the Queen was equal
to the occasion.

"Here is Dr. Bourgoin's list of the herbs that he needs to ease my
aches," she said.  "Master Talbot is so good as to say that, being
properly instructed, he will go in search of them."

"They will not be needed," said Paulett, but he spoke no farther to
the Queen.  Outside, however, he said to Humfrey, "Young man, you do
not well to waste the Sabbath evening in converse with that blinded
woman;" and meeting Mr. Talbot himself on the stair, he said, "You
are going in quest of your son, sir.  You would do wisely to admonish
him that he will bring himself into suspicion, if not worse, by
loitering amid the snares and wiles of the woman whom wrath is even
now overtaking."

Richard found his son pacing the gallery, almost choked with
agitation, and with the endeavour to conceal it from the two stolid,
heavy yeomen who dozed behind the screen.  Not till he had reached
the extreme end did Humfrey master his voice enough to utter in his
father's ear, "She has given her to me!"

Richard could not answer for a moment, then he said, "I fear me it
will be thy ruin, Humfrey."

"Not ruin in love or faithfulness," said the youth.  "Father, you
know I should everywhere have followed her and watched over her, even
to the death, even if she could never have been mine."

"I trow thou wouldst," said Richard.

"Nor would you have it otherwise--your child, your only daughter, to
be left unguarded."

"Nay, I know not that I would," said Richard.  "I cannot but care for
the poor maid like mine own, and I would not have thee less true-
hearted, Humfrey, even though it cost thee thine home, and us our
eldest son."

"You have Diccon and Ned," said Humfrey.  And then he told what had
passed, and his father observed that Beale had evidently no knowledge
of Cicely's conference with the Queen, and apparently no orders to
seize her.  It had oozed out that a commission had been sent to five
noblemen to come and superintend the execution, since Sir Amias
Paulett had again refused to let it take place without witnesses, and
Richard undertook to apply at once to Sir Amias for permission to
remove his daughter, on the ground of saving her tender youth from
the shock.

"Then," said he, "I will leave a token at Nottingham where I have
taken her; whether home or at once to Hull.  If I leave Brown Roundle
at the inn for thee, then come home; but if it be White Blossom, then
come to Hull.  It will be best that thou dost not know while here,
and I cannot go direct to Hull, because the fens at this season may
not be fit for riding.  Heatherthwayte will need no proofs to
convince him that she is not thy sister, and can wed you at once, and
you will also be able to embark in case there be any endeavour to
arrest her."

"Taking service in Holland," said Humfrey, "until there may be safety
in returning to England."

Richard sighed.  The risk and sacrifice were great, and it was to him
like the loss of two children, but the die was cast; Humfrey never
could be other than Cicely's devoted champion and guardian, and it
was better that it should be as her husband.  So he repaired to Sir
Amias, and told him that he desired not to expose his daughter's
tender years and feeble spirits to the sight of the Queen's death,
and claimed permission to take her away with him the next day, saying
that the permission of the Queen had already been granted through his
son, whom he would gladly also take with him.

Paulett hemmed and hawed.  He thought it a great error in Mr. Talbot
to avoid letting his daughter be edified by a spectacle that might go
far to moderate the contagion of intercourse with so obstinate a
Papist and deceiver.  Being of pitiless mould himself, he was
incapable of appreciating Richard's observation that compassion would
only increase her devotion to the unfortunate lady.  He would not, or
could not, part with Humfrey.  He said that there would be such a
turmoil and concourse that the services of the captain of his yeomen
would be indispensable, but that he himself, and all the rest, would
be free on the Thursday at latest.

Mr. Talbot's desire to be away was a surprise to him, for he was in
difficulties how, even in that enormous hall, to dispose of all who
claimed by right or by favour to witness what he called the tardy
fulfilment of judgment.  Yet though he thought it a weakness, he did
not refuse, and ere night Mr. Talbot was able to send formal word
that the horses would be ready for Mistress Cicely at break of day
the next morning.

The message was transmitted through the ladies as the Queen sat
writing at her table, and she at once gave orders to Elizabeth Curll
to prepare the cloak bag with necessaries for the journey.

Cicely cried out, "O madam my mother, do not send me from you!"

"There is no help for it, little one.  It is the only hope of safety
or happiness for thee."

"But I pledged myself to await Queen Elizabeth's reply here!"

"She has replied," said Mary.

"How?" cried Cicely.  "Methought your letter confirming mine offers
had not yet been sent."

"It hath not, but she hath made known to me that she rejects thy
terms, my poor maid."

"Is there then no hope?" said the girl, under her breath, which came
short with dismay.

"Hope! yea," said Mary, with a ray of brightness on her face, "but
not earthly hope.  That is over, and I am more at rest and peace than
I can remember to have been since I was a babe at my mother's knee.
But, little one, I must preserve thee for thine Humfrey and for
happiness, and so thou must be gone ere the hounds be on thy track."

"Never, mother, I cannot leave you.  You bid no one else to go!" said
Cis, clinging to her with a face bathed in tears.

"No one else is imperilled by remaining as thy bold venture has
imperilled thee, my sweet maid.  Think, child, how fears for thee
would disturb my spirit, when I would fain commune only with Heaven.
Seest thou not that to lose thy dear presence for the few days left
to me will be far better for me than to be rent with anxiety for
thee, and it may be to see thee snatched from me by these stern,
harsh men?"

"To quit you now!  It is unnatural!  I cannot."

"You will go, child.  As Queen and as mother alike, I lay my commands
on you.  Let not the last, almost the only commands I ever gave thee
be transgressed, and waste not these last hours in a vain strife."

She spoke with an authority against which Cis had no appeal, save by
holding her hand tight and covering it with kisses and tears.  Mary
presently released her hand and went on writing, giving her a little
time to restrain her agony of bitter weeping.  The first words spoken
were, "I shall not name thee in my will, nor recommend thee to thy
brother.  It would only bring on thee suspicion and danger.  Here,
however, is a letter giving full evidence of thy birth, and
mentioning the various witnesses who can attest it.  I shall leave
the like with Melville, but it will be for thy happiness and safety
if it never see the light.  Should thy brother die without heirs,
then it might be thy duty to come forward and stretch out thy hand
for these two crowns, which have more thorns than jewels in them.
Alas! would that I could dare to hope they might be exchanged for a
crown of stars!  But lie down on the bed, my bairnie.  I have much
still to do, and thou hast a long journey before thee."

Cicely would fain have resisted, but was forced to obey, though
protesting that she should not sleep; and she lay awake for a long
time watching the Queen writing, until unawares slumber overpowered
her eyes.  When she awoke, the Queen was standing over her saying,
"It is time thou wert astir, little one!"

"Oh! and have I lost all these hours of you?" cried Cicely, as her
senses awoke to the remembrance of the situation of affairs.
"Mother, why did you not let me watch with you?"

Mary only smiled and kissed her brow.  The time went by in the
preparations, in all of which the Queen took an active part.  Her
money and jewels had been restored to her by Elizabeth's orders
during her daughter's absence, and she had put twenty gold pieces in
the silken and pearl purse which she always used.  "More I may not
give thee," she said.  "I know not whether I shall be able to give my
poor faithful servants enough to carry them to their homes.  This
thou must have to provide thee.  And for my jewels, they should be
all thine by right, but the more valuable ones, which bear tokens,
might only bring thee under suspicion, poor child."

She wished Cicely to choose among them, but the poor girl had no
heart for choice, and the Queen herself put in her hand a small case
containing a few which were unobtrusive, yet well known to her, and
among them a ring with the Hepburn arms, given by Bothwell.  She also
showed her a gold chain which she meant to give to Humfrey.  In this
manner time passed, till a message came in that Master Richard Talbot
was ready.

"Who brought it?" asked the Queen, and when she heard that it was
Humfrey himself who was at the door, she bade him be called in.

"Children," she said, "we were interrupted last night.  Let me see
you give your betrothal kiss, and bless you."

"One word, my mother," said Cicely.  "Humfrey will not bear me ill-
will if I say that while there can still be any hope that Queen
Elizabeth will accept me for her prisoner in your stead, I neither
can nor ought to wed him."

"Thou mayst safely accept the condition, my son," said Mary.

"Then if these messengers should come to conduct my mother abroad,
and to take me as her hostage, Humfrey will know where to find me."

"Yea, thou art a good child to the last, my little one," said Mary.

"You promise, Humfrey?" said Cicely.

"I do," he said, knowing as well as the Queen how little chance there
was that he would be called on to fulfil it, but feeling that the
agony of the parting was thus in some degree softened to Cicely.

Mary gave the betrothal ring to Humfrey, and she laid her hands on
their clasped ones.  "My daughter and my son," she said, "I leave you
my blessing.  If filial love and unshaken truth can bring down
blessings from above, they will be yours.  Think of your mother in
times to come as one who hath erred, but suffered and repented.  If
your Church permits you, pray often for her.  Remember, when you hear
her blamed, that in the glare of courts, she had none to breed her up
in godly fear and simple truth like your good mother at Bridgefield,
but that she learnt to think what you view in the light of deadly sin
as the mere lawful instruments of government, above all for the
weaker.  Condemn her not utterly, but pray, pray with all your hearts
that her God and Saviour will accept her penitence, and unite her
sufferings with those of her Lord, since He has done her the grace of
letting her die in part for His Church.  Now," she added, kissing
each brow, and then holding her daughter in her embrace, "take her
away, Humfrey, and let me turn my soul from all earthly loves and
cares!"


CHAPTER XLIV. ON THE HUMBER.


Master Talbot had done considerately in arranging that Cicely should
at least begin her journey on a pillion behind himself, for her
anguish of suppressed weeping unfitted her to guide a horse, and
would have attracted the attention of any serving-man behind whom he
could have placed her, whereas she could lay her head against his
shoulder, and feel a kind of dreary repose there.

He would have gone by the more direct way to Hull, through Lincoln,
but that he feared that February Filldyke would have rendered the
fens impassable, so he directed his course more to the north-west.
Cicely was silent, crushed, but more capable of riding than of
anything else; in fact, the air and motion seemed to give her a
certain relief.

He meant to halt for the night at a large inn at Nottingham.  There
was much stir in the court, and it seemed to be full of the train of
some great noble.  Richard knew not whether to be glad or sorry when
he perceived the Shrewsbury colours and the silver mastiff badge, and
was greeted by a cry of "Master Richard of Bridgefield!"  Two or
three retainers of higher degree came round him as he rode into the
yard, and, while demanding his news, communicated their own, that my
Lord was on his way to Fotheringhay to preside at the execution of
the Queen of Scots.

He could feel Cicely's shudder as he lifted her off her horse, and he
replied repressively, "I am bringing my daughter from thence."

"Come in and see my Lord," said the gentleman.  "He is a woeful man
at the work that is put on him."

Lord Shrewsbury did indeed look sad, almost broken, as he held out
his hand to Richard, and said,  "This is a piteous errand, cousin, on
which I am bound.  And thou, my young kinswoman, thou didst not
succeed with her Majesty!"

"She is sick with grief and weariness," said Richard.  "I would fain
take her to her chamber."

The evident intimacy of the new-comers with so great a personage as
my Lord procured for them better accommodation than they might
otherwise have had, and Richard obtained for Cicely a tiny closet
within the room where he was himself to sleep.  He even contrived
that she should be served alone, partly by himself, partly by the
hostess, a kind motherly woman, to whom he committed her, while he
supped with the Earl, and was afterwards called into his sleeping
chamber to tell him of his endeavours at treating with Lord and Lady
Talbot, and also to hear his lamentations over the business he had
been sent upon.  He had actually offered to make over his office as
Earl Marshal to Burghley for the nonce, but as he said, "that of all
the nobles in England, such work should fall to the lot of him, who
had been for fourteen years the poor lady's host, and knew her
admirable patience and sweet conditions, was truly hard."

Moreover, he was joined in the commission with the Earl of Kent, a
sour Puritan, who would rejoice in making her drink to the dregs of
the cup of bitterness!  He was sick at heart with the thought.
Richard represented that he would, at least, be able to give what
comfort could be derived from mildness and compassion.

"Not I, not I!" said the poor man, always weak.  "Not with those
harsh yoke-fellows Kent and Paulett to drive me on, and that viper
Beale to report to the Privy Council any strain of mercy as mere
treason.  What can I do?"

"You would do much, my Lord, if you would move them to restore--for
these last hours--to her those faithful servants, Melville and De
Preaux, whom Paulett hath seen fit to seclude from her.  It is rank
cruelty to let her die without the sacraments of her Church when her
conscience will not let her accept ours."

"It is true, Richard, over true.  I will do what I can, but I doubt
me whether I shall prevail, where Paulett looks on a Mass as mere
idolatry, and will not brook that it should be offered in his house.
But come you back with me, kinsman.  We will send old Master Purvis
to take your daughter safely home."

Richard of course refused, and at the same time, thinking an
explanation necessary and due to the Earl, disclosed to him that
Cicely was no child of his, but a near kinswoman of the Scottish
Queen, whom it was desirable to place out of Queen Elizabeth's reach
for the present, adding that there had been love passages between her
and his son Humfrey, who intended to wed her and see some foreign
service.  Lord Shrewsbury showed at first some offence at having been
kept in ignorance all these years of such a fact, and wondered what
his Countess would say, marvelled too that his cousin should consent
to his son's throwing himself away on a mere stranger, of perilous
connection, and going off to foreign wars; but the good nobleman was
a placable man, and always considerably influenced by the person who
addressed him, and he ended by placing the Mastiff at Richard's
disposal to take the young people to Scotland or Holland, or wherever
they might wish to go.

This decided Mr. Talbot on making at once for the seaport; and
accordingly he left behind him the horse, which was to serve as a
token to his son that such was his course.  Cicely had been worn out
with her day's journey, and slept late and sound, so that she was not
ready to leave her chamber till the Earl and his retinue were gone,
and thus she was spared actual contact with him who was to doom her
mother, and see that doom carried out.  She was recruited by rest,
and more ready to talk than on the previous day, but she was greatly
disappointed to find that she might not be taken to Bridgefield.

"If I could only be with Mother Susan for one hour," she sighed.

"Would that thou couldst, my poor maid," said Richard.  "The mother
hath the trick of comfort."

"'Twas not comfort I thought of.  None can give me that," said the
poor girl; "but she would teach me how to be a good wife to Humfrey."

These words were a satisfaction to Richard, who had begun to feel
somewhat jealous for his son's sake, and to doubt whether the girl's
affection rose to the point of requiting the great sacrifice made for
his sake, though truly in those days parents were not wont to be
solicitous as to the mutual attachment between a betrothed pair.
However, Cicely's absolute resignation of herself and her fate into
Humfrey's hands, without even a question, and with entire confidence
and peace, was evidence enough that her heart was entirely his; nay,
had been his throughout all the little flights of ambition now so
entirely passed away, without apparently a thought on her part.

It was on the Friday forenoon, a day very unlike their last entrance
into Hull, that they again entered the old town, in the brightness of
a crisp frost; but poor Cicely could not but contrast her hopeful
mood of November with her present overwhelming sorrow, where,
however, there was one drop of sweetness.  Her foster-father took her
again to good Mr. Heatherthwayte's, according to the previous
invitation, and was rejoiced to see that the joyous welcome of Oil-
of-Gladness awoke a smile; and the little girl, being well trained in
soberness and discretion, did not obtrude upon her grief.

Stern Puritan as he was, the minister himself contained his
satisfaction that the Papist woman was to die and never reign over
England until he was out of hearing of the pale maiden who had--
strange as it seemed to him--loved her enough to be almost broken-
hearted at her death.

Richard saw Goatley and set him to prepare the Mastiff for an
immediate voyage.  Her crew, somewhat like those of a few modern
yachts, were permanently attached to her, and lived in the
neighbourhood of the wharf, so that, under the personal
superintendence of one who was as much loved and looked up to as
Captain Talbot, all was soon in a state of forwardness, and
Gillingham made himself very useful.  When darkness put a stop to the
work and supper was being made ready, Richard found time to explain
matters to Mr. Heatherthwayte, for his honourable mind would not
permit him to ask his host unawares to perform an office that might
possibly be construed as treasonable.  In spite of the preparation
which he had already received through Colet's communications, the
minister's wonder was extreme.  "Daughter to the Queen of Scots, say
you, sir!   Yonder modest, shamefast maiden, of such seemly carriage
and gentle speech?"

Richard smiled and said--"My good friend, had you seen that poor
lady--to whom God be merciful--as I have done, you would know that
what is sweetest in our Cicely's outward woman is derived from her;
for the inner graces, I cannot but trace them to mine own good wife."

Mr. Heatherthwayte seemed at first hardly to hear him, so overpowered
was he with the notion that the daughter of her, whom he was in the
habit of classing with Athaliah and Herodias, was in his house,
resting on the innocent pillow of Oil-of-Gladness.  He made his guest
recount to him the steps by which the discovery had been made, and at
last seemed to embrace the idea.  Then he asked whether Master Talbot
were about to carry the young lady to the protection of her brother
in Scotland; and when the answer was that it might be poor protection
even if conferred, and that by all accounts the Court of Scotland was
by no means a place in which to leave a lonely damsel with no
faithful guardian, the minister asked--

"How then will you bestow the maiden?"

"In that, sir, I came to ask you to aid me.  My son Humfrey is
following on our steps, leaving Fotheringhay so soon as his charge
there is ended; and I ask of you to wed him to the maid, whom we will
then take to Holland, when he will take service with the States."

The amazement of the clergyman was redoubled, and he began at first
to plead with Richard that a perilous overleaping ambition was
leading him thus to mate his son with an evil, though a royal, race.

At this Richard smiled and shook his head, pointing out that the very
last thing any of them desired was that Cicely's birth should be
known; and that even if it were, her mother's marriage was very
questionable.  It was no ambition, he said, that actuated his son,
"But you saw yourself how, nineteen years ago, the little lad
welcomed her as his little sister come back to him.  That love hath
grown up with him.  When, at fifteen years old, he learnt that she
was a nameless stranger, his first cry was that he would wed her and
give her his name.  Never hath his love faltered; and even when this
misfortune of her rank was known, and he lost all hope of gaining
her, while her mother bade her renounce him, his purpose was even
still to watch over and guard her; and at the end, beyond all our
expectations, they have had her mother's dying blessing and entreaty
that he would take her."

"Sir, do you give me your word for that?"

"Yea, Master Heatherthwayte, as I am a true man.  Mind you, worldly
matters look as different to a poor woman who knoweth the headsman is
in the house, as to one who hath her head on her dying pillow.  This
Queen had devised plans for sending our poor Cis abroad to her French
and Lorraine kindred, with some of the French ladies of her train."

"Heaven forbid!" broke out Heatherthwayte, in horror.  "The rankest
of Papists--"

"Even so, and with recommendations to give her in marriage to some
adventurous prince whom the Spaniards might abet in working woe to us
in her name.  But when she saw how staunch the child is in believing
as mine own good dame taught her, she saw, no doubt, that this would
be mere giving her over to be persecuted and mewed in a convent."

"Then the woman hath some bowels of mercy, though a Papist."

"She even saith that she doubteth not that such as live honestly and
faithfully by the light that is in them shall be saved.  So when she
saw she prevailed nothing with the maid, she left off her endeavours.
Moreover, my son not only saved her life, but won her regard by his
faith and honour; and she called him to her, and even besought him to
be her daughter's husband.  I came to you, reverend sir, as one who
has known from the first that the young folk are no kin to one
another; and as I think the peril to you is small, I deemed that you
would do them this office.  Otherwise, I must take her to Holland and
see them wedded by a stranger there."

Mr. Heatherthwayte was somewhat touched, but he sat and considered,
perceiving that to marry the young lady to a loyal Englishman was the
safest way of hindering her from falling into the clutches of a
Popish prince; but he still demurred, and asked how Mr. Talbot could
talk of the mere folly of love, and for its sake let his eldest son
and heir become a mere exile and fugitive, cut off, it might be, from
home.

"For that matter, sir," said Richard, "my son is not one to loiter
about, as the lubberly heir, cumbering the land at home.  He would,
so long as I am spared in health and strength, be doing service by
land or sea, and I trust that by the time he is needed at home, all
this may be so forgotten that Cis may return safely.  The maid hath
been our child too long for us to risk her alone.  And for such love
being weak and foolish, surely, sir, it was the voice of One greater
than you or I that bade a man leave his father and mother and cleave
unto his wife."

Mr. Heatherthwayte still murmured something about "youth" and
"lightly undertaken," and Master Talbot observed, with a smile, that
when he had seen Humfrey he might judge as to the lightness of
purpose.

Richard meanwhile was watching somewhat anxiously for the arrival of
his son, who, he had reckoned, would make so much more speed than was
possible for Cis, that he might have almost overtaken them, if the
fatal business had not been delayed longer than he had seen reason to
anticipate.  However, these last words had not long been out of his
mouth when a man's footsteps, eager, yet with a tired sound and with
the clank of spurs, came along the paved way outside, and there was a
knock at the door.  Some one else had been watching; for, as the
street door was opened, Cicely sprang forward as Humfrey held out his
arms; then, as she rested against his breast, he said, so that she
alone could hear, "Her last words to me were, 'Give her my love and
blessing, and tell her my joy is come--such joy as I never knew
before.'"

Then they knew the deed was done, and Richard said, "God have mercy
on her soul!"  Nor did Mr. Heatherthwayte rebuke him.  Indeed there
was no time, for Humfrey exclaimed, "She is swooning."  He gathered
her in his arms, and carried her where they lighted him, laying her
on Oil's little bed, but she was not entirely unconscious, and
rallied her senses so as to give him a reassuring look, not quite a
smile, and yet wondrously sweet, even in the eyes of others.  Then,
as the lamp flashed on his figure, she sprang to her feet, all else
forgotten in the exclamation.

"O Humfrey, thou art hurt!  What is it?  Sit thee down."

They then saw that his face was, indeed, very pale and jaded, and
that his dress was muddied from head to foot, and in some places
there were marks of blood; but as she almost pushed him down on the
chest beside the bed, he said, in a voice hoarse and sunk, betraying
weariness--

"Naught, naught, Cis; only my beast fell with me going down a hill,
and lamed himself, so that I had to lead him the last four or five
miles.  Moreover, this cut on my hand must needs break forth bleeding
more than I knew in the dark, or I had not frighted thee by coming in
such sorry plight," and he in his turn gazed reassuringly into her
eyes as she stood over him, anxiously examining, as if she scarce
durst trust him, that if stiff and bruised at all, it mattered not.
Then she begged a cup of wine for him, and sent Oil for water and
linen, and Humfrey had to abandon his hand to her, to be cleansed and
bound up, neither of them uttering a word more than needful, as she
knelt by the chest performing this work with skilful hands, though
there was now and then a tremor over her whole frame.

"Now, dear maid," said Richard, "thou must let him come with us and
don some dry garments: then shalt thou see him again."

"Rest and food--he needs them," said Cis, in a voice weak and
tremulous, though the self-restraint of her princely nature strove to
control it.  "Take him, father; methinks I cannot hear more to-night.
He will tell me all when we are away together.  I would be alone, and
in the dark; I know he is come, and you are caring for him.  That is
enough, and I can still thank God."

Her face quivered, and she turned away; nor did Humfrey dare to shake
her further by another demonstration, but stumbled after his father
to the minister's chamber, where some incongruous clerical attire had
been provided for him, since he disdained the offer of supping in
bed.

Mr. Heatherthwayte was much struck with the undemonstrativeness of
their meeting, for there was high esteem for austerity in the Puritan
world, in contrast to the utter want of self-restraint shown by the
more secular characters.

When Humfrey presently made his appearance with his father's cloak
wrapped over the minister's clean shirt and nether garments, Richard
said, "Son Humfrey, this good gentleman who baptized our Cis would
fain be certain that there is no lightness of purpose in this thy
design."

"Nay, nay, Mr. Talbot," broke in the minister, "I spake ere I had
seen this gentleman.  From what I have now beheld, I have no doubts
that be she who she may, it is a marriage made and blessed in
heaven."

"I thank you, sir," said Humfrey, gravely; "it is my one hope
fulfilled."

They spoke no more till he had eaten, for he was much spent, having
never rested more than a couple of hours, and not slept at all since
leaving Fotheringhay.  He had understood by the colour of the horse
left at Nottingham which road to take, and at the hostel at Hull had
encountered Gillingham, who directed him on to Mr. Heatherthwayte's.

What he brought himself to tell of the last scene at Fotheringhay has
been mostly recorded by history, and need not here be dwelt upon.
When Bourgoin and Melville fell back, unable to support their
mistress along the hall to the scaffold, the Queen had said to him,
"Thou wilt do me this last service," and had leant on his arm along
the crowded hall, and had taken that moment to speak those last words
for Cicely.  She had blessed James openly, and declared her trust
that he would find salvation if he lived well and sincerely in the
faith he had chosen.  With him she had secretly blessed her other
child.

Humfrey was much shaken and could hardly command his voice to answer
the questions of Master Heatherthwayte, but he so replied to them
that, one by one, the phrases and turns were relinquished which the
worthy man had prepared for a Sunday's sermon on "Go see now this
accursed woman and bury her, for she is a king's daughter," and he
even began to consider of choosing for his text something that would
bid his congregation not to judge after the sight of their eyes, nor
condemn after the hearing of their ears.

When Humfrey had eaten and drunk, and the ruddy hue was returning to
his cheek, Mr. Heatherthwayte discovered that he must speak with his
churchwarden that night.  Probably the pleasure of communicating the
tidings that the deed was accomplished added force to the
consideration that the father and son would rather be alone together,
for he lighted his lantern with alacrity, and carried off Dust-and-
Ashes with him.

Then Humfrey had more to tell which brooked no delay.  On the day
after the departure of his father and Cicely, Will Cavendish had
arrived, and Humfrey had been desired to demand from the prisoner an
immediate audience for that gentleman.  Mary had said, "This is anent
the child.  Call him in, Humfrey," and as Cavendish had passed the
guard he had struck his old comrade on the shoulder and observed,
"What gulls we have at Hallamshire."

He had come out from his conference fuming, and desiring to hear from
Humfrey whether he were aware of the imposture that had been put on
the Queen and upon them all, and to which yonder stubborn woman still
chose to cleave--little Cis Talbot supposing herself a queen's
daughter, and they all, even grave Master Richard, being duped.  It
was too much for Will!  A gentleman, so nearly connected with the
Privy Council, was not to be deceived like these simple soldiers and
sailors, though it suited Queen Mary's purposes to declare the maid
to be in sooth her daughter, and to refuse to disown her.  He
supposed it was to embroil England for the future that she left such
a seed of mischief.

And old Paulett had been fool enough to let the girl leave the
Castle, whereas Cavendish's orders had been to be as secret as
possible lest the mischievous suspicion of the existence of such a
person should spread, but to arrest her and bring her to London as
soon as the execution should be over; when, as he said, no harm would
happen to her provided she would give up the pretensions with which
she had been deceived.

"It would have been safer for you both," said poor Queen Mary to
Humfrey afterwards, "if I had denied her, but I could not disown my
poor child, or prevent her from yet claiming royal rights.  Moreover,
I have learnt enough of you Talbots to know that you would not owe
your safety to falsehood from a dying woman."

But Will's conceit might be quite as effectual.  He was under orders
to communicate the matter to no one not already aware of it, and as
above all things he desired to see the execution as the most
memorable spectacle he was likely to behold in his life, and he
believed Cicely to be safe at Bridgefield, he thought it unnecessary
to take any farther steps until that should be over.  Humfrey had
listened to all with what countenance he might, and gave as little
sign as possible.

But when the tragedy had been consummated, and he had seen the fair
head fall, and himself withdrawn poor little Bijou from beneath his
dead mistress's garment, handing him to Jean Kennedy, he had--with
blood still curdling with horror--gone down to the stables, taken his
horse, and ridden away.

There would no doubt be pursuit so soon as Richard and Cicely were
found not to be at Bridgefield; but there was a space in which to
act, and Mr. Talbot at once said, "The Mastiff is well-nigh ready to
sail.  Ye must be wedded to-morrow morn, and go on board without
delay."

They judged it better not to speak of this to the poor bride in her
heavy grief; and Humfrey, having heard from their little hostess that
Mistress Cicely lay quite still, and sent him her loving greeting,
consented to avail himself of the hospitable minister's own bed,
hoping, as he confided to his father, that very weariness would
hinder him from seeing the block, the axe, and the convulsed face,
that had haunted him on the only previous time when he had tried to
close his eyes.

Long before day Cicely heard her father's voice bidding her awake and
dress herself, and handing in a light.  The call was welcome, for it
had been a night of strange dreams and sadder wakenings to the sense
"it had come at last"--yet the one comfort, "Humfrey is near."  She
dressed herself in those plain black garments she had assumed in
London, and in due time came down to where her father awaited her.
She was pale, silent, and passive, and obeyed mechanically as he made
her take a little food.  She looked about as if for some one, and he
said, "Humfrey will meet us anon."  Then he himself put on her cloak,
hood, and muffler.  She was like one in a dream, never asking where
they were going, and thus they left the house.  There was light from
a waning moon, and by it he led her to the church.

It was a strange wedding in that morning moonlight streaming in at
the east window of that grand old church, and casting the shadows of
the columns and arches on the floor, only aided by one wax light,
which, as Mr. Heatherthwayte took care to protest, was not placed on
the holy table out of superstition, but because he could not see
without it.  Indeed the table stood lengthways in the centre aisle,
and would have been bare, even of a white cloth, had not Richard
begged for a Communion for the young pair to speed them on their
perilous way, and Mr. Heatherthwayte--almost under protest--
consented, since a sea voyage and warlike service in a foreign land
lay before them.  But, except that he wore no surplice, he had
resigned himself to Master Richard on that most unnatural morning,
and stifled his inmost sighs when he had to pronounce the name Bride,
given, not by himself, but by some Romish priest--when the
bridegroom, with the hand wounded for Queen Mary's sake, gave a ruby
ring, most unmistakably coming from that same perilous quarter,--and
above all when the pair and the father knelt in deep reverence.  Yet
their devotion was evidently so earnest and so heartfelt that he knew
not how to blame it, and he could not but bless them with his whole
heart as he walked down with them to the wharf.  All were silent,
except that Cicely once paused and said she wanted to speak to
"Father."  He came to her side, and she took his arm instead of
Humfrey's.

"Sir," she said; "it has come to me that now my sweet mother is left
alone it would be no small joy to her, and of great service to our
good host's little daughter, if Oil-of-Gladness could take my place
at home for a year or two."

"None will do that, Cis; but there is much that would be well in the
notion, and I will consider of it.  She is a maid of good conditions,
and the mother is lonesome."

His consideration resulted in his making the proposal, much
startling, though greatly gratifying.  Master Heatherthwayte, who
thanked him, talked of his honour for that discreet and godly woman
Mistress Susan, and said he must ponder and pray upon it, and would
reply when Mr. Talbot returned from his voyage.

At the wharf lay the Mastiff's boat in charge of Gervas and
Gillingham.  All three stepped into it together, the most silent
bride and bridegroom perhaps that the Humber had ever seen.  Only
each of the three wrung the hand of the good clergyman.  At that
moment all the bells in Hull broke forth with a joyous peal, which by
the association made the bride look up with a smile.  Her husband
forced one in return; but his father's eyes, which she could not see,
filled with tears.  He knew it was in exultation at her mother's
death, and they hurried into the boat lest she should catch the
purport of the shouts that were beginning to arise as the townsfolk
awoke to the knowledge that their enemy was dead.

The fires of Smithfield were in the remembrance of this generation.
The cities of Flanders were writhing under the Spanish yoke; "the
richest spoils of Mexico, the stoutest hearts of Spain," were already
mustering to reduce England to the condition of Antwerp or Haarlem;
and only Elizabeth's life had seemed to lie between them and her who
was bound by her religion to bring all this upon the peaceful land.
No wonder those who knew not the tissue of cruel deceits and
treacheries that had worked the final ruin of the captive, and
believed her guilty of fearful crimes, should have burst forth in a
wild tumult of joy, such as saddened even the Protestant soul of Mr.
Heatherthwayte, as he turned homewards after giving his blessing to
the mournful young girl, whom the boat was bearing over the muddy
waters of the Hull.

They soon had her on board, but the preparations were hardly yet
complete, nor could the vessel make her way down the river until the
evening tide.  It was a bright clear day, and a seat on deck was
arranged for the lady, where she sat with Humfrey beside her, holding
her cloak round her, and telling her--strange theme for a bridal day-
-all he thought well to tell her of those last hours, when Mary had
truly shown herself purified by her long patience, and exalted by the
hope that her death had in it somewhat of martyrdom.

His father meantime superintended the work of the crew, being
extremely anxious to lose no time, and to sail before night.  Mr.
Heatherthwayte's anxiety brought him on board again, for he wanted to
ask more questions about the Bridgefield doings ere beginning his
ponderings and his prayers respecting his decision for his little
daughter; nor had he taken his final leave when the anchor was at
length weighed, and the ship had passed by the strange old gables,
timbered houses, and open lofts, that bounded the harbour out from
the Hull river into the Humber itself, while both the Talbots
breathed more freely; but as the chill air of evening made itself
felt, they persuaded Cicely to let her husband take her down to her
cabin.

It was at this moment, in the deepening twilight, that the ship was
hailed, and a boat came alongside, and there was a summons, "In the
Queen's name," and a slightly made lean figure in black came up the
side.  He was accompanied by a stout man, apparently a constable.
There was a moment's pause, then the new-comer said "Kinsman Talbot--"

"I count no kindred with betrayers, Cuthbert Langston," said Richard,
drawing himself up with folded arms.

"Scorn me not, Richard Talbot," was the reply; "you stood my friend
once when none other did so, and for that cause have I hindered much
hurt to you and yours.  But for me you had been in a London jail for
these three weeks past.  Nor do I come to do you evil now.  Give up
the wench, and your name shall never be brought forward, since the
matter is to be private.  Behold a warrant from the Council
empowering me to bring before them the person of Bride Hepburn,
otherwise called Cicely Talbot."

"Man of treacheries and violence," said Mr. Heatherthwayte, standing
forward, an imposing figure in his full black gown and white ruff,
"go back!  The lady is not for thy double-dealing, nor is there now
any such person as either Bride Hepburn or Cicely Talbot."

"I cry you mercy," sneered Langston.  "I see how it is!  I shall have
to bear your reverence likewise away for a treasonable act in
performing the office of matrimony for a person of royal blood
without consent of the Queen.  And your reverence knows the penalty."

At that instant there rang from the forecastle a never-to-be-
forgotten howl of triumphant hatred and fury, and with a spring like
that of a tiger, Gillingham bounded upon him with a shout, "Remember
Babington!" and grappled with him, dragging him backwards to the
bulwark.  Richard and the constable both tried to seize the fiercely
struggling forms, but in vain.  They were over the side in a moment,
and there was a heavy splash into the muddy waters of the Humber,
thick with the downcome of swollen rivers, thrown back by the flowing
tide.

Humfrey came dashing up from below, demanding who was overboard, and
ready to leap to the rescue wherever any should point in the
darkness, but his father withheld him, nor, indeed, was there sound
or eddy to be perceived.

"It is the manifest judgment of God," said Mr. Heatherthwayte, in a
low, awe-stricken voice.

But the constable cried aloud that a murder had been done in
resisting the Queen's warrant.

With a ready gesture the minister made Humfrey understand that he
must keep his wife in the cabin, and Richard at the same time called
Mr. Heatherthwayte and all present to witness that, murder as it
undoubtedly was, it had not been in resisting the Queen's warrant,
but in private revenge of the servant, Harry Gillingham, for his
master Babington, whom he believed to have been betrayed by this
gentleman.

It appeared that the constable knew neither the name of the gentleman
nor whom the warrant mentioned.  He had only been summoned in the
Queen's name to come on board the Mastiff to assist in securing the
person of a young gentlewoman, but who she was, or why she was to be
arrested, the man did not know.  He saw no lady on deck, and he was
by no means disposed to make any search, and the presence of Master
Heatherthwayte likewise impressed him much with the belief that all
was right with the gentlemen.

Of course it would have been his duty to detain the Mastiff for an
inquiry into the matter, but the poor man was extremely ill at ease
in the vessel and among the retainers of my Lord of Shrewsbury; and
in point of fact, they might all have been concerned in a crime of
much deeper dye without his venturing to interfere.  He saw no one to
arrest, the warrant was lost, the murderer was dead, and he was
thankful enough to be returned to his boat with Master Richard
Talbot's assurance that it was probable that no inquiry would be
made, but that if it were, the pilot would be there to bear witness
of his innocence, and that he himself should return in a month at
latest with the Mastiff.

Master Heatherthwayte consoled the constable further by saying he
would return in his boat, and speak for him if there were any inquiry
after the other passenger.

"I must speak my farewells here," he said, "and trust we shall have
no coil to meet you on your return, Master Richard."

"But for her," said Humfrey, "I could not let my father face it
alone.  When she is in safety"--

"Tush, lad," said his father, "such plotters as yonder poor wretch
had become are not such choice prizes as to be inquired for.  Men are
only too glad to be rid of them when their foul work is done."

"So farewell, good Master Heatherthwayte," added Humfrey, "with
thanks for this day's work.  I have read of good and evil geniuses or
angels, be they which they may, haunting us for life, and striving
for the mastery.  Methinks my Cis hath found both on the same Humber
which brought her to us."

"Nay, go not forth with Pagan nor Popish follies on thy tongue, young
man," said Heatherthwayte, "but rather pray that the blessing of the
Holy One, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of thy
father, may be with thee and thine in this strange land, and bring
thee safely back in His own time.  And surely He will bless the
faithful."

And Richard Talbot said Amen.


CHAPTER XLV. TEN YEARS AFTER.


It was ten years later in the reign of Elizabeth, when James VI. was
under one of his many eclipses of favour, and when the united English
and Dutch fleets had been performing gallant exploits at Cadiz and
Tercera, that license for a few weeks' absence was requested for one
of the lieutenants in her Majesty's guard, Master Richard Talbot.

"And wherefore?" demanded the royal lady of Sir Walter Raleigh, the
captain of her guard, who made the request.

"To go to the Hague to look after his brother's widow and estate, so
please your Majesty; more's the pity," said Raleigh.

"His brother's widow?" repeated the Queen.

"Yea, madam.  For it may be feared that young Humfrey Talbot--I know
not whether your Majesty ever saw him--but he was my brave brother
Humfrey Gilbert's godson, and sailed with us to the West some sixteen
years back.  He was as gallant a sailor as ever trod a deck, and I
never could see why he thought fit to take service with the States.
But he did good work in the time of the Armada, and I saw him one of
the foremost in the attack on Cadiz.  Nay, he was one of those
knighted by my Lord of Essex in the market-place.  Then he sailed
with my Lord of Cumberland for the Azores, now six months since, and
hath not since been heard of, as his brother tells me, and therefore
doth Talbot request this favour of your Majesty."

"Send the young man to me," returned the Queen.

Diccon, to give him his old name, was not quite so unsophisticated as
when his father had first left him in London.  Though a good deal
shocked by what a new arrival from Holland had just told him of the
hopelessness of ever seeing the Ark of Fortune and her captain again,
he was not so overpowered with grief as to prevent him from being
full of excitement and gratification at the honour of an interview
with the Queen, and he arranged his rich scarlet and gold attire so
as to set himself off to the best advantage, that so he might be
pronounced "a proper man."

Queen Elizabeth was now some years over sixty, and her nose and chin
began to meet, but otherwise she was as well preserved as ever, and
quite as alert and dignified.  To his increased surprise, she was
alone, and as she was becoming a little deaf, she made him kneel very
near her chair.

"So, Master Talbot," she said, "you are the son of Richard Talbot of
Bridgefield."

"An it so please your Majesty."

"And you request license from us to go to the Hague?"

"An it so please your Majesty," repeated Diccon, wondering what was
coming next; and as she paused for him to continue--"There are grave
rumours and great fears for my brother's ship--he being in the Dutch
service--and I would fain learn the truth and see what may be done
for his wife."

"Who is his wife?" demanded the Queen, fixing her keen glittering
eyes on him, but he replied with readiness.

"She was an orphan brought up by my father and mother."

"Young man, speak plainly.  No tampering serves here.  She is the
wench who came hither to plead for the Queen of Scots."

"Yea, madam," said Diccon, seeing that direct answers were required.

"Tell me truly," continued the Queen.  "On your duty to your Queen,
is she what she called herself?"

"To the best of my belief she is, madam," he answered.

"Look you, sir, Cavendish brought back word that it was all an
ingenious figment which had deceived your father, mother, and the
maid herself--and no wonder, since the Queen of Scots persisted
therein to the last."

"Yea, madam, but my mother still keeps absolute proofs in the
garments and the letter that were found on the child when recovered
from the wreck.  I had never known that she was not my sister till
her journey to London; and when next I went to the north my mother
told me the whole truth."

"I pray, then, how suits it with the boasted loyalty of your house
that this brother of yours should have wedded the maid?"

"Madam; it was not prudent, but he had never a thought save for her
throughout his life.  Her mother committed her to him, and holding
the matter a deep and dead secret, he thought to do your Majesty no
wrong by the marriage.  If he erred, be merciful, madam."

"Pah! foolish youth, to whom should I be merciful since the man is
dead?  No doubt he hath left half a score of children to be puffed up
with the wind of their royal extraction."

"Not one, madam.  When last I heard they were still childless."

"And now you are on your way to take on you the cheering of your
sister-in-law, the widow," said the Queen, and as Diccon made a
gesture of assent, she stretched out her hand and drew him nearer.
"She is then alone in the world.  She is my kinswoman, if so be she
is all she calls herself.  Now, Master Talbot, go not open-mouthed
about your work, but tell this lady that if she can prove her kindred
to me, and bring evidence of her birth at Lochleven, I will welcome
her here, treat her as my cousin the Princess of Scotland, and, it
may be, put her on her way to higher preferment, so she prove herself
worthy thereof.  You take me, sir?"

Diccon did take in the situation.  He had understood how Cavendish,
partly blinded by Langston, partly unwilling to believe in any
competitor who would be nearer the throne than his niece Arabella
Stewart, and partly disconcerted by Langston's disappearance, had
made such a report to the Queen and the French Ambassador, that they
had thought that the whole matter was an imposture, and had been so
ashamed of their acquiescence as to obliterate all record of it.  But
the Queen's mind had since recurred to the matter, and as in these
later years of her reign one of her constant desires was to hinder
James from making too sure of the succession, she was evidently
willing to play his sister off against him.

Nay, in the general uncertainty, dreams came over Diccon of possible
royal honours to Queen Bridget; and then what glories would be
reflected on the house of Talbot!  His father and mother were too
old, no doubt, to bask in the sunshine of the Court, and Ned--pity
that he was a clergyman, and had done so dull a thing as marry that
little pupil of his mother's, Laetitia, as he had rendered her
Puritan name.  But he might be made a bishop, and his mother's
scholar would always become any station.  And for Diccon himself--
assuredly the Mastiff race would rejoice in a new coronet!

Seven weeks later, Diccon was back again, and was once more summoned
to the Queen's apartment.  He looked crestfallen, and she began,--

"Well, sir?  Have you brought the lady?"

"Not so, an't please your Majesty."

"And wherefore?  Fears she to come, or has she sent no message nor
letter?"

"She sends her deep and humble thanks, madam, for the honour your
Majesty intended her, but she--"

"How now?  Is she too great a fool to accept of it?"

"Yea, madam.  She prays your Grace to leave her in her obscurity at
the Hague."

Elizabeth made a sound of utter amazement and incredulity, and then
said, "This is new madness!  Come, young man, tell me all!  This is
as good and new as ever was play.  Let me hear.  What like is she?
And what is her house to be preferred to mine?"

Diccon saw his cue, and began--

"Her house, madam, is one of those tall Dutch mansions with high
roof, and many small windows therein, with a stoop or broad flight of
steps below, on the banks of a broad and pleasant canal, shaded with
fine elm-trees.  There I found her on the stoop, in the shade, with
two or three children round her; for she is a mother to all the
English orphans there, and they are but too many.  They bring them to
her as a matter of course when their parents die, and she keeps them
till their kindred in England claim them.  Madam, her queenliness of
port hath gained on her.  Had she come, she would not have shamed
your Majesty; and it seems that, none knowing her true birth, she is
yet well-nigh a princess among the many wives of officers and
merchants who dwell at the Hague, and doubly so among the men, to
whom she and her husband have never failed to do a kindness.  Well,
madam, I weary you.  She greeted me as the tender sister she has ever
been, but she would not brook to hear of fears or compassion for my
brother.  She would listen to no word of doubt that he was safe, but
kept the whole household in perfect readiness for him to come.  At
last I spake your Majesty's gracious message; and, madam, pardon me,
but all I got was a sound rating, that I should think any hope of
royal splendour or preferment should draw her from waiting for
Humfrey.  Ay, she knew he would come!  And if not, she would never be
more than his faithful widow.  Had he not given up all for her?
Should she fail in patience because his ship tarried awhile?  No; he
should find her ready in his home that he had made for her."

"Why, this is as good as the Globe Theatre!" cried the Queen, but
with a tear glittering in her eye.

"Your Majesty would have said so truly," said Diccon; "for as I sat
at evening, striving hard to make her give over these fantastic
notions and consult her true interest, behold she gave a cry--"Tis
his foot!"  Yea, and verily there was Humfrey, brown as a berry,
having been so far with his mate as to the very mouth of the River
Plate.  He had, indeed, lost his Ark of Fortune, but he has come home
with a carrack that quadruples her burthen, and with a thousand bars
of silver in her hold.  And then, madam, the joy, the kisses, the
embraces, and even more--the look of perfect content, and peace, and
trust, were enough to make a bachelor long for a wife."

"Long to be a fool!" broke out the Queen sharply.  "Look you, lad:
there may be such couples as this Humfrey and--what call you her?--
here and there."

"My father and mother are such."

"Yea, saucy cockerel as you are; but for one such, there are a
hundred others who fret the yoke, and long to be free!  Ay, and this
brother of thine, what hath he got with this wife of his but
banishment and dread of his own land?"

"Even so, madam; but they still count all they either could have had
or hoped for, nought in comparison with their love to one another."

"After ten years!  Ha!  They are no subjects for this real world of
ours; are they not rather swains in my poor Philip Sidney's Arcadia?
Ho, no; 'twere pity to meddle with them.  Leave them to their Dutch
household and their carracks.  Let them keep their own secret; I'll
meddle in the matter no more."

And so, though after Elizabeth's death and James's accession, Sir
Humfrey and Lady Talbot gladdened the eyes of the loving and
venerable pair at Bridgefield, the Princess Bride of Scotland still
remained in happy obscurity, "Unknown to History."




THE END.