Meanwhile Bridget Cookson was walking to meet them from the Rydal end of
the Lake. She was accompanied by a Manchester friend, a young doctor,
Howson by name, who had known the sisters before Nelly's marriage. He
had come to Ambleside in charge of a patient that morning, and was going
back on the morrow, and then to France. Bridget had stumbled on him in
Ambleside, and finding he had a free evening had invited him to come
and sup with them. And a vivid recollection of Nelly Cookson as a girl
had induced him to accept. He had been present indeed at the Sarratt
wedding, and could never forget Nelly as a bride, the jessamine wreath
above her dark eyes, and all the exquisite shapeliness of her slight
form, in the white childish dress of fine Indian muslin, which seemed to
him the prettiest bridal garment he had ever seen. And now--poor little
soul!

'You think she still hopes?'

Bridget shrugged her shoulders.

'She says so. But she has put on mourning at last--a few weeks ago.'

'People do turn up, you know,' said the doctor musing. 'There have been
some wonderful stories.'

'They don't turn up now,' said Bridget positively--'now that the
enquiries are done properly.'

'Oh, the Germans are pretty casual--and the hospital returns are far
from complete, I hear. However the probabilities, no doubt, are all on
the side of death.'

'The War Office are certain of it,' said Bridget with emphasis. 'But
it's no good trying to persuade her. I don't try.'

'No, why should you? Poor thing! Well, I'm off to X---- next week,' said
the young man. 'I shall keep my eyes open there, in case anything about
him should turn up.'

Bridget frowned slightly, and her face flushed.

'Should you know him again, if you saw him?' she asked, abruptly.

'I think so,' said the doctor with slight hesitation, 'I remember him
very well at the wedding. Tall and slight?--not handsome exactly, but a
good-looking gentlemanly chap? Oh yes, I remember him. But of course, to
be alive now, if by some miraculous chance he were alive, and
not to have let you know--why he must have had some brain
mischief--paralysis--or----'

'He isn't alive!' said Bridget impatiently. 'The War Office have no
doubts whatever.'

Howson was rather surprised at the sudden acerbity of her tone. But his
momentary impression was immediately lost in the interest roused in him
by the emergence from the wood, in front, of Nelly and Cicely. He was a
warm-hearted fellow, himself just married, and the approach of the
black-veiled figure, which he had last seen in bridal white, touched him
like an incident in a play.

Nelly recognised him from a short distance, and went a little pale.

'Who is that with your sister?' asked Cicely.

'It is a man we knew in Manchester,--Doctor Howson.'

'Did you expect him?'

'Oh no.' After a minute she added--'He was at our wedding. I haven't
seen him since.'

Cicely was sorry for her. But when the walkers met, Nelly greeted the
young man very quietly. He himself was evidently moved. He held her
hand a little, and gave her a quick, scrutinising look. Then he moved on
beside her, and Cicely, in order to give Nelly the opportunity of
talking to him for which she evidently wished, was forced to carry off
Bridget, and endure her company patiently all the way home.

When Nelly and the doctor arrived, following close on the two in front,
Cicely cried out that Nelly must go and lie down at once till supper.
She looked indeed a deplorable little wraith; and the doctor, casting,
again, a professional eye on her, backed up Cicely.

Nelly smiled, resisted, and finally disappeared.

'You'll have to take care of her,' said Howson to Bridget. 'She looks to
me as if she couldn't stand any strain.'

'Well, she's not going to have any. This place is quiet enough! She's
been talking of munition-work, but of course we didn't let her.'

Cicely took the young man aside and expounded her brother's plan of the
farm on the western side of Loughrigg. Howson asked questions about its
aspect, and general comfort, giving his approval in the end.

'Oh, she'll pull through,' he said kindly, 'but she must go slow. This
kind of loss is harder to bear--physically--than death straight out.
I've promised her'--he turned to Bridget--'to make all the enquiries I
can. She asked me that at once.'

After supper, just as Howson was departing, Farrell appeared, having
driven himself over through the long May evening, ostensibly to take
Cicely home, but really for the joy of an hour in Nelly's company.

He sat beside her in the garden, after Howson's departure, reading to
her, by the lingering light, the poems of a great friend of his who had
been killed at Gallipoli. Nelly was knitting, but her needles were often
laid upon her knee, while she listened with all her mind, and sometimes
with tears in her eyes, that were hidden by the softly dropping dusk.
She said little, but what she did say came now from a greatly
intensified inner life, and a sharpened intelligence; while all the
time, the charm that belonged to her physical self, her voice, her
movements, was at work on Farrell, so that he felt his hour with her a
delight after his hard day's work. And she too rested in his presence,
and his friendship. It was not possible now for her to rebuff him, to
refuse his care. She had tried, tried honestly, as Cicely saw, to live
independently--to 'endure hardness.' And the attempt had broken down.
The strange, protesting feeling, too, that she was doing some wrong to
George by accepting it was passing away. She was George's, she would
always be his, to her dying day; but to live without being loved, to
tear herself from those who wished to love her--for that she had proved
too weak. She knew it, and was not unconscious of a certain moral
defeat; as she looked out upon all the strenuous and splendid things
that women were doing in the war.

       *       *       *       *       *

Farrell and Cicely sped homeward through a night that was all but day.
Cicely scarcely spoke; she was thinking of Marsworth. Farrell had still
in his veins the sweetness of Nelly's presence. But there were other
thoughts too in his mind, the natural thoughts of an Englishman at war.
Once, over their heads, through the luminous northern sky, there passed
an aeroplane flying south-west high above the fells. Was it coming from
the North Sea, from the neighbourhood of that invincible Fleet, on which
all hung, by which all was sustained? He thought of the great ships, and
the men commanding them, as greyhounds straining in the leash. What
touch of fate would let them loose at last?

The Carton hospital was now full of men fresh from the front. The
casualties were endless. A thousand a night often along the French
front--and yet no real advance. The far-flung battle was practically at
a stand-still. And beyond, the chaos in the Balkans, the Serbian
débacle! No--the world was full of lamentation, mourning and woe; and
who could tell how Armageddon would turn? His quick mind travelled
through all the alternative possibilities ahead, on fire for his
country. But always, after each digression through the problems of the
war, thought came back to the cottage at Rydal, and Nelly on the lawn,
her white throat emerging from the thin black dress, her hands clasped
on her lap, her eyes turned to him as he read.

And all the time it was _just_ conceivable that Sarratt might still be
discovered. At that thought, the summer night darkened.


CHAPTER XI


In the summer of 1916, a dark and miserable June, all chilly showers and
lowering clouds, followed on the short-lived joys of May. But all
through it, still more through the early weeks of July, the spiritual
heaven for English hearts was brightening. In June, two months before
she was expected to move, Russia flung herself on the Eastern front of
the enemy. Brussiloff's victorious advance drove great wedges into the
German line, and the effect on that marvellous six months' battle, which
we foolishly call the Siege of Verdun, was soon to be seen. Hard pressed
they were, those heroes of Verdun!--how hard pressed no one in England
knew outside the War Office and the Cabinet, till the worst was over,
and the Crown Prince, 'with his dead and his shame,' had recoiled in
sullen defeat from the prey that need fear him no more.

Then on the first of July, the British army, after a bombardment the
like of which had never yet been seen in war, leapt from its trenches on
the Somme front, and England held her breath while her new Armies proved
of what stuff they were made. In those great days 'there were no
stragglers--none!' said an eye-witness in amazement. The incredible
became everywhere the common and the achieved. Life was laid down as at
a festival. 'From your happy son'--wrote a boy, as a heading to his last
letter on this earth.

And by the end of July the sun was ablaze again on the English fields
and harvests. Days of amazing beauty followed each other amid the
Westmorland fells; with nights of moonlight on sleeping lakes, and
murmuring becks; or nights of starlit dark, with that mysterious glow in
the north-west which in the northern valleys so often links the evening
with the dawn.

How often through these nights Nelly Sarratt lay awake, in her new white
room in Mountain Ash Farm!--the broad low window beside her open to the
night, to that 'Venus's Looking Glass' of Loughrigg Tarn below her, and
to the great heights beyond, now dissolving under the moon-magic, now
rosy with dawn, and now wreathed in the floating cloud which crept in
light and silver along the purple of the crags. To have been lifted to
this height above valley and stream, had raised and strengthened her,
soul and body, as Farrell and Hester had hoped. Her soul, perhaps,
rather than her body; for she was still the frailest of creatures,
without visible ill, and yet awakening in every quick-eyed spectator the
same misgiving as in the Manchester doctor. But she was calmer, less
apparently absorbed in her own grief; though only, perhaps, the more
accessible to the world misery of the war. In these restless nights,
her remarkable visualising power, which had only thriven, it seemed,
upon the flagging of youth and health, carried her through a series of
waking dreams, almost always concerned with the war. Under the stimulus
of Farrell's intelligence, she had become a close student of the war.
She read much, and what she read, his living contact with men and
affairs--with that endless stream of wounded in particular, which passed
through the Carton hospital--and his graphic talk illumined for her.
Then in the night arose the train of visions; the trenches--always the
trenches; those hideous broken woods of the Somme front, where the
blasted soil has sucked the best life-blood of England; those
labyrinthine diggings and delvings in a tortured earth, made for the
Huntings of Death--'Death that lays man at his length'--for panting
pursuit, and breathless flight, and the last crashing horror of the
bomb, in some hell-darkness at the end of all:--these haunted her. Or
she saw visions of men swinging from peak to peak above fathomless
depths of ice and snow on the Italian front; climbing precipices where
the foot holds by miracle, and where not only men but guns must go; or
vanishing, whole lines of them, awfully forgotten in the winter snows,
to reappear a frozen and ghastly host, with the melting of the spring.

And always, mingled with everything, in the tense night hours--that
slender khaki figure, tearing the leaf from his sketch-book, leaping
over the parados,--falling--in the No Man's Land. But, by day, the
obsession of it now often left her.

It was impossible not to enjoy her new home. Farrell had taken an old
Westmorland farm, with its white-washed porch, its small-paned windows
outlined in white on the grey walls, its low raftered rooms, and with a
few washes of colour--pure blue, white, daffodil yellow--had made all
bright within, to match the bright spaces of air and light without.
There was some Westmorland oak, some low chairs, a sofa and a piano from
the old Manchester house, some etchings and drawings, hung on the plain
walls by Farrell himself, with the most fastidious care; and a few--a
very few things--from his own best stores, which Hester allowed him to
'house' with Nelly from time to time--picture, or pot, or tapestry. She
played watch-dog steadily, not resented by Farrell, and unsuspected by
Nelly. Her one aim was that the stream of Nelly's frail life should not
be muddied by any vile gossip; and she achieved it. The few neighbours
who had made acquaintance with 'little Mrs. Sarratt' had, all of them
been tacitly, nay eagerly willing, to take their cue from Hester. To be
vouched for by Hester Martin, the 'wise woman' and saint of a
country-side, was enough. It was understood that the poor little widow
had been commended to the care of William Farrell and his sister, by the
young husband whose gallant death was officially presumed by the War
Office. Of course, Mrs. Sarratt, poor child, believed that he was still
alive--that was so natural! But that hope would die down in time. And
then--anything might happen!

Meanwhile, elderly husbands--the sole male inhabitants left in the
gentry houses of the district--who possessed any legal knowledge,
informed their wives that no one could legally presume the death of a
vanished husband, under seven years, unless indeed they happen to have a
Scotch domicile, in which case two years was enough. _Seven
years_!--preposterous!--in time of war, said the wives. To which the
husbands would easily reply that, in such cases as Mrs. Sarratt's, the
law indeed might be 'an ass,' but there were ways round it. Mrs. Sarratt
might re-marry, and no one could object, or would object. Only--if
Sarratt did rise from the dead, the second marriage would be _ipso
facto_ null and void. But as Sarratt was clearly dead, what did that
matter?

So that the situation, though an observed one--for how could the Farrell
comings and goings, the Farrell courtesies and benefactions, possibly be
hid?--was watched only by friendly and discreet eyes, thanks always to
Hester. Most people liked William Farrell; even that stricter sect, who
before the war had regarded him as a pleasure loving dilettante, and had
been often scandalised by his careless levity in the matter of his
duties as a landlord and county magnate. 'Bill Farrell' had never indeed
evicted or dealt hardly with any mortal tenant. He had merely neglected
and ignored them; had cared not a brass farthing about the rates which
he or they, paid--why should he indeed, when he was so abominably rich
from other sources than land?--nothing about improving their cows, or
sheep or pigs; nothing about 'intensive culture,' or jam or poultry, or
any of the other fads with which the persons who don't farm plague the
persons who do; while the very mention of a public meeting, or any sort
of public duty, put him to instant flight. Yet even the faddists met him
with pleasure, and parted from him with regret. He took himself 'so
jolly lightly'; you couldn't expect him to take other people seriously.
Meanwhile, his genial cheery manner made him a general favourite, and
his splendid presence, combined with his possessions and his descent,
was universally accepted as a kind of Cumberland asset, to which other
counties could hardly lay claim. If he wanted the little widow, why
certainly, let him have her! It was magnificent what he had done for his
hospital; when nobody before the war had thought him capable of a stroke
of practical work. Real good fellow, Farrell! Let him go in and win. His
devotion, and poor Nelly's beauty, only infused a welcome local element
of romance into the ever-darkening scene of war.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first anniversary of Sarratt's disappearance was over. Nelly had
gone through it quite alone. Bridget was in London, and Nelly had said
to Cicely--'Don't come for a few days--nor Sir William--please! I
shall be all right.'

They obeyed her, and she spent her few days partly on the fells, and
partly in endless knitting and sewing for a war-workroom recently
started in her immediate neighbourhood. The emotion to which she
surrendered herself would soon reduce her to a dull vacancy; and then
she would sit passive, not forcing herself to think, alone in the old
raftered room, or in the bit of garden outside, with its phloxes and
golden rods; her small fingers working endlessly--till the wave of
feeling and memory returned upon her. Those few days were a kind of
'retreat,' during which she lived absorbed in the recollections of her
short, married life, and, above all, in which she tried piteously and
bravely to make clear to herself what she believed; what sort of faith
was in her for the present and the future. It often seemed to her that
during the year since George's death, her mind had been wrenched and
hammered into another shape. It had grown so much older, she scarcely
knew it herself. Doubts she had never known before had come to her; but
also, intermittently, a much keener faith. Oh, yes, she believed in God.
She must; not only because George had believed in Him, but also because
she, her very self, had been conscious, again and again, in the night
hours, or on the mountains, of ineffable upliftings and communings, of
flashes through the veil of things. And so there must be another world;
because the God she guessed at thus, with sudden adoring insight, could
not have made her George, only to destroy him; only to give her to him
for a month, and then strike him from her for ever. The books she learnt
to know through Farrell, belonging to that central modern literature,
which is so wholly sceptical that the 'great argument' itself has almost
lost interest for those who are producing it, often bewildered her, but
did not really affect her. Religion--a vague, but deeply-felt
religion--soothed and sheltered her. But she did not want to talk about
it.

After these days were over, she emerged conscious of some radical
change. She seemed to have been walking with George 'on the other side,'
and to have left him there--for a while. She now really believed him
dead, and that she had got to live her life without him. This first full
and sincere admission of her loss tranquillised her. All the more reason
now that she should turn to the dear friendships that life still held,
should live in and for them, and follow where they led, through the
years before her. Farrell, Cicely, Hester--they stood between her
weakness--oh how conscious, how scornfully conscious, she was of
it!--and sheer desolation. Cicely, 'Willy,'--for somehow she and he had
slipped almost without knowing it into Christian names--had become to
her as brother and sister. And Hester too--so strong!--so kind!--was
part of her life; severe sometimes, but bracing. Nelly was conscious,
indeed, occasionally, that something in Hester disapproved something in
her. 'But it would be all right,' she thought, wearily, 'if only I were
stronger.' Did she mean physically or morally? The girl's thought did
not distinguish.

'I believe you want me "hatched over again and hatched different"!' she
said one evening to Hester, as she laid her volume of 'Adam Bede' aside.

'Do I ever say so?'

'No--but--if you were me--you wouldn't stop here moping!' said Nelly,
with sudden passion. 'You'd strike out--do something!'

'With these hands?' said Hester, raising one of them, and looking at it
pitifully. 'My dear--does Bridget feed you properly?'

'I don't know. I never think about it. She settles it.'

'Why do you let her settle it?'

'She will!' cried Nelly, sitting upright in her chair, her eyes bright
and cheeks flushing, as though something in Hester's words accused her.
'I couldn't stop her!'

'Well, but when she's away?'

'Then Mrs. Rowe settles it,' said Nelly, half laughing. 'I never
enquire. What does it matter?'

She put down her knitting, and her wide, sad eyes followed the clouds as
they covered the purple breast of the Langdales, which rose in
threatening, thunder light, beyond the steely tarn in front. Hester
watched her anxiously. How lovely was the brown head, with its short
curls enclosing the delicate oval of the face! But Nelly's lack of grip
on life, of any personal demand, of any healthy natural egotism, whether
towards Bridget, or anybody else, was very disquieting to Hester. In
view of the situation which the older woman saw steadily approaching,
how welcome would have been some signs of a greater fighting strength in
the girl's nature!

       *       *       *       *       *

But Nelly had made two friends since the migration to the farm with whom
at any rate she laughed; and that, as Hester admitted, was something.

One was a neighbouring farmer, an old man, with splendid eyes, under
dark bushy brows, fine ascetic features, grizzled hair, and a habit of
carrying a scythe over his shoulder which gave him the look of 'Old
Father Time,' out for the mowing of men. The other was the little son of
a neighbouring parson, an urchin of eight, who had succumbed to an
innocent passion for the pretty lady at the farm.

One radiant October afternoon, Nelly carried out a chair and some
sketching things into the garden. But the scheme Farrell had suggested
to her, of making a profession of her drawing, had not come to much.
Whether it was the dying down of hope, and therewith of physical energy,
or whether she had been brought up sharp against the limits of her small
and graceful talent, and comparing herself with Farrell, thought it no
use to go on--in any case, she had lately given it up, except as an
amusement. But there are days when the humblest artist feels the
creative stir; and on this particular afternoon there were colours and
lights abroad on the fells, now dyed red with withering fern, and
overtopped by sunny cloud, that could not be resisted. She put away the
splints she was covering, and spread out her easel.

And presently, through every bruised and tired sense, as she worked and
worked, the 'Eternal Fountain of that Heavenly Beauty' distilled His
constant balm. She worked on, soothed and happy.

In a few minutes there was a sound at the gate. A child looked in--black
tumbled hair, dark eyes, a plain but most engaging countenance.

'I'm tomin in,' he announced, and without any more ado, came in. Nelly
held out a hand and kissed him.

'You must be very good.'

'I is good,' said the child, radiantly.

Nelly spread a rug for him to lie on, and provided him with a piece of
paper, some coloured chalks and a piece of mill board. He turned over on
his front and plunged into drawing--

Silence--till Nelly asked--

'What are you drawing, Tommy?'

'Haggans and Hoons,' said a dreamy voice, the voice of one absorbed.

'I forget'--said Nelly gravely--'which are the good ones?'

'The Hoons are good. The Haggans are awfully wicked!' said the child,
slashing away at his drawing with bold vindictive strokes.

'Are you drawing a Haggan, Tommy?'

'Yes.'

He held up a monster, half griffin, half crocodile, for her to see, and
she heartily admired it.

'Where do the Haggans live, Tommy?'

'In Jupe,' said the child, again drawing busily.

'You mean Jupiter?'

'I _don't_!' said Tommy reproachfully, 'I said Jupe, and I mean Jupe.
Perhaps'--he conceded, courteously--'I may have got the idea from that
other place. But it's quite different. You do believe it's quite
different--don't you?'

'Certainly,' said Nelly.

'I'm glad of that--because--well, because I can't be friends with people
that say it isn't different. You do see that, don't you?'

Nelly assured him she perfectly understood, and then Tommy rolled over
on his back, and staring at the sky, began to talk in mysterious tones
of 'Jupe,' and the beings that lived in it, Haggans, and Hoons, lions
and bears, and white mice. His voice grew dreamier and dreamier. Nelly
thought he was asleep, and she suddenly found herself looking at the
little figure on the grass with a passionate hunger. If such a living
creature belonged to her--to call her its very own--to cling to her with
its dear chubby hands!

She bent forward, her eyes wet, above the unconscious Tommy. But a step
on the road startled her, and raising her head she saw 'Old Father
Time,' with scythe on shoulder, leaning on the little gate which led
from the strip of garden to the road, and looking at her with the
expression which implied a sarcastic view of things in general, and
especially of 'gentlefolk.' But he was favourably inclined to Mrs.
Sarratt, and when Nelly invited him in, he obeyed her, and grounding his
scythe, as though it had been a gun, he stood leaning upon it,
indulgently listening while she congratulated him on a strange incident
which, as she knew from Hester, had lately occurred to him.

A fortnight before, the old man had received a letter from the captain
of his son's company in France sympathetically announcing to him the
death in hospital of his eldest son, from severe wounds received in a
raid, and assuring him he might feel complete confidence 'that
everything that could be done for your poor boy has been done.'

The news had brought woe to the cottage where the old man and his wife
lived alone, since the fledging of their sturdy brood, under a spur of
Loughrigg. The wife, being now a feeble body, had taken to her bed under
the shock of grief; the old man had gone to his work as usual, 'nobbut a
bit queerer in his wits,' according to the farmer who employed him. Then
after three days came a hurried letter of apology from the captain, and
a letter from the chaplain, to say there had been a most deplorable
mistake, and 'your son, I am glad to say, was only slightly wounded,
and is doing well!'

Under so much contradictory emotion, old Backhouse's balance had wavered
a good deal. He received Nelly's remarks with a furtive smile, as though
he were only waiting for her to have done, and when they ceased, he drew
a letter slowly from his pocket.

'D'ye see that, Mum?'

Nelly nodded.

'I'se juist gotten it from t' Post Office. They woant gie ye noothin'
till it's forced oot on 'em. But I goa regular, an to-day owd
Jacob--'at's him as keps t' Post Office--handed it ower. It's from
Donald, sure enoof.'

He held it up triumphantly. Nelly's heart leapt--and sank. How often in
the first months of her grief had she seen--in visions--that blessed
symbolic letter held up by some ministering hand!--only to fall from the
ecstasy of the dream into blacker depths of pain.

'Oh, Mr. Backhouse, I'm so glad!' was all she could find to say. But her
sweet trembling face spoke for her. After a pause, she added--'Does he
write with his own hand?'

'You mun see for yorsel'.' He held it out to her. She looked at it
mystified.

'But it's not opened!'

'I hadna juist me spectacles,' said Father Time, cautiously. 'Mebbee
yo'll read it to me.'

'But it's to his mother!' cried Nelly. 'I can't open your wife's
letter!'

'You needn't trooble aboot that. You read it, Mum. There'll be noothin'
in it.'

He made her read it. There was nothing in it. It was just a nice letter
from a good boy, saying that he had been knocked over in 'a bit of a
scrap,' but was nearly all right, and hoped his father and mother were
well, 'as it leaves me at present.' But when it was done, Father Time
took off his hat, bent his grey head, and solemnly thanked his God, in
broad Westmorland. Nelly's eyes swam, as she too bowed the head,
thinking of another who would never come back; and Tommy, thumb in
mouth, leant against her, listening attentively.

At the end of the thanksgiving however, Backhouse raised his head
briskly.

'Not that I iver believed that foolish yoong mon as wrote me that Dick
wor dead,' he said, contemptuously. 'Bit it's as weel to git things
clear.'

Nelly heartily agreed, adding--

'I may be going to London next week, Mr. Backhouse. You say your son
will be in the London Hospital. Shall I go and see him?'

Backhouse looked at her cautiously.

'I doan't know, Mum. His moother will be goin', likely.'

'Oh, I don't want to intrude, Mr. Backhouse. But if she doesn't go?'

'Well, Mum; I will say you've a pleasant coontenance, though yo're not
juist sich a thrivin' body as a'd like to see yer. But theer's mony
people as du more harm nor good by goin' to sit wi' sick foak.'

Nelly meekly admitted it; and then she suggested that she might be the
bearer of anything Mrs. Backhouse would like to send her son--clothes,
for instance? The old man thawed rapidly, and the three, Nelly, Tommy,
and Father Time, were soon sincerely enjoying each other's society, when
a woman in a grey tweed costume, and black sailor hat, arrived at the
top of a little hill in the road outside the garden, from which the farm
and its surroundings could be seen.

At the sight of the group in front of the farm, she came to an abrupt
pause, and hidden from them by a projecting corner of wall she surveyed
the scene--Nelly, with Tommy on her knee, and the old labourer who had
just shouldered his scythe again, and was about to go on his way.

It was Bridget Cookson, who had been to Kendal for the day, and had
walked over from Grasmere, where the char-à-banc, alias the 'Yellow
Peril,' had deposited her. She had passed the Post Office on her way,
and had brought thence a letter which she held in her hand. Her face was
pale and excited. She stood thinking; her eyes on Nelly, her lips moving
as though she were rehearsing some speech or argument.

Then when she had watched old Backkhouse make his farewell, and turn
towards the gate, she hastily opened a black silk bag hanging from her
wrist, and thrust the letter into it.

After which she walked on, meeting the old man in the lane, and run into
by Tommy, who, head foremost, was rushing home to shew his glorious
Haggan to his 'mummy.'

Nelly's face at sight of her sister stiffened insensibly.

'Aren't you very tired, Bridget? Have you walked all the way? Yes, you
_do_ look tired! Have you had tea?'

'Yes, at Windermere.'

Bridget cleared the chair on which Nelly had placed her paint-box, and
sat down. She was silent a little and then said abruptly--

'It's a horrid bore, I shall have to go to London again.'

'Again?' Nelly's look of surprise was natural. Bridget had returned from
another long stay in the Bloomsbury boarding-house early in October, and
it was now only the middle of the month. But Bridget's doings were
always a great mystery to Nelly. She was translating something from the
Spanish--that was all Nelly knew--and also, that when an offer had been
made to her through a friend, of some translating work for the Foreign
Office, she had angrily refused it. She would not, she said, be a slave
to any public office.

'Won't it be awfully expensive?' said Nelly after a pause, as Bridget
did not answer. The younger sister was putting her painting things
away, and making ready to go in. For though the day had been wonderfully
warm for October, the sun had just set over Bowfell, and the air had
grown suddenly chilly.

'Well, I can't help it,' said Bridget, rather roughly. 'I shall have to
go.'

Something in her voice made Nelly look at her.

'I say you _are_ tired! Come in and lie down a little. That walk from
Grasmere's too much for you!'

Bridget submitted with most unusual docility.

The sisters entered the house together.

'I'll go upstairs for a little,' said Bridget. 'I shall be all right by
supper.' Then, as she slowly mounted the stairs, a rather gaunt and
dragged figure in her dress of grey alpaca, she turned to say--

'I met Sir William on the road just now. He passed me in the car, and
waved his hand. He called out something--I couldn't hear it.'

'Perhaps to say he would come to supper,' said Nelly, her face
brightening. 'I'll go and see what there is.'

Bridget went upstairs. Her small raftered room was invaded by the last
stormy light of the autumn evening. The open casement window admitted a
cold wind. Bridget shut it, with a shiver. But instead of lying down,
she took a chair by the window, absently removed her hat, and sat there
thinking. The coppery light from the west illumined her face with its
strong discontented lines, and her hands, which were large, but white
and shapely--a source indeed of personal pride to their owner.

Presently, in the midst of her reverie, she heard a step outside, and
saw Sir William Farrell approaching the gate. Nelly, wrapped in a white
shawl, was still strolling about the garden, and Bridget watched their
meeting--Nelly's soft and smiling welcome, and Farrell's eagerness, his
evident joy in finding her alone.

'And she just wilfully blinds herself!' thought Bridget
contemptuously--'talks about his being a brother to her, and that sort
of nonsense. He's in love with her!--of course he's in love with her.
And as for Nelly--she's not in love with him. But she's getting used to
him; she depends on him. When he's not there she misses him. She's
awfully glad to see him when he comes. Perhaps, it'll take a month or
two. I give it a month or two--perhaps six months--perhaps a year. And
then she'll marry him--and--'

Here her thoughts became rather more vague and confused. They were
compounded of a fierce impatience with the war, and of certain urgent
wishes and ambitions, which had taken possession of a strong and
unscrupulous character. She wanted to travel. She wanted to see the
world, and not to be bothered by having to think of money. Contact with
very rich people, like the Farrells, and the constant spectacle of what
an added range and power is given to the human will by money, had
turned the dull discontent of her youth into an active fever of desire.
She had no illusions about herself at all. She was already a plain and
unattractive old maid. Nobody would want to marry her; and she did not
want to marry anybody. But she wanted to _do_ things and to _see_
things, when the hateful war was over. She was full of curiosities about
life and the world, that were rather masculine than feminine. Her
education, though it was still patchy and shallow, had been advancing
since Nelly's marriage, and her intelligence was hungry. The
satisfaction of it seemed too to promise her the only real pleasures to
which she could look forward in life. On the wall of her bedroom were
hanging photographs of Rome, Athens, the East. She dreamt of a wandering
existence; she felt that she would be insatiable of movement, of
experience, if the chance were given her.

But how could one travel, or buy books, or make new acquaintances,
without money?--something more at any rate than the pittance on which
she and Nelly subsisted.

What was it Sir William was supposed to have, by way of income?--thirty
thousand a year? Well, he wouldn't always be spending it on his
hospital, and War income tax, and all the other horrible burdens of the
time. If Nelly married him, she would have an ample margin to play with;
and to do Nelly justice, she was always open-handed, always ready to
give away. She would hand over her own small portion to her sister, and
add something to it. With six or seven hundred a year, Bridget would be
mistress of her own fate, and of the future. Often, lately, in waking
moments of the night, she had felt a sudden glow of exultation, thinking
what she could do with such a sum. The world seemed to open out on all
sides--offering her new excitements, new paths to tread in. She wanted
no companion, to hamper her with differing tastes and wishes. She would
be quite sufficient to herself.

The garden outside grew dark. She heard Farrell say 'It's too cold for
you--you must come in,' and she watched Nelly enter the house in front
of him--turning her head back to answer something he said to her. Even
through the dusk Bridget was conscious of her sister's beauty. She did
not envy it in the least. It was Nelly's capital--Nelly's opportunity.
Let her use it for them both. Bridget would be well satisfied to gather
up the crumbs from her rich sister's table.

Then from the dream, she came back with chill and desperation--to
reality. The letter in her pocket--the journey before her--she pondered
alternatives. What was she to do in this case--or in that? Everything
might be at stake--everything was at stake--her life and Nelly's--

The voices from the parlour below came up to her. She heard the
crackling of a newly lighted fire--Farrell reading aloud--and Nelly's
gentle laughter. She pictured the scene; the two on either side of the
fire, with Nelly's mourning, her plain widow's dress, as the symbol--in
Nelly's eyes--of what divided her from Farrell, or any other suitor, and
made it possible to be his friend without fear. Bridget knew that Nelly
so regarded it. But that of course was just Nelly's foolish way of
looking at things. It was only a question of time.

And meanwhile the widow's dress had quite other meanings for Bridget.
She pondered long in the dark, till the supper bell rang.

At supper, her silence embarrassed and infected her companions, and
Farrell, finding it impossible to get another tête-à-tête with Nelly,
took his leave early. He must be up almost with the dawn so as to get to
Carton by nine o'clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Out of a stormy heaven the moon was breaking as he walked back to his
cottage. The solitude of the mountain ways, the freshness of the
rain-washed air, and the sweetness of his hour with Nelly, after the
bustle of the week, the arrivals and departures, the endless business,
of a great hospital:--he was conscious of them all, intensely conscious,
as parts of a single, delightful whole to which he had looked forward
for days. And yet he was restless and far from happy. He wandered about
the mountain roads for a long time--watching the moon as it rose above
the sharp steep of Loughrigg and sent long streamers of light down the
Elterwater valley, and up the great knees of the Pikes. The owls hooted
in the oak-woods, and the sound of water--the Brathay rushing over the
Skelwith rocks, and all the little becks in fell and field, near and
far--murmured through the night air, and made earth-music to the fells.
Farrell had much of the poet in him; and the mountains and their life
were dear to him. But he was rapidly passing into the stage when a man
over-mastered by his personal desires is no longer open to the soothing
of nature. He had recently had a long and confidential talk with his
lawyer at Carlisle, who was also his friend, and had informed himself
minutely about the state of the law. Seven years!--unless, of her own
free will, she took the infinitesimal risk of marriage before the period
was up.

But he despaired of her doing any such thing. He recognised fully that
the intimacy she allowed him, her sweet openness and confidingness, were
all conditioned by what she regarded as the fixed points in her life; by
her widowhood, legal and spiritual, and by her tacit reliance on his
recognition of the fact that she was set apart, bound as other widows
were not bound, protected by the very mystery of Sarratt's fate, from
any thought of re-marriage.

And he!--all the time the strength of a man's maturest passion was
mounting in his veins. And with it a foreboding--coming he knew not
whence--like the sudden shadow that, as he looked, blotted out the
moonlight on the shining bends and loops of the Brathay, where it
wandered through the Elterwater fields.


CHAPTER XII


Bridget Cookson slowly signed her name to the letter she had been
writing in the drawing-room of the boarding-house where she was
accustomed to stay during her visits to town. Then she read the letter
through--

'I can't get back till the middle or end of next week at least. There's
been a great deal to do, of one kind or another. And I'm going down to
Woking to-morrow to spend the week-end with a girl I met here who's
knocked up in munition-work. Don't expect me till you see me. But I
daresay I shan't be later than Friday.'

Bridget Cookson had never yet arrived at telling falsehoods for the mere
pleasure of it. On the whole she preferred not to tell them. But she was
well aware that her letter to Nelly contained a good many, both
expressed and implied.

Well, that couldn't be helped. She put up her letter, and then proceeded
to look carefully through the contents of her handbag. Yes, her passport
was all right, and her purse with its supply of notes. Also the letter
that she was to present to the Base Commandant, or the Red Cross
representative at the port of landing. The latter had been left open for
her to read. It was signed 'Ernest Howson, M.D.,' and asked that Miss
Bridget Cookson might be sent forward to No. 102, General Hospital, X
Camp, France, as quickly as possible.

There was also another letter addressed to herself in the same
handwriting. She opened it and glanced through it--

'DEAR MISS COOKSON,--I think I have made everything as easy for you as I
can on this side. You won't have any difficulty. I'm awfully glad you're
coming. I myself am much puzzled, and don't know what to think. Anyway I
am quite clear that my right course was to communicate with
you--_first._ Everything will depend on what you say.'

The following afternoon, Bridget found herself, with a large party of
V.A.D.'s, and other persons connected with the Red Cross, on board a
Channel steamer. The day was grey and cold, and Bridget having tied on
her life-belt, and wrapped herself in her thickest cloak, found a seat
in the shelter of the deck cabins whence the choppy sea, the destroyer
hovering round them, and presently the coast of France were visible. A
secret excitement filled her. What was she going to see? and what was
she going to do? All round her too were the suggestions of war,
commonplace and familiar by now to half the nation, but not to Bridget
who had done her best to forget the war. The steamer deck was crowded
with officers returning from leave who were walking up and down, all of
them in life-belts, chatting and smoking. All eyes were watchful of the
sea, and the destroyer; and the latest submarine gossip passed from
mouth to mouth. The V.A.D.'s with a few army nurses, kept each other
company on the stern deck. The mild sea gave no one any excuse for
discomfort, and the pleasant-faced rosy girls in their becoming
uniforms, laughed and gossiped with each other, though not without a
good many side glances towards the khaki figures pacing the deck, many
of them specimens of English youth at its best.

Bridget however took little notice of them. She was becoming more and
more absorbed in her own problem. She had not in truth made up her mind
how to deal with it, and she admitted reluctantly that she would have to
be guided by circumstance. Midway across, when the French coast and its
lighthouses were well in view, she took out the same letter which she
had received two days before at the Grasmere post-office, and again read
it through.

'X Camp, 102, General Hospital.


'DEAR MISS COOKSON,--I am writing to _you_, in the first instance
instead of to Mrs. Sarratt, because I have a vivid remembrance of what
seemed to me your sister's frail physical state, when I saw you last May
at Rydal. I hope she is much stronger, but I don't want to risk what, if
it ended in disappointment, might only be a terrible strain upon her to
no purpose--so I am preparing the way by writing to you.

'The fact is I want you to come over to France--at once. Can you get
away, without alarming your sister, or letting her, really, know
anything about it? It is the merest, barest chance, but I think there is
just a chance, that a man who is now in hospital here _may_ be poor
George Sarratt--only don't build upon it yet, _please_. The case was
sent on here from one of the hospitals near the Belgian frontier about a
month ago, in order that a famous nerve-specialist, who has joined us
here for a time, might give his opinion on it. It is a most
extraordinary story. I understand from the surgeon who wrote to our
Commandant, that one night, about three months ago, two men, in German
uniforms, were observed from the British front-line trench, creeping
over the No Man's Land lying between the lines at a point somewhere east
of Dixmude. One man, who threw up his hands, was dragging the other, who
seemed wounded. It was thought that they were deserters, and a couple of
men were sent out to bring them in. Just as they were being helped into
our trench, however, one of them was hit by an enemy sniper and mortally
wounded. Then it was discovered that they were not Germans at all. The
man who had been hit said a few incoherent things about his wife and
children in the Walloon patois as he lay in the trench, and trying to
point to his companion, uttered the one word "Anglais"--that, everyone
swears to--and died. No papers were found on either of them, and when
the other man was questioned, he merely shook his head, with a vacant
look. Various tests were applied to him, but it was soon clear, both
that he was dumb--and deaf--from nerve shock, probably--and that he was
in a terrible physical state. He had been severely wounded--apparently
many months before--in the shoulder and thigh. The wounds had evidently
been shockingly neglected, and were still septic. The surgeon who
examined him thought that what with exposure, lack of food, and his
injuries, it was hardly probable he would live more than a few weeks.
However, he has lingered till now, and the specialist I spoke of has
just seen him.

'As to identification marks there were none. But you'll hear all about
that when you come. All I can say is that, as soon as they got the man
into hospital, the nurses and surgeons became convinced that he _was_
English, and that in addition to his wounds, it was a case of severe
shell-shock--acute and long-continued neurasthenia properly
speaking,--loss of memory, and all the rest of it.

'Of course the chances of this poor fellow being George Sarratt are
infinitesimal--I must warn you as to that. How account for the interval
between September 1915 and June 1916--for his dress, his companion--for
their getting through the German lines?

'However, directly I set eyes on this man, which was the week after I
arrived here, I began to feel puzzled about him. He reminded me of
someone--but of whom I couldn't remember. Then one afternoon it suddenly
flashed upon me--and for the moment I felt almost sure that I was
looking at George Sarratt. Then, of course, I began to doubt again. I
have tried--under the advice of the specialist I spoke of--all kinds of
devices for getting into some kind of communication with him. Sometimes
the veil between him and those about him seems to thin a little, and one
makes attempts--hypnotism, suggestion, and so forth. But so far, quite
in vain. He has, however, one peculiarity which I may mention. His hands
are long and rather powerful. But the little fingers are both
crooked--markedly so. I wonder if you ever noticed Sarratt's hands?
However, I won't write more now. You will understand, I am sure, that I
shouldn't urge you to come, unless I thought it seriously worth your
while. On the other hand, I cannot bear to excite hopes which may--which
probably will--come to nothing. All I can feel certain of is that it is
my duty to write, and I expect that you will feel that it is your duty
to come.

'I send you the address of a man at the War Office--high up in the
R.A.M.C.--to whom I have already written. He will, I am sure, do all he
can to help you get out quickly. Whoever he is, the poor fellow here is
very ill.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The steamer glided up the dock of the French harbour. The dusk had
fallen, but Bridget was conscious of a misty town dimly sprinkled with
lights, and crowned with a domed church; of chalk downs, white and
ghostly, to right and left; and close by, of quays crowded with
soldiers, motors, and officials. Carrying her small suit-case, she
emerged upon the quay, and almost immediately was accosted by the
official of the Red Cross who had been told off to look after her.

'Let me carry your suit-case. There is a motor here, which will take you
to X----. There will be two nurses going with you.'

Up the long hill leading southwards out of the town, sped the motor,
stopping once to show its pass to the sentries--khaki and grey, on
either side of the road, and so on into the open country, where an
autumn mist lay over the uplands, beneath a faintly starlit sky. Soon it
was quite dark. Bridget listened vaguely to the half-whispered talk of
the nurses opposite, who were young probationers going back to work
after a holiday, full of spirits and merry gossip about 'Matron' and
'Sister,' and their favourite surgeons. Bridget was quite silent.
Everything was strange and dreamlike. Yet she was sharply conscious that
she was nearing--perhaps--some great experience, some act--some
decision--which she would have to make for herself, with no one to
advise her. Well, she had never been a great hand at asking advice.
People must decide things for themselves.

She wondered whether they would let her see 'the man' that same night.
Hardly--unless he were worse--in danger. Otherwise, they would be sure
to think it better for her to see him first in daylight. She too would
be glad to have a night's rest before the interview. She had a curiously
bruised and battered feeling, as of someone who had been going through
an evil experience.

Pale stretches of what seemed like water to the right, and across it a
lighthouse. And now to the left, a sudden spectacle of lines of light in
a great semicircle radiating up the side of a hill.

The nurses exclaimed--

'There's the Camp! Isn't it pretty at night?'

The officer sitting in front beside the driver turned to ask--

'Where shall I put you down?'

'Number----' said both the maidens in concert. The elderly major in
khaki--who in peace-time was the leading doctor of a Shropshire country
town--could not help smiling at the two lassies, and their bright looks.

'You don't seem particularly sorry to come back!' he said.

'Oh, we're tired of holidays,' said the taller of the two, with a laugh.
'People at home think they're _so_ busy, and---'

'You think they're doing nothing?'

'Well, it don't seem much, when you've been out here!' said the girl
more gravely--'and when you know what there is to do!'

'Aye, aye,' said the man in front. 'We could do with hundreds more of
your sort. Hope you preached to your friends.'

'We did!' said both, each with the same young steady voice.

'Here we are--Stop, please.'

For the motor had turned aside to climb the hill into the semicircle. On
all sides now were rows of low buildings--hospital huts--hospital
marquees--stores--canteens. Close to the motor, as it came to a
stand-still, the door of a great marquee stood open, and Bridget could
see within, a lighted hospital ward, with rows of beds, men in scarlet
bed-jackets, sitting or lying on them--flowers--nurses moving about. The
scene was like some bright and delicate illumination on the dark.

'I shall have to take you a bit further on,' said the major to Bridget,
as the two young nurses waved farewell. 'We've got a room in the hotel
for you. And Dr. Howson will come for you in the morning. He thought
that would be more satisfactory both for you and the patient than that
you should go to the hospital to-night.'

Bridget acquiesced, with a strong sense of relief. And presently the
camp and its lights were all left behind again, and the motor was
rushing on, first through a dark town, and then through woods--pine
woods--as far as the faint remaining light enabled her to see, till dim
shapes of houses, and scattered lamps began again to appear, and the
motor drew up.

'Well, you'll find a bed here, and some food,' said the major as he
handed her out. 'Can't promise much. It's a funny little place, but
they don't look after you badly.'

They entered one of the small seaside hotels of the cheaper sort which
abound in French watering-places, where the walls of the tiny rooms seem
to be made of brown paper, and everyone is living in their neighbour's
pocket. But a pleasant young woman came forward to take Bridget's bag.

'Mademoiselle Cook--Cookson?' she said interrogatively. 'I have a letter
for Mademoiselle. Du médecin,' she added, addressing the major.

'Ah?' That gentleman put down Bridget's bag in the little hall, and
stood attentive. Bridget opened the letter--a very few words--and read
it with an exclamation.

   'DEAR MISS COOKSON,--I am awfully sorry not
   to meet you to-night, and at the hospital to-morrow.
   But I am sent for to Bailleul. My only brother
   has been terribly wounded--they think fatally--in a
   bombing attack last night. I am going up at once--there
   is no help for it. One of my colleagues, Dr.
   Vincent, will take you to the hospital and will tell me
   your opinion. In haste.--Yours sincerely,


   'ERNEST HOWSON.'

'H'm, a great pity!' said the major, as she handed the note to him.
'Howson has taken a tremendous interest in the case. But Vincent is next
best. Not the same thing perhaps--but still--Of course the whole
medical staff here has been interested in it. It has some extraordinary
features. You I think have had a brother-in-law "missing" for some
time?'

He had piloted her into the bare _salle à manger_, where two young
officers, with a party of newly-arrived V.A.D.'s were having dinner, and
where through an open window came in the dull sound of waves breaking on
a sandy shore.

'My brother-in-law has been missing since the battle of Loos,' said
Bridget--'more than a year. We none of us believe that he can be alive.
But of course when Dr. Howson wrote to me, I came at once.'

'Has he a wife?'

'Yes, but she is very delicate. That is why Dr. Howson wrote to me. If
there were any chance--of course we must send for her. But I shall
know--I shall know at once.'

'I suppose you will--yes, I suppose you will,' mused the major. 'Though
of course a man is terribly aged by such an experience. He's
English--that we're certain of. He often seems to understand--half
understand--a written phrase or word in English. And he is certainly a
man of refinement. All his personal ways--all that is instinctive and
automatic--the subliminal consciousness, so to speak--seems to be that
of a gentleman. But it is impossible to get any response out of him, for
anything connected with the war. And yet we doubt whether there is any
actual brain lesion. So far it seems to be severe functional
disturbance--which is neurasthenia--aggravated by his wounds and general
state. But the condition is getting worse steadily. It is very sad, and
very touching. However, you will get it all out of Vincent. You must
have some dinner first. I wish you a good-night.'

And the good man, so stout and broad-shouldered that he seemed to be
bursting out of his khaki, hurried away. The lady seemed to him
curiously hard and silent--'a forbidding sort of party.' But then he
himself was a person of sentiment, expressing all the expected feelings
in the right places, and with perfect sincerity.

Bridget took her modest dinner, and then sat by the window, looking out
over a lonely expanse of sand, towards a moonlit sea. To right and left
were patches of pine wood, and odd little seaside villas, with fantastic
turrets and balconies. A few figures passed--nurses in white head
dresses, and men in khaki. Bridget understood after talking to the
little _patronne_, that the name of the place was Paris à la Mer, that
there was a famous golf course near, and that large building, with a
painted front to the right, was once the Casino, and now a hospital for
officers.

It was all like a stage scene, the sea, the queer little houses, the
moonlight, the passing figures. Only the lights were so few and dim, and
there was no music.

'Miss Cookson?'

Bridget turned, to see a tall young surgeon in khaki, tired, pale and
dusty, who looked at her with a frown of worry, a man evidently
over-driven, and with hardly any mind to give to this extra task that
had been put upon him.

'I'm sorry to be late--but we've had an awful rush to-day,' he said, as
he perfunctorily shook hands. 'There was some big fighting on the Somme,
the night before last, and the casualty trains have been coming in all
day. I'm only able to get away for five minutes.

'Well now, Miss Cookson'--he sat down opposite her, and tried to get his
thoughts into business shape--'first let me tell you it's a great
misfortune for you that Howson's had to go off. I know something about
the case--but not nearly as much as he knows. First of all--how old was
your brother-in-law?'

'About twenty-seven--I don't know precisely.'

'H'm. Well of course this man looks much older than that--but the
question is what's he been through? Was Lieutenant Sarratt fair or
dark?'

'Rather dark. He had brown hair.'

'Eyes?'

'I can't remember precisely,' said Bridget, after a moment. 'I don't
notice the colour of people's eyes. But I'm sure they were some kind of
brown.'

'This man's are a greenish grey. Can you recollect anything peculiar
about Lieutenant Sarratt's hands?'

Again Bridget paused for a second or two, and then said--'I can't
remember anything at all peculiar about them.'

The surgeon looked at her closely, and was struck with the wooden
irresponsiveness of the face, which was however rather handsome, he
thought, than otherwise. No doubt, she was anxious to speak
deliberately, when so much might depend on her evidence and her opinion.
But he had never seen any countenance more difficult to read.

'Perhaps you're not a close observer of such things?'

'No, I don't think I am.'

'H'm--that's rather a pity. A great deal may turn on them, in this
case.'

Then the face before him woke up a little.

'But I am quite sure I should know my brother-in-law again, under any
circumstances,' said Bridget, with emphasis.

'Ah, don't be so sure! Privation and illness change people terribly. And
this poor fellow has _suffered_!'--he shrugged his shoulders
expressively. 'Well, you will see him to-morrow. There is of course no
external evidence to help us whatever. The unlucky accident that the
Englishman's companion--who was clearly a Belgian peasant, disguised--of
that there is no doubt--was shot through the lungs at the very moment
that the two men reached the British line, has wiped out all possible
means of identification--unless, of course, the man himself can be
recognised by someone who knew him. We have had at least a dozen
parties--relations of "missing" men--much more recent cases--over here
already--to no purpose. There is really no clue, unless'--the speaker
rose with a tired smile--'unless you can supply one, when you see him.
But I am sorry about the fingers. That has always seemed to me a
possible clue. To-morrow then, at eleven?'

Bridget interrupted.

'It is surely most unlikely that my brother-in-law could have survived
all this time? If he had been a prisoner, we should have heard of him,
long ago. Where could he have been?'

The young man shrugged his shoulders.

'There have been a few cases, you know--of escaped prisoners--evading
capture for a long time--and finally crossing the line. But of course it
_is_ very unlikely--most unlikely. Well, to-morrow?' He bowed and
departed.

Bridget made her way to her small carpetless room, and sat for long with
a shawl round her at the open window. She could imagine the farm in this
moonlight. It was Saturday. Very likely both Cicely and Sir William were
at the cottage. She seemed to see Nelly, with the white shawl over her
dark head, saying good-night to them at the farm-gate. That meant that
it was all going forward. Some day,--and soon,--Nelly would discover
that Farrell was necessary to her--that she couldn't do without
him--just as she had never been able in practical ways to do without her
sister. No, there was nothing in the way of Nelly's great future, and
the free development of her--Bridget's--own life, but this sudden and
most unwelcome stroke of fate. If she had to send for Nelly--supposing
it really were Sarratt--and then if he died--Nelly might never get over
it.

It might simply kill her--why not? All the world knew that she was a
weakling. And if it didn't kill her, it would make it infinitely less
likely that she would marry Farrell--in any reasonable time. Nelly was
not like other people. She was all feelings. Actually to see George
die--and in the state that these doctors described--would rack and
torture her. She would never be the same again. The first shock was bad
enough; this might be far worse. Bridget's selfishness, in truth,
counted on the same fact as Farrell's tenderness. 'After all, what
people don't see, they can't feel'--to quite the same degree. But if
Nelly, being Nelly, had seen the piteous thing, she would turn against
Farrell, and think it loyalty to George to send her rich suitor about
his business. Bridget felt that she could exactly foretell the course of
things. A squalid and melancholy veil dropped over the future. Poverty,
struggle, ill-health for Nelly--poverty, and the starving of all natural
desires and ambitions for herself--that was all there was to look
forward to, if the Farrells were alienated, and the marriage thwarted.

A fierce revolt shook the woman by the window. She sat on there till the
moon dropped into the sea, and everything was still in the little
echoing hotel. And then though she went to bed she could not sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

After her coffee and roll in the little _salle à manger_, which with its
bare boards and little rags of curtains was only meant for summer
guests, and was now, on this first of November, nippingly cold, Bridget
wandered a little on the shore watching the white dust of the foam as a
chill west wind skimmed it from the incoming waves, then packed her bag,
and waited restlessly for Dr. Vincent. She understood she was to be
allowed, if she wished, two visits in the hospital, so as to give her an
opportunity of watching the patient she was going to see, without undue
hurry, and would then be motored back to D---- in time for the night
boat. She was bracing herself therefore to an experience the details of
which she only dimly foresaw, but which must in any case be excessively
disagreeable. What exactly she was going to do or say, she didn't know.
How could she, till the new fact was before her?

Punctually on the stroke of eleven, a motor arrived in charge of an army
driver, and Bridget set out. They were to pick up Vincent in the town of
X---- itself and run on to the Camp. The sun was out by this time, and
all the seaside village, with its gimcrack hotels and villas flung
pell-mell upon the sand, and among the pines, was sparkling under it. So
were the withered woods, where the dead leaves were flying before the
wind, the old town where Napoleon gathered his legions for the attack on
England, and the wide sandy slopes beyond it, where the pine woods had
perished to make room for the Camp. The car stopped presently on the
edge of the town. To the left spread a river estuary, with a spit of
land beyond, and lighthouses upon it, sharp against a pale blue sky.
Every shade of pale yellow, of lilac and pearl, sparkled in the
distance, in the scudding water, the fast flying westerly clouds, and
the sandy inlets among the still surviving pines.

'You're punctuality itself,' said a man emerging from a building before
which a sentry was pacing--'Now we shall be there directly.'

The building, so Bridget was informed, housed the Headquarters of the
Base, and from it the business of the great Camp, whether on its
military or its hospital side, was mainly carried on. And as they drove
towards the Camp her companion, with the natural pride of the Englishman
in his job, told the marvellous tale of the two preceding years--how the
vast hospital city had been reared, and organised--the military camp
too--the convalescent camp--the transports--and the feeding.

'The Boche thought they were the only organisers in the world!--We've
taught them better!' he said, with a laugh in his pleasant eyes, the
whole man of him, so weary the night before, now fresh and alert in the
morning sunshine.

Bridget listened with an unwilling attention. This bit of the war seen
close at hand was beginning to suggest to her some new vast world, of
which she was wholly ignorant, where she was the merest cypher on
sufferance. The thought was disagreeable to her irritable pride, and she
thrust it aside. She had other things to consider.

They drew up outside one of the general hospitals lined along the Camp
road.

'You'll find him in a special ward,' said Vincent, as he handed her out.
'But I'll take you first to Sister.'

They entered the first hut, and made their way past various small rooms,
amid busy people going to and fro. Bridget was aware of the usual
hospital smell of mingled anesthetic and antiseptic, and presently, her
companion laid a hasty hand on her arm and drew her to one side. A
surgeon passed with a nurse. They entered a room on the right, and left
the door of it a little ajar.

'The operating theatre,' said Vincent, with a gesture that shewed her
where to look; and through the open door Bridget saw a white room
beyond, an operating table and a man, a splendid boy of nineteen or
twenty lying on it, with doctors and nurses standing round. The youth's
features shewed waxen against the white walls, and white overalls of the
nurses.

'This way,' said Vincent. 'Sister, this is Miss Cookson. You
remember--Dr. Howson sent for her.'

A shrewd-faced woman of forty in nurse's dress looked closely at
Bridget.

'We shall be very glad indeed, Miss Cookson, if you can throw any light
on this case. It is one of the saddest we have here. Will you follow me,
please?'

Bridget found herself passing through the main ward of the hut, rows of
beds on either hand. She seemed to be morbidly conscious of scores of
eyes upon her, and was glad when she found herself in the passage beyond
the ward.

The Sister opened a door into a tiny sitting-room, and offered Bridget a
chair.

'They have warned you that this poor fellow is deaf and dumb?'

'Yes--I had heard that.'

'And his brain is very clouded. He tries to do all we tell him--it is
touching to see him. But his real intelligence seems to be far away.
Then there are the wounds. Did Dr. Howson tell you about them?'

'He said there were bad wounds.'

The Sister threw up her hands.

'How he ever managed to do the walking he must have done to get through
the lines is a mystery to us all. What he must have endured! The wounds
must have been dressed to begin with in a German field-hospital. Then on
his way to Germany, before the wounds had properly healed--that at least
is our theory--somewhere near the Belgian frontier he must have made his
escape. What happened then, of course, during the winter and spring
nobody knows; but when he reached our lines, the wounds were both in a
septic state. There have been two operations for gangrene since he has
been here. I don't think he'll stand another.'

Bridget lifted her eyes and looked intently at the speaker--

'You think he's very ill?'

'Very ill,' said the Sister emphatically. 'If you can identify him, you
must send for his wife at once--_at once_! Lieutenant Sarratt was, I
think, married?'

'Yes,' said Bridget. 'Now may I see him?'

The Sister looked at her visitor curiously. She was both puzzled and
repelled by Bridget's manner, by its lack of spring and cordiality, its
dull suggestion of something reserved and held back. But perhaps the
woman was only shy; and oppressed by the responsibility of what she had
come to do. The Sister was a very human person, and took tolerant views
of everything that was not German. She rose, saying gently--

'If I may advise you, take time to watch him, before you form or express
any opinion. We won't hurry you.'

Bridget followed her guide a few steps along the corridor. The Sister
opened a door, and stood aside to let Bridget pass in. Then she came in
herself, and beckoned to a young probationer who was rolling bandages on
the further side of the only bed the room contained. The girl quietly
put down her work and went out.

There was a man lying in the bed, and Bridget looked at him. Her heart
beat so fast, that she felt for a moment sick and suffocated. The Sister
bent over him tenderly, and put back the hair, the grey hair which had
fallen over his forehead. At the touch, his eyes opened, and as he saw
the Sister's face he very faintly smiled. Bridget suddenly put out a
hand and steadied herself by a chair standing beside the bed. The Sister
however saw nothing but the face on the pillow, and the smile. The smile
was so rare!--it was the one sufficient reward for all his nurses did
for him.

'Now I'll leave you,' said the Sister, forbearing to ask any further
questions. 'Won't you sit down there? If you want anyone, you have only
to touch that bell.'

She disappeared. And Bridget sat down, her eyes on the figure in the
bed, and on the hand outside the sheet. Her own hands were trembling, as
they lay crossed upon her lap.

How grey and thin the hair was--how ghostly the face--what suffering in
every line!

Bridget drew closer.

'George!' she whispered.

No answer. The man's eyes were closed again. He seemed to be asleep.
Bridget looked at his hand--intently. Then she touched it.

The heavy blue-veined eyelids rose again, as though at the only summons
the brain understood. Bridget bent forward. What colour there had been
in it before ebbed from her sallow face; her lips grew white. The eyes
of the man in the bed met hers--first mechanically--without any sign of
consciousness; then--was it imagination?--or was there a sudden change
of expression--a quick trouble--a flickering of the lids? Bridget shook
through every limb. If he recognised her, if the sight of her brought
memory back--even a gleam of it--there was an end of everything, of
course. She had only to go to the nearest telegraph office and send for
Nelly.

But the momentary stimulus passed as she looked--the eyes grew vacant
again--the lids fell. Bridget drew a long breath. She raised herself and
moved her chair farther away.

Time passed. The window behind her was open, and the sun came in, and
stole over the bed. The sick man scarcely moved at all. There was
complete silence, except for the tread of persons in the corridor
outside, and certain distant sounds of musketry and bomb practice from
the military camp half a mile away.

He was dying--the man in the bed. That was plain. Bridget knew the look
of mortal illness. It couldn't be long.

She sat there nearly an hour--thinking. At the end of that time she rang
the hand-bell near her.

Sister Agnes appeared at once. Bridget had risen and confronted her.

'Well,' said the Sister eagerly. But the visitor's irresponsive look
quenched her hopes at once.

'I see nothing at all that reminds me of my brother-in-law,' said
Bridget with emphasis. 'I am very sorry--but I cannot identify this
person as George Sarratt.'

The Sister's face fell.

'You don't even see the general likeness Dr. Howson thought he saw?'

Bridget turned back with her towards the bed.

'I see what Dr. Howson meant,' she said, slowly. 'But there is no real
likeness. My brother-in-law's face was much longer. His mouth was quite
different. And his eyes were brown.'

'Did you see the eyes again? Did he look at you?'

'Yes.'

'And there was no sign of recognition?'

'No.'

'Poor dear fellow!' said the Sister, stooping over him again. There was
a profound and yearning pity in the gesture. 'I wish we could have kept
him more alive--more awake--for you, to see. But there had to be morphia
this morning. He had a dreadful night. Are you _quite_ sure? Wouldn't
you like to come back this afternoon, and watch him again? Sometimes a
second time--Oh, and what of the hands?--did you notice them?' And
suddenly remembering Dr. Howson's words, the Sister pointed to the
long, bloodless fingers lying on the sheet, and to the marked deformity
in each little finger.

'Yet--but George's hands were not peculiar in any way.' Bridget's voice,
as she spoke, seemed to herself to come from far away; as though it were
that of another person speaking under compulsion.

'I'm sorry--I'm sorry!'--the Sister repeated. 'It's so sad for him to be
dying here--all alone--nobody knowing even who he is--when one thinks
how somebody must be grieving and longing for him.'

'Have you no other enquiries?' said Bridget, abruptly, turning to pick
up some gloves she had laid down.

'Oh yes--we have had other visitors--and I believe there is a gentleman
coming to-morrow. But nothing that sounded so promising as your visit.
You won't come again?'

'It would be no use,' said the even, determined voice. 'I will write to
Dr. Howson from London. And I do hope'--for the first time, the kindly
nurse perceived some agitation in this impressive stranger--'I do hope
that nobody will write to my sister--to Mrs. Sarratt. She is very
delicate. Excitement and disappointment might just kill her. That's why
I came.'

'And that of course is why Dr. Howson wrote to you first. Oh I am sure
he will take every care. He'll be very, very sorry! You'll write to him?
And of course so shall I.'

The news that the lady from England had failed to identify the nameless
patient to whom doctor and nurses had been for weeks giving their most
devoted care spread rapidly, and Bridget before she left the hospital
had to run the gauntlet of a good many enquiries, at the hands of the
various hospital chiefs. She produced on all those who questioned her
the impression of an unattractive, hard, intelligent woman whose
judgment could probably be trusted.

'Glad she isn't my sister-in-law!' thought Vincent as he turned back
from handing her into the motor which was to take her to the port. But
he did not doubt her verdict, and was only sorry for 'old Howson,' who
had been so sure that something would come of her visit.

The motor took Bridget rapidly back to D----, where she would be in good
time for an afternoon boat. She got some food, automatically, at a hotel
near the quay, and automatically made her way to the boat when the time
came. A dull sense of something irrevocable,--something
horrible,--overshadowed her. But the 'will to conquer' in her was as
iron; and, as in the Prussian conscience, left no room for pity or
remorse.


CHAPTER XIII


A psychologist would have found much to interest him in Bridget
Cookson's mental state during the days which followed on her journey to
France. The immediate result of that journey was an acute sharpening of
intelligence, accompanied by a steady, automatic repression of all those
elements of character or mind which might have interfered with its free
working. Bridget understood perfectly that she had committed a crime,
and at first she had not been able to protect herself against the normal
reaction of horror or fear. But the reaction passed very quickly.
Conscience gave up the ghost. Selfish will, and keen wits held the
field; and Bridget ceased to be more than occasionally uncomfortable,
though a certain amount of anxiety was of course inevitable.

She did not certainly want to be found out, either by Nelly or the
Farrells; and she took elaborate steps to prevent it. She wrote first a
long letter to Howson giving her reasons for refusing to believe in his
tentative identification of the man at X---- as George Sarratt, and
begging him not to write to her sister. 'That would be indeed _cruel_.
She can just get along now, and every month she gets a little stronger.
But her heart, which was weakened by the influenza last year, would
never stand the shock of a fearful disappointment. Please let her be. I
take all the responsibility. That man is not George Sarratt. I hope you
may soon discover who he is.'

Step No. 2 was to go, on the very morning after she arrived in London,
to the Enquiry Office in A---- Street. Particulars of the case in France
had that morning reached the office, and Bridget was but just in time to
stop a letter from Miss Eustace to Nelly. When she pointed out that she
had been over to France on purpose to see for herself, that there was no
doubt at all in her own mind, and that it would only torment a frail
invalid to no purpose to open up the question, the letter was of course
countermanded. Who could possibly dispute a sister's advice in such a
case? And who could attribute the advice to anything else than sisterly
affection!

Meanwhile among the mountains an unusually early winter was beginning to
set in. The weather grew bitterly cold, and already a powdering of snow
was on the fell-tops. For all that, Nelly could never drink deep enough
of the November beauty, as it shone upon the fells through some bright
frosty days. The oaks were still laden with leaf; the fern was still
scarlet on the slopes; and the ghylls and waterfalls leapt foaming white
down their ancestral courses. And in this austerer world, Nelly's
delicate personality, as though braced by the touch of winter, seemed to
move more lightly and buoyantly. She was more vividly interested in
things and persons--in her drawing, her books, her endless knitting and
sewing for the wounded. She was puzzled that Bridget stayed so long in
town, but alack! she could do very well without Bridget. Some portion of
the savour of life, of that infinity of small pleasures which each day
may bring for the simple and the pure in heart, was again hers.
Insensibly the great wound was healing. The dragging anguish of the
first year assailed her now but rarely.

One morning she opened the windows in the little sitting-room, to let in
the sunshine, and the great spectacle of the Pikes wrapped in majestic
shadow, purple-black, with the higher peaks ranged in a hierarchy of
light behind them.

She leant far out of the window, breathing in the tonic smell of the oak
leaves on the grass beneath her, and the freshness of the mountain air.
Then, as she turned back to the white-walled raftered room with its
bright fire, she was seized with the pleasantness of this place which
was now her home. Insensibly it had captured her heart, and her senses.
And who was it--what contriving brain--had designed and built it up, out
of the rough and primitive dwelling it had once been?

Of course, William Farrell had done it all! There was scarcely a piece
of furniture, a picture, a book, that was not of his choosing and
placing. Little by little, they had been gathered round her. His hand
had touched and chosen them, every one. He took far more pleasure and
interest in the details of these few rooms than in any of his own
houses and costly possessions.

Suddenly--as she sat there on the window-ledge, considering the room,
her back to the mountains--one of those explosions of consciousness
rushed upon Nelly, which, however surprising the crash, are really long
prepared and inevitable.

What did that room really _mean_--the artistic and subtle simplicity of
it?--the books, the flowers, and the few priceless things, drawings or
terra-cottas, brought from the cottage, and changed every few weeks by
Farrell himself, who would arrive with them under his arm, or in his
pockets, and take them back in like manner.

The colour flooded into Nelly's face. She dropped it in her hands with a
low cry. An agony seized her. She loathed herself.

Then springing up passionately she began to pace the narrow floor, her
slender arms and hands locked behind her.

Sir William was coming that very evening. So was Cicely, who was to be
her own guest at the farm, while Marsworth, so she heard, was to have
the spare room at the cottage.

She had not seen William Farrell for some time--for what counted, at
least, as some time in their relation; not since that evening before
Bridget went away--more than a fortnight. But it was borne in upon her
that she had heard from him practically every day. There, in the drawer
of her writing-table, lay the packet of his letters. She looked for
them now morning after morning, and if they failed her, the day seemed
blank. Anybody might have read them--or her replies. None the less
Farrell's letters were the outpouring of a man's heart and mind to the
one person with whom he felt himself entirely at ease. The endless
problems and happenings of the great hospital to which he was devoting
more and more energy, and more and more wealth; the incidents and
persons that struck him; his loves and hates among the staff or the
patients; the humour or the pity of the daily spectacle;--it was all
there in his letters, told in a rich careless English that stuck to the
memory. Nelly was accustomed to read and re-read them.

Yes, and she was proud to receive them!--proud that he thought so much
of her opinion and cared so much for her sympathy. But _why_ did he
write to her, so constantly, so intimately?--what was the real motive of
it all?

At last, Nelly asked herself the question. It was fatal of course. So
long as no question is asked of Lohengrin--who, what, and whence he
is--the spell holds, the story moves. But examine it, as we all know,
and the vision fades, the gleam is gone.

She passed rapidly, and almost with terror, into a misery of remorse.
What had she been doing with this kindest and best of men? Allowing him
to suppose that after a little while she would be quite ready to forget
George and be his wife? That threw her into a fit of helpless crying.
The tears ran down her cheeks as she moved to and fro. Her
George!--falling out there, in that ghastly No Man's Land, dying out
there, alone, with no one to help, and quiet now in his unknown grave.
And after little more than a year she was to forget him, and be rich and
happy with a new lover--a new husband?

She seemed to herself the basest of women. Base towards George--and
towards Farrell--both! What could she do?--what must she do? Oh, she
must go away--she must break it all off! And looking despairingly round
the room, which only an hour before had seemed to her so dear and
familiar, she tried to imagine herself in exile from all it represented,
cut off from Farrell and from Cicely, left only to her own weak self.

But she must--she _must_! That very evening she must speak to Willy--she
must have it out. Of course he would urge her to stay there--he would
promise to go away--and leave her alone. But that would be too mean, too
ungrateful. She couldn't banish him from this spot that he loved, where
he snatched his few hours--always now growing fewer--of rest and
pleasure. No, she must just depart. Without telling him? Without
warning? Her will failed her.

She got out her table, with its knitting, and its bundles of prepared
work which had arrived that morning from the workroom, and began upon
one of them mechanically. But she was more and more weighed down by a
sense of catastrophe--which was also a sense of passionate shame. Why,
she was George's wife, still!--his _wife_--for who could _know_, for
certain, that he was dead? That was what the law meant. _Seven years_!

       *       *       *       *       *

She spent the day in a wretched confusion of thoughts and plans. A
telegram from Cicely arrived about midday--'Can't get to you till
to-morrow. Willy and Marsworth coming to-day--Marsworth not till late.'

So any hour might bring Farrell. She sat desperately waiting for him.
Meanwhile there was a post-card from Bridget saying that she too would
probably arrive that evening.

That seemed the last straw. Bridget would merely think her a fool;
Bridget would certainly quarrel with her. Why, it had been Bridget's
constant object to promote the intimacy with the Farrells, to throw her
and Sir William together. Nelly remembered her own revolts and refusals.
They seemed now so long ago! In those days it was jealousy for George
that filled her, the fierce resolve to let no one so much as dream that
she could ever forget him, and to allow no one to give money to George's
wife, for whom George himself had provided, and should still provide.
And at an earlier stage--after George left her, and before he died--she
could see herself, as she looked back, keeping Sir William firmly at a
distance, resenting those friendly caressing ways, which others
accepted--which she too now accepted, so meekly, so abominably! She
thought of his weekly comings and goings, as they were now; how, in
greeting and good-bye, he would hold her hands, both of them, in his;
how once or twice he had raised them to his lips. And it had begun to
seem quite natural to her, wretch that she was; because he pitied her,
because he was so good to her--and so much older, nearly twenty years.
He was her brother and dear friend, and she the little sister whom he
cherished, who sympathised with all he did, and would listen as long as
he pleased, while he talked of everything that filled his mind--the war
news, his work, his books, his companions; or would sit by, watching
breathlessly while his skilful hand put down some broad 'note' of colour
or light, generally on a page of her own sketch-book.

Ah, but it must end--it must end! And she must tell him to-night.

Then she fell to thinking of how it was she had been so blind for so
long; and was now in this tumult of change. One moment, and she was
still the Nelly of yesterday, cheerful, patient, comforted by the love
of her friends; and the next, she had become this poor, helpless thing,
struggling with her conscience, her guilty conscience, and her sorrow.
How had it happened? There was something uncanny, miraculous in it. But
anyway, there, in a flash it stood revealed--her treason to George--her
unkindness to Willy.

For she would never marry him--never! She simply felt herself an
unfaithful wife--a disloyal friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

The November day passed on, cloudless, to its red setting over the
Coniston fells. Wetherlam stood black against the barred scarlet of the
west, and all the valleys lay veiled in a blue and purple mist,
traversed by rays of light, wherever a break in the mountain wall let
the sunset through. The beautiful winter twilight had just begun, when
Nelly heard the step she waited for outside.

She did not run to the window to greet him as she generally did. She sat
still, by the fire, her knitting on her knee. Her black dress was very
black, with the plainest white ruffle at her throat. She looked very
small and pitiful. Perhaps she meant to look it! The weak in dealing
with the strong have always that instinctive resource.

'How jolly to find you alone!' said Farrell joyously, as he entered the
room. 'I thought Miss Bridget was due.' He put down the books with which
he had come laden and approached her with outstretched hands. 'I
say!--you don't look well!' His look, suddenly sobered, examined her.

'Oh yes, I am quite well. Bridget comes to-night.'

She hurriedly withdrew herself, and he sat down opposite her, holding
some chilly fingers to the blaze, surveying her all the time.

'Why doesn't Bridget stop here and look after you?'

Nelly laughed. 'Because she has much more interesting things to do!'

'That's most unlikely! Have you been alone all the week?'

'Yes, but quite busy, thank you--and quite well.' 'You don't look it,'
he repeated gravely, after a moment.

'So busy, and so well,' she insisted, 'that even I can't find excuses
for idling here much longer.'

He gave a perceptible start. 'What does that mean? What are you going to
do?'

'I don't know. But I think'--she eyed him uneasily--'hospital work of
some kind.'

He shook his head.

'I wouldn't take you in my hospital! You'd knock up in a week.'

'You're quite, quite mistaken,' she said, eagerly. 'I can wash dishes
and plates now as well as anyone. Hester told me the other day of a
small hospital managed by a friend of hers--where they want a
parlour-maid. I could do that capitally.'

'Where is it?' he asked, after a moment.

She hesitated, and at last said evasively--

'In Surrey somewhere--I think.'

He took up the tongs, and deliberately put the fire together, in
silence. At last he said--

'I thought you promised Cicely and me that you wouldn't attempt
anything of the kind?'

'Not till I was fit.' Her voice trembled a little. 'But now I am--quite
fit.'

'You should let your friends judge that for you,' he said gently.

'No, no, I can't. I must judge for myself.' She spoke with growing
agitation. 'You have been so awfully, awfully good to me!--and now'--she
bent forward and laid a pleading hand on his arm--'now you must be good
to me in another way I you must let me go. I brood here too much. I want
not to think--I am so tired of myself. Let me go and think about other
people--drudge a little--and slave a little! Let me--it will do me
good!'

His face altered perceptibly during this appeal. When he first came in,
fresh from the frosty air, his fair hair and beard flaming in the
firelight, his eyes all pleasure, he had seemed the embodiment of
whatever is lusty and vigorous in life--an overwhelming presence in the
little cottage room. But he had many subtler aspects. And as he listened
to her, the Viking, the demi-god, disappeared.

'And what about those--to whom it will do harm?'

'Oh no, it won't do harm--to anybody,' she faltered.

'It will do the greatest harm!'--he laid a sharp emphasis on the words.
'Isn't it worth while to be just the joy and inspiration of those who
can work hard--so that they go away from you, renewed like eagles?
Cicely and I come--we tell you our troubles--our worries--our failures,
and our successes. We couldn't tell them to anyone else. But you sit
here; and you're so gentle and so wise--you see things so clearly, just
because you're not in the crowd, not in the rough and tumble--that we go
away--bucked up!--and run our shows the better for our hours with you.
Why must women be always bustling and hurrying, and all of them doing
the same things? If you only knew the blessing it is to find someone
with a little leisure just to feel, and think!--just to listen to what
one has to say. You know I am always bursting with things to say!'

He looked at her with a laugh. His colour had risen.

'I arrive here--often--full of grievances and wrath against
everybody--hating the Government--hating the War Office--hating our own
staff, or somebody on it--entirely and absolutely persuaded that the
country is going to the dogs, and that we shall be at Germany's mercy in
six months. Well, there you sit--I don't know how you manage it!--but
somehow it all clears away. I don't want to hang anybody any more--I
think we are going to win--I think our staff are splendid fellows, and
the nurses, angels--(they ain't, though, all the same!)--and it's all
_you_!--just by being you--just by giving me rope enough--letting me
have it all out. And I go away with twice the work in me I had when I
came. And Cicely's the same--and Hester. You play upon us all--just
because'--he hesitated--'because you're so sweet to us all. You raise us
to a higher power; you work through us. Who else will do it if you
desert us?'

Her lips trembled.

'I don't want to desert you, but--what right have I to such
comfort--such luxury--when other people are suffering and toiling?'

He raised his eyebrows.

'Luxury? This little room? And there you sit sewing and knitting all
day! And I'll be bound you don't eat enough to keep a sparrow!'

There was silence. She was saying to herself--'Shall I ever be able to
go?--to break with them all?' The thought, the image, of George flashed
again through her mind. But why was it so much fainter, so much less
distinct than it had been an hour ago? Yet she seemed to turn to him, to
beg him piteously to protect her from something vague and undefined.

Suddenly a low voice spoke--

'Nelly!--don't go!'

She looked up--startled--her childish eyes full of tears.

He held out his hand, and she could not help it, she yielded her own.

Farrell's look was full of energy, of determination. He drew nearer to
her, still holding her hand. But he spoke with perfect self-control.

'Nelly, I won't deceive you! I love you! You are everything to me. It
seems as if I had never been happy--never known what happiness could
possibly mean till I knew you. To come here every week--to see you like
this for these few hours--it changes everything--it sweetens
everything--because you are in my heart--because I have the hope--that
some day----'

She withdrew her hand and covered her face.

'Oh, it's my fault--my fault!' she said, incoherently--'how could
I?--how _could_ I?'

There was silence again. He opened his lips to speak once or twice, but
no words came. One expression succeeded another on his face; his eyes
sparkled. At last he said--'How could you help it? You could not prevent
my loving you.'

'Yes, I could--I ought----,' she said, vehemently. 'Only I was a fool--I
never realised. That's so like me. I won't face things. And yet'--she
looked at him miserably--'I did beg you to let me live my own
life--didn't I?--not to spoil me--not--not to be so kind to me.'

He smiled.

'Yes. But then you see--you were you!'

She sprang up, looking down upon him, as he sat by the fire. 'That's
just it. If I were another person! But no!--no! I can't be your friend.
I'm not old enough--or clever enough. And I can't ever be anything
else.'

'Why?' He asked it very quietly, his eyes raised to hers. He could see
the quick beat of her breath under her black dress.

'Because I'm not my own. I'm not free--you know I'm not. I'm not free
legally--and I'm not free in heart. Oh, if George were to come in at
that door!'--she threw back her head with a passionate gesture--'there
would be nobody else in the world for me--nobody--nobody!'

He stooped over the fire, fidgeting with it, so that his face was hidden
from her.

'You know, I think, that if I believed there was the faintest hope of
that, I should never have said a word--of my own feelings. But as it
is--why must you feel bound to break up this--this friendship, which
means so much to us all? What harm is there in it? Time will clear up a
great deal. I'll hold my tongue--I promise you. I won't bother you. I
won't speak of it again--for a year--or more--if you wish. But--don't
forsake us!'

He looked up with that smile which in Cicely's unbiased opinion gave him
such an unfair advantage over womankind.

With a little sob, Nelly walked away towards the window, which was still
uncurtained though the night had fallen. Outside there was a starry deep
of sky, above Wetherlam and the northern fells. The great shapes held
the valley in guard; the river windings far below seemed still to keep
the sunset; while here and there shone scattered lights in farms and
cottages, sheltering the old, old life of the dales.

Insensibly Nelly's passionate agitation began to subside. Had she been
filling her own path with imaginary perils and phantoms? Yet there
echoed in her mind the low-spoken words--'I won't deceive you! I love
you!' And the recollection both frightened and touched her.

Presently Farrell spoke again, quite in his usual voice.

'I shall be in despair if you leave me to tackle Cicely alone. She's
been perfectly mad lately. But you can put it all right if you choose.'

Nelly was startled into turning back towards him.

'Oh!--how can I?'

'Tell her she has been behaving abominably, and making a good fellow's
life a burden to him. Scold her! Laugh at her!'

'What has she been doing?' said Nelly, still standing by the window.

Farrell launched into a racy and elaborate account--the effort of one
determined, _coûte que coûte_, to bring the conversation back to an
ordinary key--of Cicely's proceedings, during the ten days since Nelly
had seen her.

It appeared that Marsworth, after many weeks during which they had heard
nothing of him, had been driven north again to his Carton doctor, by a
return of neuralgic trouble in his wounded arm; and as usual had put up
at the Rectory, where as usual Miss Daisy, the Rector's granddaughter,
had ministered to him like the kind little brick she was.

'You see, she's altogether too good to be true!' said Farrell. 'And yet
it is true. She looks after her grandfather and the parish. She runs the
Sunday school, and all the big boys are in love with her. She does
V.A.D. work at the hospital. She spends nothing on her dress. She's
probably up at six every morning. And all the time, instead of being
plain, which of course virtue ought to be, she's as pretty as
possible--like a little bird. And Cicely can't abide her. I don't know
whether she's in love with Marsworth. Probably she is. Why not? At any
rate, whenever Marsworth and Cicely fall out, which they do every
day--Cicely has the vile habit--of course you know!--of visiting
Marsworth's sins upon little Daisy Stewart. I understood she was guilty
of some enormity at the Red Cross sale in the village last week.
Marsworth was shocked, and had it out with her. Consequently they
haven't been on speaking terms for days.'

'What shall we do with them to-morrow?' cried Nelly in alarm, coming to
sit down again by the fire and taking up her knitting. How strange it
was--after that moment of tempestuous emotion--to have fallen back
within a few minutes into this familiar, intimate chat! Her pulse was
still rushing. She knew that something irrevocable had happened, and
that when she was alone, she must face it. And meanwhile here she sat
knitting!--and trying to help him with Cicely as usual!

'Oh, and to-morrow!'--said Farrell with amusement, 'the fat will indeed
be in the fire.'

And he revealed the fact that on his way through Grasmere he had fallen
in with the Stewarts. The old man had been suffering from bronchitis,
and the two had come for a few days' change to some cousins at Grasmere.

'And the old man's a bit of a collector and wants to see the Turners. He
knows Carton by heart. So I had to ask them to come up to-morrow--and
there it is!--Cicely will find them in possession, with Marsworth in
attendance!'

'Why does she come at all?' said Nelly, wondering. 'She knows Captain
Marsworth will be here. She said so, in her telegram.'

Farrell shrugged his shoulders.

'"It taks aw soarts to mak a worrld," as they say up here. But Marsworth
and Cis are queer specimens! I am privately certain he can't do for long
without seeing her. And as for her, I had no sooner arranged that he
should join me here to-night, than she telegraphed to you! Just like
her! I had no idea she thought of coming. Well, I suppose to quarrel
yourself into matrimony is one of the recognised openings!'

The talk dropped. The joint consciousness behind it was too much for
it. It fell like a withered leaf.

Farrell got up to go. Nelly too rose, trembling, to her feet. He took
her hand.

'Don't leave us,' he repeated, softly. 'You are our little saint--you
help us by just living. Don't attempt things too hard for you. You'll
kill yourself, and then----'

She looked at him mutely, held by the spell of his eyes.

'Well then,' he finished, abruptly, 'there won't be much left for one
man to live for. Good-night.'

He was gone, and she was left standing in the firelight, a small,
bewildered creature.

'What shall I do?' she was saying to herself, 'Oh, what ought I to do?'

She sank down on the floor, and hid her face against a chair.
Helplessly, she wished that Hester would come!--someone wise and strong
who would tell her what was right. The thought of supplanting George, of
learning to forget him, of letting somebody else take his place in her
heart, was horrible--even monstrous--to her. Yet she did not know how
she would ever find the strength to make Farrell suffer. His devotion
appealed--not to any answering passion in her--there was none--but to an
innate lovingness, that made it a torment to her to refuse to love and
be loved. Her power of dream, of visualisation, shewed him to her alone
and unhappy; when, perhaps, she might still--without harm--have been a
help to him--have shewn him her gratitude. She felt herself wavering and
retreating; seeking, as usual, the easiest path out of her great
dilemma. Must she either be disloyal to her George?--her dead, her
heroic George!--or unkind to this living man, whose unselfish devotion
had stood between her and despair? After all, might it not still go on?
She could protect herself. She was not afraid.

But she _was_ afraid! She was in truth held by the terror of her own
weakness, and Farrell's strength, as she lay crouching by the fire.

Outside the wind was rising. Great clouds were coming up from the
south-west. The rain had begun. Soon it was lashing the windows, and
pouring from the eaves of the old farmhouse.

Nelly went back to her work; and the wind and rain grew wilder as the
hours passed. Just as she was thinking wearily of going to bed, there
were sounds of wheels outside.

Bridget? so late! Nelly had long since given her up. What a night on
which to face the drive from Windermere! Poor horse!--poor man!

Yes, it was certainly Bridget! As Nelly half rose, she heard the harsh,
deep voice upon the stairs. A tall figure, heavily cloaked, entered.

'My dear Bridget--I'd quite given you up!'

'No need,' said Bridget coolly, as she allowed Nelly to kiss her cheek.
'The afternoon train from Euston was a little late. You can't help that
with all these soldiers about.'

'Come and sit down by the fire. Have you done all you wanted to do?'

'Yes.'

Bridget sat down, after taking off her wet water-proof, and held a
draggled hat to the blaze. Nelly looking at her was struck by the fact
that Bridget's hair had grown very grey, and the lines in her face very
deep. What an extraordinary person Bridget was! What had she been doing
all this time?

But nothing could be got out of the traveller. She sat by the fire for a
while, and let Nelly get her a tray of food. But she said very little,
except to complain of the weather, and, once, to ask if the Farrells
were at the cottage.

'Sir William is there, with Captain Marsworth,' said Nelly. 'Cicely
comes here to-morrow.'

'Does she expect me to give her my room?' said Bridget sharply.

'Not at all. She likes the little spare-room.'

'Or pretends to! Has Sir William been here to-day?'

'Yes, he came round.'

A few more questions and answers led to silence broken only by the
crackling of the fire. The firelight played on Nelly's cheek and throat,
and on her white languid hands. Presently it caught her wedding-ring,
and Bridget's eye was drawn to the sparkle of the gold. She sat looking
absently at her sister. She was thinking of a tiny room in a hut
hospital--of the bed--and of those eyes that had opened on her. And
there sat Nelly--knowing nothing!

It was all a horrible anxiety. But it couldn't last long.


CHAPTER XIV


'So you are not at church?'

The voice was Marsworth's as he stepped inside the flagged passage of
the farm, Nelly having just opened the door to him.

'It's so far!--in winter,' said Nelly a little guiltily. 'I go to
Grasmere in summer.'

'Oh! don't apologise--to a heathen like me! I'm only too thankful to
find you alone. Is your sister here?'

'Yes. But we've made a room for her in one of the outhouses. She works
there.'

'What at? Is she still learning Spanish?' asked Marsworth, smiling, as
he followed Nelly into the little white drawing-room.

'I don't know,' said Nelly, after a moment, in a tone of depression.
'Bridget doesn't tell me.'

The corners of Marsworth's strong mouth shewed amusement. He was not
well acquainted with Bridget Cookson, but as far as his observation
went, she seemed to him a curious specimen of the half-educated
pretentious woman so plentiful in our modern life. In place of
'psychology' and 'old Spanish,' the subjects in which Miss Cookson was
said to be engaged, he would have liked to prescribe for her--and all
her kin--courses of an elementary kind in English history and vulgar
fractions.

But, for Nelly Sarratt, Marsworth felt the tender and chivalrous respect
that natures like hers exact easily from strong men. To him, as to
Farrell, she was the 'little saint' and peacemaker, with her lovingness,
her sympathy, her lack of all the normal vanities and alloys that beset
the pretty woman. That she was not a strong character, that she was
easily influenced and guided by those who touched her affections, he
saw. But that kind of weakness in a woman--when that woman also
possesses the mysterious something, half physical, half spiritual, which
gives delight--is never unpleasing to such men as Marsworth, nor indeed
to other women. It was Marsworth's odd misfortune that he should have
happened to fall in love with a young woman who had practically none of
the qualities that he naturally and spontaneously admired in the sex.

It was, however, about that young woman that he had come to talk. For he
was well aware of Nelly's growing intimacy with Cicely, and had lately
begun to look upon that as his last hope.

Yet he was no sooner alone with Nelly than he felt a dim compunction.
This timid creature, with her dark haunting eyes, had problems enough of
her own to face. He perceived clearly that Farrell's passion for her was
mounting fast, and he had little or no idea what kind of response she
was likely to make to it. But all the same his own need drove him on.
And Nelly, who had scarcely slept all night, caught eagerly at some
temporary escape from her own perplexities.

'Dear Mrs. Sarratt!--have you _any_ idea, whether Cicely cares one brass
farthing for me, or not?'

To such broad and piteous appeal was a gallant officer reduced. Nelly
was sorry for him, but could not hide the smile in her eyes, as she
surveyed him.

'Have you really asked her?'

'Asked her? Many times!--in the dark ages. It is months, however, since
she gave me the smallest chance of doing it again. Everything I do or
say appears to annoy her, and of course, naturally, I have relieved her
of my presence as much as possible.'

Nelly had taken up her knitting.

'If you never come--perhaps--Cicely thinks you are tired of her.'

Marsworth groaned.

'Is that her line now? And yet you know--you are witness!--of how she
behaves when I do come.'

Nelly looked up boldly.

'You mustn't be angry, but--why can't you accept her--as she is--without
always wanting her different?'

Marsworth flushed slightly. The impressive effect of his fine iron-grey
head, and marked features, his scrupulously perfect dress, and general
look of competence and ability, was deplorably undone by the signs in
him of bewilderment and distress.

'You mean--you think I bully her?--she thinks so?'

'She--she feels--you so dreadfully disapprove of her!' said Nelly,
sticking to it, but smiling.

'She regards me as a first-class prig in fact?'

'No--but she thinks you don't always understand.'

'That I don't know what a splendid creature she is, really?' said
Marsworth with increasing agitation. 'But I do know it! I know it up and
down. Why everybody--except those she dislikes!--at that hospital,
adores her. She's wearing herself out at the work. None of us are fit to
black her boots. But if one ever tries to tell her so--my hat!'

'Perhaps she doesn't like being praised either,' said Nelly softly.
'Perhaps she thinks--an old friend--should take it all for granted.'

'Good Lord!' said Marsworth holding his head in desperation--'whatever I
do is wrong! Dear Mrs. Sarratt!--look here--I must speak up for myself.
You know how Cicely has taken of late to being intolerably rude to
anybody she thinks is my friend. She castigates me through them. That
poor little girl, Daisy Stewart--why she's ready at any moment to
worship Cicely! But Cicely tramples on her--_you_ know how she does
it--and if I interfere, I'm made to wish I had never been born! At the
present moment, Cicely won't speak to me. There was some silly shindy at
a parish tea last week--by the way, she's coming to you to-day?'

'She arrives for lunch,' said Nelly, looking at the clock.

'And the Stewarts are coming to the cottage in the afternoon!' said
Marsworth in despair. 'Can you keep her away?'

'I'll try--but you know it's not much good trying to manage Cicely.'

'Don't I know it! I return to my first question--does she care a
hapo'rth?'

Nelly was looking dreamily into the fire.

'You mean--does she care enough to give up her ways and take to yours?'

'Yes, I suppose I do mean that,' he said, with sudden seriousness.

Nelly shook her head, smiling.

'I don't know! But--Cicely's worth a deal of trouble.'

He assented with a mixture of fervour and depression.

'We've known each other since we were boy and girl. That's what makes
the difficulty, perhaps. We know each other too well. When she was a
child of fourteen, I was already in the Guards, and I used to try and
tackle her--because no one else would. Her father was dead. Her mother
had no influence with her; and Willy was too lazy. So I tried my hand.
And I find myself doing the same thing now. But of course it's
fatal--it's fatal!'

Nelly tried to cheer him up, but she was not herself very hopeful. She,
perceived too clearly the martinet in him and the rebel in Cicely. If
something were suddenly to throw them together, some common interest or
emotion, each might find the other's heart in a way past undoing. On the
other hand the jarring habit, once set up, has a way of growing worse,
and reducing everything else to dust and ashes. Finally she wound up
with a timid but emphatic counsel.

'Please--please--don't be sarcastic.'

He looked injured.

'I never am!'

Nelly laughed.

'You don't know when you are. And be very nice to her this afternoon.'

'How can I, if she shews me at once that I'm unwelcome? You haven't
answered my question.'

He was standing ready for departure. Nelly's face changed--became all
sad and tender pity.

'You must ask it yourself!' she said eagerly, 'Go on asking it. It would
be too--too dreadful, wouldn't it?--to miss everything--by being proud,
or offended, for nothing----'

'What do you mean by everything?'

'You know,' she said, after a moment, shielding her eyes as they looked
into the fire; 'I'm sure you know. It _is_ everything.'

As he walked back to the cottage, he found himself speculating not so
much about his own case as about his friend's. Willy was certainly in
love. And Nelly Sarratt was as softly feminine as Cicely was mannish
and strong. But he somehow did not feel that Willy's chances were any
safer than his own.

A car arrived at one o'clock bringing Cicely, much wrapped up in fur
coat and motor-veils. She came impetuously into the sitting-room, and
seemed to fill it. It took some time to peel her and reduce her to the
size of an ordinary mortal. She then appeared in a navy-blue coat and
skirt, with navy-blue boots buttoned almost to the knees. The skirt was
immensely full and immensely short. When the strange erection to which
the motor-veil was attached was removed, Cicely showed a dark head with
hair cut almost short, and parted on the left side. Her eyebrows were
unmistakably blackened, her lips unmistakably--strengthened; and Nelly
saw at once that her guest was in a very feverish and irritated
condition.

'Are you alone?' said Cicely, glancing imperiously round her, when the
disrobing was done.

'Bridget is here.'

'What are you going to do this afternoon?'

'Can't we have a walk, you and I, together?'

'Of course we can. Why should we be bothered with anyone else?'

'I suppose,' said Nelly timidly--'they will come in to tea?'

'"They"? Oh! you mean Willy and Captain Marsworth? It is such a pity
Willy can't find somebody more agreeable for these Sundays.'

Cicely threw herself back in her chair, and lifted a navy-blue boot to
the fire.

'More agreeable than Captain Marsworth?'

'Exactly. Willy can't do anything without him, when he's in these parts;
and it spoils everything!'

Nelly dropped a kiss on Cicely's hair, as she stood beside her.

'Why didn't you put off coming till next week?'

'Why should I allow my plans to be interfered with by Captain
Marsworth?' said Cicely, haughtily. 'I came to see _you_!'

'Well, we needn't see much of him,' said Nelly, soothingly, as she
dropped on a stool beside her friend.

'I'm not going to be kept out of the cottage, by Captain Marsworth, all
the same!' said Cicely hastily. 'There are several books there I want.'

'Oh, Cicely, what have you been doing?' said Nelly, laying her head on
her guest's knees.

'Doing? Nothing that I hadn't a perfect right to do. But I suppose--that
very particular gentleman--has been complaining?'

Nelly looked up, and met an eye, fiercely interrogative, yet trying hard
not to be interrogative.

'I've been doing my best to pick up the pieces.'

'Then he has been complaining?'

'A little narrative of facts,' said Nelly mildly.

'Facts--_facts_!' said Cicely, with the air of a disturbed lioness. 'As
if a man whose ideas of manners and morals date from about--a million
years before the Flood.'

'Dear!--there weren't any manners or morals a million years before the
Flood.'

Cicely drew a breath of exasperation.

'It's all very well to laugh, but if you only knew how _impossible_ that
man is!'

'Then why not get a Sunday free from him?'

Cicely flushed against her will, and said nothing. Nelly's black eyes
observed her with as much sarcasm in their sweetness as she dared to
throw into them. She changed her tone.

'Don't go to the cottage this afternoon, Cicely.'

'Why?' The voice was peremptory.

'Well, because----' Nelly described Farrell's chance meeting with the
Stewarts and the inevitable invitation. Cicely's flush deepened. But she
tried to speak carelessly.

'Of course, the merest device on that girl's part! She arranged it all.'

'I really don't think she did.'

'Ah, well, _you_ haven't seen what's been going on. A more shameless
pursuit----'

Cicely stopped abruptly. There was a sudden sparkle in Nelly's look,
which seemed to shew that the choice of the word 'pursuit' had been
unlucky.

Miss Farrell quieted down.

'Of course,' she said, with a very evident attempt to recapture whatever
dignity might be left on the field, 'neither Willy nor I like to see an
old friend throwing himself away on a little pink and white nonentity
like Daisy Stewart. We can't be expected to smile upon it.'

'But I understand, from one of the parties principally concerned, that
there is really nothing in it!' said Nelly, smiling.

'One of the perjuries I suppose at which Jove laughs!' said Cicely
getting up, and hastily rearranging her short curls with the help of
various combs, before the only diminutive looking-glass the farm
sitting-room provided. 'However, we shall see what happens. I have no
doubt Miss Daisy has arranged the proposal scene for this very
afternoon. We shall be in for the last act of the play.'

'Then you _are_ going to the cottage?'

'Certainly!' said Cicely, with a clearing brow. 'Don't let's talk any
more about it. Do give me some lunch. I'm ravenous. Ah, here's your
sister!'

For through a back window looking on what had once been a farm-yard, and
was now a small garden, Cicely saw Bridget emerge from the rebuilt
outhouse where an impromptu study had been devised for her, and walk
towards the farm.

'I say, what's happened to your sister?'

'Happened to her? What do you mean?'

'She looks so much older.'

'I suppose she's been working too hard,' said Nelly, remorsefully. 'I
wish I knew what it was all about.'

'Well, I can tell you'--said Cicely laughing and whispering--'that
Willy doesn't think it's about anything in particular!'

'Hush!' said Nelly, with a pained look. 'Perhaps we shall all turn out
to be quite wrong. We shall discover that it was something--'

'Desperately interesting and important? Not it! But I'm going to be as
good as good. You'll see.'

And when Bridget appeared, Cicely did indeed behave herself with
remarkable decorum. Her opinion was that Nelly's strange sister had
grown more unlike other people than ever since she had last seen her.
She seemed to be in a perpetual brown study, which was compatible,
however, with a curious watchfulness which struck Cicely particularly.
She was always aware of any undercurrent in the room--of anyone going in
or out--of persons passing in the road. At lunch she scarcely opened her
lips, but Cicely was all the time conscious of being observed. After
luncheon Bridget got up abruptly, and said she was going down to
Grasmere to post a letter.

'Oh, then,' said Nelly--'you can ask if there are any for me.'

For there was no delivery at the farm on Sunday morning. Bridget nodded,
and they soon saw her emerge from the farm gate and take the Grasmere
road.

'I must say your sister seems greatly to prefer her own company to
ours,' said Cicely, lighting her cigarette.

Again Nelly looked distressed.

'She was always like that,' she said at last. 'It doesn't really mean
anything.'

'Do I know you well enough to ask whether you get on with her?'

Nelly coloured. 'I try my best'--she said, rather despairingly. Then she
added--'she does all sorts of things for me that I'm too lazy to do for
myself!'

'I believe she likes Willy better than most people!' laughed Cicely.
'I'm not suggesting, please, that she has designs upon him. But she is
certainly more forthcoming to him than to anybody else, isn't she?'

Nelly did not reply. The remark only clouded her look still more. For
her inner mind was perfectly aware of Bridget's attitude towards William
Farrell, and understood it only too well. She knew by this time, past
any doubt, that Bridget was hungry for the Farrell wealth, and was
impatient with herself as a little fool who had not yet made certain of
it. If she stuck to her purpose--if she went away and cut off all
communication with Carton--Bridget would probably quarrel with her for
good.

Would she stick to her purpose? Her mind was miserably swaying to and
fro. She felt morally as she had once felt--physically--on a summer
afternoon long before, when she, who could not swim, had gone
imperceptibly out of her depth, while bathing, and had become suddenly
aware of a seaward current, carrying her away. No help was near. For
five minutes, which had seemed five years, she had wrestled against the
deadly force, which if her girlish strength had been a fraction less,
would have swept her out, a lifeless plaything to the open sea.
Spiritually, it was the same now. Farrell's will, and--infinitely less
important, but still, to be reckoned with--Bridget's will, were pressing
her hard. She did not know if she could keep her footing.

Meanwhile Cicely, in complete ignorance of the new and agonised tension
in Nelly's mind, was thinking only of her own affairs. As soon as her
after-luncheon cigarette was done, she sprang up and began to put on her
hat.

'So you _are_ going to the cottage?' said Nelly.

'Certainly. How do you like my boots?'

She held up one for inspection.

'I don't like them!'

'Fast, you think? Ah, wait till you see my next costume! High Russian
boots, delicious things, up to there!' Cicely indicated a point above
the knee, not generally reached by the female boot--'hand-painted and
embroidered--with tassels--you know!--corduroy trousers!'

'Cicely!--you won't!'

'Shan't I--and a pink jersey, the new shade? I saw a friend of mine in
this get-up, last week. Ripping! Only she had red hair, which completed
it. Perhaps I might dye mine!'

They sallied forth into a mild winter afternoon. Nelly would have
avoided the cottage and Farrell if she could, but Cicely had her own way
as usual. Presently they turned into a side lane skirting the tarn, from
which the cottage and its approaches could be seen, at a distance. From
the white-pillared porch, various figures were emerging, four in all.

Cicely came to a stop.

'There, you see!' she said, in her sharpest voice--'Look there!' For two
of the figures, whom it was easy to identify as Captain Marsworth and
Miss Stewart, diverging from the other pair, went off by themselves in
the direction of Skelwith, with a gay wave of the hand to the old Rector
and Farrell left behind.

Cicely's sudden scarlet ebbed in a moment, leaving her quite white. She
walked on with difficulty, her eyes on the ground. Nelly dared not
address her, or slip a sympathising hand into hers. And it was too late
to retreat. Farrell had perceived them, and he and his companion came
towards them. Cicely pulled herself rapidly together.

Nelly too had need of a minute or two's recollection before Farrell
joined them. He and she were still to meet as usual, while meeting was
possible--wasn't that how it stood? After all, her new plans could not
be made in a moment. She had promised nothing; but he had
promised--would she be able to hold him to it? Her heart trembled as he
came nearer.

But he met her in a sunny mood, introducing her to the white-haired old
clergyman, and watching Cicely with eyes that shewed a hidden amusement.

'The other two seemed to have some private business to discuss,' he said
carelessly. 'So they've got rid of us for a while. They're walking round
the other side of the tarn and will join us at the top of Red Bank. At
least if you're up to a walk?'

He addressed Nelly, who could do nothing but assent, though it meant a
tête-à-tête with him, while Cicely and the old Rector followed.

Mr. Stewart found Miss Farrell anything but an agreeable companion. He
was not a shrewd observer, and the love-affairs especially of his
fellow-creatures were always a surprise and a mystery to him. But he
vaguely understood that his little granddaughter was afraid of Miss
Farrell and did not get on with her. He, too, was afraid of Cicely and
her sharp tongue, while her fantastic dress and her rouge put him in
mind of passages in the prophet Ezekiel, the sacred author of whom he
was at that moment making a special study with a view to a Cambridge
University sermon. It would be terrible if Daisy were ever to take to
imitating Miss Farrell. He was a little disturbed about Daisy lately.
She had been so absent-minded, and sometimes--even--a little flighty.
She had forgotten the day before, to look out some passages for him; and
there was a rent in his old overcoat she had not mended. He was
disagreeably conscious of it. And what could she have to say to Captain
Marsworth? It was all rather odd--and annoying. He walked in a
preoccupied silence.

Farrell and Nelly meanwhile were, it seemed, in no lack of conversation.
He told her that he might possibly be going to France, in a week or two,
for a few days. The Allied offensive on the Somme was apparently
shutting down for the winter. 'The weather in October just broke
everybody's heart, vile luck! Nothing to be done but to make the winter
as disagreeable to the Boche as we can, and to go on piling up guns and
shells for the spring. I'm going to look at hospitals at X---' he named
a great base camp--'and I daresay they'll let me have a run along some
bit of the front, if there's a motor to be had.'

Nelly stopped abruptly. He could see the colour fluctuating in her
delicate face.

'You're going to X---? You--you might see Dr. Howson?'

'Howson?' he said, surprised. 'Do you know him? Yes, I shall certainly
see Howson. He's now the principal surgeon at one of the General
Hospitals there, where I specially want to look at some new splints
they've been trying.'

Nelly moved on without speaking for a little. At last she said, almost
inaudibly--

'He promised me--to make enquiries.'

'Did he?' Farrell spoke in the grave, deep voice he seemed to keep for
her alone, which was always sweet to her ear. 'And he has never
written?' She shook her head. 'But he would have written--instantly--you
may be quite sure, if there had been the slightest clue.'

'Oh yes, I know, I know,' she said hastily.

'Give me any message for him you like--or any questions you'd like me to
ask.'

'Yes'--she said, vaguely.

It seemed to him she was walking languidly, and he was struck by her
weary look. The afternoon had turned windy and cold with gusts of rain.
But when he suggested an immediate return to the cottage, Nelly would
have none of it.

'We were to meet Captain Marsworth and Miss Stewart. Where are they?'

They emerged at the moment from the cottage grounds, upon the high road;
Farrell pointed ahead, and Nelly saw Marsworth and Miss Stewart walking
fast up the hill before them, and evidently in close conversation.

'What can they have to talk about?' said Nelly, wondering.

'Wouldn't you like to know!'

'You're not going to tell me?'

'Not a word.'

His eyes laughed at her. They walked on beside each other, strangely
content. And yet, with what undercurrents of sensitive and wounded
consciousness on her side, of anxiety on his!

At the top of Red Bank they came up with Marsworth and Miss Stewart.
Nelly's curiosity was more piqued than ever. If all that Marsworth had
said to her was true, why this evident though suppressed agitation on
the girl's part, and these shades of mystery in the air? Daisy Stewart
was what anybody would have called 'a pretty little thing.' She was
small, round-cheeked, round-eyed, round-limbed; light upon her feet;
shewing a mass of brown hair brushed with gold under her hat, and the
fresh complexion of a mountain maid. Nelly guessed her age about three
and twenty, and could not help keenly watching the meeting between her
and Cicely. She saw Cicely hold out a limp hand, and the girl's timid,
almost entreating eyes.

But, the next moment, her attention was diverted to a figure slowly
mounting the steep hill from Grasmere, on the top of which the cottage
party were now standing, uncertain whether to push on for their walk, or
to retreat homewards before the increasing rain. The person approaching
was Bridget. As she perceived her, Nelly was startled into quick
recollection of Cicely's remark of the morning--'Your sister seems to
have grown much older.' But not only older--_different!_ Nelly could not
have analysed her own impression, but it was so painful that she ran
down to meet her.

'Bridget, it's too far for you to Grasmere!--and coming back up this
awful hill! You look quite done. Do go home and lie down, or will you
come to the cottage for tea first? It's nearer.'

Bridget looked at her coldly.

'Why do you make such a fuss? I'm all right. But I'm not coming to the
cottage, thank you. I've got things to do.'

The implication was that everyone else was idle. Nelly drew back,
rebuffed. And as Bridget reached the group at the top of the hill it was
as though the rain and darkness suddenly deepened. All talk dropped.
Farrell, indeed, greeted her courteously, introduced her to the
Stewarts, and asked her to come back to the cottage for tea. But he was
refused as Nelly had been. Bridget went on her way alone towards the
farm. But after parting from the others she turned back suddenly to
say--'There were no letters for you, Nelly.'

'What a mercy!' said Farrell, as Bridget disappeared. 'Don't you think
so? I never have any forwarded here.'

'Ah, but you get so many,' said Nelly wistfully. 'But still, letters
don't matter to me--now.'

He said nothing, but it roused in him a kind of fierce soreness that she
would always keep the past so clearly before herself and him.

Violent rain came on, and they hurried back to the cottage for shelter.
Cicely was talking extravagantly all the time. She was tired to death,
she said, of everything patriotic. The people who prattled about
nursing, and the people who prattled about the war--especially the
people who talked about women's work--were all equally intolerable. She
meant to give up everything very soon. Somebody must amuse themselves,
or the world would go mad. Farrell threw at her some brotherly jibes;
the old Rector looked scared; and Marsworth said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were bright fires in the cottage, and the dripping walkers were
glad to crowd round them; all except Cicely and Marsworth, who seemed to
Nelly's watching sense to be oddly like two wrestlers pacing round each
other, and watching the opportunity to close. Each would take out a book
from the shelves and put it back, or take up a newspaper from the
tables--crossing repeatedly, but never speaking. And meanwhile Nelly
also noticed that Daisy Stewart, now that Cicely's close contact was
removed, was looking extraordinarily pretty. Radiance, not to be
concealed, shone from her charming childish face.

Suddenly Marsworth paused in front of Cicely, intercepting her as she
was making for the door.

'Would you be an angel, Miss Farrell, and help me to find a particular
Turner drawing I want to see? Willy says it's in the studio somewhere.'

Cicely paused, half haughty, half irresolute.

'Willy knows his way about the portfolios much better than I do.'

Marsworth came nearer, and leaning one hand on the table between them,
bent over to her. He was smiling, but there was emotion in his look.

'Willy is looking after these people. Won't you?'

Cicely considered.

'All right!' she said carelessly, at last, and led the way.


CHAPTER XV


The studio was empty. A wood fire burnt on the wide hearth, making a
pleasant glow in the wintry twilight. Cicely seated herself on the end
of a sofa, crossed her feet, and took out a cigarette. But to
Marsworth's intense relief she had taken off the helmet-like erection
she called a hat, and her black curly hair strayed as it pleased about
her brow and eyes.

'Well?' she said, at last, looking at him coolly. Marsworth could not
help laughing. He brought a chair, and placed it where he could see her
from below, as he lay back in it, his hands behind his head.

'Of course, you don't want to look at the portfolio,' she resumed, 'that
was your excuse. You want to tell me of your engagement to Miss
Stewart.'

Marsworth laughed again. Her ear caught what seemed to be a note of
triumph.

'Make haste, please!' she said, breathing quickly. 'There isn't very
much time.'

His face changed. He sat up, and held out his hand to her.

'Dear Cicely, I want you to do something for me.'

But she put her own behind her back.

'Have you been quarrelling already? Because if you want me to make it
up, that really isn't my vocation.'

He was silent a moment surveying her. Then he said quietly--'I want you
to help me. I want you to be kind to that little girl.'

'Daisy Stewart? Thank you. But I've no gift at all for mothering babes!
Besides--she'll now have all the advice, and all the kindness she
wants.'

Marsworth's lips twitched.

'Yes, that's true--if you and I can help her out. Cicely!--aren't you a
great friend of Sir John Raine?'

He named one of the chiefs of the Army Medical Department, a man whose
good word was the making of any aspirant in the field he ruled.

Cicely looked rather darkly at her questioner.

'What do you mean?'

'I want you to help me get an appointment for somebody.'

'For whom?'

'For the man Daisy Stewart wants to marry.'

Cicely could not conceal her start.

'I don't like being mystified,' she said coldly.

Marsworth allowed his smile to shew itself.

'I'm not trying to mystify you in the least. Daisy Stewart has been
engaged for nearly a year to one of the house-surgeons in your
hospital--young Fellows. Nobody knows it--not Willy even. It has been
kept a dead secret, because that wicked old man the Rector won't have
it. Daisy makes him comfortable, and he won't give her up, if he can
help it. And as young Fellows has nothing but his present pay--a year
with board and lodging--it seemed hopeless. But now he has got his eye
on something.'

And in a quiet business-like voice Marsworth put the case of the
penniless one--his qualifications, his ambitions, and the particular
post under the Army Medical Board on which he had set his hopes. If only
somebody with influence would give him a leg up!

Cicely interrupted.

'Does Willy know?'

'No. You see, I have come to you first.'

'How long have you known?'

'Since my stay with them last autumn. I suspected something then, just
as I was leaving; and Miss Daisy confessed--when I was there in May.
Since then she seems to have elected me her chief adviser. But, of
course, I had no right to tell anybody anything.'

'That is what you like--to advise people?'

Marsworth considered it.

'There was a time'--he said, at last, in a different voice, 'when my
advice used to be asked by someone else--and sometimes taken.'

Cicely pretended to light another cigarette, but her slim fingers shook
a little.

'And now--you never give it?'

'Oh yes, I do,' he said, with sudden bitterness--'even unasked. I'm
always the same old bore.'

There was silence. His right hand stole towards her left that was lying
limply over her knee. Cicely's eyes looking down were occupied with his
disabled arm, which, although much improved, was still glad to slip into
its sling whenever it was not actively wanted.

But just as he was capturing her, Cicely sprang up.

'I must go and see about Sir John Raine.'

'Cicely--I don't care a brass farthing about Sir John Raine!'

'But having once brought him in, I recommend you to stick to him,' said
Cicely, with teasing eyes. 'And don't go advising young women. It's not
good for the military. _I'm_ going to take this business in hand.'

And she made for departure, but Marsworth got to the door first, and put
his back against it.

'Find me the Turner, Cicely.'

'A man who asks for a thing on false pretences shouldn't have it.'

A silence. Then a meek voice said--

'Captain Marsworth, my brother, Sir William Farrell, will be requiring
my services at tea!'

Marsworth moved aside and she forward. But as she neared him, he caught
her passionately in his arms and kissed her. She released herself,
crimson.

'Do I like being kissed?' she said in a low voice--'do I? Anyway
don't do it again!--and if you dare to say a word yet--to anyone--'

Her eyes threatened; but he saw in them revelations her pride could not
check, and would have disobeyed her at once; but she was too quick for
him. In a second she had opened the door and was gone.

During the rest of the afternoon, her brother and Nelly watched Cicely's
proceedings with stupefaction; only equalled by the bewilderment of Miss
Daisy Stewart. For that young lady was promoted to the good graces of
Sir William's formidable sister with a rapidity and completeness which
only natural good manners and good sense could have enabled her to deal
with; considering the icy exclusion to which she had been so long
condemned. But as she possessed both, she took it very simply; always
with the same serene light in her grey eyes.

Marsworth said to himself presently that young Fellows' chances were
good. But in truth he hardly remembered anything about them, except that
by the help of them he had kissed Cicely! And he had yet to find out
what that remarkable fact was to mean, either to himself or to her. She
refused to let him take her back to the farm, and she only gave him a
finger in farewell. Nor did she say a word of what had happened, even to
Nelly.

Nelly spent again a very wakeful night. Farrell had walked home with
them, and she understood from him that, although he was going over early
to Carton the following morning, he would be at the cottage again
before many days were over. It seemed to her that in telling her so he
had looked at her with eyes that seemed to implore her to trust him. And
she, on hearing it, had been merely dumb and irresponsive, not
forbidding or repellent, as she ought to have been. The courage to wound
him to the quick--to leave him bereft, to go out into the desert
herself, seemed to be more and more oozing away from her.

Yet there beside her bed, on the table which held her Testament, and the
few books--almost all given her by W.F.--to which she was wont to turn
in her wakeful hours, was George's photograph in uniform. About three
o'clock in the morning she lit her candle, and lay looking at it, till
suddenly she stretched out her hand for it, kissed it repeatedly, and
putting it on her breast, clasped her hands over it, and so fell asleep.

But before she fell asleep, she was puzzled by the sounds in Bridget's
room next door. Bridget seemed to be walking about--pacing up and down
incessantly. Sometimes the steps would cease; only to begin again after
a while with the same monotony. What could be the matter with Bridget?
This vague worry about her sister entered into and heightened all
Nelly's other troubles. Yet all the same, in the end, she fell asleep;
and the westerly wind blowing over Wetherlam, and chasing wild flocks of
grey rain-clouds before him, found no one awake in the cottage or the
farm to listen to the concert he was making with the fells, but
Bridget--and Cicely.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bridget Cookson had indeed some cause for wakefulness. Locked away in
the old workbox, where she kept the papers to which she attached
importance, was a letter bearing the imprint 'O.A.S.,' which had been
delivered to her on Sunday afternoon by the Grasmere post-mistress. It
ran as follows:


'DEAR MISS COOKSON,--I know of course that you are fully convinced the
poor fellow we have here in charge has nothing to do with your
brother-in-law. But as you saw him, and as the case may throw light on
other cases of a similar nature, I thought I would just let you know
that owing apparently to the treatment we have been carrying out, there
are some very interesting signs of returning consciousness since your
visit, though nothing very definite as yet. He is terribly ill, and
physically I see no chance for him. But I think he _may_ be able to tell
us who he is before the end, in which case I will inform you, lest you
should now or at any future time feel the smallest misgiving as to your
own verdict in the matter. This is very unlikely, I know, for I
understand you were very decided; but still as soon as we have definite
information--if we get it--you may wish to inform poor Mrs. Sarratt of
your journey here. I hope she is getting stronger. She did indeed look
very frail when I saw her last.

'Yours very truly,

'ROBERT HOWSON.'

Since the receipt of that letter Bridget's reflections had been more
disagreeable than any she had yet grappled with. In Nelly's company the
awfulness of what she had done did sometimes smite home to her. Well,
she had staked everything upon it, and the only possible course was to
brazen it out. That George should die, and die _quickly_--without any
return of memory or speech, was what she terribly and passionately
desired. In all probability he would die quickly; he might even now be
dead. She saw the thing perpetually as a race between his returning
mind--if he still lived, and it was returning--and his ebbing strength.
If she had lived in old Sicilian days, she would have made a waxen image
like the Theocritean sorceress, and put it by the fire, that as it
wasted, so George might waste. As it was, she passed her time during the
forty-eight hours after reading Howson's letter in a silent and
murderous concentration on one thought and wish--George Sarratt's
speedy death.

What a release indeed for everybody!--if people would only tell the
truth, and not dress up their real feelings and interests in stale
sentimentalisms. Farrell made happy at no very distant date; Nelly
settled for life with a rich man who adored her; her own future
secured--with the very modest freedom and opportunity she craved:--all
this on the one side--futile tragedy and suffering on the other. None
the less, there were moments when, with a start, she realised what other
people might think of her conduct. But after all she could always plead
it was a mistake--an honest mistake. Are there not constantly cases in
the law courts, which shew how easy it is to fail in identifying the
right person, or to persist in identifying the wrong one?

During the days before Farrell returned, the two sisters were alone
together. Bridget would gladly have gone away out of sight and hearing
of Nelly. But she did not dare to leave the situation--above all, the
postman--unwatched. Meanwhile Nelly made repeated efforts to break down
the new and inexplicable barrier which seemed to have arisen between
herself and Bridget. Why would Bridget always sit alone in that chilly
outside room, which even with a large fire seemed to Nelly
uninhabitable? She tried to woo her sister, by all the small devices in
her power.

'Why won't you come and sit with me a bit, Bridget? I'm so dull all
alone!'--she would say when, after luncheon or high tea, Bridget showed
signs of immediately shutting herself up again.

'I can't. I must do some work.'

'Do tell me what you're doing, Bridget?'

'Oh, you wouldn't understand.'

'Well, other people don't always think me a born idiot!'--Nelly would
say, not without resentment. 'I really could understand, Bridget, if
you'd try.'

'I haven't the time.'

'And you're killing yourself with so many hours of it. Why should you
slave so? If you only would come and help me sometimes with the Red
Cross work, I'd do any needlework for you, that you wanted.'

'You know I hate needlework.'

'You're not doing anything--not _anything_--for the war, Bridget!' Nelly
would venture, wistfully, at last.

'There are plenty of people to do things for the war. I didn't want the
war! Nobody asked my opinion.'

And presently the door would shut, and Nelly would be left to watch the
torrents of rain outside, and to endeavour by reading and drawing, by
needlework and the society of her small friend Tommy, whenever she could
capture him, to get through the day. She pined for Hester, but Hester
was doing Welfare work in a munition factory at Leeds, and could not be
got at.

So there she sat alone, brooding and planning, too timid to talk to
Bridget of her own schemes, and, in her piteous indecision, longing
guiltily for Farrell's return. Meanwhile she had written to several
acquaintances who were doing V.A.D. work in various voluntary hospitals,
to ask for information.

Suddenly, after the rain came frost and north wind--finally snow; the
beginning in the north of the fiercest winter Western Europe has known
for many years. Over heights and dales alike spread the white Leveller,
melting by day in the valley bottoms, and filling up his wastage by
renewed falls at night. Nelly ventured out sometimes to look at the high
glories of Wetherlam and the Pikes, under occasional gleams of sun.
Bridget never put a foot out of doors, except when she went to the
garden gate to look for the postman in the road, and take the letters
from him.

At last, one evening, when after a milder morning a bitter blast from
the north springing up at dusk had, once more, sent gusts of snow
scudding over the fells, Nelly's listening ear heard the well-known step
at the gate. She sprang up with a start of joy. She had been so lonely,
so imprisoned with her own sad thoughts. The coming of this kind, strong
man, so faithful to his small friend through all the stress of his busy
and important life, made a sudden impression upon her, which brought the
tears to her eyes. She thought of Carton, of its splendid buildings, and
the great hospital which now absorbed them; she seemed to see Farrell as
the king of it all, the fame of his doings spreading every month over
the north, and wiping out all that earlier conception of him as a
dilettante and an idler of which she had heard from Hester. And yet,
escaping from all that activity, that power, that constant interest and
excitement, here he was, making use of his first spare hour to come
through the snow and the dark, just to spend an hour with Nelly Sarratt,
just to cheer her lonely little life.

Nelly ran to the window and opened it.

'Is that really you?' she called, joyously, while the snow drifted
against her face.

Farrell, carrying a lantern, was nearing the porch. The light upon his
face as he turned shewed her his look of delight.

'I'm later than I meant, but the roads are awful. May I walk in?'

She ran down to meet him; then hung back rather shyly in the passage,
while he took off his overcoat and shook the snow from his beard.

'Have you any visitors?' he asked, still dusting away the snow.

'Only Bridget. I asked Hester, but she couldn't come.'

He came towards her along the narrow passage, to the spot where she
stood tremulous on the lowest step of the stairs. A lamp burning on a
table revealed her slight figure in black, the warm white of her throat
and face, the grace of the bending head, and the brown hair wreathed
about it. He saw her as an exquisite vision in a dim light and shade.
But it was not that which broke down his self-control so much as the
pathetic look in her dark eyes, the look of one who is glad, and yet
shrinks from her own gladness--tragically conscious of her own weakness,
and yet happy in it. It touched his heart so profoundly that whether
the effect was pain or pleasure he could not have told. But as he
reached the step, moved by an irresistible impulse, he held out his
arms, and she melted into them. For one entrancing instant, he held her
close and warm upon his breast, while the world went by.

But the next moment she had slipped away, and was sitting on the step,
her face in her hands.

He did not plead or excuse himself. He just stood by her endeavouring to
still and control his pulses--till at last she looked up. The lamp
shewed her his face, and the passion in it terrified her. For there had
been no passion in her soft and sudden yielding. Only the instinct of
the child that is forsaken and wants comforting, that feels love close
to it, and cannot refuse it.

'There, you see!' she said, desperately--'You see--I must go!'

'No! It's I who must go. Unless '--his voice sank almost to a
whisper--'Nelly!--couldn't you--marry me? You should never, never regret
it.'

She shook her head, and as she dropped her face again in her hands he
saw a shudder run through her. At the sight his natural impulse was to
let passion have its way, to raise her in his arms again, and whisper to
her there in the dark, as love inspired him, his cheek on hers. But he
did not venture. He was well aware of something intangible and
incalculable in Nelly that could not be driven. His fear of it held him
in check. He knew that she was infinitely sorry for him and tender
towards him. But he knew too that she was not in love with him. Only--he
would take his chance of that, if only she would marry him.

'Dear!' he said, stooping to her, and touching her dark curls with his
hand. 'Let's call in Hester! She's dreadfully wise! If you were with her
I should feel happy--I could wait. But it is when I see you so lonely
here--and so sad--nobody to care for you!--that I can't bear it!'

Through the rush of the wind, a sound of someone crossing the yard
behind the farm came to their ears. Nelly sprang to her feet and led the
way upstairs. Farrell followed her, and as they moved, they heard
Bridget open the back door and come in.

The little sitting-room was bright with lamp and fire, and Farrell,
perceiving that they were no longer to be alone, and momentarily
expecting Bridget's entrance, put impatience aside and began to talk of
his drive from Carton.

'The wind on Dunmail Raise was appalling, and the lamps got so
be-snowed, we had to be constantly clearing them. But directly we got
down into the valley it mended, and I managed to stop at the
post-office, and ask if there were any letters for you. There were
two--and a telegram. What have I done with them?' He began to search in
his pockets, his wits meanwhile in such a whirl that it was difficult
for him to realise what he was doing.

At that point Bridget opened the door. He turned to shake hands with
her, and then resumed his fumbling.

'I'm sure they did give them to me'--he said, in some concern,--'two
letters and a telegram.'

'A telegram!' said Bridget, suddenly, hurrying forward,--'it must be for
me.'

She peremptorily held out her hand, and as she did so, Nelly caught
sight of her sister. Startled out of all other thoughts she too made a
step forward. What _was_ wrong with Bridget? The tall, gaunt woman stood
there livid, her eyes staring at Farrell, her hand unsteady as she
thrust it towards him.

'Give me the telegram, please! I was expecting one,' she said, trying to
speak as usual.

Farrell turned to her in surprise.

'But it wasn't for you, Miss Cookson. It was for Mrs. Sarratt. I saw the
address quite plainly. Ah, here they are. How stupid of me! What on
earth made me put them in that pocket.'

He drew out the letters and the telegram. Bridget said again--'Give it
me, please! I know it's for me!' And she tried to snatch it. Farrell's
face changed. He disliked Bridget Cookson heartily, mainly on Nelly's
account, and her rude persistence nettled a temper accustomed to
command. He quietly put her aside.

'When your sister has read it, Miss Cookson, she will no doubt let you
see it. As it happens, the post-mistress made me promise to give it to
Mrs. Sarratt myself. She seemed interested--I don't know why.'

Nelly took it. Farrell--who began to have some strange misgiving--stood
between her and Bridget. Bridget made no further movement. Her eyes were
fixed on Nelly.

Nelly, bewildered by the little scene and by Bridget's extraordinary
behaviour, tore open the brown envelope, and read slowly--'Please come
at once. Have some news for you. Your sister will explain. Howson, Base
Headquarters, X------, France.'

'Howson?' said Nelly. Then the colour began to ebb from her face. 'Dr.
Howson?' she repeated. 'What news? What does he mean? _Oh_!'--the cry
rang through the room--'_it's George_!--it's George! he's
found!--he's found!'

She thrust the telegram piteously into Farrell's hands. He read it, and
turned to Bridget.

'What does Dr. Howson mean, Miss Cookson, and why does he refer Mrs.
Sarratt to you?'

For some seconds she could not make her pale lips reply. Finally, she
said--'That's entirely my own affair, Sir William. I shall tell my
sister, of course. But Nelly had better go at once, as Dr. Howson
advises. I'll go and see to things.'

She turned slowly away. Nelly ran forward and caught her.

'Oh, Bridget--don't go--you mustn't go! What news is it? Bridget, tell
me!--you couldn't--you _couldn't_ be so cruel--not to tell me--if you
knew anything about George!'

Bridget stood silent.

'Oh, what can I do--what can I do?' cried Nelly.

Then her eyes fell on the letters still in her hand. She tore one
open--and read it--with mingled cries of anguish and joy. Farrell dared
not go near her. There seemed already a gulf between her and him.

'It's from Miss Eustace'--she said, panting, as she looked up at last,
and handed the letter to him--it's George--he's alive--they've heard
from France--he asks for me--but--but--he's dying.'

Her head dropped forward a little. She caught at the back of a chair,
nearly fainting. But when Farrell approached her, she put up a hand in
protest.

'No, no,--I'm all right. But, Bridget, Miss Eustace says--you've
actually _seen_ him--you've been to France. When did you go?'

'About three weeks ago,' said Bridget, after a moment's pause. 'Oh, of
course I know'--she threw back her head defiantly--'you'll all set on
me--you'll all blame me. But I suppose I may be mistaken like anybody
else--mayn't I? I didn't think the man I saw was George--I didn't! And
what was the good of disturbing your mind?'

But as she told the lie, she told it so lamely and unconvincingly that
neither of the other two believed it for a moment. Nelly stood
up--tottering--but mistress of herself. She looked at Farrell.

'Sir William--can you take me to Windermere, for the night-train? I know
when it goes--10.20. I'll be ready--by nine.' She glanced at the clock,
which was just nearing seven.

'Of course,' said Farrell, taking up his hat. 'I'll go and see to the
motor. But'--he looked at her with entreaty--'you can't go this long
journey alone!'

The words implied a bitter consciousness that his own escort was
impossible. Nelly did not notice it. She only said impatiently--

'But, of course, I must go alone.'

She stood silent--mastering the agony within--forcing herself to think
and will. When the pause was over, she said quietly--'I will be quite
ready at nine.' And then mechanically--'It's very good of you.'

He went away, passing Bridget, who stood with one foot on the fender,
staring down into the fire.

When the outer door had closed upon him, Nelly looked at her sister. She
was trembling all over.

'Bridget--_why_ did you do it?' The voice was low and full of horror.

'What do you mean? I made a mistake--that's all!'

'Bridget--you _knew_ it was George! You couldn't be mistaken. Miss
Eustace says--in the letter'--she pointed to it--'they asked you about
his hands. Do you remember how you used to mock at them?'

'As if one could remember after a year and a half!'

'No, you couldn't forget, Bridget--a thing like that--I know you
couldn't. And what made you do it! Did you think I had forgotten
George?'

At that the tears streamed down her face, unheeded. She approached her
sister piteously.

'Bridget, tell me what he looked like! Did you speak to him--did you see
his eyes open? Oh my poor George!--and I here--never thinking of
him'--she broke off incoherently, twisting her hands. 'Miss Eustace says
he was wounded in two places--severely--that she's afraid there's no
hope. Did they say that to you, Bridget--tell me!--for Heaven's sake
tell me!'

'You'll make yourself ill,' said Bridget harshly. 'You'd better lie
down, and let me pack for you.'

Nelly laughed out.

'As if I'd ever let you do anything for me any more! No, that's done
with. You've been so accustomed to manage me all these years. You
thought you could manage me now--you thought you could let George
die--and I should never know--and you'd make me marry--William Farrell.
Bridget--_I hate you!'_

She broke off, shivering, but resumed almost at once--'I see it all--I
think I see it all. And now it's all done for between you and me. If
George dies, I shall never come back to live with you again. You'd
better make plans, Bridget. It's over for ever.'

'You don't know what you're saying, now,' said Bridget, coldly.

Nelly did not hear her, she was lost in a whirl of images and thoughts.
And governed by them she went up to Bridget again, thrusting her small
white face under her sister's eyes.

'What sort of a room was he in, Bridget? Who was nursing him? Are you
sure he didn't know you? Did you call him by his name? Did you make him
understand?'

'He knew nobody,' said Bridget, drawing back, against her will, before
the fire in Nelly's wild eyes. 'He was in a very good room. There was a
nurse sitting with him.'

'Was he--was he very changed?'

'Of course he was. If not, I should have known him.'

Nelly half smiled. Bridget could never have thought that soft mouth
capable of so much scorn. But no words came. Then Nelly walked away to a
drawer where she kept her accounts, her cheque-book, and any loose money
she might be in possession of. She took out her cheque-book and some two
or three pounds that lay there.

'If you want money, I can lend you some,' said Bridget, catching at the
old note of guardianship.

'Thank you. But I shall not want it.'

'Nelly, don't be a fool!' said Bridget, stung at last into speech.
'Suppose all you think is true--I don't admit it, mind--but suppose it's
true. How was I doing such a terrible wrong to you?--in the eyes, I
mean, of sensible people--in not disturbing your mind. Nobody
expected--that man I saw--to know anybody again--or to live more than a
few days. Even if I had been certain--and how could I be
certain?--wasn't it _reasonable_ to weigh one thing against another? You
know very well--it's childish to ignore it--what's been going on
here----'

But she paused. Nelly, writing a letter, was not apparently concerned
with anything Bridget had been saying. It did not seem to have reached
her ears. A queer terror shot through Bridget. But she dismissed it. As
if Nelly could ever really get on without her. Little, feckless,
sentimental thing!

Nelly finished her letter and put it up.

'I have written to Sir William's agent, Bridget'--she said turning
towards her sister--'to say that I give up the farm. I shall pay the
servant. Hester will look after my things, and send them--when I want
them.'

'Why Hester?' said Bridget, with something of a sneer.

Nelly did not answer. She put up her letter, took the money and the
cheque-book and went out of the room. Bridget heard her call their one
servant, Mrs. Dowson, and presently steps ascended the stairs and
Nelly's door shut. The sound of the shutting door roused in her again
that avenging terror. Her first impulse was to go and force herself
into Nelly's room, so as to manage and pack for her as usual. But
something stopped her. She consoled herself by going down to the kitchen
to look after the supper. Nelly, of course, must have some food before
her night journey.

Behind that shut door, Nelly was looking into the kind weather-beaten
face of Mrs. Dowson.

'Mrs. Dowson, I'm going away to-night--and I'm not coming back. Sir
William knows.'

Then she caught the woman's gnarled hands, and her own features began to
work.

'Mrs. Dowson, they've found my husband! Did Sir William tell you? He's
not dead--he's alive--But he's very, very ill.'

'Oh, you poor lamb!' cried Mrs. Dowson. 'No--Sir William tellt me nowt.
The Lord be gracious to you!' Bathed in sudden tears, she kissed one of
the hands that held hers, pouring out incoherent words of hope. But
Nelly did not cry, and presently she said firmly--

'Now, please, you must help me to pack. Sir William will be here at
nine.'

Presently all was ready. Nelly had hunted out an old grey travelling
dress in which George had often seen her, and a grey hat with a veil.
She hastily put all her black clothes aside.

'Miss Martin will send me anything I want. I have asked her to come and
fetch my things.'

'But Miss Cookson will be seein' to that!' said Mrs. Dowson wondering.
Nelly made no reply. She locked her little box, and then stood upright,
looking round the small room. She seemed to be saying 'Good-bye' for
ever to the Nelly who had lived, and dreamed, and prayed there. She was
going to George--that was all she knew.

Downstairs, Bridget was standing at the door of the little dining-room.
'I have put out some cold meat for you,' she said, stiffly. 'You won't
get anything for a long time.'

Nelly acquiesced. She drank some tea, and ate as much as she could.
Neither she nor Bridget spoke, till Bridget, who was at the window
looking out into the snow, turned round to say--'Here's the motor.'

Nelly rose, and tied her veil on closely. Mrs. Dowson brought her a
thick coat, which had been part of her trousseau, and wrapped her in it.

'You had better take your grey shawl,' said Bridget.

'I have it here, Miss,' said Mrs. Dowson, producing it. 'I'll put it
over her in the motor.'

She disappeared to open the door to Sir William's knock.

Nelly turned to her sister.

'Good-bye, Bridget.'

Bridget flamed out.

'And you don't mean to write to me? You mean to carry out this absurd
plan of separation!'

'I don't know what I shall do--till I have seen George,' said Nelly
steadily. 'He'll settle for me. Only you and I are not sisters any
more.'

Bridget shrugged her shoulders, with some angry remark about 'theatrical
nonsense.' Nelly went out into the passage, threw her arms about Mrs.
Dowson's neck, for a moment, and then hurried out towards the car. It
stood there in the falling snow, its bright lights blazing on the bit of
Westmorland wall opposite, and the overhanging oaks, still heavy with
dead leaf. Farrell was standing at the door, holding a fur rug. He and
Mrs. Dowson tucked it in round Nelly's small cloaked figure.

Then without a word, Farrell shut the door of the car, and took the seat
beside the driver. In another minute Bridget was watching the lights of
the lamps rushing along the sides of the lane, till at a sharp bend of
the road it disappeared.

There was a break presently in the snow-fall, and as they reached the
shores of Windermere, Nelly was aware of struggling gleams of moonlight
on steely water. The anguish in her soul almost resented the break in
the darkness. She was going to George; but George was dying, and while
he had been lying there in his lonely suffering, she had been forgetting
him, and betraying him. The recollection of Farrell's embrace
overwhelmed her with a crushing sense of guilt. George indeed should
never know. But that made no difference to her own misery.

The miles flew by. She began to think of her journey, to realise her
helplessness and inexperience in the practical things of life. She must
get her passport, and some money. Who would advise her, and tell her how
to get to France under war conditions? Would she be allowed to go by the
short sea passage? For that she knew a special permit was necessary.
Could she get it at once, or would she be kept waiting in town? The
notion of having to wait one unnecessary hour tortured her. Then her
thoughts fastened on Miss Eustace of the Enquiry Office, who had written
her the letter which had arrived simultaneously with Dr. Howson's
telegram. 'Let me know if I can be of any use to you, for your journey.
If there is anything you want to know that we can help you in, you had
better come straight to this office.'

Yes, that she would do. But the train arrived in London at 7 A.M. And
she could not possibly see Miss Eustace before ten or eleven. She must
just sit in the waiting-room till it was time. And she must get some
money. She had her cheque-book and would ask Sir William to tell her how
to get a cheque cashed in London. She was ashamed of her own ignorance
in these small practical matters.

The motor stopped. Sir William jumped down, but before he came to open
the door for her, she saw him turn round and wave his hand to two
persons standing outside the station. They hurried towards the motor,
and as Nelly stepped down from it, she felt herself grasped by eager
hands.

'You poor darling! I thought we couldn't be in time. But we flew. Don't
trouble about anything. We've done it all.'

Cicely!--and behind her Marsworth.

Nelly drew back.

'Dear Cicely!' she said faintly--'but I can manage--I can manage quite
well.'

Resistance, however, was useless. Marsworth and Cicely, it seemed, were
going to London with her--Cicely probably to France; and Marsworth had
already telegraphed about her passport. She would have gladly gone by
herself, but she finally surrendered--for George's sake, that she might
get to him the quicker.

Then everything was done for her. Amid the bustle of the departing
train, she was piteously aware of Farrell, and just before they started,
she leant out to give him her hand.

'I will tell George all you have done for me,' she said, gulping down a
sob.

He pressed her hand before releasing it, but said nothing. What was
there to say? Meanwhile, Cicely, to ease the situation, was chattering
hard, describing how Farrell had sent his chauffeur to Ambleside on a
motor bicycle, immediately after leaving Nelly, and so had got a
telephone message through to Cicely.

'We had the small car out and ready in ten minutes, and, by good luck,
there was a motor-transport man on leave, who had come to see a brother
in the hospital. We laid hands on him, and he drove us here. But it's a
mercy we're not sitting on the Raise! You remember that heap of stones
on the top of the Raise, that thing they say is a barrow--the grave of
some old British party before the Flood?--well, the motor gave out
there! Herbert and the chauffeur sat under it in the snow and worked at
it. I thought the river was coming over the road, and that the wind
would blow us all away. But it'll be all right for your crossing
to-morrow--the storm will have quite gone down. Herbert thinks you'll
start about twelve o'clock,--and you'll be at the camp that same night.
Oh, isn't it wonderful!--isn't it _ripping_?' cried Cicely under her
breath, stooping down to kiss Nelly, while the two men talked at the
carriage window.--'You're going to get him home! We'll have the best men
in London to look after him. He'll pull through, you'll see--he'll pull
through!'

Nelly sank into a seat and closed her eyes. Cicely's talk--why did she
call Marsworth 'Herbert'?--was almost unbearable to her. _She_ knew
through every vein that she was going across the Channel--to see George
die. If only she were in time!--if only she might hold him in her arms
once more! Would the train never go?

Farrell, in spite of snow and storm, pushed his way back to Carton that
night. In that long motor drive a man took counsel with himself on whom
the war had laid a chastening and refining hand. The human personality
cannot spend itself on tasks of pity and service without taking the
colour of them, without rising insensibly to the height of them. They
may have been carelessly adopted, or imposed from without. But the mere
doing of them exalts. As the dyer's hand is 'subdued to what it works
in,' so the man that is always about some generous business for his
fellow-men suffers thereby, insensibly, a change, which is part of the
'heavenly alchemy' for ever alive in the world. It was so at any rate
with William Farrell. The two years of his hospital work--hard, honest
grappling with the problems of human pain and its relief--had made a far
nobler man of him. So now, in this solitary hour, he looked his
trouble--courageously, chivalrously--in the face. The crash of all his
immediate hopes was bitter indeed. What matter! Let him think only of
those two poor things about to meet in France.

As to the future, he was well aware of the emotional depths in Nelly's
nature. George Sarratt's claim upon her life and memory would now be
doubly strong. For, with that long and intimate observation of the war
which his hospital experience had brought him, Farrell was keenly aware
of the merciful fact that the mere distance which, generally speaking,
the war imposes between the man dying on the battle-field and those who
love him at home, inevitably breaks the blow. The nerves of the woman
who loses her husband or her son are, at least, not tortured by the
actual sight of his wounds and death. The suffering is spiritual, and
the tender benumbing touch of religion or patriotism, or the remaining
affections of life, has less to fight with than when the physical senses
themselves are racked with acute memories of bodily wounds and bodily
death. It is not that sorrow is less deep, or memory less tenacious; but
both are less ruinous to the person sorrowing. So, at least, Farrell had
often seen it, among even the most loving and passionate of women.
Nelly's renascence in the quiet Westmorland life had been a fresh
instance of it; and he had good reason for thinking that, but for the
tragic reappearance of George Sarratt, it would not have taken very
long,--a few months more, perhaps--before she would have been persuaded
to let herself love, and be loved again.

But now, every fibre in her delicate being--physical and
spiritual--would be racked by the sight of Sarratt's suffering and
death. And no doubt--pure, scrupulous little soul!--she would be
tormented by the thought of what had just passed between herself and
him, before the news from France arrived. He might as well look that in
the face.

Well!--patience and time--there was nothing else to look to. He braced
himself to both, as he sped homeward through the high snowy roads, and
dropped through sleeping Keswick to Bassenthwaite and Carton. Then with
the sight of the hospital, the Red Cross flag drooping above its
doorway, as he drove up to it, the burden and interest of his great
responsibilities returned upon him. He jumped out to say a few cheery
words of thanks to his chauffeur, and went on with a rapid step to his
office on the ground floor, where he found important letters and
telegrams awaiting him. He dealt with them till far into the night. But
the thought of Nelly never really left him; nor that haunting physical
memory of her soft head upon his shoulder.


CHAPTER XVI


Of the weary hours which intervened between her meeting with Cicely and
Marsworth at Windermere station and her sight of Dr. Howson on the
rain-beaten quay at Bolougne, Nelly Sarratt could afterwards have given
no clear account. Of all the strings that were pulled, and the exalted
persons invoked, in order to place her as quickly as possible by the
side of her dying husband, she knew practically nothing. Cicely and
Marsworth, with Farrell to help them at the other end of a telegraph
wire, did everything. Passports and special permits were available in a
minimum of time. In the winter dawn at Euston Station, there was the
grey-headed Miss Eustace waiting; and two famous Army doctors journeyed
to Charing Cross a few hours later, on purpose to warn the wife of the
condition in which she was likely to find her husband, and to give her
kindly advice as to how she could help him most. The case had already
made a sensation at the Army Medical Headquarters; the reports on it
from France were being eagerly followed; and when the young wife
appeared from the north, her pathetic beauty quickened the general
sympathy. Nelly's path to France was smoothed in every possible way. No
Royalty could have been more anxiously thought for.

But she herself realised scarcely anything about it. It was her nature
to be grateful, sweet, responsive; but her gratitude and her sweetness
during these hours were automatic, unconscious. She was the spectator,
so to speak, of a moving picture which carried her on with it, in which
she was merely passive. The crowded boat, the grey misty sea, the
destroyers to right and left, she was aware of them in one connection
only--as part of the process by which she and George were to meet again.

But at last the boat was alongside the quays of the French port, and
through sheets of rain she saw the lights of a climbing town, and the
gleaming roadways of the docks. Crowds of men in khaki; a park of big
guns, their wet nozzles glittering under the electric lamps overhead;
hundreds of tethered horses; a long line of motor lorries;--the scene to
her was all a vague confusion, as Cicely, efficient and masterful as
usual, made a way for them both along the deck of the steamer through
close ranks of soldiers--a draft waiting their orders to disembark. Then
as they stepped on land, perception sharpened in a moment. A tall man in
khaki--whom she recognised as Dr. Howson--came eagerly forward.

'Mrs. Sarratt!--I hope you're not too tired. Would you rather get some
food here, in the town, or push on at once?'

'At once, please. How is he?'

A pair of kind grey eyes looked down upon her sadly.

'Very ill, _-very_ ill!--_but_ quite sensible. I know you will be
brave.'

He carried her along the quay--while Cicely was taken possession of by a
nurse in uniform, who talked rapidly in an undertone.

'I have two cars,' said Howson to Nelly--'You and I will go first. Our
head Sister, Miss Parrish, who has been in charge of the case for so
long, will bring Miss Farrell.'

And as they reached the two waiting motors, Nelly found her hand grasped
by a comely elderly woman, in a uniform of grey and red.

'He was quite comfortable when we left him, Mrs. Sarratt. There's a
wonderful difference, even since yesterday, in his _mind_. He's
beginning to remember everything. He knows you're coming. He said--"Give
her my dear love, and tell her I'm not going to have my supper till she
comes. She shall give it me." Think of that! It's like a miracle. Three
weeks ago, he never spoke, he knew nobody.'

Nelly's white face trembled, but she said nothing. Howson put her into
the foremost car, and they were soon off, threading their way through
the busy streets of the base, while the Sister followed with Cicely.

'Oh, it was _cruel_ not to let Mrs. Sarratt know earlier!' said the
Sister indignantly, in answer to a hurried question from Cicely as soon
as they were alone. 'She might have had three weeks with him, and now
there can only be a day or two. What was Miss Cookson about? Even if she
were just mistaken, she might at least have brought her sister over to
see for herself--instead of preventing it by every means in her power. A
most extraordinary woman!'

Cicely felt her way in reply. She really knew nothing except what
Farrell had been able hurriedly to say to Marsworth at Windermere
station--which had been afterwards handed on to her. Farrell himself was
entirely mystified. 'The only motive I can suggest'--he had said to
Marsworth--'is that Miss Cookson had an insane dislike of her
brother-in-law. But, even so, why did she do it?'

Why, indeed? Cicely now heard the whole story from her companion; and
her shrewd mind very soon began to guess at reasons. She had always
observed Bridget's complaisance towards her brother, and even towards
herself--a clumsy complaisance which had never appealed at all either to
her or him. And she had noticed many small traits and incidents that
seemed to shew that Bridget had resented her sister's marriage, and felt
bitterly that Nelly might have done far better for herself. Also that
there was a strong taste for personal luxury in Bridget, which seemed
entirely lacking in Nelly.

'She wanted Willy's money!'--thought Cicely--'and couldn't get it for
herself. So when poor Sarratt disappeared, she saw a way of getting it
through Nelly. Not a bad idea!--if you are to have ideas of that kind.
But then, why behave like an idiot when Providence had done the thing
for you?'

That was really the puzzle. George Sarratt was dying. Why not let poor
Nelly have her last weeks with him in peace, and then--in time--marry
her safely and lawfully to Willy?

But Cicely had again some inkling of Bridget's probable reply. She had
not been intimate with Nelly for more than a year without realising that
she was one of those creatures--so rare in our modern world--who do in
truth live and die by their affections. The disappearance of her husband
had very nearly killed her. In the first winter after he was finally
reported as 'Missing--believed killed,' and when she had really
abandoned hope, the slightest accident--a bad chill--an attack of
childish illness--any further shock--might have slit the thin-spun life
in a few days or weeks. The Torquay doctor had told Hester that she was
on the brink of tuberculosis, and if she were exposed to infection would
certainly develop it. Since then she had gained greatly in vitality and
strength. If only Fate had left her alone! 'With happiness and Willy,
she'd have been all right!' thought Cicely, who was daily accustomed to
watch the effect of mind on body in her brother's hospital. But now,
with this fresh and deeper tragedy before her--tearing at the poor
little heart--crushing the life again out of the frail being--why, the
prospects of a happy ending were decidedly less. The odious Bridget
might after all have acted intelligibly, though abominably.

As to the history of Sarratt's long disappearance, Cicely found that
very little was known.

'We don't question him,' said the Sister. 'It only exhausts him; and it
wouldn't be any good. He may tell his wife something more, of his own
accord, but we doubt whether he knows much more than he told Dr. Howson.
He remembers being wounded at Loos--lying out undiscovered, he thinks
for two days--then a German hospital--and a long, long journey. And
that's practically all. But just lately--this week, actually!--Dr.
Howson has got some information, through a family of peasants living
near Cassel, behind the British lines. They have relations across the
Belgian border, and gradually they have discovered who the man was who
came over the frontier with Mr. Sarratt. He came from a farm, somewhere
between Brussels and Courtrai, and now they've managed to get a letter
through from his brother. You know the man himself was shot just as they
reached the British lines. But this letter really tells a good deal. The
brother says that they found Mr. Sarratt almost dead,--and, as they
thought, insane--in a wood near their house. He was then wearing the
uniform of a British officer. They guessed he was an escaped prisoner,
and they took him in and hid him. Then news filtered through to them of
two English officers who had made their escape from a hospital train
somewhere south-west of Brussels; one slightly wounded, and one
severely; the severely wounded man suffering also from shell-shock. And
the slightly wounded man was shot, while the other escaped. The train,
it was said, was lying in a siding at the time--at the further edge of
the forest bordering their farm. So, of course, they identified the man
discovered by them as the severely wounded officer. Mr. Sarratt must
have somehow just struggled through to their side of the forest, where
they found him.

'What happened then, we can't exactly trace. He must have been there all
the winter. He was deaf and dumb, from nerve-shock, and could give no
account of himself at all. The men of the farm, two unmarried sons, were
good to him, but their old mother, whose family was German, always hated
his being there. She was in terror of the German military police who
used to ride over the farm, and one day, when her sons were away, she
took Mr. Sarratt's uniform, his identification disk, and all the
personal belongings she could find, and either burned or buried them.
The sons, who were patriotic Belgians, were however determined to
protect him, and no doubt there may have been some idea of a reward, if
they could find his friends. But they were afraid of their tyrannical
old mother, and of what she might do. So at last they made up their
minds to try somehow and get him over the French frontier, which was
not far off, and through the German lines. One of the brothers, whose
name was Benoit Desalles, to whom they say poor Mr. Sarratt was much
attached, went with him. They must have had an awful time, walking by
night, and hiding by day. Mr. Sarratt's wounds must have been in a bad
state, for they were only half healed when he escaped, and they had been
neglected all the winter. So how he dragged himself the distance he did,
the doctors can't imagine. And the peasants near the frontier from whom
we have got what information we have, have no knowledge at all of how he
and his Belgian guide finally got through the German lines. But when
they reached our lines, they were both, as Dr. Howson wrote to Miss
Cookson, in German uniforms. His people suppose that Benoit had stripped
some German dead, and that in the confusion caused in the German
line--at a point where it ran through a Belgian village--by a British
raid, at night, they got across the enemy trenches. And no doubt Benoit
had local knowledge which helped.

'Then in the No Man's Land, between the lines, they were under both
shell and rifle-fire, till it was seen by our men that Benoit had his
hands up, and that the other was wounded. The poor Belgian was dragging
Mr. Sarratt who was unconscious, and at last--wasn't it ill-luck?--just
as our men were pulling them into the trench, Benoit was shot through
the head by a German sniper. That, at least, is how we now reconstruct
the story. As far as Mr. Sarratt is concerned, we let it alone. We have
no heart to worry him. Poor fellow--poor, gallant, patient fellow!'

And the Sister's strong face softened, as Bridget had seen it soften at
Sarratt's bedside.

'And there is really no hope for him?' asked Cicely after a time. The
Sister shook her head.

'The wounds have never healed--and they drain his life away. The heart
can't last out much longer. But he's not in pain now--thank God! It's
just weakness. I assure you, everybody--almost--in this huge camp, asks
for him and many--pray for him.' The Sister's eyes filled with tears.
'And now that the poor wife's come in time, there'll be an excitement! I
heard two men in one of our wards discussing it this morning. "They do
say as Mrs. Sarratt will be here to-day," said one of them. "Well,
that's a bit of all right, ain't it?" said the other, and they both
smoked away, looking as pleased as Punch. You see Miss Cookson's
behaviour has made the whole thing so extraordinary.'

Cicely agreed.

'I suppose she thought it would be all over in a day or two,' she said,
half-absently.

The Sister looked puzzled.

'And that it would be better not to risk the effect on his wife? Of
course Mrs. Sarratt does look dreadfully delicate. So you _don't_ think
it was a mistake? It's very difficult to see how it could be! The hands
alone--one would think that anybody who really knew him must have
recognised them.'

Cicely said no more. But she wondered how poor Nelly and her sister
would ever find it possible to meet again.

Meanwhile, in the car ahead, Howson was gently and tenderly preparing
the mind of Nelly for her husband's state. He described to her also, the
first signs of Sarratt's returning consciousness--the excitement among
his doctors and nurses--the anxious waiting for the first words--the
first clear evidence of restored hearing. And then, at last, the dazed
question--'Where am I?'--and the perplexed effort to answer
Howson's--'Can you tell us your name and regiment?'

Howson described the breathless waiting of himself and another doctor,
and then the slow coming of the words: 'My name is George Sarratt,
Lieutenant, 21st Lanchesters. But why----?'

A look of bewilderment at nurses and doctors, and then again--sleep.

'The next time he spoke, it was quite distinctly and of his own accord.
The nurse heard him saying softly--it was in the early morning--"I want
my wife--send for her." She told him you had been already sent for, and
he turned his head round at once and went to sleep.'

Howson could hardly go on, so keenly did he realise the presence of the
woman beside him. The soft fluttering breath unmanned him. But by
degrees Nelly heard all there was to know; especially the details of
the rapid revival of hearing, speech, and memory, which had gone on
through the preceding three days.

'And what is such a blessing,' said Howson, with the cheerfulness of the
good doctor--'is that he seems to be quite peaceful--quite at rest. He's
not unhappy. He's just waiting for you. They'll have given him an
injection of strychnine this evening to help him through.'

'How long?' The words were just breathed into the darkness.

'A day or two certainly--perhaps a week,' he said reluctantly. 'It's a
question of strength. Sometimes it lasts much longer than we expect.'

He said nothing to her of her sister's visit. Instinctively he suspected
some ugly meaning in that story. And Nelly asked no questions.

Suddenly, she was aware of lights in the darkness, and then of a great
camp marked out in a pattern of electric lamps, stretching up and away
over what seemed a wide and sloping hillside. Nelly put down the window
to see.

'Is it here?' 'No. A little further on.'

It seemed to her interminably further. The car rattled over the rough
pavement of a town, then through the darkness of woods--threading its
way through a confusion of pale roads--until, with a violent bump, it
came to a stop.

In the blackness of the November night, the chauffeur, mistaking the
entrance to a house, had run up a back lane and into a sand-bank.

'Do you hear the sea?' said Howson, as he helped Nelly to alight.
'There'll be wind to-night. But here we are.'

She looked round her as they walked through a thin wood. To her right
beyond the bare trees was a great building with a glass front. She could
see lights within--the passing figures of nurses--rows of beds--and men
in bed jackets--high rooms frescoed in bright colours.

'That used to be the Casino. Now it's a Red Cross Hospital. There are
always doctors there. So when we moved him away from the camp, we took
this little house close to the Hospital. The senior surgeon there can be
often in and out. He's looking after him splendidly.'

A small room in a small house, built for summer lodgings by the sea;
bare wooden walls and floor; a stove; open windows through which came
the slow boom of waves breaking on a sandy shore; a bed, and in it an
emaciated figure, propped up.

Nelly, as the door closed behind her, broke into a run like the soft
flight of a bird, and fell on her knees beside the bed. She had taken
off her hat and cloak. Excitement had kindled two spots of red in her
pale cheeks. The man in the bed turned his eyes towards her, and smiled.

'Nelly!'

Howson and the Sister went on tiptoe through a side door into another
room.

'Kiss me, Nelly!'

Nelly, trembling, put her soft lips to his. But as she did so, a chill
anguish struck her--the first bitterness of the naked truth. As yet she
had only seen it through a veil, darkly. Was this her George--this
ghost, grey-haired, worn out, on the brink of the unknown? The old
passionate pressure of the mouth gone--for ever! Her young husband--her
young lover--she saw him far back in the past, on Rydal lake, the
dripping oars in his hand. This was a spirit which touched her--a
spiritual love which shone upon her. And she had never yet known so
sharp an agony.

So sharp it was that it dried all tears. She knelt there with his hands
in hers, kissing them, and gazing at him.

'Nelly, it's hard luck! Darling, I'd better have been patient. In time,
perhaps, I should have come back to you. How I got away--who planned
it--I don't remember. I remember nothing--of all that time. But Howson
has heard something, through some people near Cassel--has he told you?'

'Yes--but don't try to remember.'

He smiled at her. How strange the old sweetness on these grey lips!

'Have you missed me--dreadfully? Poor little Nelly! You're very pale--a
little shadow! Darling!--I _would_ like to live!'

And at that--at last--the eyes of both, as they gazed at each other,
filled with tears. Tears for the eternal helplessness of man,--the
'tears of things.'

But he roused himself, snatching still at a little love, a little
brightness--before the dark. The strychnine injected had given him
strength.

'Give me that jelly--and the champagne. Feed me, Nelly! But have you had
any food?'

The stress laid on the '_you_' the tone of his voice, were so like his
old self that Nelly caught her breath. A ray of mad hope stole in. She
began to feed him, and as she did so, the Sister, as though she had
heard Sarratt's question, came quietly in with a tray on which was some
food for Nelly, and put it down beside her. Then she disappeared again.

With difficulty, Sarratt swallowed a few mouthfuls of jelly and
champagne. Then his left hand--the right was helpless--made a faint but
peremptory sign, and Nelly obediently took some food under his dimly
smiling eyes.

'I have thought of this so often,' he murmured--I knew you'd come. It's
been like someone walking through a dark passage that was getting
lighter. Only once--I had a curious dream. I thought I saw Bridget'

Nelly, trembling, took away his tray and her own, and then knelt down
again beside him. She kissed his forehead, and tried to divert his
thoughts by asking him if he was warm enough. His hands were very cold.
Should she make up the fire?

'Oh, no,--it's all right. But wasn't it strange? Suddenly, I seemed to
be looking at her--quite close--and she at me. And I was worried because
I had seen her more distinctly than I could remember you. Come
nearer--put your dear head against me. Oh, if I could only hold you, as
I used to!'

There was silence a little. But the wine had flushed him, and when the
bloodless lids lifted again, there was more life in the eyes.

'Nelly, poor darling, have you been very lonely?--Were the Farrells kind
to you?'

'Yes, George, very kind. They did everything--everything they could.'

'Sir William promised me'--he said, gratefully. 'And where have you been
all the time? At Rydal?'

'No. I was ill--after the news came----'

'Poor Nelly!'

'And Sir William lent us one of his farms--near his cottage--do you
remember?'

'A little. That was kind of him--very kind. Nelly--I want to send him a
message----'

'Yes.'

'Give him my grateful thanks, darling,--and--and--my blessing.'

Nelly hid her face against him, and he felt the convulsion of tearless
sobbing that passed through her.

'Poor Nelly!'--he said again, touching her hand tenderly. Then after
another pause--'Sit there, darling, where I can see you--your dear head,
and your eyes, and your pretty neck. You must go to bed soon, you
know--but just a little while! Now tell me what you have been doing.
Talk to me. I won't talk. I'll rest--but I shall hear. That's so
wonderful--that I _can_ hear you. I've been living in such a queer
world--no tongue--no ears--no mind, hardly--only my eyes.'

She obeyed him by a great effort. She talked to him--of what, she hardly
knew!--about her months in London and Torquay--: about her illness--the
farm--Hester Martin--and Cicely.

When she came to speak of her friendship with Cicely, he smiled in
surprise, his eyes still shut.

'That's jolly, dearest. You remember, I didn't like her. She wasn't at
all nice to you--once. But thank her for me--please.'

'She's here now, George, she brought me here. She wouldn't let me come
alone.'

'God bless her!' he said, under his breath. 'I'll see her--to-morrow.
Now go on talking. You won't mind if I go to sleep? They won't let you
stop here, dear. You'll be upstairs. But you'll come early--won't you?'

They gave him morphia, and he went to sleep under her eyes. Then the
night nurse came in, and the surgeon from the hospital opposite, with
Howson. And Cicely took Nelly away.

Cicely had made everything ready in the little bare room upstairs. But
when she had helped Nelly to undress, she did not linger.

'Knock on the wall, if you want me. It is only wood, I shall hear
directly.'

Nelly kissed her and she went. For nothing in her tender service that
day was Nelly more grateful to her.

Then Nelly put out her light, and drawing up the blind, she sat for long
staring into the moonlight night. The rain had stopped, but the wind was
high over the sea, which lay before her a tumbled mass of waves, not a
hundred yards away. To her right was the Casino, a subdued light shining
through the blinds of its glass verandahs, behind which she sometimes
saw figures passing--nurses and doctors on their various errands. Were
there men dying there to-night--like her George?

The anguish that held her, poor child, was no simple sorrow. Never--she
knew it doubly now--had she ceased to love her husband. She had told
Farrell the truth--'If George now were to come in at that door, there
would be no other man in the world for me!' And yet, while George was
dying, and at the very moment that he was asking for her, she had been
in Farrell's arms, and yielding to his kisses. George would never know;
but that only made her remorse the more torturing. She could never
confess to him--that indeed was her misery. He would die, and her
unfaith would stand between them for ever.

A cleverer, a more experienced, a more practical woman, in such a case,
would have found a hundred excuses and justifications for herself that
never occurred to Nelly Sarratt, to this young immature creature, in
whom the passionate love of her marriage had roused feelings and
emotions, which, when the man on whom they were spent was taken from
her, were still the master-light of all her seeing--still so strong and
absorbing, that, in her widowed state, they were like blind forces
searching unconsciously for some new support, some new thing to love.
She had nearly died for love--and then when her young strength revived
it had become plain that she could only live for love. Her hands had met
the hands seeking hers, inevitably, instinctively. To refuse, to stand
aloof, to cause pain--that had been the torment, the impossibility, for
one who had learnt so well how to give and to make happy. There was in
it no sensual element--only Augustine's 'love of loving.' Yet her
stricken conscience told her that, in her moral indecision, if the
situation had lasted much longer, she had not been able to make up her
mind to marry Farrell quickly, she might easily have become his
mistress, through sheer weakness, sheer dread of his suffering, sheer
longing to be loved.

Explanations and excuses, for any more seasoned student of human nature,
emerged on every hand. Nelly in her despair allowed herself none of
them. It merely seemed to her, in this night vigil, that she was
unworthy to touch her George, to nurse him, to uphold him; utterly
unworthy of all this reverent pity and affection that was being lavished
upon her for his sake.

She sat up most of the night, wrapped in her fur cloak, alive to any
sound from the room below. And about four in the morning, she stole down
the stairs to listen at his door. There one of the nurses found her, and
moved with pity, brought her in. They settled her in an arm-chair near
him; and then with the tardy coming of the November day, she watched the
sad waking that was so many hours nearer death, at that moment when
man's life is at its wretchedest, and all the forces of the underworld
seem to be let loose upon it.

And there, for five days and nights, with the briefest possible
intervals for food, and the sleep of exhaustion, she sat beside him. She
was dimly conscious of the people about her, of the boundless tenderness
and skill that was poured out upon the poor sufferer at her side; she
did everything for George that the nurses could shew her how to do--; it
was the one grain of personal desire left in her, and doctors and nurses
developed the most ingenious pity in devising things for her to do, and
in letting every remedy that soothed his pain, or cleared his mind, go,
as far as possible, through her hands. And there were moments when she
would walk blindly along the sea beach with Cicely, finding a stimulus
to endure in the sharpness of the winter wind, or looking in vague
wonder at the great distant camp, with its streets of hospitals, its
long lines of huts, its training-grounds, and the bodies of men at work
upon them. Here, the war came home to her, as a vast machine by which
George, like millions of others, had been caught and crushed. She
shuddered to think of it.

At intervals Sarratt still spoke a good deal, though rarely after their
third day together. He asked her once--'Dear, did you ever send for my
letter?' She paused a moment to think. 'You mean the letter you left for
me--in case?' He made a sign of assent, and then smiled into the face
bending over him. 'Read it again, darling. I mean it all now, as I did
then.' She could only kiss him softly--without tears. After the first
day she never cried.

On the last night of his life, when she thought that all speech was
over, and that she would never hear his voice, or see a conscious look,
again, he opened his eyes suddenly, and she heard--'I love you,
sweetheart! I love you, sweetheart!' twice over. That was the last
sound. Towards midnight he died.

Next morning Cicely wrote to Farrell:--

'We are coming home to-morrow after they bury him in the cemetery here.
Please get Hester--_whatever she may be doing_--to throw it up, and come
and meet us. She is the only person who can help Nelly now for a bit
Nelly pines for Rydal--where they were together. She would go to
Hester's cottage. Tell Hester.

'Why, old boy, do such things happen? That's what I keep asking--not
being a saint, like these dear nurses here, who really have been
angelic. I am the only one who rebels. George Sarratt was so patient--so
terribly patient! And Nelly is just crushed--for the moment, though I
sometimes expect to see a strange energy in her before long. But I keep
knocking my head all day, and part of the night--the very small part
that I'm not asleep--against the questions that everybody seems to have
asked since the world began--and I know that I am a fool, and go on
doing it.

'George Sarratt, I think, was a simple Christian, and died like one. He
seemed to like the Chaplain, which was a comfort. How much any of that
means to Nelly I don't know.'

She also wrote to Marsworth:--

'Meet us, please, at Charing Cross. I have no spirit to answer your last
letters as they deserve. But I give you notice that I don't thrive on
too sweet a diet--and praise is positively bad for me. It wrinkles me up
the wrong way.

'What can be done about that incredible sister? She ought to know that
Nelly is determined not to see her. Just think!--they might have had
nearly a month together, and she cut it down to five days!

('Dear Herbert, say anything you like, and the sweeter the better!)

'Yours,

'CICELY.'


CHAPTER XVII


'Well--what news?' said Farrell abruptly. For Cicely had come into his
library with a letter in her hand. The library was a fine
eighteenth-century room still preserved intact amid the general
appropriation of the big house by the hospital, and when he was not busy
in his office, it was his place of refuge.

Cicely perched herself on the edge of his writing-table.

'Hester has brought her to Rydal all right,' she said cheerfully.

'How is she?'

'As you might expect. But Hester says she talks of nothing but going to
work. She has absolutely set her heart upon it, and there is no moving
her.'

'It is, of course, an absurdity,' said Farrell, frowning.

'Absurdity or not, she means to do it, and Hester begs that nobody will
try to persuade her against it. She has promised Hester to stay with her
for three weeks, and then she has already made her arrangements.'

'What is she going to do?'

'She is going to a hospital near Manchester. They want a V.A.D.
housemaid.'

Farrell rose impatiently, and stretching out his hand for his pipe,
began to pace the room, steeped evidently in disagreeable reflection.

'You know as well as I do'--he said at last--that she hasn't the
physical strength for it.'

'Well then she'll break down, and we can put her to bed. But try she
will, and I entirely approve of it,' said Cicely firmly. 'Hard physical
work--till you drop--till you're so tired, you must go to sleep--that's
the only thing when you're as miserable as poor Nelly. You know it is,
Will. Don't you remember that poor Mrs. Henessy whose son died here? Her
letters to me afterwards used to be all about scrubbing. If she could
scrub from morning till night, she could just get along. She scrubbed
herself sane again. The bigger the floor, the better she liked it. When
bedtime came, she just slept like a log. And at last she got all right.
But it was touch-and-go when she left here.'

'She was a powerfully-built woman,' said Farrell gloomily.

'Oh, well, it isn't always the strapping ones that come through. Anyway,
old boy, I'm afraid you can't do anything to alter it.'

She looked at him a little askance. It was perfectly understood between
them that Cicely was more or less acquainted with her brother's plight,
and since her engagement to Marsworth had been announced it was
astonishing how much more ready Farrell had been to confide in her, and
she to be confided in.

But for her few days in France, however, with Nelly Sarratt, Marsworth
might still have had some wrestles to go through with Cicely. At the
very moment when Farrell's telephone message arrived, imploring her to
take charge of Nelly on her journey, Cicely was engaged in fresh
quarrelling with her long-suffering lover. But the spectacle of
Sarratt's death, and Nelly's agony, together with her own quick
divination of Nelly's inner mind, had worked profoundly on Cicely, and
Marsworth had never shewn himself a better fellow than in his complete
sympathy with her, and his eager pity for the Sarratts. 'I haven't the
heart to tease him'--Cicely had said candidly after her return to
England. 'He's been so horribly nice to me!' And the Petruchio having
once got the upper hand, the Katherine was--like her prototype--almost
overdoing it. The corduroy trousers, Russian boots, the flame-coloured
jersey actually arrived. Cicely looked at them wistfully and locked them
up. As to the extravagances that still remained, in hats, or skirts, or
head-dressing, were they to be any further reduced, Marsworth would
probably himself implore her not to be too suddenly reasonable. For,
without them, Cicely would be only half Cicely.

But his sister's engagement, perhaps, had only made Farrell feel more
sharply than ever the collapse of his own hopes. Three days after
Sarratt's death Nelly had written to him to give him George's dying
message, and to thank him on her own account for all that he had done
to help her journey. The letter was phrased as Nelly could not help
phrasing anything she wrote. Cicely, to whom Nelly dumbly shewed it,
thought it 'sweet.' But on Farrel's morbid state, it struck like ice,
and he had the greatest difficulty in writing a letter of sympathy, such
as any common friend must send her, in return. Every word seemed to him
either too strong or too weak. The poor Viking, indeed, had begun to
look almost middle-aged, and Cicely with a pang had discovered or
fancied some streaks of grey in the splendid red beard and curly hair.
At the same time her half-sarcastic sense perceived that he was far
better provided than Nelly, with the means of self-protection against
his trouble. 'Men always are,' thought Cicely--'they have so much more
interesting things to do.' And she compared the now famous hospital,
with its constant scientific developments, the ever-changing and
absorbing spectacle of the life within it, and Farrell's remarkable
position amid its strenuous world--with poor Nelly's 'housemaiding.'

But Nelly was choosing the path that suited her own need, and in the
spiritual world, the humblest means may be the best. It was when she was
cooking for her nuns that some of St. Teresa's divinest ecstasies came
upon her! Not that there was any prospect of ecstasy for Nelly Sarratt.
She seemed to herself to be engaged in a kind of surgery--the cutting or
burning away of elements in herself that she had come to scorn. Hester,
who was something of a saint herself, came near to understanding her.
Cicely could only wonder. But Hester perceived, with awe, a _fierceness_
in Nelly--a kind of cruelty--towards herself, with which she knew well,
from a long experience of human beings, that it was no use to argue. The
little, loving, easy-going thing had discovered in her own gentleness
and weakness, the source of something despicable--that is, of her own
failure to love George as steadfastly and truly as he had loved her. The
whole memory of her marriage was poisoned for her by this bitter sense
that in little more than a year after she had lost him, while he was
actually still alive, and when the law even, let alone the highest
standards of love, had not released her, she had begun to yield to the
wooing of another man. Perhaps only chance, under all the difficult
circumstances of her intimacy with Farrell, had saved her from a
shameful yielding--from dishonour, as well as a broken faith.

'What had brought it about?'--she asked herself. And she asked it with a
desperate will, determined to probe her own sin to the utmost. 'Soft
living!'--was her own reply--moral and physical indolence. The pleasure
of being petted and spoiled, the readiness to let others work for her,
and think for her, what people called her 'sweetness!' She turned upon
it with a burning hatred and contempt. She would scourge it out of
herself. And then perhaps some day she would be able to think of
George's last faint words with something else than remorseful
anguish--_ love you, sweetheart!--I love you, sweetheart!'_

During the three weeks, however, that she was with Hester, she was very
silent. She clung to Hester without words, and with much less than her
usual caressingness. She found--it was evident--a certain comfort in
solitary walks, in the simple talk of Mrs. Tyson, and 'Father Time,' who
came to see her, and scolded her for her pale cheeks with a
disrespectful vigour which brought actually a smile to her eyes. Tommy
was brought over to see her; and she sat beside him, while he lay on the
floor drawing Hoons and Haggans, at a great rate, and brimful of fresh
adventures in 'Jupe.' But he was soon conscious that his old playfellow
was not the listener she had been; and he presently stole away with a
wistful look at her.

One evening early in December, Hester coming in from marketing in
Ambleside, found Nelly, sitting by the fire, a book open on her knee, so
absorbed in thought that she had not heard her friend's entrance. Yet
her lips seemed to be moving. Hester came softly, and knelt down beside
her.

'Darling, I have been such a long time away!'

Nelly drew a deep breath.

'Oh, no I--I--I've been thinking,'

Hester looked at the open book, and saw that it was 'The Letters of St.
Ignatius'--a cheap copy, belonging to a popular theological 'Library,'
she herself had lately bought.

'Did that interest you, Nelly?' she asked, wondering.

'Some of it'--said Nelly, flushing a little. And after a moment's
hesitation, she pointed to a passage under her hand:--'For I fear your
love, lest it injure me, for it is easy to do what you will; but it is
difficult for me to attain unto God, if ye insist on sparing me.'

And suddenly Hester remembered that before going out she had entreated
Nelly to give herself another fortnight's rest before going to
Manchester. It would then be only six weeks since her husband's death.
'And if you break down, dear,'--she had ventured--'it won't only be
trouble to you--but to them '--meaning the hospital authorities.
Whereupon for the first time since her return, Nelly's eyes had filled
with tears. But she made no reply, and Hester had gone away uneasy.

'Why will you be so hard on yourself?' she murmured, taking the lovely
childish face in her two hands and kissing it.

Nelly gently released herself, and pointed again, mutely, to a passage
further on--the famous passage in which the saint, already in the
ecstasy of martyrdom, appeals again to the Christian church in Rome,
whether he is bound, not to save him from the wild beasts of the arena.
'I entreat you, shew not unto me an unseasonable love! Suffer me to be
the food of wild beasts, through whom it is allowed me to attain unto
God. I am the corn of God; let me be ground by the teeth of the wild
beasts, that I may be found the pure bread of Christ.... Pardon me in
this. I know what is expedient for me. I am but now beginning to be a
disciple.'

'Nelly dear--what do you mean?'

A faint little smile crossed Nelly's face.

'Oh, nothing--only;--' she sighed again--'It's so _splendid_! Such a
will!--such a faith! No one thinks like that now. No one is willing to
be "the corn of God."'

'Oh, yes they are!' said Hester, passionately. 'There are thousands of
men--and women--in this war, who are willing to do everything--suffer
everything--for others--their country--their people at home.'

'Well, then they're happy!--and why hold anyone back?' said Nelly, with
soft reproach. And letting her head drop on Hester's shoulder, she said,
slowly--

'Let me go, dear Hester--let me go! It's drudgery I want--_drudgery_'
she repeated with intensity. 'Something that I don't want to
do--something that's against the grain--all day long.' Then she laughed
and roused herself. 'Not much likeness between me and St. Ignatius, is
there?'

Hester considered her gravely.

'When people like you are wrestling all day and every day with something
too hard for them, their strength gives way. They think they can do it,
but they can't.'

'My strength won't give way,' said Nelly, with quiet conviction. Then,
after pausing a moment, she said with a strange ardour--'I once heard a
story--a true story--of a man, who burnt his own hand off, because it
had struck his friend. He held it in a flame till there was only the
burnt stump, and after that he forgave himself and could bear to live
again.'

'But whom have you struck, you poor child!' cried Hester.

'_George_!' said Nelly, looking at her with bitterly shining eyes.

Hester's arms enfolded her, and they talked far into the night. Before
they separated, Hester had agreed that the date of Nelly's departure
should be not postponed, but quickened.

And during the few remaining days they were together, Hester could only
notice with growing amazement the change in all the small ways and
habits that had once characterised Nelly Sarratt--especially since her
Torquay illness; the small invalidisms and self-indulgences, the
dependence on a servant or on Bridget. Now the ascetic, penitential
passion had come upon her; as it comes in different forms, upon many a
man or woman in the _sélva oscúra_ of their life; and Hester knew that
there was no resisting it.

Hester went back to her 'Welfare' work. Cicely travelled between Carton
and London, collecting her trousseau and declaring that she _would_ be
married in Lent, whatever people might say. Farrell was deeply engaged
in introducing a new antiseptic treatment of an extremely costly kind
throughout his hospital, in watching the results of it, and in giving
facilities for the study of it, to the authorities and officials of all
kinds who applied to him. A sorrowful man--but a very busy one.
Marsworth was making his mark in the Intelligence Department of the War
Office, and was being freely named as the head of an important Military
Mission to one of the Allied Headquarters. What would become of Cicely
and the wedding, if the post were given him, and--as was probable--at a
day's warning--was not quite clear. Cicely, however, took it calmly.
'They can't give us less than three hours' notice--and if it's after two
o'clock, we can always get married somehow by five. You scurry round,
pay fifty pounds, and somebody at Lambeth does it. Then--I should see
him safely off in the evening!'

Meanwhile Bridget Cookson was living in her usual Bloomsbury
boarding-house, holding herself quite aloof from the idle ways of its
inmates, who, in the midst of the world-war, were still shopping as
usual in the mornings and spending the afternoons in tea and gossip.
Bridget, however, was scarcely employing her own time to any greater
profit for a burdened country. She was learning various languages, and
attending a number of miscellaneous lectures. Her time was fairly full,
and she lived in an illusion of multifarious knowledge which flattered
her vanity. She was certainly far cleverer; and better-educated than
the other women of her boarding-house; and she was one of those persons
who throughout life prefer to live with their inferiors. 'The only
remedy against a superiority,'--says some French writer--'is to love
it.' But Bridget was so made that she could not love it; she could only
pull it down and belittle it.

But all the same, Bridget Cookson was no monster, though she was
probably without feelings and instincts that most people possess. She
missed Nelly a good deal, more than Nelly herself would have believed.
And she thought now, that she had behaved like a fool in not recognising
Sarratt at once, and so preserving her influence with her sister.
Morally, however, she saw no great harm in what she had done. It was
arguable, at any rate. Everything was arguable. As to the effect on
Nelly of the outward and visible facts of Sarratt's death, it seemed to
have been exactly what she, Bridget, had foreseen. Through some
Manchester acquaintance she succeeded in getting occasional news of
Nelly, who was, it appeared, killing herself with hard and disagreeable
work. She heard also from the woman left in charge of the Loughrigg farm
that all Mrs. Sarratt's personal possessions had been sent to the care
of Miss Martin, and that Sir William had shut up the cottage and never
came there. Sometimes Bridget would grimly contrast this state of things
with what might have happened, had her stroke succeeded, and had George
died unrecognised. In that event how many people would have been made
happy, who were now made miserable!

The winter passed away, the long and bitter winter which seemed to
sharpen for English hearts and nerves all the suffering of the war. On
the Somme the Germans were secretly preparing the retreat which began
with the spring, while the British armies were growing to their full
stature, month by month, and England was becoming slowly accustomed to
the new and amazing consciousness of herself as a great military power.
And meanwhile death in the trenches still took its steady toll of our
best and dearest; and at sea, while British sea-power pressed home its
stifling grasp on the life of Germany, the submarine made England
anxious, but not afraid.

March shewed some pale gleams of spring, but April was one of the
coldest and dreariest in the memory of living man. The old earth in
sympathy with the great struggle that was devastating and searing her,
seemed to be withholding leaf and flower, and forbidding the sun to woo
her.

Till the very first days of May! Then, with a great return upon herself,
Nature flew to work. The trees rushed into leaf, and never had there
been such a glorious leafage. Everything was late, but everything was
perfection. And nowhere was the spring loveliness more lovely than in
Westmorland. The gentle valleys of the Lakes had been muffled in snow
and scourged with hail. The winter furies had made their lairs in the
higher fells, and rushed shrieking week after week through delicate and
quiet scenes not made for them. The six months from November to May had
been for the dale-dwellers one long endurance. But in one May week all
was forgotten, and atoned for. Beauty, 'an hourly presence,' reigned
without a rival. From the purple heights that stand about Langdale and
Derwentwater, to the little ferns and mountain plants that crept on
every wall, or dipped in every brook, the mountain land was all alive
and joyful. The streams alone made a chorus for the gods.

Hester, who was now a woman of sixty, had reluctantly admitted, by the
middle of the month, that, after a long winter spent in a munition
factory and a Lancashire town, employed on the most strenuous work that
she, an honest worker all her life, had ever known, a fortnight's
holiday was reasonable. And she wrote to Nelly Sarratt, just as she was
departing northwards, to say--cunningly--that she was very tired and run
down, and would Nelly come and look after her for a little? It was the
first kindness she had ever asked of Nelly, to whom she had done so
many. Nelly telegraphed in reply that in two days she would be at Rydal.

Hester spent the two days in an expectation half-eager, half-anxious. It
had been agreed between them that in their correspondence the subject of
Nelly's health was to be tabooed. In case of a serious breakdown, the
Commandant of Nelly's hospital would write. Otherwise there were to be
no enquiries and no sympathy. Cicely Marsworth before her marriage in
early March had seen Nelly twice and had reported--against the
grain--that although 'most unbecomingly thin,' the obstinate little
creature said she was well, and apparently was well. Everybody in the
hospital, said Cicely, was at Nelly's feet. 'It is of course nonsense
for her to lay down, that she won't be petted, Nature has settled that
for her. However, I am bound to say it is the one thing that makes her
angry, and the nurses are all amazed at what she has been able to stand.
There is a half-blind boy, suffering from "shock" in one of the wards,
to whom they say she has devoted herself for months. She has taught him
to speak again, and to walk, and the nerve-specialist who has been
looking after the poor fellow told her he would trust her with his worst
cases, if only she would come and nurse for him. That did seem to please
her. She flushed up a little when she told me. Otherwise she has become
_horribly impersonal_! Her wings are growing rapidly. But oh, Hester, I
did and do prefer the old Nelly to any angel I've ever known. If I
hadn't married Herbert, I should like to spend all my time in _tempting
her_--the poor darling!--as the devil--who was such a fool!--tempted St.
Anthony. I know plenty of saints; but I know only one little, soft
kissable Nelly. She shan't be taken from us!'

_So horribly impersonal_! What did Cicely mean?

Well, Cicely--with the object described in full view--would soon be
able to tell her. For the Marsworths were coming to Carton for a week,
before starting for Rome, and would certainly come over to her to say
good-bye. As to William--would it really be necessary to leave him
behind? Nelly must before long brace herself to see him again, as an
ordinary friend. He had meant no harm--and done no harm--poor William!
Hester was beginning secretly to be his warm partisan.

Twenty-four hours later, Nelly arrived. As Hester received her from the
coach, and walked with her arm round the tiny waist to the cottage by
the bend of the river, where tea beside the sun-flecked stream was set
for the traveller, the older friend was at once startled and reassured.
Reassured--because, after these six months, Nelly could laugh once more,
and her step was once more firm and normal; and startled, by the new and
lonely independence she perceived in her frail visitor. Nelly was in
black again, with a small black hat from which her widow's veil fell
back over her shoulders. The veil, the lawn collar and cuffs, together
with her childish slightness, and the curls on her temples and brow that
she had tried in vain to straighten, made her look like a little girl
masquerading. And yet, in truth, what struck her hostess was the sad
maturity for which she seemed to have exchanged her old clinging ways.
She spoke, for the first time, as one who was mistress of her own life
and its issues; with a perfectly clear notion of what there was for her
to do. She had made up her mind, she told Hester, to take work offered
her in one of the new special hospitals for nervous cases which were the
product of the war. 'They think I have a turn for it, and they are going
to train me. Isn't it kind and dear of them?'

'But I am told it is the most exhausting form of nursing there is,' said
Hester wondering. 'Are you quite sure you can stand it?'

'Try me!' said Nelly, with a strange brightness of look. Then reaching
out a hand she slipped it contentedly into her friend's. 'Hester!--isn't
it strange what we imagine about ourselves--and what is really true? I
thought the first weeks that I was in hospital, I _must_ break down. I
never dreamt that anyone could feel so tired--so deadly ill--and yet go
on. And then one began, little by little, to get hardened,--of course
I'm only now beginning to feel that!--and it seems like being born
again, with a quite new body, that one can make--yes, _make_--do as one
likes. That's what the soldiers tell me--about _their_ training. And
they wonder at it, as I do.'

'My dear, you're horribly thin,' interrupted Hester.

'Oh, not too thin!' said Nelly, complacently.

Then she lifted up her eyes suddenly, and saw the lake in a dazzle of
light, and Silver How, all purple, as of old; yet another family of wild
duck swimming where the river issued from the lake; and just beyond, the
white corner of the house where she and George had spent their few days
of bliss. Slowly, the eyes filled with brimming tears. She threw off
her hat and veil, and slipping to the grass, she laid her head against
her friend's knee, and there was a long silence.

Hester broke it at last.

'I want you to come a little way up the fell, and look at a daffodil
field. We'll leave a message, and Cicely can follow us there.' And then
she added, not without trepidation--'and I asked her to bring William,
if he had time.'

Nelly was silent a moment, and then said quietly---'Thank you. I'm glad
you did.'

They left the garden and wandered through some rocky fields on the side
of the fell, till they came to one where Linnaeus or any other pious
soul might well have gone upon his knees for joy. Some loving hand had
planted it with daffodils--the wild Lent lily of the district, though
not now very plentiful about the actual lakes. And the daffodils had
come back rejoicing to their kingdom, and made it their own again. They
ran in lines and floods, in troops and skirmishers, all through the
silky grass, and round the trunks of the old knotted oaks, that hung as
though by one foot from the emerging rocks and screes. Above, the bloom
of the wild cherries made a wavering screen of silver between the
daffodils and the May sky; amid the blossom the golden-green of the oaks
struck a strong riotous note; and far below, at their feet, the lake lay
blue, with all the sky within it, and the softness of the larch-woods on
its banks.

Nelly dropped into the grass among the daffodils. One could not have
called her the spirit of the spring--the gleeful, earthly spring--as it
would have been natural to do, in her honeymoon days. And yet, as Hester
watched her, she seemed in her pale, changed beauty to be in some
strange harmony with that grave, renewing, fruitful heart of all things,
whereof the daffodils and the cherry-blossom were but symbols.

Presently there were voices beneath them--climbing voices that came
nearer--of a man and a woman. Nelly's hand begun to pluck restlessly at
the grass beside her.

Cicely emerged first, Cicely in white, very bridal, and very happy. Very
conscious too, though she did not betray it by a movement or a look, of
the significance of this first meeting, since Sarratt's death, between
her brother and Nelly. But they met very simply. Nelly went a little way
down the steep to meet them. She kissed Cicely, and gave Farrell her
hand.

'It was very good of you to come.'

But then it seemed to Hester, who could not help watching it, that
Nelly's face, as she stood there looking gravely at Farrell, shewed a
sudden trouble and agitation. It was gone very quickly, however, and she
and he walked on together along a green path skirting the fells, and
winding through the daffodils and the hawthorns.

Cicely and Hester followed, soon perceiving that the two ahead had
slipped into animated conversation.

'What can it be about?' said Cicely, in Hester's ear.

'I heard the word "Charcot,"' said Hester.

The bride listened deliberately.

'And William's talking about an article in the _Lancet_ he's been boring
Herbert and me with, by that very specialist that Nelly's so keen
about,--the man that is going to have her trained to nurse his cases.
Something about the new treatment of "shock." I say, Hester, what an odd
sort of fresh beginning!'

Cicely turned a look half grave, half laughing on her companion--adding
hastily--

'The specialist's married!'

Hester frowned a little.

'Beginning of what?'

'Oh, I don't know,' said Cicely, with a shrug, 'But life is long,
Mademoiselle Hester, and now they've got a common interest--outside
themselves. They can talk about _things_--not feelings. Goodness!--did
you hear that? William is head over ears in his new antiseptic--and look
at Nelly--she's quite pink! That's what I meant by her being _horribly
impersonal_. She used the word "scientific" to me, three times, when I
went to see her--_Nelly_!'

'If she's impersonal, I should doubt whether William is,' said Hester
drily.

'Ah, no--poor Willy!' was Cicely's musing reply. 'It's a hard time for
him. I don't believe she's ever out of his mind. Or at least, she
wouldn't be, if it weren't for his work. That's the blessed part--for
both of them. And now you see--it gives them such a deal to talk
about'--her gesture indicated the couple in front. 'It's like two sore
surfaces, isn't it, that mustn't touch--you want something between.'

'All the same, William mustn't set his heart--'

'And Hester--dear old thing!--mustn't preach!' said Cicely laughing, and
pinching her cousin's arm. 'What's the good of saying that, about a man
like William, who knows what he wants? Of course he's set his heart, and
will go on setting it. But he'll _wait_--as long as she likes.'

'It'll be a long time.'

'All right! They're neither of them Methuselahs yet. Heavens!--What are
they at now? _Ambrine_!--_she's_ talking to _him_'

But some deep mingled instinct, at once of sympathy with Nelly and pity
for Farrell, made Hester unwilling to discuss the subject any more.
George's death was too recent; peace and a happy future too remote. So
she turned on Cicely.

'And please, what have you done with Herbert? I was promised a
bridegroom.'

'Business!' said Cicely, sighing. 'We had hardly arrived for our week's
leave, when the wretched War Office wired him to come back. He went this
morning, and I wanted to go too, but--I'm not to racket just now.'

Cicely blushed, and Hester, smiling, pressed her hand.

'Then you're not going to Rome?'

'Certainly I am! But one has to give occasional sops to the domestic
tyrant.'

They sauntered back to tea in Hester's garden by the river, and there
the talk of her three guests was more equal and unfettered, more of a
real interchange, than Hester ever remembered it. Of old, Farrell had
been the guardian and teacher, indoctrinating Nelly with his own views
on art, reading to her from his favourite poets, or surrounding her in a
hundred small matters with a playful and devoted homage. But now in the
long wrestle with her grief and remorse, she had thought, as well as
felt. She was as humble and simple as ever, but her companions realised
that she was standing on her own feet. And this something new in
her--which was nothing but a strengthened play of intelligence and
will--had a curious effect on Farrell. It seemed to bring him out, also;
so that the nobler aspects of his life, and the nobler proportions of
his character shewed themselves, unconsciously. Hester, with anxious
joy, guessed at the beginnings of a new moral relation, a true
comradeship, between himself and Nelly, such as there had never yet
been--which might go far. It masked the depths in both of them; or
rather it was a first bridge thrown over the chasm between them. What
would come of it?

Again she rebuked herself even for the question. But when the time for
departure came, and Nelly took Cicely into the house to fetch the wraps
which had been left there, Farrell drew his chair close to Hester's. She
read agitation in his look.

'So she's actually going to take up this new nursing? She says she is to
have six months' training.'

'Yes--don't grudge it her!'

Farrell was silent a moment, then broke out--'Did you ever see anything
so small and transparent as her hands are? I was watching them as she
sat there.'

'But they're capable!' laughed Hester. 'You should hear what her matron
says of her.'

Farrell sighed.

'How much weight has she lost?'

'Not more--as yet--than she can stand. There's an intense life in her--a
spiritual life--that seems to keep her going.'

'Hester--dear Hester--watch over her!'

He put out a hand and grasped his cousin's.

'Yes, you may trust me.'

'Hester!--do you believe there'll ever be any hope for me?'

'It's unkind even to think of it yet,' she said gravely.

He drew himself up, recovering self-control.

'I know--I know. I hope I'm not quite a fool! And indeed it's better
than I thought. She's not going to banish me altogether. When this new
hospital's open--in another month or so--and she's settled there--she
asks me to call upon her. She wants me to go into this man's treatment.'
There was a touch of comedy in the words; but the emotion in his face
was painful to see.

'Good!' said Hester, smiling.

When the guests were gone, Nelly came slowly back to Hester from the
garden gate. Her hands were loosely clasped before her, her eyes on the
ground. When she reached Hester she looked up and Hester saw that her
eyes were full of tears.

'He'll miss her very much,' she said, sadly.

'Cicely?'

'Yes--she's been a great deal more to him lately than she used to be.'

Nelly stood silently looking out over the lake for a while. In her mind
and Hester's there were thoughts which neither could express. Suddenly,
Nelly turned to Hester. Her voice sounded strained and quick. 'I never
told you--on my way here, I went to see Bridget.'

Hester was taken by surprise. After a moment's silence she said--

'Has she ever repented--ever asked your forgiveness?

Nelly shook her head.

'But I think--she would be sorry--if she could. I shall go and see her
sometimes. But she doesn't want me. She seems quite busy--and
satisfied.'

'Satisfied!' said Hester, indignantly.

'I mean with what she is doing--with her way of living.'

There was silence. But presently there was a stifled sob in the
darkness; and Hester knew that Nelly was thinking of those irrecoverable
weeks of which Bridget's cruelty had robbed her.

Then presently bedtime came, and Hester saw her guest to her room. But a
little while after, as she was standing by her own window she heard the
garden door open and perceived a small figure slipping down over the
lawn--a shadow among shadows--towards the path along the lake. And she
guessed of course that Nelly had gone out to take a last look at the
scene of her lost happiness, before her departure on the morrow.

Only twenty-two--with all her life before her--if she lived!

Of course, the probability was that she would live--and gradually
forget--and in process of time marry William Farrell. But Hester could
not be at all sure that the story would so work out. Supposing that the
passion of philanthropy, or the passion of religion, fastened upon
her--on the girlish nature that had proved itself with time to be of so
much finer and rarer temper than those about her had ever suspected?
Both passions are absorbing; both tend to blunt in many women the
natural instinct of the woman towards the man. Nelly had been an
old-fashioned, simple girl, brought up in a backwater of life. Now she
was being drawn into that world of the new woman--where are women
policemen, and women chauffeurs, and militant suffragists, and women in
overalls and breeches, and many other strange types. The war has shown
us--suddenly and marvellously--the adaptability of women. Would little
Nelly, too, prove as plastic as the rest, and in the excitement of
meeting new demands, and reaching out to new powers, forget the old
needs and sweetnesses?

It might be so; but in her heart of hearts, Hester did not believe it
would be so.

Meanwhile Nelly was wandering through the May dusk along the lake. She
walked through flowers. The scents of a rich earth were in the air;
daylight lingered, but a full and golden moon hung over Loughrigg in the
west; and the tranced water of the lake was marvellously giving back the
beauty amid which it lay--form, and colour, and distance--and all the
magic of the hour between day and night. There was no boat, alack, to
take her to the island; but there it lay, dreaming on the silver water,
with a great hawthorn in full flower shewing white upon its rocky side.
She made her way to the point nearest to the island, and there sat down
on a stone at the water's edge.

Opposite to her was the spot where she and George had drifted with the
water on their last night together. If she shut her eyes she could see
his sunburnt face, blanched by the moonlight, his strong shoulders, his
hands--which she had kissed--lying on the oars. And mingling with the
vision was that other--of a grey, dying face, a torn and broken body.

Her heart was full of intensest love and yearning; but the love was no
longer a torment. She knew now that if she had been able to tell George
everything, he would never have condemned her; he would only have opened
his arms and comforted her.

She was wrapped in a mystical sense of communion with him, as she sat
dreaming there. But in such a calm and exaltation of spirit, that there
was ample room besides in her mind for the thought of William
Farrell--her friend. Her most faithful and chivalrous friend! She
thought of Farrell's altered aspect, of the signs of a great task laid
upon him, straining even his broad back. And then, of his loneliness.
Cicely was gone--his 'little friend' was gone.

What could she still do for him? It seemed to her that even while George
stood spiritually beside her, in this scene of their love, he was
bidding her think kindly and gratefully of the man whom he had blessed
in dying--the man who, in loving her, had meant him no harm.

