"There he is!  That is my Silvio.  He stands on his hind legs and
rattles the door handle when he wants to come into a room."  She opened
the door, speaking to the cat as though he were a baby:  "Did him want
his movver?  Come then; but he must stay with her!"  She lifted the cat,
and came back with him in her arms.  He was certainly a magnificent
animal.  A chinchilla grey Persian with long silky hair; a really lordly
animal with a haughty bearing despite his gentleness; and with great
paws which spread out as he placed them on the ground.  Whilst she was
fondling him, he suddenly gave a wriggle like an eel and slipped out of
her arms.  He ran across the room and stood opposite a low table on
which stood the mummy of an animal, and began to mew and snarl.  Miss
Trelawny was after him in an instant and lifted him in her arms, kicking
and struggling and wriggling to get away; but not biting or scratching,
for evidently he loved his beautiful mistress.  He ceased to make a
noise the moment he was in her arms; in a whisper she admonished him:

"O you naughty Silvio!  You have broken your parole that mother gave for
you.  Now, say goodnight to the gentlemen, and come away to mother's
room!"  As she was speaking she held out the cat's paw to me to shake.
As I did so I could not but admire its size and beauty.  "Why," said I,
"his paw seems like a little boxing-glove full of claws."  She smiled:

"So it ought to.  Don't you notice that my Silvio has seven toes, see!"
she opened the paw; and surely enough there were seven separate claws,
each of them sheathed in a delicate, fine, shell-like case.  As I gently
stroked the foot the claws emerged and one of them accidentally--there
was no anger now and the cat was purring--stuck into my hand.
Instinctively I said as I drew back:

"Why, his claws are like razors!"

Doctor Winchester had come close to us and was bending over looking at
the cat's claws; as I spoke he said in a quick, sharp way:

"Eh!"  I could hear the quick intake of his breath.  Whilst I was
stroking the now quiescent cat, the Doctor went to the table and tore
off a piece of blotting-paper from the writing-pad and came back.  He
laid the paper on his palm and, with a simple "pardon me!" to Miss
Trelawny, placed the cat's paw on it and pressed it down with his other
hand.  The haughty cat seemed to resent somewhat the familiarity, and
tried to draw its foot away.  This was plainly what the Doctor wanted,
for in the act the cat opened the sheaths of its claws and and made
several reefs in the soft paper. Then Miss Trelawny took her pet away.
She returned in a couple of minutes; as she came in she said:

"It is most odd about that mummy!  When Silvio came into the room
first--indeed I took him in as a kitten to show to Father--he went on
just the same way.  He jumped up on the table, and tried to scratch and
bite the mummy.  That was what made Father so angry, and brought the
decree of banishment on poor Silvio.  Only his parole, given through me,
kept him in the house."

Whilst she had been gone, Doctor Winchester had taken the bandage from
her father's wrist.  The wound was now quite clear, as the separate cuts
showed out in fierce red lines.  The Doctor folded the blotting-paper
across the line of punctures made by the cat's claws, and held it down
close to the wound.  As he did so, he looked up triumphantly and
beckoned us over to him.

The cuts in the paper corresponded with the wounds in the wrist!  No
explanation was needed, as he said;

"It would have been better if master Silvio had not broken his parole!"

We were all silent for a little while.  Suddenly Miss Trelawny said:

"But Silvio was not in here last night!"

"Are you sure?  Could you prove that if necessary?"  She hesitated
before replying:

"I am certain of it; but I fear it would be difficult to prove.  Silvio
sleeps in a basket in my room.  I certainly put him to bed last night; I
remember distinctly laying his little blanket over him, and tucking him
in.  This morning I took him out of the basket myself.  I certainly
never noticed him in here; though, of course, that would not mean much,
for I was too concerned about poor father, and too much occupied with
him, to notice even Silvio."

The Doctor shook his head as he said with a certain sadness:

"Well, at any rate it is no use trying to prove anything now.  Any cat
in the world would have cleaned blood-marks--did any exist--from his paws
in a hundredth part of the time that has elapsed."

Again we were all silent; and again the silence was broken by Miss
Trelawny:

"But now that I think of it, it could not have been poor Silvio that
injured Father. My door was shut when I first heard the sound; and
Father's was shut when I listened at it.  When I went in, the injury had
been done; so that it must have been before Silvio could possibly have
got in."  This reasoning commended itself, especially to me as a
barrister, for it was proof to satisfy a jury.  It gave me a distinct
pleasure to have Silvio acquitted of the crime--possibly because he was
Miss Trelawny's cat and was loved by her.  Happy cat!  Silvio's mistress
was manifestly pleased as I said:

"Verdict, 'not guilty!'"  Doctor Winchester after a pause observed:

"My apologies to master Silvio on this occasion; but I am still puzzled
to know why he is so keen against that mummy.  Is he the same toward the
other mummies in the house?  There are, I suppose, a lot of them.  I saw
three in the hall as I came in."

"There are lots of them," she answered.  "I sometimes don't know whether
I am in a private house or the British Museum.  But Silvio never
concerns himself about any of them except that particular one.  I
suppose it must be because it is of an animal, not a man or a woman."

"Perhaps it is of a cat!" said the Doctor as he started up and went
across the room to look at the mummy more closely.  "Yes," he went on,
"it is the mummy of a cat; and a very fine one, too.  If it hadn't been
a special favourite of some very special person it would never have
received so much honour.  See!  A painted case and obsidian eyes--just
like a human mummy.  It is an extraordinary thing, that knowledge of
kind to kind.  Here is a dead cat--that is all; it is perhaps four or
five thousand years old--and another cat of another breed, in what is
practically another world, is ready to fly at it, just as it would if it
were not dead.  I should like to experiment a bit about that cat if you
don't mind, Miss Trelawny."  She hesitated before replying:

"Of course, do anything you may think necessary or wise; but I hope it
will not be anything to hurt or worry my poor Silvio."  The Doctor
smiled as he answered:

"Oh, Silvio would be all right:  it is the other one that my sympathies
would be reserved for."

"How do you mean?"

"Master Silvio will do the attacking; the other one will do the
suffering."

"Suffering?"  There was a note of pain in her voice.  The Doctor smiled
more broadly:

"Oh, please make your mind easy as to that.  The other won't suffer as
we understand it; except perhaps in his structure and outfit."

"What on earth do you mean?"

"Simply this, my dear young lady, that the antagonist will be a mummy
cat like this one.  There are, I take it, plenty of them to be had in
Museum Street.  I shall get one and place it here instead of that one--
you won't think that a temporary exchange will violate your Father's
instructions, I hope.  We shall then find out, to begin with, whether
Silvio objects to all mummy cats, or only to this one in particular."

"I don't know," she said doubtfully.  "Father's instructions seem very
uncompromising."  Then after a pause she went on:  "But of course under
the circumstances anything that is to be ultimately for his good must be
done.  I suppose there can't be anything very particular about the mummy
of a cat."

Doctor Winchester said nothing.  He sat rigid, with so grave a look on
his face that his extra gravity passed on to me; and in its enlightening
perturbation I began to realise more than I had yet done the strangeness
of the case in which I was now so deeply concerned.  When once this
thought had begun there was no end to it.  Indeed it grew, and
blossomed, and reproduced itself in a thousand different ways.  The room
and all in it gave grounds for strange thoughts.  There were so many
ancient relics that unconsciously one was taken back to strange lands
and strange times.  There were so many mummies or mummy objects, round
which there seemed to cling for ever the penetrating odours of bitumen,
and spices and gums--"Nard and Circassia's balmy smells"--that one was
unable to forget the past.  Of course, there was but little light in the
room, and that carefully shaded; so that there was no glare anywhere.
None of that direct light which can manifest itself as a power or an
entity, and so make for companionship.  The room was a large one, and
lofty in proportion to its size.  In its vastness was place for a
multitude of things not often found in a bedchamber.  In far corners
of the room were shadows of uncanny shape.  More than once as I thought,
the multitudinous presence of the dead and the past took such hold on me
that I caught myself looking round fearfully as though some strange
personality or influence was present.  Even the manifest presence of
Doctor Winchester and Miss Trelawny could not altogether comfort or
satisfy me at such moments.  It was with a distinct sense of relief that
I saw a new personality in the room in the shape of Nurse Kennedy.
There was no doubt that that business-like, self-reliant, capable young
woman added an element of security to such wild imaginings as my own.
She had a quality of common sense that seemed to pervade everything
around her, as though it were some kind of emanation.  Up to that moment
I had been building fancies around the sick man; so that finally all
about him, including myself, had become involved in them, or enmeshed,
or saturated, or. . . But now that she had come, he relapsed into his
proper perspective as a patient; the room was a sick-room, and the
shadows lost their fearsome quality.  The only thing which it could not
altogether abrogate was the strange Egyptian smell. You may put a mummy
in a glass case and hermetically seal it so that no corroding air can
get within; but all the same it will exhale its odour.  One might think
that four or five thousand years would exhaust the olfactory qualities
of anything; but experience teaches us that these smells remain, and
that their secrets are unknown to us.  Today they are as much mysteries
as they were when the embalmers put the body in the bath of natron. . .


All at once I sat up.  I had become lost in an absorbing reverie.  The
Egyptian smell had seemed to get on my nerves--on my memory--on my very
will.

At that moment I had a thought which was like an inspiration.  If I was
influenced in such a manner by the smell, might it not be that the sick
man, who lived half his life or more in the atmosphere, had gradually
and by slow but sure process taken into his system something which had
permeated him to such degree that it had a new power derived from
quantity--or strength--or . . .

I was becoming lost again in a reverie.  This would not do.  I must take
such precaution that I could remain awake, or free from such entrancing
thought.  I had had but half a night's sleep last night; and this night
I must remain awake.  Without stating my intention, for I feared that I
might add to the trouble and uneasiness of Miss Trelawny, I went
downstairs and out of the house.  I soon found a chemist's shop, and
came away with a respirator.  When I got back, it was ten o'clock; the
Doctor was going for the night.  The Nurse came with him to the door of
the sick-room, taking her last instructions.  Miss Trelawny sat still
beside the bed.  Sergeant Daw, who had entered as the Doctor went out,
was some little distance off.

When Nurse Kennedy joined us, we arranged that she should sit up till
two o'clock, when Miss Trelawny would relieve her.  Thus, in accordance
with Mr. Trelawny's instructions, there would always be a man and a
woman in the room; and each one of us would overlap, so that at no time
would a new set of watchers come on duty without some one to tell of
what--if anything--had occurred.  I lay down on a sofa in my own room,
having arranged that one of the servants should call me a little before
twelve.  In a few moments I was asleep.

When I was waked, it took me several seconds to get back my thoughts so
as to recognise my own identity and surroundings.  The short sleep had,
however, done me good, and I could look on things around me in a more
practical light than I had been able to do earlier in the evening.  I
bathed my face, and thus refreshed went into the sick-room.  I moved
very softly.  The Nurse was sitting by the bed, quiet and alert; the
Detective sat in an arm-chair across the room in deep shadow.  He did
not move when I crossed, until I got close to him, when he said in a
dull whisper:

"It is all right; I have not been asleep!"  An unnecessary thing to say,
I thought--it always is, unless it be untrue in spirit.  When I told him
that his watch was over; that he might go to bed till I should call him
at six o'clock, he seemed relieved and went with alacrity.  At the door
he turned and, coming back to me, said in a whisper:

"I sleep lightly and I shall have my pistols with me.  I won't feel so
heavy-headed when I get out of this mummy smell."

He too, then, had shared my experience of drowsiness!

I asked the Nurse if she wanted anything.  I noticed that she had a
vinaigrette in her lap.  Doubtless she, too, had felt some of the
influence which had so affected me. She said that she had all she
required, but that if she should want anything she would at once let me
know.  I wished to keep her from noticing my respirator, so I went to
the chair in the shadow where her back was toward me.  Here I quietly
put it on, and made myself comfortable.

For what seemed a long time, I sat and thought and thought.  It was
a wild medley of thoughts, as might have been expected from the
experiences of the previous day and night.  Again I found myself
thinking of the Egyptian smell; and I remember that I felt a delicious
satisfaction that I did not experience it as I had done.  The respirator
was doing its work.

It must have been that the passing of this disturbing thought made for
repose of mind, which is the corollary of bodily rest, for, though I
really cannot remember being asleep or waking from it, I saw a vision--I
dreamed a dream, I scarcely know which.

I was still in the room, seated in the chair.  I had on my respirator
and knew that I breathed freely.  The Nurse sat in her chair with her
back toward me.  She sat quite still.  The sick man lay as still as the
dead.  It was rather like the picture of a scene than the reality; all
were still and silent; and the stillness and silence were continuous.
Outside, in the distance I could hear the sounds of a city, the
occasional roll of wheels, the shout of a reveller, the far-away echo of
whistles and the rumbling of trains.  The light was very, very low; the
reflection of it under the green-shaded lamp was a dim relief to the
darkness, rather than light.  The green silk fringe of the lamp had
merely the colour of an emerald seen in the moonlight. The room, for all
its darkness, was full of shadows.  It seemed in my whirling thoughts as
though all the real things had become shadows--shadows which moved, for
they passed the dim outline of the high windows.  Shadows which had
sentience. I even thought there was sound, a faint sound as of the mew
of a cat--the rustle of drapery and a metallic clink as of metal faintly
touching metal.  I sat as one entranced.  At last I felt, as in
nightmare, that this was sleep, and that in the passing of its portals
all my will had gone.

All at once my senses were full awake.  A shriek rang in my ears.  The
room was filled suddenly with a blaze of light.  There was the sound of
pistol shots--one, two; and a haze of white smoke in the room.  When my
waking eyes regained their power, I could have shrieked with horror
myself at what I saw before me.


Chapter IV
The Second Attempt


The sight which met my eyes had the horror of a dream within a dream,
with the certainty of reality added.  The room was as I had seen it
last; except that the shadowy look had gone in the glare of the many
lights, and every article in it stood stark and solidly real.

By the empty bed sat Nurse Kennedy, as my eyes had last seen her,
sitting bolt upright in the arm-chair beside the bed.  She had placed a
pillow behind her, so that her back might be erect; but her neck was
fixed as that of one in a cataleptic trance.  She was, to all intents
and purposes, turned into stone.  There was no special expression on her
face--no fear, no horror; nothing such as might be expected of one in
such a condition.  Her open eyes showed neither wonder nor interest.
She was simply a negative existence, warm, breathing, placid; but
absolutely unconscious of the world around her.  The bedclothes were
disarranged, as though the patient had been drawn from under them
without throwing them back.  The corner of the upper sheet hung upon the
floor; close by it lay one of the bandages with which the Doctor had
dressed the wounded wrist. Another and another lay further along the
floor, as though forming a clue to where the sick man now lay.  This was
almost exactly where he had been found on the previous night, under the
great safe.  Again, the left arm lay toward the safe.  But there had
been a new outrage, an attempt had been made to sever the arm close to
the bangle which held the tiny key.  A heavy "kukri" knife--one of the
leaf-shaped knives which the Gurkhas and others of the hill tribes of
India use with such effect--had been taken from its place on the wall,
and with it the attempt had been made. It was manifest that just at the
moment of striking, the blow had been arrested, for only the point of
the knife and not the edge of the blade had struck the flesh.  As it
was, the outer side of the arm had been cut to the bone and the blood
was pouring out.  In addition, the former wound in front of the arm had
been cut or torn about terribly, one of the cuts seemed to jet out blood
as if with each pulsation of the heart.  By the side of her father knelt
Miss Trelawny, her white nightdress stained with the blood in which she
knelt.  In the middle of the room Sergeant Daw, in his shirt and
trousers and stocking feet, was putting fresh cartridges into his
revolver in a dazed mechanical kind of way.  His eyes were red and
heavy, and he seemed only half awake, and less than half conscious of
what was going on around him.  Several servants, bearing lights of
various kinds, were clustered round the doorway.

As I rose from my chair and came forward, Miss Trelawny raised her eyes
toward me. When she saw me she shrieked and started to her feet,
pointing towards me.  Never shall I forget the strange picture she made,
with her white drapery all smeared with blood which, as she rose from
the pool, ran in streaks toward her bare feet.  I believe that I had
only been asleep; that whatever influence had worked on Mr. Trelawny and
Nurse Kennedy--and in less degree on Sergeant Daw--had not touched me.
The respirator had been of some service, though it had not kept off the
tragedy whose dire evidences were before me.  I can understand now--I
could understand even then--the fright, added to that which had gone
before, which my appearance must have evoked.  I had still on the
respirator, which covered mouth and nose; my hair had been tossed in my
sleep.  Coming suddenly forward, thus enwrapped and dishevelled, in that
horrified crowd, I must have had, in the strange mixture of lights, an
extraordinary and terrifying appearance.  It was well that I recognised
all this in time to avert another catastrophe; for the half-dazed,
mechanically-acting Detective put in the cartridges and had raised his
revolver to shoot at me when I succeeded in wrenching off the respirator
and shouting to him to hold his hand.  In this also he acted
mechanically; the red, half-awake eyes had not in them even then the
intention of conscious action.  The danger, however, was averted.  The
relief of the situation, strangely enough, came in a simple fashion.
Mrs. Grant, seeing that her young mistress had on only her nightdress,
had gone to fetch a dressing-gown, which she now threw over her.  This
simple act brought us all back to the region of fact.  With a long
breath, one and all seemed to devote themselves to the most pressing
matter before us, that of staunching the flow of blood from the arm of
the wounded man.  Even as the thought of action came, I rejoiced; for
the bleeding was very proof that Mr. Trelawny still lived.

Last night's lesson was not thrown away.  More than one of those present
knew now what to do in such an emergency, and within a few seconds
willing hands were at work on a tourniquet.  A man was at once
despatched for the doctor, and several of the servants disappeared to
make themselves respectable.  We lifted Mr. Trelawny on to the sofa
where he had lain yesterday; and, having done what we could for him,
turned our attention to the Nurse.  In all the turmoil she had not
stirred; she sat there as before, erect and rigid, breathing softly and
naturally and with a placid smile. As it was manifestly of no use to
attempt anything with her till the doctor had come, we began to think of
the general situation.

Mrs. Grant had by this time taken her mistress away and changed her
clothes; for she was back presently in a dressing-gown and slippers, and
with the traces of blood removed from her hands.  She was now much
calmer, though she trembled sadly; and her face was ghastly white.  When
she had looked at her father's wrist, I holding the tourniquet, she
turned her eyes round the room, resting them now and again on each one
of us present in turn, but seeming to find no comfort.  It was so
apparent to me that she did not know where to begin or whom to trust
that, to reassure her, I said:

"I am all right now; I was only asleep."  Her voice had a gulp in it as
she said in a low voice:

"Asleep!  You! and my Father in danger!  I thought you were on the
watch!"  I felt the sting of justice in the reproach; but I really
wanted to help her, so I answered:

"Only asleep.  It is bad enough, I know; but there is something more
than an "only" round us here.  Had it not been that I took a definite
precaution I might have been like the Nurse there."  She turned her eyes
swiftly on the weird figure, sitting grimly upright like a painted
statue; and then her face softened.  With the action of habitual
courtesy she said:

"Forgive me!  I did not mean to be rude.  But I am in such distress and
fear that I hardly know what I am saying.  Oh, it is dreadful!  I fear
for fresh trouble and horror and mystery every moment."  This cut me to
the very heart, and out of the heart's fulness I spoke:

"Don't give me a thought!  I don't deserve it.  I was on guard, and yet
I slept.  All that I can say is that I didn't mean to, and I tried to
avoid it; but it was over me before I knew it.  Anyhow, it is done now;
and can't be undone.  Probably some day we may understand it all; but
now let us try to get at some idea of what has happened.  Tell me what
you remember!"  The effort to recollect seemed to stimulate her; she
became calmer as she spoke:

"I was asleep, and woke suddenly with the same horrible feeling on me
that Father was in great and immediate danger.  I jumped up and ran,
just as I was, into his room.  It was nearly pitch dark, but as I opened
the door there was light enough to see Father's nightdress as he lay on
the floor under the safe, just as on that first awful night.  Then I
think I must have gone mad for a moment."  She stopped and shuddered.
My eyes lit on Sergeant Daw, still fiddling in an aimless way with the
revolver.  Mindful of my work with the tourniquet, I said calmly:

"Now tell us, Sergeant Daw, what did you fire at?"  The policeman seemed
to pull himself together with the habit of obedience.  Looking around at
the servants remaining in the room, he said with that air of importance
which, I take it, is the regulation attitude of an official of the law
before strangers:

"Don't you think, sir, that we can allow the servants to go away?  We
can then better go into the matter."  I nodded approval; the servants
took the hint and withdrew, though unwillingly, the last one closing the
door behind him.  Then the Detective went on:

"I think I had better tell you my impressions, sir, rather than recount
my actions. That is, so far as I remember them."  There was a mortified
deference now in his manner, which probably arose from his consciousness
of the awkward position in which he found himself.  "I went to sleep
half-dressed--as I am now, with a revolver under my pillow.  It was the
last thing I remember thinking of.  I do not know how long I slept.  I
had turned off the electric light, and it was quite dark.  I thought I
heard a scream; but I can't be sure, for I felt thick-headed as a man
does when he is called too soon after an extra long stretch of work.
Not that such was the case this time.  Anyhow my thoughts flew to the
pistol.  I took it out, and ran on to the landing.  Then I heard a sort
of scream, or rather a call for help, and ran into this room.  The room
was dark, for the lamp beside the Nurse was out, and the only light was
that from the landing, coming through the open door.  Miss Trelawny was
kneeling on the floor beside her father, and was screaming.  I thought I
saw something move between me and the window; so, without thinking, and
being half dazed and only half awake, I shot at it.  It moved a little
more to the right between the windows, and I shot again.  Then you came
up out of the big chair with all that muffling on your face.  It seemed
to me, being as I say half dazed and half awake--I know, sir, you will
take this into account--as if it had been you, being in the same
direction as the thing I had fired at.  And so I was about to fire again
when you pulled off the wrap."  Here I asked him--I was cross-examining
now and felt at home:

"You say you thought I was the thing you fired at.  What thing?"  The
man scratched his head, but made no reply.

"Come, sir," I said, "what thing; what was it like?"  The answer came in
a low voice:

"I don't know, sir.  I thought there was something; but what it was, or
what it was like, I haven't the faintest notion.  I suppose it was
because I had been thinking of the pistol before I went to sleep, and
because when I came in here I was half dazed and only half awake--which I
hope you will in future, sir, always remember."  He clung to that
formula of excuse as though it were his sheet-anchor.  I did not want to
antagonise the man; on the contrary I wanted to have him with us.
Besides, I had on me at that time myself the shadow of my own default;
so I said as kindly as I knew how:

"Quite right! Sergeant.  Your impulse was correct; though of course in
the half-somnolent condition in which you were, and perhaps partly
affected by the same influence--whatever it may be--which made me sleep
and which has put the Nurse in that cataleptic trance, it could not be
expected that you would paused to weigh matters.  But now, whilst the
matter is fresh, let me see exactly where you stood and where I sat.  We
shall be able to trace the course of your bullets."  The prospect of
action and the exercise of his habitual skill seemed to brace him at
once; he seemed a different man as he set about his work.  I asked Mrs.
Grant to hold the tourniquet, and went and stood where he had stood and
looked where, in the darkness, he had pointed.  I could not but notice
the mechanical exactness of his mind, as when he showed me where he had
stood, or drew, as a matter of course, the revolver from his pistol
pocket, and pointed with it.  The chair from which I had risen still
stood in its place.  Then I asked him to point with his hand only, as I
wished to move in the track of his shot.

Just behind my chair, and a little back of it, stood a high buhl
cabinet.  The glass door was shattered.  I asked:

"Was this the direction of your first shot or your second?"  The answer
came promptly.

"The second; the first was over there!"

He turned a little to the left, more toward the wall where the great
safe stood, and pointed.  I followed the direction of his hand and came
to the low table whereon rested, amongst other curios, the mummy of the
cat which had raised Silvio's ire.  I got a candle and easily found the
mark of the bullet.  It had broken a little glass vase and a tazza of
black basalt, exquisitely engraved with hieroglyphics, the graven lines
being filled with some faint green cement and the whole thing being
polished to an equal surface.  The bullet, flattened against the wall,
lay on the table.

I then went to the broken cabinet.  It was evidently a receptacle for
valuable curios; for in it were some great scarabs of gold, agate, green
jasper, amethyst, lapis lazuli, opal, granite, and blue-green china.
None of these things happily were touched.  The bullet had gone through
the back of the cabinet; but no other damage, save the shattering of the
glass, had been done.  I could not but notice the strange arrangement of
the curios on the shelf of the cabinet.  All the scarabs, rings,
amulets, &c. were arranged in an uneven oval round an exquisitely-carved
golden miniature figure of a hawk-headed God crowned with a disk and
plumes.  I did not wait to look further at present, for my attention was
demanded by more pressing things; but I determined to make a more minute
examination when I should have time.  It was evident that some of the
strange Egyptian smell clung to these old curios; through the broken
glass came an added whiff of spice and gum and bitumen, almost stronger
than those I had already noticed as coming from others in the room.

All this had really taken but a few minutes.  I was surprised when my
eye met, through the chinks between the dark window blinds and the
window cases, the brighter light of the coming dawn.  When I went back
to the sofa and took the tourniquet from Mrs. Grant, she went over and
pulled up the blinds.

It would be hard to imagine anything more ghastly than the appearance of
the room with the faint grey light of early morning coming in upon it.
As the windows faced north, any light that came was a fixed grey light
without any of the rosy possibility of dawn which comes in the eastern
quarter of heaven.  The electric lights seemed dull and yet glaring; and
every shadow was of a hard intensity.  There was nothing of morning
freshness; nothing of the softness of night.  All was hard and cold and
inexpressibly dreary.  The face of the senseless man on the sofa seemed
of a ghastly yellow; and the Nurse's face had taken a suggestion of
green from the shade of the lamp near her.  Only Miss Trelawny's face
looked white; and it was of a pallor which made my heart ache.  It
looked as if nothing on God's earth could ever again bring back to it
the colour of life and happiness.

It was a relief to us all when Doctor Winchester came in, breathless
with running.  He only asked one question:

"Can anyone tell me anything of how this wound was gotten?"  On seeing
the headshake which went round us under his glance, he said no more, but
applied himself to his surgical work.  For an instant he looked up at
the Nurse sitting so still; but then bent himself to his task, a grave
frown contracting his brows.  It was not till the arteries were tied and
the wounds completely dressed that he spoke again, except, of course,
when he had asked for anything to be handed to him or to be done for
him.  When Mr. Trelawny's wounds had been thoroughly cared for, he said
to Miss Trelawny:

"What about Nurse Kennedy?"  She answered at once:

"I really do not know.  I found her when I came into the room at
half-past two o'clock, sitting exactly as she does now.  We have not
moved her, or changed her position.  She has not wakened since.  Even
Sergeant Daw's pistol-shots did not disturb her."

"Pistol-shots?  Have you then discovered any cause for this new
outrage?"  The rest were silent, so I answered:

"We have discovered nothing.  I was in the room watching with the Nurse.
Earlier in the evening I fancied that the mummy smells were making me
drowsy, so I went out and got a respirator.  I had it on when I came on
duty; but it did not keep me from going to sleep.  I awoke to see the
room full of people; that is, Miss Trelawny and Sergeant Daw, being only
half awake and still stupefied by the same scent or influence which had
affected us, fancied that he saw something moving through the shadowy
darkness of the room, and fired twice.  When I rose out of my chair,
with my face swathed in the respirator, he took me for the cause of the
trouble.  Naturally enough, he was about to fire again, when I was
fortunately in time to manifest my identity.  Mr. Trelawny was lying
beside the safe, just as he was found last night; and was bleeding
profusely from the new wound in his wrist.  We lifted him on the sofa,
and made a tourniquet.  That is, literally and absolutely, all that any
of us know as yet.  We have not touched the knife, which you see lies
close by the pool of blood. Look!" I said, going over and lifting it.
"The point is red with the blood which has dried."

Doctor Winchester stood quite still a few minutes before speaking:

"Then the doings of this night are quite as mysterious as those of last
night?"

"Quite!" I answered.  He said nothing in reply, but turning to Miss
Trelawny said:

"We had better take Nurse Kennedy into another room.  I suppose there is
nothing to prevent it?"

"Nothing!  Please, Mrs. Grant, see that Nurse Kennedy's room is ready;
and ask two of the men to come and carry her in."  Mrs. Grant went out
immediately; and in a few minutes came back saying:

"The room is quite ready; and the men are here."  By her direction two
footmen came into the room and, lifting up the rigid body of Nurse
Kennedy under the supervision of the Doctor, carried her out of the
room.  Miss Trelawny remained with me in the sick chamber, and Mrs.
Grant went with the Doctor into the Nurse's room.

When we were alone Miss Trelawny came over to me, and taking both my
hands in hers, said:

"I hope you won't remember what I said.  I did not mean it, and I was
distraught."  I did not make reply; but I held her hands and kissed
them.  There are different ways of kissing a lady's hands.  This way was
intended as homage and respect; and it was accepted as such in the
high-bred, dignified way which marked Miss Trelawny's bearing and every
movement.  I went over to the sofa and looked down at the senseless man.
The dawn had come much nearer in the last few minutes, and there was
something of the clearness of day in the light.  As I looked at the
stern, cold, set face, now as white as a marble monument in the pale
grey light, I could not but feel that there was some deep mystery beyond
all that had happened within the last twenty-six hours.  Those beetling
brows screened some massive purpose; that high, broad forehead held some
finished train of reasoning, which the broad chin and massive jaw would
help to carry into effect.  As I looked and wondered, there began to
steal over me again that phase of wandering thought which had last night
heralded the approach of sleep.  I resisted it, and held myself sternly
to the present.  This was easier to do when Miss Trelawny came close to
me, and, leaning her forehead against my shoulder, began to cry
silently.  Then all the manhood in me woke, and to present purpose.  It
was of little use trying to speak; words were inadequate to thought. But
we understood each other; she did not draw away when I put arm
protectingly over her shoulder as I used to do with my little sister
long ago when in her childish trouble she would come to her big brother
to be comforted.  That very act or attitude of protection made me more
resolute in my purpose, and seemed to clear my brain of idle, dreamy
wandering in thought.  With an instinct of greater protection, however,
I took away my arm as I heard the Doctor's footstep outside the door.

When Doctor Winchester came in he looked intently at the patient before
speaking. His brows were set, and his mouth was a thin, hard line.
Presently he said:

"There is much in common between the sleep of your Father and Nurse
Kennedy. Whatever influence has brought it about has probably worked the
same way in both cases.  In Kennedy's case the coma is less marked.  I
cannot but feel, however, that with her we may be able to do more and
more quickly than with this patient, as our hands are not tied.  I have
placed her in a draught; and already she shows some signs, though very
faint ones, of ordinary unconsciousness.  The rigidity of her limbs is
less, and her skin seems more sensitive--or perhaps I should say less
insensitive--to pain."

"How is it, then," I asked, "that Mr. Trelawny is still in this state of
insensibility; and yet, so far as we know, his body has not had such
rigidity at all?"

"That I cannot answer.  The problem is one which we may solve in a few
hours; or it may need a few days.  But it will be a useful lesson in
diagnosis to us all; and perhaps to many and many others after us, who
knows!" he added, with the genuine fire of an enthusiast.

As the morning wore on, he flitted perpetually between the two rooms,
watching anxiously over both patients.  He made Mrs. Grant remain with
the Nurse, but either Miss Trelawny or I, generally both of us, remained
with the wounded man. We each managed, however, to get bathed and
dressed; the Doctor and Mrs. Grant remained with Mr. Trelawny whilst we
had breakfast.

Sergeant Daw went off to report at Scotland Yard the progress of the
night; and then to the local station to arrange for the coming of his
comrade, Wright, as fixed with Superintendent Dolan.  When he returned I
could not but think that he had been hauled over the coals for shooting
in a sick-room; or perhaps for shooting at all without certain and
proper cause.  His remark to me enlightened me in the matter:

"A good character is worth something, sir, in spite of what some of them
say.  See! I've still got leave to carry my revolver."

That day was a long and anxious one.  Toward nightfall Nurse Kennedy so
far improved that the rigidity of her limbs entirely disappeared.  She
still breathed quietly and regularly; but the fixed expression of her
face, though it was a calm enough expression, gave place to fallen
eyelids and the negative look of sleep. Doctor Winchester had, towards
evening, brought two more nurses, one of whom was to remain with Nurse
Kennedy and the other to share in the watching with Miss Trelawny, who
had insisted on remaining up herself.  She had, in order to prepare for
the duty, slept for several hours in the afternoon.  We had all taken
counsel together, and had arranged thus for the watching in Mr.
Trelawny's room.  Mrs. Grant was to remain beside the patient till
twelve, when Miss Trelawny would relieve her.  The new nurse was to sit
in Miss Trelawny's room, and to visit the sick chamber each quarter of
an hour.  The Doctor would remain till twelve; when I was to relieve
him.  One or other of the detectives was to remain within hail of the
room all night; and to pay periodical visits to see that all was well.
Thus, the watchers would be watched; and the possibility of such events
as last night, when the watchers were both overcome, would be avoided.

When the sun set, a strange and grave anxiety fell on all of us; and in
our separate ways we prepared for the vigil.  Doctor Winchester had
evidently been thinking of my respirator, for he told me he would go out
and get one.  Indeed, he took to the idea so kindly that I persuaded
Miss Trelawny also to have one which she could put on when her time for
watching came.

And so the night drew on.


Chapter V
More Strange Instructions


When I came from my room at half-past eleven o'clock I found all well in
the sick-room.  The new nurse, prim, neat, and watchful, sat in the
chair by the bedside where Nurse Kennedy had sat last night.  A little
way off, between the bed and the safe, sat Dr. Winchester alert and
wakeful, but looking strange and almost comic with the respirator over
mouth and nose.  As I stood in the doorway looking at them I heard a
slight sound; turning round I saw the new detective, who nodded, held up
the finger of silence and withdrew quietly.  Hitherto no one of the
watchers was overcome by sleep.

I took a chair outside the door.  As yet there was no need for me to
risk coming again under the subtle influence of last night.  Naturally
my thoughts went revolving round the main incidents of the last day and
night, and I found myself arriving at strange conclusions, doubts,
conjectures; but I did not lose myself, as on last night, in trains of
thought.  The sense of the present was ever with me, and I really felt
as should a sentry on guard.  Thinking is not a slow process; and when
it is earnest the time can pass quickly.  It seemed a very short time
indeed till the door, usually left ajar, was pulled open and Dr.
Winchester emerged, taking off his respirator as he came.  His act, when
he had it off, was demonstrative of his keenness.  He turned up the
outside of the wrap and smelled it carefully.

"I am going now," he said.  "I shall come early in the morning; unless,
of course, I am sent for before.  But all seems well tonight."

The next to appear was Sergeant Daw, who went quietly into the room and
took the seat vacated by the Doctor.  I still remained outside; but
every few minutes looked into the room.  This was rather a form than a
matter of utility, for the room was so dark that coming even from the
dimly-lighted corridor it was hard to distinguish anything.

A little before twelve o'clock Miss Trelawny came from her room.  Before
coming to her father's she went into that occupied by Nurse Kennedy.
After a couple of minutes she came out, looking, I thought, a trifle
more cheerful.  She had her respirator in her hand, but before putting
it on, asked me if anything special had occurred since she had gone to
lie down.  I answered in a whisper--there was no loud talking in the
house tonight--that all was safe, was well.  She then put on her
respirator, and I mine; and we entered the room.  The Detective and the
Nurse rose up, and we took their places.  Sergeant Daw was the last to
go out; he closed the door behind him as we had arranged.

For a while I sat quiet, my heart beating.  The place was grimly dark.
The only light was a faint one from the top of the lamp which threw a
white circle on the high ceiling, except the emerald sheen of the shade
as the light took its under edges. Even the light only seemed to
emphasize the blackness of the shadows.  These presently began to seem,
as on last night, to have a sentience of their own.  I did not myself
feel in the least sleepy; and each time I went softly over to look at
the patient, which I did about every ten minutes, I could see that Miss
Trelawny was keenly alert.  Every quarter of an hour one or other of the
policemen looked in through the partly opened door.  Each time both Miss
Trelawny and I said through our mufflers, "all right," and the door was
closed again.

As the time wore on, the silence and the darkness seemed to increase.
The circle of light on the ceiling was still there, but it seemed less
brilliant than at first.  The green edging of the lamp-shade became like
Maori greenstone rather than emerald. The sounds of the night without
the house, and the starlight spreading pale lines along the edges of the
window-cases, made the pall of black within more solemn and more
mysterious.

We heard the clock in the corridor chiming the quarters with its silver
bell till two o'clock; and then a strange feeling came over me.  I could
see from Miss Trelawny's movement as she looked round, that she also had
some new sensation.  The new detective had just looked in; we two were
alone with the unconscious patient for another quarter of an hour.

My heart began to beat wildly.  There was a sense of fear over me.  Not
for myself; my fear was impersonal.  It seemed as though some new person
had entered the room, and that a strong intelligence was awake close to
me.  Something brushed against my leg.  I put my hand down hastily and
touched the furry coat of Silvio. With a very faint far-away sound of a
snarl he turned and scratched at me.  I felt blood on my hand.  I rose
gently and came over to the bedside.  Miss Trelawny, too, had stood up
and was looking behind her, as though there was something close to her.
Her eyes were wild, and her breast rose and fell as though she were
fighting for air. When I touched her she did not seem to feel me; she
worked her hands in front of her, as though she was fending off
something.

There was not an instant to lose.  I seized her in my arms and rushed
over to the door, threw it open, and strode into the passage, calling
loudly:

"Help!  Help!"

In an instant the two Detectives, Mrs. Grant, and the Nurse appeared on
the scene. Close on their heels came several of the servants, both men
and women. Immediately Mrs. Grant came near enough, I placed Miss
Trelawny in her arms, and rushed back into the room, turning up the
electric light as soon as I could lay my hand on it.  Sergeant Daw and
the Nurse followed me.

We were just in time.  Close under the great safe, where on the two
successive nights he had been found, lay Mr. Trelawny with his left arm,
bare save for the bandages, stretched out.  Close by his side was a
leaf-shaped Egyptian knife which had lain amongst the curios on the
shelf of the broken cabinet.  Its point was stuck in the parquet floor,
whence had been removed the blood-stained rug.

But there was no sign of disturbance anywhere; nor any sign of any one
or anything unusual.  The Policemen and I searched the room accurately,
whilst the Nurse and two of the servants lifted the wounded man back to
bed; but no sign or clue could we get.  Very soon Miss Trelawny returned
to the room.  She was pale but collected. When she came close to me she
said in a low voice:

"I felt myself fainting.  I did not know why; but I was afraid!"

The only other shock I had was when Miss Trelawny cried out to me, as I
placed my hand on the bed to lean over and look carefully at her father:

"You are wounded.  Look! look! your hand is bloody.  There is blood on
the sheets!" I had, in the excitement, quite forgotten Silvio's scratch.
As I looked at it, the recollection came back to me; but before I could
say a word Miss Trelawny had caught hold of my hand and lifted it up.
When she saw the parallel lines of the cuts she cried out again:

"It is the same wound as Father's!"  Then she laid my hand down gently
but quickly, and said to me and to Sergeant Daw:

"Come to my room!  Silvio is there in his basket."  We followed her, and
found Silvio sitting in his basket awake.  He was licking his paws.  The
Detective said:

"He is there sure enough; but why licking his paws?"

Margaret--Miss Trelawny--gave a moan as she bent over and took one of
the forepaws in her hand; but the cat seemed to resent it and snarled.
At that Mrs. Grant came into the room.  When she saw that we were
looking at the cat she said:

"The Nurse tells me that Silvio was asleep on Nurse Kennedy's bed ever
since you went to your Father's room until a while ago.  He came there
just after you had gone to master's room.  Nurse says that Nurse Kennedy
is moaning and muttering in her sleep as though she had a nightmare.  I
think we should send for Dr. Winchester."

"Do so at once, please!" said Miss Trelawny; and we went back to the
room.

For a while Miss Trelawny stood looking at her father, with her brows
wrinkled. Then, turning to me, as though her mind were made up, she
said:

"Don't you think we should have a consultation on Father?  Of course I
have every confidence in Doctor Winchester; he seems an immensely clever
young man.  But he is a young man; and there must be men who have
devoted themselves to this branch of science.  Such a man would have
more knowledge and more experience; and his knowledge and experience
might help to throw light on poor Father's case. As it is, Doctor
Winchester seems to be quite in the dark.  Oh! I don't know what to do.
It is all so terrible!"  Here she broke down a little and cried; and I
tried to comfort her.

Doctor Winchester arrived quickly.  His first thought was for his
patient; but when he found him without further harm, he visited Nurse
Kennedy.  When he saw her, a hopeful look came into his eyes.  Taking a
towel, he dipped a corner of it in cold water and flicked on the face.
The skin coloured, and she stirred slightly.  He said to the new nurse--
Sister Doris he called her:

"She is all right.  She will wake in a few hours at latest.  She may be
dizzy and distraught at first, or perhaps hysterical.  If so, you know
how to treat her."

"Yes, sir!" answered Sister Doris demurely; and we went back to Mr.
Trelawny's room. As soon as we had entered, Mrs. Grant and the Nurse
went out so that only Doctor Winchester, Miss Trelawny, and myself
remained in the room.  When the door had been closed Doctor Winchester
asked me as to what had occurred.  I told him fully, giving exactly
every detail so far as I could remember.  Throughout my narrative, which
did not take long, however, he kept asking me questions as to who had
been present and the order in which each one had come into the room.  He
asked other things, but nothing of any importance; these were all that
took my attention, or remained in my memory.  When our conversation was
finished, he said in a very decided way indeed, to Miss Trelawny:

"I think, Miss Trelawny, that we had better have a consultation on this
case."  She answered at once, seemingly a little to his surprise:

"I am glad you have mentioned it.  I quite agree.  Who would you
suggest?"

"Have you any choice yourself?" he asked.  "Any one to whom your Father
is known? Has he ever consulted any one?"

"Not to my knowledge.  But I hope you will choose whoever you think
would be best.  My dear Father should have all the help that can be had;
and I shall be deeply obliged by your choosing.  Who is the best man in
London--anywhere else--in such a case?"

"There are several good men; but they are scattered all over the world.
Somehow, the brain specialist is born, not made; though a lot of hard
work goes to the completing of him and fitting him for his work.  He
comes from no country.  The most daring investigator up to the present
is Chiuni, the Japanese; but he is rather a surgical experimentalist
than a practitioner.  Then there is Zammerfest of Uppsala, and Fenelon
of the University of Paris, and Morfessi of Naples.  These, of course,
are in addition to our own men, Morrison of Aberdeen and Richardson of
Birmingham. But before them all I would put Frere of King's College.  Of
all that I have named he best unites theory and practice.  He has no
hobbies--that have been discovered at all events; and his experience is
immense.  It is the regret of all of us who admire him that the nerve so
firm and the hand so dexterous must yield to time.  For my own part I
would rather have Frere than any one living."

"Then," said Miss Trelawny decisively, "let us have Doctor Frere--by the
way, is he 'Doctor' or 'Mister'?--as early as we can get him in the
morning!"

A weight seemed removed from him, and he spoke with greater ease and
geniality than he had yet shown:

"He is Sir James Frere.  I shall go to him myself as early as it is
possibly to see him, and shall ask him to come here at once."  Then
turning to me he said:

"You had better let me dress your hand."

"It is nothing," I said.

"Nevertheless it should be seen to.  A scratch from any animal might
turn out dangerous; there is nothing like being safe."  I submitted;
forthwith he began to dress my hand.  He examined with a
magnifying-glass the several parallel wounds, and compared them with the
slip of blotting-paper, marked with Silvio's claws, which he took from
his pocket-book.  He put back the paper, simply remarking:

"It's a pity that Silvio slips in--and out--just when he shouldn't."

The morning wore slowly on.  By ten o'clock Nurse Kennedy had so far
recovered that she was able to sit up and talk intelligibly.  But she
was still hazy in her thoughts; and could not remember anything that had
happened on the previous night, after her taking her place by the
sick-bed.  As yet she seemed neither to know nor care what had happened.

It was nearly eleven o'clock when Doctor Winchester returned with Sir
James Frere. Somehow I felt my heart sink when from the landing I saw
them in the hall below; I knew that Miss Trelawny was to have the pain
of telling yet another stranger of her ignorance of her father's life.

Sir James Frere was a man who commanded attention followed by respect.
He knew so thoroughly what he wanted himself, that he placed at once on
one side all wishes and ideas of less definite persons.  The mere flash
of his piercing eyes, or the set of his resolute mouth, or the lowering
of his great eyebrows, seemed to compel immediate and willing obedience
to his wishes.  Somehow, when we had all been introduced and he was well
amongst us, all sense of mystery seemed to melt away.  It was with a
hopeful spirit that I saw him pass into the sick-room with Doctor
Winchester.

They remained in the room a long time; once they sent for the Nurse, the
new one, Sister Doris, but she did not remain long.  Again they both
went into Nurse Kennedy's room.  He sent out the nurse attendant on her.
Doctor Winchester told me afterward that Nurse Kennedy, though she was
ignorant of later matters, gave full and satisfactory answers to all
Doctor Frere's questions relating to her patient up to the time she
became unconscious.  Then they went to the study, where they remained so
long, and their voices raised in heated discussion seemed in such
determined opposition, that I began to feel uneasy.  As for Miss
Trelawny, she was almost in a state of collapse from nervousness before
they joined us.  Poor girl! she had had a sadly anxious time of it, and
her nervous strength had almost broken down.

They came out at last, Sir James first, his grave face looking as
unenlightening as that of the sphinx.  Doctor Winchester followed him
closely; his face was pale, but with that kind of pallor which looked
like a reaction.  It gave me the idea that it had been red not long
before.  Sir James asked that Miss Trelawny would come into the study.
He suggested that I should come also.  When we had entered, Sir James
turned to me and said:

"I understand from Doctor Winchester that you are a friend of Miss
Trelawny, and that you have already considerable knowledge of this case.
Perhaps it will be well that you should be with us.  I know you already
as a keen lawyer, Mr. Ross, though I never had the pleasure of meeting
you.  As Doctor Winchester tells me that there are some strange matters
outside this case which seem to puzzle him--and others--and in which he
thinks you may yet be specially interested, it might be as well that you
should know every phase of the case.  For myself I do not take much
account of mysteries--except those of science; and as there seems to be
some idea of an attempt at assassination or robbery, all I can say is
that if assassins were at work they ought to take some elementary
lessons in anatomy before their next job, for they seem thoroughly
ignorant.  If robbery were their purpose, they seem to have worked with
marvellous inefficiency.  That, however, is not my business."  Here he
took a big pinch of snuff, and turning to to Miss Trelawny, went on:
"Now as to the patient. Leaving out the cause of his illness, all we can
say at present is that he appears to be suffering from a marked attack
of catalepsy.  At present nothing can be done, except to sustain his
strength.  The treatment of my friend Doctor Winchester is mainly such
as I approve of; and I am confident that should any slight change arise
he will be able to deal with it satisfactorily.  It is an interesting
case--most interesting; and should any new or abnormal development arise
I shall be happy to come at any time.  There is just one thing to which
I wish to call your attention; and I put it to you, Miss Trelawny,
directly, since it is your responsibility.  Doctor Winchester informs me
that you are not yourself free in the matter, but are bound by an
instruction given by your Father in case just such a condition of things
should arise.  I would strongly advise that the patient be removed to
another room; or, as an alternative, that those mummies and all such
things should be removed from his chamber.  Why, it's enough to put any
man into an abnormal condition, to have such an assemblage of horrors
round him, and to breathe the atmosphere which they exhale.  You have
evidence already of how such mephitic odour may act.  That nurse--
Kennedy, I think you said, Doctor--isn't yet out of her state of
catalepsy; and you, Mr. Ross, have, I am told, experienced something of
the same effects.  I know this"--here his eyebrows came down more than
ever, and his mouth hardened--"if I were in charge here I should insist
on the patient having a different atmosphere; or I would throw up the
case.  Doctor Winchester already knows that I can only be again
consulted on this condition being fulfilled.  But I trust that you will
see your way, as a good daughter to my mind should, to looking to your
Father's health and sanity rather than to any whim of his--whether
supported or not by a foregoing fear, or by any number of "penny
dreadful" mysteries.  The day has hardly come yet, I am glad to say,
when the British Museum and St. Thomas's Hospital have exchanged their
normal functions.  Good-day, Miss Trelawny.  I earnestly hope that I may
soon see your Father restored.  Remember, that should you fulfil the
elementary condition which I have laid down, I am at your service day or
night.  Good-morning, Mr. Ross.  I hope you will be able to report to me
soon, Doctor Winchester."

When he had gone we stood silent, till the rumble of his carriage wheels
died away. The first to speak was Doctor Winchester:

"I think it well to say that to my mind, speaking purely as a physician,
he is quite right.  I feel as if I could have assaulted him when he made
it a condition of not giving up the case; but all the same he is right
as to treatment.  He does not understand that there is something odd
about this special case; and he will not realise the knot that we are
all tied up in by Mr. Trelawny's instructions.  Of course--" He was
interrupted by Miss Trelawny:

"Doctor Winchester, do you, too, wish to give up the case; or are you
willing to continue it under the conditions you know?"

"Give it up!  Less now than ever.  Miss Trelawny, I shall never give it
up, so long as life is left to him or any of us!"  She said nothing, but
held out her hand, which he took warmly.

"Now," said she, "if Sir James Frere is a type of the cult of
Specialists, I want no more of them.  To start with, he does not seem to
know any more than you do about my Father's condition; and if he were a
hundredth part as much interested in it as you are, he would not stand
on such punctilio.  Of course, I am only too anxious about my poor
Father; and if I can see a way to meet either of Sir James Frere's
conditions, I shall do so.  I shall ask Mr. Marvin to come here today,
and advise me as to the limit of Father's wishes.  If he thinks I am
free to act in any way on my own responsibility, I shall not hesitate to
do so."  Then Doctor Winchester took his leave.

 Miss Trelawny sat down and wrote a letter to Mr. Marvin, telling him of
the state of affairs, and asking him to come and see her and to bring
with him any papers which might throw any light on the subject.  She
sent the letter off with a carriage to bring back the solicitor; we
waited with what patience we could for his coming.

It is not a very long journey for oneself from Kensington Palace Gardens
to Lincoln's Inn Fields; but it seemed endlessly long when waiting for
someone else to take it.  All things, however, are amenable to Time; it
was less than an hour all told when Mr. Marvin was with us.

He recognised Miss Trelawny's impatience, and when he had learned
sufficient of her father's illness, he said to her:

"Whenever you are ready I can go with you into particulars regarding
your Father's wishes."

"Whenever you like," she said, with an evident ignorance of his meaning.
"Why not now?"  He looked at me, as to a fellow man of business, and
stammered out:

"We are not alone."

"I have brought Mr. Ross here on purpose," she answered.  "He knows so
much at present, that I want him to know more."  The solicitor was a
little disconcerted, a thing which those knowing him only in courts
would hardly have believed.  He answered, however, with some hesitation:

"But, my dear young lady--Your Father's wishes!--Confidence between father
and child--"

Here she interrupted him; there was a tinge of red in her pale cheeks as
she did so:

"Do you really think that applies to the present circumstances, Mr.
Marvin?  My Father never told me anything of his affairs; and I can now,
in this sad extremity, only learn his wishes through a gentleman who is
a stranger to me and of whom I never even heard till I got my Father's
letter, written to be shown to me only in extremity.  Mr. Ross is a new
friend; but he has all my confidence, and I should like him to be
present.  Unless, of course," she added, "such a thing is forbidden by
my Father.  Oh! forgive me, Mr. Marvin, if I seem rude; but I have been
in such dreadful trouble and anxiety lately, that I have hardly command
of myself."  She covered her eyes with her hand for a few seconds; we
two men looked at each other and waited, trying to appear unmoved.  She
went on more firmly; she had recovered herself:

"Please! please do not think I am ungrateful to you for your kindness in
coming here and so quickly.  I really am grateful; and I have every
confidence in your judgment.  If you wish, or think it best, we can be
alone."  I stood up; but Mr. Marvin made a dissentient gesture.  He was
evidently pleased with her attitude; there was geniality in his voice
and manner as he spoke:

"Not at all!  Not at all!  There is no restriction on your Father's
part; and on my own I am quite willing.  Indeed, all told, it may be
better.  From what you have said of Mr. Trelawny's illness, and the
other--incidental--matters, it will be well in case of any grave
eventuality, that it was understood from the first, that circumstances
were ruled by your Father's own imperative instructions.  For, please
understand me, his instructions are imperative--most imperative.  They
are so unyielding that he has given me a Power of Attorney, under which
I have undertaken to act, authorising me to see his written wishes
carried out.  Please believe me once for all, that he intended fully
everything mentioned in that letter to you!  Whilst he is alive he is to
remain in his own room; and none of his property is to be removed from
it under any circumstances whatever.  He has even given an inventory of
the articles which are not to be displaced."

Miss Trelawny was silent.  She looked somewhat distressed; so, thinking
that I understood the immediate cause, I asked:

"May we see the list?"  Miss Trelawny's face at once brightened; but it
fell again as the lawyer answered promptly--he was evidently prepared for
the question:

"Not unless I am compelled to take action on the Power of Attorney.  I
have brought that instrument with me.  You will recognise, Mr. Ross"--he
said this with a sort of business conviction which I had noticed in his
professional work, as he handed me the deed--"how strongly it is worded,
and how the grantor made his wishes apparent in such a way as to leave
no loophole.  It is his own wording, except for certain legal
formalities; and I assure you I have seldom seen a more iron-clad
document.  Even I myself have no power to make the slightest relaxation
of the instructions, without committing a distinct breach of faith.  And
that, I need not tell you, is impossible." He evidently added the last
words in order to prevent an appeal to his personal consideration.  He
did not like the seeming harshness of his words, however, for he added:

"I do hope, Miss Trelawny, that you understand that I am willing--
frankly and unequivocally willing--to do anything I can, within the
limits of my power, to relieve your distress.  But your Father had, in
all his doings, some purpose of his own which he did not disclose to me.
So far as I can see, there is not a word of his instructions that he had
not thought over fully.  Whatever idea he had in his mind was the idea
of a lifetime; he had studied it in every possible phase, and was
prepared to guard it at every point.

"Now I fear I have distressed you, and I am truly sorry for it; for I
see you have much--too much--to bear already.  But I have no alternative.
If you want to consult me at any time about anything, I promise you I
will come without a moment's delay, at any hour of the day or night.
There is my private address," he scribbled in his pocket-book as he
spoke, "and under it the address of my club, where I am generally to be
found in the evening."  He tore out the paper and handed it to her.  She
thanked him.  He shook hands with her and with me and withdrew.

As soon as the hall door was shut on him, Mrs. Grant tapped at the door
and came in. There was such a look of distress in her face that Miss
Trelawny stood up, deadly white, and asked her:

"What is it, Mrs. Grant?  What is it?  Any new trouble?"

"I grieve to say, miss, that the servants, all but two, have given
notice and want to leave the house today.  They have talked the matter
over among themselves; the butler has spoken for the rest.  He says as
how they are willing to forego their wages, and even to pay their legal
obligations instead of notice; but that go today they must."

"What reason do they give?"

"None, miss.  They say as how they're sorry, but that they've nothing to
say.  I asked Jane, the upper housemaid, miss, who is not with the rest
but stops on; and she tells me confidential that they've got some notion
in their silly heads that the house is haunted!"

We ought to have laughed, but we didn't.  I could not look in Miss
Trelawny's face and laugh.  The pain and horror there showed no sudden
paroxysm of fear; there was a fixed idea of which this was a
confirmation.  For myself, it seemed as if my brain had found a voice.
But the voice was not complete; there was some other thought, darker and
deeper, which lay behind it, whose voice had not sounded as yet.


Chapter VI
Suspicions


The first to get full self-command was Miss Trelawny.  There was a
haughty dignity in her bearing as she said:

"Very well, Mrs. Grant; let them go!  Pay them up to today, and a
month's wages. They have hitherto been very good servants; and the
occasion of their leaving is not an ordinary one.  We must not expect
much faithfulness from any one who is beset with fears.  Those who
remain are to have in future double wages; and please send these to me
presently when I send word."  Mrs. Grant bristled with smothered
indignation; all the housekeeper in her was outraged by such generous
treatment of servants who had combined to give notice:

"They don't deserve it, miss; them to go on so, after the way they have
been treated here.  Never in my life have I seen servants so well
treated or anyone so good to them and gracious to them as you have been.
They might be in the household of a King for treatment.  And now, just
as there is trouble, to go and act like this.  It's abominable, that's
what it is!"

Miss Trelawny was very gentle with her, and smothered her ruffled
dignity; so that presently she went away with, in her manner, a lesser
measure of hostility to the undeserving.  In quite a different frame of
mind she returned presently to ask if her mistress would like her to
engage a full staff of other servants, or at any rate try to do so.
"For you know, ma'am," she went on, "when once a scare has been
established in the servants' hall, it's wellnigh impossible to get rid
of it.  Servants may come; but they go away just as quick.  There's no
holding them.  They simply won't stay; or even if they work out their
month's notice, they lead you that life that you wish every hour of the
day that you hadn't kept them.  The women are bad enough, the huzzies;
but the men are worse!"  There was neither anxiety nor indignation in
Miss Trelawny's voice or manner as she said:

"I think, Mrs. Grant, we had better try to do with those we have.
Whilst my dear Father is ill we shall not be having any company, so that
there will be only three now in the house to attend to.  If those
servants who are willing to stay are not enough, I should only get
sufficient to help them to do the work.  It will not, I should think, be
difficult to get a few maids; perhaps some that you know already.  And
please bear in mind, that those whom you get, and who are suitable and
will stay, are henceforth to have the same wages as those who are
remaining.  Of course, Mrs. Grant, you well enough understand that
though I do not group you in any way with the servants, the rule of
double salary applies to you too."  As she spoke she extended her long,
fine-shaped hand, which the other took and then, raising it to her lips,
kissed it impressively with the freedom of an elder woman to a younger.
I could not but admire the generosity of her treatment of her servants.
In my mind I endorsed Mrs. Grant's sotto voce remark as she left the
room:

"No wonder the house is like a King's house, when the mistress is a
Princess!"

"A Princess!"  That was it.  The idea seemed to satisfy my mind, and to
bring back in a wave of light the first moment when she swept across my
vision at the ball in Belgrave Square.  A queenly figure! tall and slim,
bending, swaying, undulating as the lily or the lotos.  Clad in a
flowing gown of some filmy black material shot with gold. For ornament
in her hair she wore an old Egyptian jewel, a tiny crystal disk, set
between rising plumes carved in lapis lazuli.  On her wrist was a broad
bangle or bracelet of antique work, in the shape of a pair of spreading
wings wrought in gold, with the feathers made of coloured gems.  For all
her gracious bearing toward me, when our hostess introduced me, I was
then afraid of her.  It was only when later, at the picnic on the river,
I had come to realise her sweet and gentle, that my awe changed to
something else.

For a while she sat, making some notes or memoranda.  Then putting them
away, she sent for the faithful servants.  I thought that she had better
have this interview alone, and so left her.  When I came back there were
traces of tears in her eyes.

The next phase in which I had a part was even more disturbing, and
infinitely more painful.  Late in the afternoon Sergeant Daw came into
the study where I was sitting. After closing the door carefully and
looking all round the room to make certain that we were alone, he came
close to me.

"What is it?" I asked him.  "I see you wish to speak to me privately."

"Quite so, sir!  May I speak in absolute confidence?"

"Of course you may.  In anything that is for the good of Miss Trelawny--
and of course Mr. Trelawny--you may be perfectly frank.  I take it that
we both want to serve them to the best of our powers."  He hesitated
before replying:

"Of course you know that I have my duty to do; and I think you know me
well enough to know that I will do it.  I am a policeman--a detective;
and it is my duty to find out the facts of any case I am put on, without
fear or favour to anyone.  I would rather speak to you alone, in
confidence if I may, without reference to any duty of anyone to anyone,
except mine to Scotland Yard."

"Of course! of course!" I answered mechanically, my heart sinking, I did
not know why.  "Be quite frank with me.  I assure you of my confidence."

"Thank you, sir.  I take it that what I say is not to pass beyond you--
not to anyone. Not to Miss Trelawny herself, or even to Mr. Trelawny
when he becomes well again."

"Certainly, if you make it a condition!" I said a little more stiffly.
The man recognised the change in my voice or manner, and said
apologetically:

"Excuse me, sir, but I am going outside my duty in speaking to you at
all on the subject.  I know you, however, of old; and I feel that I can
trust you.  Not your word, sir, that is all right; but your discretion!"

I bowed.  "Go on!" I said.  He began at once:

"I have gone over this case, sir, till my brain begins to reel; but I
can't find any ordinary solution of it.  At the time of each attempt no
one has seemingly come into the house; and certainly no one has got out.
What does it strike you is the inference?"

"That the somebody--or the something--was in the house already," I
answered, smiling in spite of myself.

"That's just what I think," he said, with a manifest sigh of relief.
"Very well! Who can be that someone?"

"'Someone, or something,' was what I said," I answered.

"Let us make it 'someone,' Mr. Ross!  That cat, though he might have
scratched or bit, never pulled the old gentleman out of bed, and tried
to get the bangle with the key off his arm.  Such things are all very
well in books where your amateur detectives, who know everything before
it's done, can fit them into theories; but in Scotland Yard, where the
men aren't all idiots either, we generally find that when crime is done,
or attempted, it's people, not things, that are at the bottom of it."

"Then make it 'people' by all means, Sergeant."

"We were speaking of 'someone,' sir."

"Quite right.  Someone, be it!"

"Did it ever strike you, sir, that on each of the three separate
occasions where outrage was effected, or attempted, there was one person
who was the first to be present and to give the alarm?"

"Let me see!  Miss Trelawny, I believe, gave the alarm on the first
occasion.  I was present myself, if fast asleep, on the second; and so
was Nurse Kennedy.  When I woke there were several people in the room;
you were one of them.  I understand that on that occasion also Miss
Trelawny was before you.  At the last attempt I was Miss Trelawny
fainted.  I carried her out and went back.  In returning, I was first;
and I think you were close behind me."

Sergeant Daw thought for a moment before replying:

"She was present, or first, in the room on all the occasions; there was
only damage done in the first and second!"

The inference was one which I, as a lawyer, could not mistake.  I
thought the best thing to do was to meet it half-way.  I have always
found that the best way to encounter an inference is to cause it to be
turned into a statement.

"You mean," I said, "that as on the only occasions when actual harm was
done, Miss Trelawny's being the first to discover it is a proof that she
did it; or was in some way connected with the attempt, as well as the
discovery?"

"I didn't venture to put it as clear as that; but that is where the
doubt which I had leads."  Sergeant Daw was a man of courage; he
evidently did not shrink from any conclusion of his reasoning on facts.

We were both silent for a while.  Fears began crowding in on my own
mind.  Not doubts of Miss Trelawny, or of any act of hers; but fears
lest such acts should be misunderstood.  There was evidently a mystery
somewhere; and if no solution to it could be found, the doubt would be
cast on someone.  In such cases the guesses of the majority are bound to
follow the line of least resistance; and if it could be proved that any
personal gain to anyone could follow Mr. Trelawny's death, should such
ensue, it might prove a difficult task for anyone to prove innocence in
the face of suspicious facts.  I found myself instinctively taking that
deferential course which, until the plan of battle of the prosecution is
unfolded, is so safe an attitude for the defence.  It would never do for
me, at this stage, to combat any theories which a detective might form.
I could best help Miss Trelawny by listening and understanding.  When
the time should come for the dissipation and obliteration of the
theories, I should be quite willing to use all my militant ardour, and
all the weapons at my command.

"You will of course do your duty, I know," I said, "and without fear.
What course do you intend to take?"

"I don't know as yet, sir.  You see, up to now it isn't with me even a
suspicion.  If any one else told me that that sweet young lady had a
hand in such a matter, I would think him a fool; but I am bound to
follow my own conclusions.  I know well that just as unlikely persons
have been proved guilty, when a whole court--all except the prosecution
who knew the facts, and the judge who had taught his mind to wait--would
have sworn to innocence.  I wouldn't, for all the world, wrong such a
young lady; more especial when she has such a cruel weight to bear.  And
you will be sure that I won't say a word that'll prompt anyone else to
make such a charge.  That's why I speak to you in confidence, man to
man.  You are skilled in proofs; that is your profession.  Mine only
gets so far as suspicions, and what we call our own proofs--which are
nothing but ex parte evidence after all.  You know Miss Trelawny better
than I do; and though I watch round the sick-room, and go where I like
about the house and in and out of it, I haven't the same opportunities
as you have of knowing the lady and what her life is, or her means are;
or of anything else which might give me a clue to her actions.  If I
were to try to find out from her, it would at once arouse her
suspicions.  Then, if she were guilty, all possibility of ultimate proof
would go; for she would easily find a way to baffle discovery.  But if
she be innocent, as I hope she is, it would be doing a cruel wrong to
accuse her.  I have thought the matter over according to my lights
before I spoke to you; and if I have taken a liberty, sir, I am truly
sorry."

"No liberty in the world, Daw," I said warmly, for the man's courage and
honesty and consideration compelled respect.  "I am glad you have spoken
to me so frankly. We both want to find out the truth; and there is so
much about this case that is strange--so strange as to go beyond all
experiences--that to aim at truth is our only chance of making anything
clear in the long-run--no matter what our views are, or what object we
wish to achieve ultimately!"  The Sergeant looked pleased as he went on:

"I thought, therefore, that if you had it once in your mind that
somebody else held to such a possibility, you would by degrees get
proof; or at any rate such ideas as would convince yourself, either for
or against it.  Then we would come to some conclusion; or at any rate we
should so exhaust all other possibilities that the most likely one would
remain as the nearest thing to proof, or strong suspicion, that we could
get. After that we should have to--"

Just at this moment the door opened and Miss Trelawny entered the room.
The moment she saw us she drew back quickly, saying:

"Oh, I beg pardon!  I did not know you were here, and engaged."  By the
time I had stood up, she was about to go back.

"Do come in," I said; "Sergeant Daw and I were only talking matters
over."

Whilst she was hesitating, Mrs. Grant appeared, saying as she entered
the room: "Doctor Winchester is come, miss, and is asking for you."

I obeyed Miss Trelawny's look; together we left the room.

When the Doctor had made his examination, he told us that there was
seemingly no change.  He added that nevertheless he would like to stay
in the house that night is he might.  Miss Trelawny looked glad, and
sent word to Mrs. Grant to get a room ready for him.  Later in the day,
when he and I happened to be alone together, he said suddenly:

"I have arranged to stay here tonight because I want to have a talk
with you.  And as I wish it to be quite private, I thought the least
suspicious way would be to have a cigar together late in the evening
when Miss Trelawny is watching her father."  We still kept to our
arrangement that either the sick man's daughter or I should be on watch
all night.  We were to share the duty at the early hours of the morning.
I was anxious about this, for I knew from our conversation that the
Detective would watch in secret himself, and would be particularly alert
about that time.

The day passed uneventfully.  Miss Trelawny slept in the afternoon; and
after dinner went to relieve the Nurse.  Mrs. Grant remained with her,
Sergeant Daw being on duty in the corridor.  Doctor Winchester and I
took our coffee in the library.  When we had lit our cigars he said
quietly:

"Now that we are alone I want to have a confidential talk.  We are
'tiled,' of course; for the present at all events?"

"Quite so!" I said, my heart sinking as I thought of my conversation
with Sergeant Daw in the morning, and of the disturbing and harrowing
fears which it had left in my mind.  He went on:

"This case is enough to try the sanity of all of us concerned in it.
The more I think of it, the madder I seem to get; and the two lines,
each continually strengthened, seem to pull harder in opposite
directions."

"What two lines?"  He looked at me keenly for a moment before replying.
Doctor Winchester's look at such moments was apt to be disconcerting.
It would have been so to me had I had a personal part, other than my
interest in Miss Trelawny, in the matter.  As it was, however, I stood
it unruffled.  I was now an attorney in the case; an amicus curiae in
one sense, in another retained for the defence.  The mere thought that
in this clever man's mind were two lines, equally strong and opposite,
was in itself so consoling as to neutralise my anxiety as to a new
attack.  As he began to speak, the Doctor's face wore an inscrutable
smile; this, however, gave place to a stern gravity as he proceeded:

"Two lines:  Fact and--Fancy!  In the first there is this whole thing;
attacks, attempts at robbery and murder; stupefyings; organised
catalepsy which points to either criminal hypnotism and thought
suggestion, or some simple form of poisoning unclassified yet in our
toxicology.  In the other there is some influence at work which is not
classified in any book that I know--outside the pages of romance.  I
never felt in my life so strongly the truth of Hamlet's words:

     'There are more things in Heaven and earth... 
     Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.'

"Let us take the 'Fact' side first.  Here we have a man in his home;
amidst his own household; plenty of servants of different classes in the
house, which forbids the possibility of an organised attempt made from
the servants" hall.  He is wealthy, learned, clever.  From his
physiognomy there is no doubting that he is a man of iron will and
determined purpose.  His daughter--his only child, I take it, a young
girl bright and clever--is sleeping in the very next room to his.  There
is seemingly no possible reason for expecting any attack or disturbance
of any kind; and no reasonable opportunity for any outsider to effect
it.  And yet we have an attack made; a brutal and remorseless attack,
made in the middle of the night.  Discovery is made quickly; made with
that rapidity which in criminal cases generally is found to be not
accidental, but of premeditated intent.  The attacker, or attackers, are
manifestly disturbed before the completion of their work, whatever their
ultimate intent may have been.  And yet there is no possible sign of
their escape; no clue, no disturbance of anything; no open door or
window; no sound.  Nothing whatever to show who had done the deed, or
even that a deed has been done; except the victim, and his surroundings
incidental to the deed!

"The next night a similar attempt is made, though the house is full of
wakeful people; and though there are on watch in the room and around it
a detective officer, a trained nurse, an earnest friend, and the man's
own daughter.  The nurse is thrown into a catalepsy, and the watching
friend--though protected by a respirator--into a deep sleep.  Even the
detective is so far overcome with some phase of stupor that he fires off
his pistol in the sick-room, and can't even tell what he thought he was
firing at.  That respirator of yours is the only thing that seems to
have a bearing on the 'fact' side of the affair.  That you did not lose
your head as the others did--the effect in such case being in proportion
to the amount of time each remained in the room--points to the
probability that the stupefying medium was not hypnotic, whatever else
it may have been.  But again, there is a fact which is contradictory.
Miss Trelawny, who was in the room more than any of you--for she was in
and out all the time and did her share of permanent watching also--did
not seem to be affected at all.  This would show that the influence,
whatever it is, does not affect generally--unless, of course, it was that
she was in some way inured to it.  If it should turn out that it be some
strange exhalation from some of those Egyptian curios, that might
account for it; only, we are then face to face with the fact that Mr.
Trelawny, who was most of all in the room--who, in fact, lived more than
half his life in it--was affected worst of all.  What kind of influence
could it be which would account for all these different and
contradictory effects?  No! the more I think of this form of the
dilemma, the more I am bewildered!  Why, even if it were that the
attack, the physical attack, on Mr. Trelawny had been made by some one
residing in the house and not within the sphere of suspicion, the
oddness of the stupefyings would still remain a mystery.  It is not easy
to put anyone into a catalepsy.  Indeed, so far as is known yet in
science, there is no way to achieve such an object at will.  The crux of
the whole matter is Miss Trelawny, who seems to be subject to none of
the influences, or possibly of the variants of the same influence at
work.  Through all she goes unscathed, except for that one slight
semi-faint.  It is most strange!"

I listened with a sinking heart; for, though his manner was not
illuminative of distrust, his argument was disturbing.  Although it was
not so direct as the suspicion of the Detective, it seemed to single out
Miss Trelawny as different from all others concerned; and in a mystery
to be alone is to be suspected, ultimately if not immediately.  I
thought it better not to say anything.  In such a case silence is indeed
golden; and if I said nothing now I might have less to defend, or
explain, or take back later.  I was, therefore, secretly glad that his
form of putting his argument did not require any answer from me--for the
present, at all events. Doctor Winchester did not seem to expect any
answer--a fact which, when I recognised it, gave my pleasure, I hardly
knew why.  He paused for a while, sitting with his chin in his hand, his
eyes staring at vacancy, whilst his brows were fixed.  His cigar was
held limp between his fingers; he had apparently forgotten it.  In an
even voice, as though commencing exactly where he had left off, he
resumed his argument:

"The other horn of the dilemma is a different affair altogether; and if
we once enter on it we must leave everything in the shape of science and
experience behind us.  I confess that it has its fascinations for me;
though at every new thought I find myself romancing in a way that makes
me pull up suddenly and look facts resolutely in the face.  I sometimes
wonder whether the influence or emanation from the sick-room at times
affects me as it did the others--the Detective, for instance.  Of course
it may be that if it is anything chemical, any drug, for example, in
vaporeal form, its effects may be cumulative.  But then, what could
there be that could produce such an effect?  The room is, I know, full
of mummy smell; and no wonder, with so many relics from the tomb, let
alone the actual mummy of that animal which Silvio attacked.  By the
way, I am going to test him tomorrow; I have been on the trace of a
mummy cat, and am to get possession of it in the morning.  When I bring
it here we shall find out if it be a fact that racial instinct can
survive a few thousand years in the grave.  However, to get back to the
subject in hand.  These very mummy smells arise from the presence of
substances, and combinations of substances, which the Egyptian priests,
who were the learned men and scientists of their time, found by the
experience of centuries to be strong enough to arrest the natural forces
of decay. There must be powerful agencies at work to effect such a
purpose; and it is possible that we may have here some rare substance or
combination whose qualities and powers are not understood in this later
and more prosaic age.  I wonder if Mr. Trelawny has any knowledge, or
even suspicion, of such a kind?  I only know this for certain, that a
worse atmosphere for a sick chamber could not possibly be imagined; and
I admire the courage of Sir James Frere in refusing to have anything to
do with a case under such conditions.  These instructions of Mr.
Trelawny to his daughter, and from what you have told me, the care with
which he has protected his wishes through his solicitor, show that he
suspected something, at any rate. Indeed, it would almost seem as if he
expected something to happen. . . . I wonder if it would be possible to
learn anything about that!  Surely his papers would show or suggest
something. . . . It is a difficult matter to tackle; but it might have to
be done.  His present condition cannot go on for ever; and if anything
should happen there would have to be an inquest.  In such case full
examination would have to be made into everything. . . . As it stands,
the police evidence would show a murderous attack more than once
repeated.  As no clue is apparent, it would be necessary to seek one in
a motive."

He was silent.  The last words seemed to come in a lower and lower tone
as he went on.  It had the effect of hopelessness.  It came to me as a
conviction that now was my time to find out if he had any definite
suspicion; and as if in obedience to some command, I asked:

"Do you suspect anyone?"  He seemed in a way startled rather than
surprised as he turned his eyes on me:

"Suspect anyone?  Any thing, you mean.  I certainly suspect that there
is some influence; but at present my suspicion is held within such
limit.  Later on, if there be any sufficiently definite conclusion to my
reasoning, or my thinking--for there are not proper data for reasoning--I
may suspect; at present however--"

He stopped suddenly and looked at the door.  There was a faint sound as
the handle turned.  My own heart seemed to stand still.  There was over
me some grim, vague apprehension.  The interruption in the morning, when
I was talking with the Detective, came back upon me with a rush.

The door opened, and Miss Trelawny entered the room.

When she saw us, she started back; and a deep flush swept her face.  For
a few seconds she paused; at such a time a few succeeding seconds seem
to lengthen in geometrical progression.  The strain upon me, and, as I
could easily see, on the Doctor also, relaxed as she spoke:

"Oh, forgive me, I did not know that you were engaged.  I was looking
for you, Doctor Winchester, to ask you if I might go to bed tonight
with safety, as you will be here.  I feel so tired and worn-out that I
fear I may break down; and tonight I would certainly not be of any
use."  Doctor Winchester answered heartily:

"Do!  Do go to bed by all means, and get a good night's sleep.  God
knows! you want it.  I am more than glad you have made the suggestion,
for I feared when I saw you tonight that I might have you on my hands a
patient next."

She gave a sigh of relief, and the tired look seemed to melt from her
face.  Never shall I forget the deep, earnest look in her great,
beautiful black eyes as she said to me:

"You will guard Father tonight, won't you, with Doctor Winchester?  I
am so anxious about him that every second brings new fears.  But I am
really worn-out; and if I don't get a good sleep, I think I shall go
mad.  I will change my room for tonight. I'm afraid that if I stay so
close to Father's room I shall multiply every sound into a new terror.
But, of course, you will have me waked if there be any cause.  I shall
be in the bedroom of the little suite next the boudoir off the hall.  I
had those rooms when first I came to live with Father, and I had no care
then. . . . It will be easier to rest there; and perhaps for a few hours
I may forget.  I shall be all right in the morning.  Good-night!"

When I had closed the door behind her and come back to the little table
at which we had been sitting, Doctor Winchester said:

"That poor girl is overwrought to a terrible degree.  I am delighted
that she is to get a rest.  It will be life to her; and in the morning
she will be all right.  Her nervous system is on the verge of a
breakdown.  Did you notice how fearfully disturbed she was, and how red
she got when she came in and found us talking?  An ordinary thing like
that, in her own house with her own guests, wouldn't under normal
circumstances disturb her!"

I was about to tell him, as an explanation in her defence, how her
entrance was a repetition of her finding the Detective and myself alone
together earlier in the day, when I remembered that that conversation
was so private that even an allusion to it might be awkward in evoking
curiosity.  So I remained silent.

We stood up to go to the sick-room; but as we took our way through the
dimly-lighted corridor I could not help thinking, again and again, and
again--ay, and for many a day after--how strange it was that she had
interrupted me on two such occasions when touching on such a theme.

There was certainly some strange web of accidents, in whose meshes we
were all involved.


Chapter VII
The Traveller's Loss


That night everything went well.  Knowing that Miss Trelawny herself was
not on guard, Doctor Winchester and I doubled our vigilance.  The Nurses
and Mrs. Grant kept watch, and the Detectives made their visit each
quarter of an hour.  All night the patient remained in his trance.  He
looked healthy, and his chest rose and fell with the easy breathing of a
child.  But he never stirred; only for his breathing he might have been
of marble.  Doctor Winchester and I wore our respirators, and irksome
they were on that intolerably hot night.  Between midnight and three
o'clock I felt anxious, and had once more that creepy feeling to which
these last few nights had accustomed me; but the grey of the dawn,
stealing round the edges of the blinds, came with inexpressible relief,
followed by restfulness, went through the household.  During the hot
night my ears, strained to every sound, had been almost painfully
troubled; as though my brain or sensoria were in anxious touch with
them.  Every breath of the Nurse or the rustle of her dress; every soft
pat of slippered feet, as the Policeman went his rounds; every moment of
watching life, seemed to be a new impetus to guardianship.  Something of
the same feeling must have been abroad in the house; now and again I
could hear upstairs the sound of restless feet, and more than once
downstairs the opening of a window.  With the coming of the dawn,
however, all this ceased, and the whole household seemed to rest.
Doctor Winchester went home when Sister Doris came to relieve Mrs.
Grant.  He was, I think, a little disappointed or chagrined that nothing
of an exceptional nature had happened during his long night vigil.

At eight o'clock Miss Trelawny joined us, and I was amazed as well as
delighted to see how much good her night's sleep had done her.  She was
fairly radiant; just as I had seen her at our first meeting and at the
picnic.  There was even a suggestion of colour in her cheeks, which,
however, looked startlingly white in contrast with her black brows and
scarlet lips.  With her restored strength, there seemed to have come a
tenderness even exceeding that which she had at first shown to her sick
father.  I could not but be moved by the loving touches as she fixed his
pillows and brushed the hair from his forehead.

I was wearied out myself with my long spell of watching; and now that
she was on guard I started off to bed, blinking my tired eyes in the full
light and feeling the weariness of a sleepless night on me all at once.

I had a good sleep, and after lunch I was about to start out to walk to
Jermyn Street, when I noticed an importunate man at the hall door.  The
servant in charge was the one called Morris, formerly the "odd man," but
since the exodus of the servants promoted to be butler pro tem.  The
stranger was speaking rather loudly, so that there was no difficulty in
understanding his grievance.  The servant man was respectful in both
words and demeanour; but he stood squarely in front of the great double
door, so that the other could not enter.  The first words which I heard
from the visitor sufficiently explained the situation:

"That's all very well, but I tell you I must see Mr. Trelawny!  What is
the use of your saying I can't, when I tell you I must.  You put me off,
and off, and off!  I came here at nine; you said then that he was not
up, and that as he was not well he could not be disturbed.  I came at
twelve; and you told me again he was not up.  I asked then to see any of
his household; you told me that Miss Trelawny was not up.  Now I come
again at three, and you tell me he is still in bed, and is not awake
yet.  Where is Miss Trelawny?  'She is occupied and must not be
disturbed!'  Well, she must be disturbed!  Or some one must.  I am here
about Mr. Trelawny's special business; and I have come from a place
where servants always begin by saying No.  'No' isn't good enough for me
this time!  I've had three years of it, waiting outside doors and tents
when it took longer to get in than it did into the tombs; and then you
would think, too, the men inside were as dead as the mummies.  I've had
about enough of it, I tell you.  And when I come home, and find the door
of the man I've been working for barred, in just the same way and with
the same old answers, it stirs me up the wrong way.  Did Mr. Trelawny
leave orders that he would not see me when I should come?"

He paused and excitedly mopped his forehead.  The servant answered very
respectfully:

"I am very sorry, sir, if in doing my duty I have given any offence.
But I have my orders, and must obey them.  If you would like to leave
any message, I will give it to Miss Trelawny; and if you will leave your
address, she can communicate with you if she wishes."  The answer came
in such a way that it was easy to see that the speaker was a kind-
hearted man, and a just one.

"My good fellow, I have no fault to find with you personally; and I am
sorry if I have hurt your feelings.  I must be just, even if I am angry.
But it is enough to anger any man to find himself in the position I am.
Time is pressing.  There is not an hour--not a minute--to lose!  And yet
here I am, kicking my heels for six hours; knowing all the time that
your master will be a hundred times angrier than I am, when he hears how
the time has been fooled away.  He would rather be waked out of a
thousand sleeps than not see me just at present--and before it is too
late.  My God! it's simply dreadful, after all I've gone through, to
have my work spoiled at the last and be foiled in the very doorway by a
stupid flunkey!  Is there no one with sense in the house; or with
authority, even if he hasn't got sense?  I could mighty soon convince
him that your master must be awakened; even if he sleeps like the Seven
Sleepers--"

There was no mistaking the man's sincerity, or the urgency and
importance of his business; from his point of view at any rate.  I
stepped forward.

"Morris," I said, "you had better tell Miss Trelawny that this gentleman
wants to see her particularly.  If she is busy, ask Mrs. Grant to tell
her."

"Very good, sir!" he answered in a tone of relief, and hurried away.

I took the stranger into the little boudoir across the hall.  As we went
he asked me:

"Are you the secretary?"

"No!  I am a friend of Miss Trelawny's.  My name is Ross."

"Thank you very much, Mr. Ross, for your kindness!" he said.  "My name
is Corbeck.  I would give you my card, but they don't use cards where
I've come from.  And if I had had any, I suppose they, too, would have
gone last night--"

He stopped suddenly, as though conscious that he had said too much.  We
both remained silent; as we waited I took stock of him.  A short, sturdy
man, brown as a coffee-berry; possibly inclined to be fat, but now lean
exceedingly.  The deep wrinkles in his face and neck were not merely
from time and exposure; there were those unmistakable signs where flesh
or fat has fallen away, and the skin has become loose.  The neck was
simply an intricate surface of seams and wrinkles, and sun-scarred with
the burning of the Desert.  The Far East, the Tropic Seasons, and the
Desert--each can have its colour mark.  But all three are quite
different; and an eye which has once known, can thenceforth easily
distinguish them.  The dusky pallor of one; the fierce red-brown of the
other; and of the third, the dark, ingrained burning, as though it had
become a permanent colour.  Mr. Corbeck had a big head, massive and
full; with shaggy, dark red-brown hair, but bald on the temples.  His
forehead was a fine one, high and broad; with, to use the terms of
physiognomy, the frontal sinus boldly marked.  The squareness of it
showed "ratiocination"; and the fulness under the eyes "language".  He
had the short, broad nose that marks energy; the square chin--marked
despite a thick, unkempt beard--and massive jaw that showed great
resolution.

"No bad man for the Desert!" I thought as I looked.

Miss Trelawny came very quickly.  When Mr. Corbeck saw her, he seemed
somewhat surprised.  But his annoyance and excitement had not
disappeared; quite enough remained to cover up any such secondary and
purely exoteric feeling as surprise. But as she spoke he never took his
eyes off her; and I made a mental note that I would find some early
opportunity of investigating the cause of his surprise.  She began with
an apology which quite smoothed down his ruffled feelings:

"Of course, had my Father been well you would not have been kept
waiting.  Indeed, had not I been on duty in the sick-room when you
called the first time, I should have seen you at once.  Now will you
kindly tell me what is the matter which so presses?" He looked at me and
hesitated.  She spoke at once:

"You may say before Mr. Ross anything which you can tell me.  He has my
fullest confidence, and is helping me in my trouble.  I do not think you
quite understand how serious my Father's condition is.  For three days
he has not waked, or given any sign of consciousness; and I am in
terrible trouble about him.  Unhappily I am in great ignorance of my
Father and his life.  I only came to live with him a year ago; and I
know nothing whatever of his affairs.  I do not even know who you are,
or in what way your business is associated with him."  She said this
with a little deprecating smile, all conventional and altogether
graceful; as though to express in the most genuine way her absurd
ignorance.

He looked steadily at her for perhaps a quarter of a minute; then he
spoke, beginning at once as though his mind were made up and his
confidence established:

"My name is Eugene Corbeck.  I am a Master of Arts and Doctor of Laws
and Master of Surgery of Cambridge; Doctor of Letters of Oxford; Doctor
of Science and Doctor of Languages of London University; Doctor of
Philosophy of Berlin; Doctor of Oriental Languages of Paris.  I have
some other degrees, honorary and otherwise, but I need not trouble you
with them.  Those I have name will show you that I am sufficiently
feathered with diplomas to fly into even a sick-room.  Early in life--
fortunately for my interests and pleasures, but unfortunately for my
pocket--I fell in with Egyptology.  I must have been bitten by some
powerful scarab, for I took it bad.  I went out tomb-hunting; and
managed to get a living of a sort, and to learn some things that you
can't get out of books.  I was in pretty low water when I met your
Father, who was doing some explorations on his own account; and since
then I haven't found that I have many unsatisfied wants.  He is a real
patron of the arts; no mad Egyptologist can ever hope for a better
chief!"

He spoke with feeling; and I was glad to see that Miss Trelawny coloured
up with pleasure at the praise of her father.  I could not help
noticing, however, that Mr. Corbeck was, in a measure, speaking as if
against time.  I took it that he wished, while speaking, to study his
ground; to see how far he would be justified in taking into confidence
the two strangers before him.  As he went on, I could see that his
confidence kept increasing.  When I thought of it afterward, and
remembered what he had said, I realised that the measure of the
information which he gave us marked his growing trust.

"I have been several times out on expeditions in Egypt for your Father;
and I have always found it a delight to work for him.  Many of his
treasures--and he has some rare ones, I tell you-he has procured through
me, either by my exploration or by purchase--or--or--otherwise.  Your
Father, Miss Trelawny, has a rare knowledge.  He sometimes makes up his
mind that he wants to find a particular thing, of whose existence--if it
still exists--he has become aware; and he will follow it all over the
world till he gets it.  I've been on just such a chase now."

He stopped suddenly, as suddenly as thought his mouth had been shut by
the jerk of a string.  We waited; when he went on he spoke with a
caution that was new to him, as though he wished to forestall our asking
any questions:

"I am not at liberty to mention anything of my mission; where it was
to, what it was for, or anything at all about it.  Such matters are in
confidence between Mr. Trelawny and myself; I am pledged to absolute
secrecy."

He paused, and an embarrassed look crept over his face.  Suddenly he
said:

"You are sure, Miss Trelawny, your Father is not well enough to see me
today?"

A look of wonderment was on her face in turn.  But it cleared at once;--
she stood up, saying in a tone in which dignity and graciousness were
blended:

"Come and see for yourself!"  She moved toward her father's room; he
followed, and I brought up the rear.

Mr. Corbeck entered the sick-room as though he knew it.  There is an
unconscious attitude or bearing to persons in new surroundings which
there is no mistaking. Even in his anxiety to see his powerful friend,
he glanced for a moment round the room, as at a familiar place.  Then
all his attention became fixed on the bed.  I watched him narrowly, for
somehow I felt that on this man depended much of our enlightenment
regarding the strange matter in which we were involved.

It was not that I doubted him.  The man was of transparent honesty; it
was this very quality which we had to dread.  He was of that courageous,
fixed trueness to his undertaking, that if he should deem it his duty to
guard a secret he would do it to the last.  The case before us was, at
least, an unusual one; and it would, consequently, require more liberal
recognition of bounds of the duty of secrecy than would hold under
ordinary conditions.  To us, ignorance was helplessness.  If we could
learn anything of the past we might at least form some idea of the
conditions antecedent to the attack; and might, so, achieve some means
of helping the patient to recovery. There were curios which might be
removed. . . . My thoughts were beginning to whirl once again; I pulled
myself up sharply and watched.  There was a look of infinite pity on the
sun-stained, rugged face as he gazed at his friend, lying so helpless.
The sternness of Mr. Trelawny's face had not relaxed in sleep; but
somehow it made the helplessness more marked.  It would not have
troubled one to see a weak or an ordinary face under such conditions;
but this purposeful, masterful man, lying before us wrapped in
impenetrable sleep, had all the pathos of a great ruin.  The sight was
not a new one to us; but I could see that Miss Trelawny, like myself,
was moved afresh by it in the presence of the stranger.  Mr. Corbeck's
face grew stern.  All the pity died away; and in its stead came a grim,
hard look which boded ill for whoever had been the cause of this mighty
downfall.  This look in turn gave place to one of decision; the volcanic
energy of the man was working to some definite purpose.  He glanced
around at us; and as his eyes lighted on Nurse Kennedy his eyebrows went
up a trifle.  She noted the look, and glanced interrogatively at Miss
Trelawny, who flashed back a reply with a glance.  She went quietly from
the room, closing the door behind her.  Mr. Corbeck looked first at me,
with a strong man's natural impulse to learn from a man rather than a
woman; then at Miss Trelawny, with a remembrance of the duty of
courtesy, and said:

"Tell me all about it.  How it began and when!"  Miss Trelawny looked at
me appeallingly; and forthwith I told him all that I knew.  He seemed to
make no motion during the whole time; but insensibly the bronze face
became steel.  When, at the end, I told him of Mr. Marvin's visit and of
the Power of Attorney, his look began to brighten.  And when, seeing his
interest in the matter, I went more into detail as to its terms, he
spoke:

"Good!  Now I know where my duty lies!"

With a sinking heart I heard him.  Such a phrase, coming at such a time,
seemed to close the door to my hopes of enlightenment.

"What do you mean?" I asked, feeling that my question was a feeble one.

His answer emphasized my fears:

"Trelawny knows what he is doing.  He had some definite purpose in all
that he did; and we must not thwart him.  He evidently expected
something to happen, and guarded himself at all points."

"Not at all points!" I said impulsively.  "There must have been a weak
spot somewhere, or he wouldn't be lying here like that!"  Somehow his
impassiveness surprised me.  I had expected that he would find a valid
argument in my phrase; but it did not move him, at least not in the way
I thought.  Something like a smile flickered over his swarthy face as he
answered me:

"This is not the end!  Trelawny did not guard himself to no purpose.
Doubtless, he expected this too; or at any rate the possibility of it."

"Do you know what he expected, or from what source?"  The questioner was
Miss Trelawny.

The answer came at once:  "No!  I know nothing of either. I can 
guess . . ."  He stopped suddenly.

"Guess what?"  The suppressed excitement in the girl's voice was akin to
anguish. The steely look came over the swarthy face again; but there was
tenderness and courtesy in both voice and manner as he replied:

"Believe me, I would do anything I honestly could to relieve you
anxiety.  But in this I have a higher duty."

"What duty?"

"Silence!"  As he spoke the word, the strong mouth closed like a steel
trap.

We all remained silent for a few minutes.  In the intensity of our
thinking, the silence became a positive thing; the small sounds of life
within and without the house seemed intrusive.  The first to break it
was Miss Trelawny.  I had seen an idea--a hope--flash in her eyes; but
she steadied herself before speaking:

"What was the urgent subject on which you wanted to see me, knowing that
my Father was--not available?"  The pause showed her mastery of her
thoughts.

The instantaneous change in Mr. Corbeck was almost ludicrous.  His start
of surprise, coming close upon his iron-clad impassiveness, was like a
pantomimic change.  But all idea of comedy was swept away by the tragic
earnestness with which he remembered his original purpose.

"My God!" he said, as he raised his hand from the chair back on which it
rested, and beat it down with a violence which would in itself have
arrested attention.  His brows corrugated as he went on:  "I quite
forgot!  What a loss!  Now of all times!  Just at the moment of success!
He lying there helpless, and my tongue tied!  Not able to raise hand or
foot in my ignorance of his wishes!"

"What is it?  Oh, do tell us!  I am so anxious about my dear Father!  Is
it any new trouble?  I hope not! oh, I hope not!  I have had such
anxiety and trouble already!  It alarms me afresh to hear you speak so!
Won't you tell me something to allay this terrible anxiety and
uncertainty?"

He drew his sturdy form up to his full height as he said:

"Alas!  I cannot, may not, tell you anything.  It is his secret."  He
pointed to the bed. "And yet--and yet I came here for his advice, his
counsel, his assistance.  And he lies there helpless. . . . And time
is flying by us!  It may soon be too late!"

"What is it? what is it?" broke in Miss Trelawny in a sort of passion of
anxiety, her face drawn with pain.  "Oh, speak!  Say something!  This
anxiety, and horror, and mystery are killing me!"  Mr. Corbeck calmed
himself by a great effort.

"I may not tell you details; but I have had a great loss.  My mission,
in which I have spent three years, was successful.  I discovered all
that I sought--and more; and brought them home with me safely.
Treasures, priceless in themselves, but doubly precious to him by whose
wishes and instructions I sought them.  I arrived in London only last
night, and when I woke this morning my precious charge was stolen.
Stolen in some mysterious way.  Not a soul in London knew that I was
arriving.  No one but myself knew what was in the shabby portmanteau
that I carried.  My room had but one door, and that I locked and bolted.
The room was high in the house, five stories up, so that no entrance
could have been obtained by the window.  Indeed, I had closed the window
myself and shut the hasp, for I wished to be secure in every way.  This
morning the hasp was untouched. . . . And yet my portmanteau was empty.
The lamps were gone! . . . There! it is out.  I went to Egypt to search
for a set of antique lamps which Mr. Trelawny wished to trace.  With
incredible labour, and through many dangers, I followed them.  I brought
them safe home. . . . And now!"  He turned away much moved.  Even his
iron nature was breaking down under the sense of loss.

Miss Trelawny stepped over and laid her hand on his arm.  I looked at
her in amazement.  All the passion and pain which had so moved her
seemed to have taken the form of resolution.  Her form was erect, her
eyes blazed; energy was manifest in every nerve and fibre of her being.
Even her voice was full of nervous power as she spoke.  It was apparent
that she was a marvellously strong woman, and that her strength could
answer when called upon.

"We must act at once!  My Father's wishes must be carried out if it is
possible to us. Mr. Ross, you are a lawyer.  We have actually in the
house a man whom you consider one of the best detectives in London.
Surely we can do something.  We can begin at once!"  Mr. Corbeck took
new life from her enthusiasm.

"Good!  You are your Father's daughter!" was all he said.  But his
admiration for her energy was manifested by the impulsive way in which
he took her hand.  I moved over to the door.  I was going to bring
Sergeant Daw; and from her look of approval, I knew that Margaret--Miss
Trelawny--understood.  I was at the door when Mr. Corbeck called me back.

"One moment," he said, "before we bring a stranger on the scene.  It
must be borne in mind that he is not to know what you know now, that the
lamps were the objects of a prolonged and difficult and dangerous
search.  All I can tell him, all that he must know from any source, is
that some of my property has been stolen.  I must describe some of the
lamps, especially one, for it is of gold; and my fear is lest the thief,
ignorant of its historic worth, may, in order to cover up his crime,
have it melted.  I would willingly pay ten, twenty, a hundred, a
thousand times its intrinsic value rather than have it destroyed.  I
shall tell him only what is necessary.  So, please, let me answer any
questions he may ask; unless, of course, I ask you or refer to either of
you for the answer."  We both nodded acquiescence.  Then a thought
struck me and I said:

"By the way, if it be necessary to keep this matter quiet it will be
better to have it if possible a private job for the Detective.  If once
a thing gets to Scotland Yard it is out of our power to keep it quiet,
and further secrecy may be impossible.  I shall sound Sergeant Daw
before he comes up.  If I say nothing, it will mean that he accepts the
task and will deal with it privately."  Mr. Corbeck answered at once:

"Secrecy is everything.  The one thing I dread is that the lamps, or
some of them, may be destroyed at once."  To my intense astonishment
Miss Trelawny spoke out at once, but quietly, in a decided voice:

"They will not be destroyed; nor any of them!"  Mr. Corbeck actually
smiled in amazement.

"How on earth do you know?" he asked.  Her answer was still more
incomprehensible:

"I don't know how I know it; but know it I do.  I feel it all through
me; as though it were a conviction which has been with me all my life!"


Chapter VIII
The Finding of the Lamps


Sergeant Daw at first made some demur; but finally agreed to advise
privately on a matter which might be suggested to him.  He added that I
was to remember that he only undertook to advise; for if action were
required he might have to refer the matter to headquarters.  With this
understanding I left him in the study, and brought Miss Trelawny and Mr.
Corbeck to him.  Nurse Kennedy resumed her place at the bedside before
we left the room.

I could not but admire the cautious, cool-headed precision with which
the traveller stated his case.  He did not seem to conceal anything, and
yet he gave the least possible description of the objects missing.  He
did not enlarge on the mystery of the case; he seemed to look on it as
an ordinary hotel theft.  Knowing, as I did, that his one object was to
recover the articles before their identity could be obliterated, I could
see the rare intellectual skill with which he gave the necessary matter
and held back all else, though without seeming to do so.  "Truly,"
thought I, "this man has learned the lesson of the Eastern bazaars; and
with Western intellect has improved upon his masters!"  He quite
conveyed his idea to the Detective, who, after thinking the matter over
for a few moments, said:

"Pot or scale? that is the question."

"What does that mean?" asked the other, keenly alert.

"An old thieves phrase from Birmingham.  I thought that in these days of
slang everyone knew that.  In old times at Brum, which had a lot of
small metal industries, the gold- and silver-smiths used to buy metal
from almost anyone who came along. And as metal in small quantities
could generally be had cheap when they didn't ask where it came from, it
got to be a custom to ask only one thing--whether the customer wanted the
goods melted, in which case the buyer made the price, and the melting-
pot was always on the fire.  If it was to be preserved in its present
state at the buyer's option, it went into the scale and fetched standard
price for old metal.

"There is a good deal of such work done still, and in other places than
Brum.  When we're looking for stolen watches we often come across the
works, and it's not possible to identify wheels and springs out of a
heap; but it's not often that we come across cases that are wanted.
Now, in the present instance much will depend on whether the thief is a
good man--that's what they call a man who knows his work.  A first-class
crook will know whether a thing is of more value than merely the metal
in it; and in such case he would put it with someone who could place it
later on--in America or France, perhaps.  By the way, do you think anyone
but yourself could identify your lamps?"

"No one but myself!"

"Are there others like them?"

"Not that I know of," answered Mr. Corbeck; "though there may be others
that resemble them in many particulars."  The Detective paused before
asking again: "Would any other skilled person--at the British Museum, for
instance, or a dealer, or a collector like Mr. Trelawny, know the value--
the artistic value--of the lamps?"

"Certainly!  Anyone with a head on his shoulders would see at a glance
that the things were valuable."

The Detective's face brightened.  "Then there is a chance.  If your door
was locked and the window shut, the goods were not stolen by the chance
of a chambermaid or a boots coming along.  Whoever did the job went
after it special; and he ain't going to part with his swag without his
price.  This must be a case of notice to the pawnbrokers.  There's one
good thing about it, anyhow, that the hue and cry needn't be given.  We
needn't tell Scotland Yard unless you like; we can work the thing
privately.  If you wish to keep the thing dark, as you told me at the
first, that is our chance."  Mr. Corbeck, after a pause, said quietly:

"I suppose you couldn't hazard a suggestion as to how the robbery was
effected?" The Policeman smiled the smile of knowledge and experience.

"In a very simple way, I have no doubt, sir.  That is how all these
mysterious crimes turn out in the long-run.  The criminal knows his work
and all the tricks of it; and he is always on the watch for chances.
Moreover, he knows by experience what these chances are likely to be,
and how they usually come.  The other person is only careful; he doesn't
know all the tricks and pits that may be made for him, and by some
little oversight or other he falls into the trap.  When we know all
about this case, you will wonder that you did not see the method of it
all along!"  This seemed to annoy Mr. Corbeck a little; there was
decided heat in his manner as he answered:

"Look here, my good friend, there is not anything simple about this
case--except that the things were taken.  The window was closed; the
fireplace was bricked up.  There is only one door to the room, and that
I locked and bolted.  There is no transom; I have heard all about hotel
robberies through the transom.  I never left my room in the night.  I
looked at the things before going to bed; and I went to look at them
again when I woke up.  If you can rig up any kind of simple robbery out
of these facts you are a clever man.  That's all I say; clever enough to
go right away and get my things back."  Miss Trelawny laid her hand upon
his arm in a soothing way, and said quietly:

"Do not distress yourself unnecessarily.  I am sure they will turn up."
Sergeant Daw turned to her so quickly that I could not help remembering
vividly his suspicions of her, already formed, as he said:

"May I ask, miss, on what you base that opinion?"

I dreaded to hear her answer, given to ears already awake to suspicion;
but it came to me as a new pain or shock all the same:

"I cannot tell you how I know.  But I am sure of it!"  The Detective
looked at her for some seconds in silence, and then threw a quick glance
at me.

Presently he had a little more conversation with Mr. Corbeck as to his
own movements, the details of the hotel and the room, and the means of
identifying the goods.  Then he went away to commence his inquiries, Mr.
Corbeck impressing on him the necessity for secrecy lest the thief
should get wind of his danger and destroy the lamps.  Mr. Corbeck
promised, when going away to attend to various matters of his own
business, to return early in the evening, and to stay in the house.

All that day Miss Trelawny was in better spirits and looked in better
strength than she had yet been, despite the new shock and annoyance of
the theft which must ultimately bring so much disappointment to her
father.

We spent most of the day looking over the curio treasures of Mr.
Trelawny.  From what I had heard from Mr. Corbeck I began to have some
idea of the vastness of his enterprise in the world of Egyptian
research; and with this light everything around me began to have a new
interest.  As I went on, the interest grew; any lingering doubts which I
might have had changed to wonder and admiration.  The house seemed to be
a veritable storehouse of marvels of antique art.  In addition to the
curios, big and little, in Mr. Trelawny's own room--from the great
sarcophagi down to the scarabs of all kinds in the cabinets--the great
hall, the staircase landings, the study, and even the boudoir were full
of antique pieces which would have made a collector's mouth water.

Miss Trelawny from the first came with me, and looked with growing
interest at everything.  After having examined some cabinets of
exquisite amulets she said to me in quite a naive way:

"You will hardly believe that I have of late seldom even looked at any
of these things. It is only since Father has been ill that I seem to
have even any curiosity about them. But now, they grow and grow on me to
quite an absorbing degree.  I wonder if it is that the collector's blood
which I have in my veins is beginning to manifest itself.  If so, the
strange thing is that I have not felt the call of it before.  Of course
I know most of the big things, and have examined them more or less; but
really, in a sort of way I have always taken them for granted, as though
they had always been there.  I have noticed the same thing now and again
with family pictures, and the way they are taken for granted by the
family.  If you will let me examine them with you it will be
delightful!"

It was a joy to me to hear her talk in such a way; and her last
suggestion quite thrilled me.  Together we went round the various rooms
and passages, examining and admiring the magnificent curios.  There was
such a bewildering amount and variety of objects that we could only
glance at most of them; but as we went along we arranged that we should
take them seriatim, day by day, and examine them more closely.  In the
hall was a sort of big frame of floriated steel work which Margaret said
her father used for lifting the heavy stone lids of the sarcophagi.  It
was not heavy and could be moved about easily enough.  By aid of this we
raised the covers in turn and looked at the endless series of
hieroglyphic pictures cut in most of them.  In spite of her profession
of ignorance Margaret knew a good deal about them; her year of life with
her father had had unconsciously its daily and hourly lesson.  She was a
remarkably clever and acute-minded girl, and with a prodigious memory;
so that her store of knowledge, gathered unthinkingly bit by bit, had
grown to proportions that many a scholar might have envied.

And yet it was all so naive and unconscious; so girlish and simple.  She
was so fresh in her views and ideas, and had so little thought of self,
that in her companionship I forgot for the time all the troubles and
mysteries which enmeshed the house; and I felt like a boy again. . . .

The most interesting of the sarcophagi were undoubtedly the three in Mr.
Trelawny's room.  Of these, two were of dark stone, one of porphyry and
the other of a sort of ironstone.  These were wrought with some
hieroglyphs.  But the third was strikingly different.  It was of some
yellow-brown substance of the dominating colour effect of Mexican onyx,
which it resembled in many ways, excepting that the natural pattern of
its convolutions was less marked.  Here and there were patches almost
transparent--certainly translucent.  The whole chest, cover and all, was
wrought with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of minute hieroglyphics,
seemingly in an endless series.  Back, front, sides, edges, bottom, all
had their quota of the dainty pictures, the deep blue of their colouring
showing up fresh and sharply edge in the yellow stone.  It was very
long, nearly nine feet; and perhaps a yard wide.  The sides undulated,
so that there was no hard line.  Even the corners took such excellent
curves that they pleased the eye.  "Truly," I said, "this must have been
made for a giant!"

"Or for a giantess!" said Margaret.

This sarcophagus stood near to one of the windows.  It was in one
respect different from all the other sarcophagi in the place.  All the
others in the house, of whatever material--granite, porphyry, ironstone,
basalt, slate, or wood--were quite simple in form within.  Some of them
were plain of interior surface; others were engraved, in whole or part,
with hieroglyphics.  But each and all of them had no protuberances or
uneven surface anywhere.  They might have been used for baths; indeed,
they resembled in many ways Roman baths of stone or marble which I had
seen.  Inside this, however, was a raised space, outlined like a human
figure.  I asked Margaret if she could explain it in any way.  For
answer she said:

"Father never wished to speak about this.  It attracted my attention
from the first; but when I asked him about it he said:  'I shall tell
you all about it some day, little girl--if I live!  But not yet!  The
story is not yet told, as I hope to tell it to you!  Some day, perhaps
soon, I shall know all; and then we shall go over it together.  And a
mighty interesting story you will find it--from first to last!'  Once
afterward I said, rather lightly I am afraid:  'Is that story of the
sarcophagus told yet, Father?'  He shook his head, and looked at me
gravely as he said:  'Not yet, little girl; but it will be--if I live--
if I live!'  His repeating that phrase about his living rather
frightened me; I never ventured to ask him again."

Somehow this thrilled me.  I could not exactly say how or why; but it
seemed like a gleam of light at last.  There are, I think, moments when
the mind accepts something as true; though it can account for neither
the course of the thought, nor, if there be more than one thought, the
connection between them.  Hitherto we had been in such outer darkness
regarding Mr. Trelawny, and the strange visitation which had fallen on
him, that anything which afforded a clue, even of the faintest and most
shadowy kind, had at the outset the enlightening satisfaction of a
certainty.  Here were two lights of our puzzle.  The first that Mr.
Trelawny associated with this particular curio a doubt of his own
living.  The second that he had some purpose or expectation with regard
to it, which he would not disclose, even to his daughter, till complete.
Again it was to be borne in mind that this sarcophagus differed
internally from all the others.  What meant that odd raised place?  I
said nothing to Miss Trelawny, for I feared lest I should either
frighten her or buoy her up with future hopes; but I made up my mind
that I would take an early opportunity for further investigation.

Close beside the sarcophagus was a low table of green stone with red
veins in it, like bloodstone.  The feet were fashioned like the paws of
a jackal, and round each leg was twined a full-throated snake wrought
exquisitely in pure gold.  On it rested a strange and very beautiful
coffer or casket of stone of a peculiar shape.  It was something like a
small coffin, except that the longer sides, instead of being cut off
square like the upper or level part were continued to a point.  Thus it
was an irregular septahedron, there being two planes on each of the two
sides, one end and a top and bottom.  The stone, of one piece of which
it was wrought, was such as I had never seen before.  At the base it was
of a full green, the colour of emerald without, of course, its gleam.
It was not by any means dull, however, either in colour or substance,
and was of infinite hardness and fineness of texture.  The surface was
almost that of a jewel.  The colour grew lighter as it rose, with
gradation so fine as to be imperceptible, changing to a fine yellow
almost of the colour of "mandarin" china.  It was quite unlike anything
I had ever seen, and did not resemble any stone or gem that I knew.  I
took it to be some unique mother-stone, or matrix of some gem.  It was
wrought all over, except in a few spots, with fine hieroglyphics,
exquisitely done and coloured with the same blue-green cement or pigment
that appeared on the sarcophagus.  In length it was about two feet and a
half; in breadth about half this, and was nearly a foot high.  The
vacant spaces were irregularly distributed about the top running to the
pointed end.  These places seemed less opaque than the rest of the
stone.  I tried to lift up the lid so that I might see if they were
translucent; but it was securely fixed.  It fitted so exactly that the
whole coffer seemed like a single piece of stone mysteriously hollowed
from within.  On the sides and edges were some odd-looking protuberances
wrought just as finely as any other portion of the coffer which had been
sculptured by manifest design in the cutting of the stone.  They had
queer-shaped holes or hollows, different in each; and, like the rest,
were covered with the hieroglyphic figures, cut finely and filled in
with the same blue-green cement.

On the other side of the great sarcophagus stood another small table of
alabaster, exquisitely chased with symbolic figures of gods and the
signs of the zodiac.  On this table stood a case of about a foot square
composed of slabs of rock crystal set in a skeleton of bands of red
gold, beautifully engraved with hieroglyphics, and coloured with a blue
green, very much the tint of the figures on the sarcophagus and the
coffer.  The whole work was quite modern.

But if the case was modern what it held was not.  Within, on a cushion
of cloth of gold as fine as silk, and with the peculiar softness of old
gold, rested a mummy hand, so perfect that it startled one to see it.  A
woman's hand, fine and long, with slim tapering fingers and nearly as
perfect as when it was given to the embalmer thousands of years before.
In the embalming it had lost nothing of its beautiful shape; even the
wrist seemed to maintain its pliability as the gentle curve lay on the
cushion.  The skin was of a rich creamy or old ivory colour; a dusky
fair skin which suggested heat, but heat in shadow.  The great
peculiarity of it, as a hand, was that it had in all seven fingers,
there being two middle and two index fingers.  The upper end of the
wrist was jagged, as though it had been broken off, and was stained with
a red-brown stain.  On the cushion near the hand was a small scarab,
exquisitely wrought of emerald.

"That is another of Father's mysteries.  When I asked him about it he
said that it was perhaps the most valuable thing he had, except one.
When I asked him what that one was, he refused to tell me, and forbade
me to ask him anything concerning it. 'I will tell you,' he said, 'all
about it, too, in good time--if I live!'"

"If I live!" the phrase again.  These three things grouped together, the
Sarcophagus, the Coffer, and the Hand, seemed to make a trilogy of
mystery indeed!

At this time Miss Trelawny was sent for on some domestic matter.  I
looked at the other curios in the room; but they did not seem to have
anything like the same charm for me, now that she was away.  Later on in
the day I was sent for to the boudoir where she was consulting with Mrs.
Grant as to the lodgment of Mr. Corbeck.  They were in doubt as to
whether he should have a room close to Mr. Trelawny's or quite away from
it, and had thought it well to ask my advice on the subject.  I came to
the conclusion that he had better not be too near; for the first at all
events, he could easily be moved closer if necessary.  When Mrs. Grant
had gone, I asked Miss Trelawny how it came that the furniture of this
room, the boudoir in which we were, was so different from the other
rooms of the house.

"Father's forethought!" she answered.  "When I first came, he thought,
and rightly enough, that I might get frightened with so many records of
death and the tomb everywhere.  So he had this room and the little suite
off it--that door opens into the sitting-room--where I slept last night,
furnished with pretty things.  You see, they are all beautiful.  That
cabinet belonged to the great Napoleon."

"There is nothing Egyptian in these rooms at all then?" I asked, rather
to show interest in what she had said than anything else, for the
furnishing of the room was apparent.  "What a lovely cabinet!  May I
look at it?"

"Of course! with the greatest pleasure!" she answered, with a smile.
"Its finishing, within and without, Father says, is absolutely
complete."  I stepped over and looked at it closely.  It was made of
tulip wood, inlaid in patterns; and was mounted in ormolu.  I pulled
open one of the drawers, a deep one where I could see the work to great
advantage.  As I pulled it, something rattled inside as though rolling;
there was a tinkle as of metal on metal.

"Hullo!" I said.  "There is something in here.  Perhaps I had better not
open it."

"There is nothing that I know of," she answered.  "Some of the
housemaids may have used it to put something by for the time and
forgotten it.  Open it by all means!"

I pulled open the drawer; as I did so, both Miss Trelawny and I started
back in amazement.

There before our eyes lay a number of ancient Egyptian lamps, of various
sizes and of strangely varied shapes.

We leaned over them and looked closely.  My own heart was beating like a
trip-hammer; and I could see by the heaving of Margaret's bosom that
she was strangely excited.

Whilst we looked, afraid to touch and almost afraid to think, there was
a ring at the front door; immediately afterwards Mr. Corbeck, followed
by Sergeant Daw, came into the hall.  The door of the boudoir was open,
and when they saw us Mr. Corbeck came running in, followed more slowly
by the Detective.  There was a sort of chastened joy in his face and
manner as he said impulsively:

"Rejoice with me, my dear Miss Trelawny, my luggage has come and all my
things are intact!"  Then his face fell as he added, "Except the lamps.
The lamps that were worth all the rest a thousand times. . . ."  He
stopped, struck by the strange pallor of her face.  Then his eyes,
following her look and mine, lit on the cluster of lamps in the drawer.
He gave a sort of cry of surprise and joy as he bent over and touched
them:

"My lamps!  My lamps!  Then they are safe--safe--safe! . . . But how,
in the name of God--of all the Gods--did they come here?"

We all stood silent.  The Detective made a deep sound of in-taking
breath.  I looked at him, and as he caught my glance he turned his eyes
on Miss Trelawny whose back was toward him.

There was in them the same look of suspicion which had been there when
he had spoken to me of her being the first to find her father on the
occasions of the attacks.


Chapter IX
The Need of Knowledge


Mr. Corbeck seemed to go almost off his head at the recovery of the
lamps.  He took them up one by one and looked them all over tenderly, as
though they were things that he loved.  In his delight and excitement he
breathed so hard that it seemed almost like a cat purring.  Sergeant Daw
said quietly, his voice breaking the silence like a discord in a melody:

"Are you quite sure those lamps are the ones you had, and that were
stolen?"

His answer was in an indignant tone:  "Sure!  Of course I'm sure.  There
isn't another set of lamps like these in the world!"

"So far as you know!"  The Detective's words were smooth enough, but his
manner was so exasperating that I was sure he had some motive in it; so
I waited in silence. He went on:

"Of course there may be some in the British Museum; or Mr. Trelawny may
have had these already.  There's nothing new under the sun, you know,
Mr. Corbeck; not even in Egypt.  These may be the originals, and yours
may have been the copies.  Are there any points by which you can
identify these as yours?"

Mr. Corbeck was really angry by this time.  He forgot his reserve; and
in his indignation poured forth a torrent of almost incoherent, but
enlightening, broken sentences:

"Identify!  Copies of them!  British Museum!  Rot!  Perhaps they keep a
set in Scotland Yard for teaching idiot policemen Egyptology!  Do I know
them?  When I have carried them about my body, in the desert, for three
months; and lay awake night after night to watch them!  When I have
looked them over with a magnifying-glass, hour after hour, till my eyes
ached; till every tiny blotch, and chip, and dinge became as familiar to
me as his chart to a captain; as familiar as they doubtless have been
all the time to every thick-headed area-prowler within the bounds of
mortality.  See here, young man, look at these!"  He ranged the lamps in
a row on the top of the cabinet.  "Did you ever see a set of lamps of
these shapes--of any one of these shapes?  Look at these dominant figures
on them!  Did you ever see so complete a set--even in Scotland Yard; even
in Bow Street?  Look! one on each, the seven forms of Hathor. Look at
that figure of the Ka of a Princess of the Two Egypts, standing between
Ra and Osiris in the Boat of the Dead, with the Eye of Sleep, supported
on legs, bending before her; and Harmochis rising in the north.  Will
you find that in the British Museum--or Bow Street?  Or perhaps your
studies in the Gizeh Museum, or the Fitzwilliam, or Paris, or Leyden, or
Berlin, have shown you that the episode is common in hieroglyphics; and
that this is only a copy.  Perhaps you can tell me what that figure of
Ptah-Seker-Ausar holding the Tet wrapped in the Sceptre of Papyrus
means?  Did you ever see it before; even in the British Museum, or
Gizeh, or Scotland Yard?"

He broke off suddenly; and then went on in quite a different way:

"Look here! it seems to me that the thick-headed idiot is myself!  I beg
your pardon, old fellow, for my rudeness.  I quite lost my temper at the
suggestion that I do not know these lamps.  You don't mind, do you?"
The Detective answered heartily:

"Lord, sir, not I.  I like to see folks angry when I am dealing with
them, whether they are on my side or the other.  It is when people are
angry that you learn the truth from them.  I keep cool; that is my
trade!  Do you know, you have told me more about those lamps in the past
two minutes than when you filled me up with details of how to identify
them."

Mr. Corbeck grunted; he was not pleased at having given himself away.
All at once he turned to  me and said in his natural way:

"Now tell me how you got them back?"  I was so surprised that I said
without thinking:

"We didn't get them back!"  The traveller laughed openly.

"What on earth do you mean?" he asked.  "You didn't get them back!  Why,
there they are before your eyes!  We found you looking at them when we
came in."  By this time I had recovered my surprise and had my wits
about me.

"Why, that's just it," I said.  "We had only come across them, by
accident, that very moment!"

Mr. Corbeck drew back and looked hard at Miss Trelawny and myself;
turning his eyes from one to the other as he asked:

"Do you mean to tell me that no one brought them here; that you found
them in that drawer?  That, so to speak, no one at all brought them
back?"

"I suppose someone must have brought them here; they couldn't have come
of their own accord.  But who it was, or when, or how, neither of us
knows.  We shall have to make inquiry, and see if any of the servants
know anything of it."

We all stood silent for several seconds.  It seemed a long time.  The
first to speak was the Detective, who said in an unconscious way:

"Well, I'm damned!  I beg your pardon, miss!"  Then his mouth shut like
a steel trap.

We called up the servants, one by one, and asked them if they knew
anything of some articles placed in a drawer in the boudoir; but none of
them could throw any light on the circumstance.  We did not tell them
what the articles were; or let them see them.

Mr. Corbeck packed the lamps in cotton wool, and placed them in a tin
box.  This, I may mention incidentally, was then brought up to the
detectives' room, where one of the men stood guard over them with a
revolver the whole night.  Next day we got a small safe into the house,
and placed them in it.  There were two different keys.  One of them I
kept myself; the other I placed in my drawer in the Safe Deposit vault.
We were all determined that the lamps should not be lost again.

About an hour after we had found the lamps, Doctor Winchester arrived.
He had a large parcel with him, which, when unwrapped, proved to be the
mummy of a cat. With Miss Trelawny's permission he placed this in the
boudoir; and Silvio was brought close to it.  To the surprise of us all,
however, except perhaps Doctor Winchester, he did not manifest the least
annoyance; he took no notice of it whatever.  He stood on the table
close beside it, purring loudly.  Then, following out his plan, the
Doctor brought him into Mr. Trelawny's room, we all following. Doctor
Winchester was excited; Miss Trelawny anxious.  I was more than
interested myself, for I began to have a glimmering of the Doctor's
idea.  The Detective was calmly and coldly superior; but Mr. Corbeck,
who was an enthusiast, was full of eager curiosity.

The moment Doctor Winchester got into the room, Silvio began to mew and
wriggle; and jumping out of his arms, ran over to the cat mummy and
began to scratch angrily at it.  Miss Trelawny had some difficulty in
taking him away; but so soon as he was out of the room he became quiet.
When she came back there was a clamour of comments:

"I thought so!" from the Doctor.

"What can it mean?" from Miss Trelawny.

"That's a very strange thing!" from Mr. Corbeck.

"Odd! but it doesn't prove anything!" from the Detective.

"I suspend my judgment!" from myself, thinking it advisable to say
something.

Then by common consent we dropped the theme--for the present.

In my room that evening I was making some notes of what had happened,
when there came a low tap on the door.  In obedience to my summons
Sergeant Daw came in, carefully closing the door behind him.

"Well, Sergeant," said I, "sit down.  What is it?"

"I wanted to speak to you, sir, about those lamps."  I nodded and
waited:  he went on:  "You know that that room where they were found
opens directly into the room where Miss Trelawny slept last night?"

"Yes."

"During the night a window somewhere in that part of the house was
opened, and shut again.  I heard it, and took a look round; but I could
see no sign of anything."

"Yes, I know that!" I said; "I heard a window moved myself."

"Does nothing strike you as strange about it, sir?"

"Strange!" I said; "Strange! why it's all the most bewildering,
maddening thing I have ever encountered.  It is all so strange that one
seems to wonder, and simply waits for what will happen next.  But what
do you mean by strange?"

The Detective paused, as if choosing his words to begin; and then said
deliberately:

"You see, I am not one who believes in magic and such things.  I am for
facts all the time; and I always find in the long-run that there is a
reason and a cause for everything.  This new gentleman says these things
were stolen out of his room in the hotel.  The lamps, I take it from
some things he has said, really belong to Mr. Trelawny.  His daughter,
the lady of the house, having left the room she usually occupies, sleeps
that night on the ground floor.  A window is heard to open and shut
during the night.  When we, who have been during the day trying to find
a clue to the robbery, come to the house, we find the stolen goods in a
room close to where she slept, and opening out of it!"

He stopped.  I felt that same sense of pain and apprehension, which I
had experienced when he had spoken to me before, creeping, or rather
rushing, over me again.  I had to face the matter out, however.  My
relations with her, and the feeling toward her which I now knew full
well meant a very deep love and devotion, demanded so much.  I said as
calmly as I could, for I knew the keen eyes of the skilful investigator
were on me:

"And the inference?"

He answered with the cool audacity of conviction:

"The inference to me is that there was no robbery at all.  The goods
were taken by someone to this house, where they were received through a
window on the ground floor.  They were placed in the cabinet, ready to
be discovered when the proper time should come!"

Somehow I felt relieved; the assumption was too monstrous.  I did not
want, however, my relief to be apparent, so I answered as gravely as I
could:

"And who do you suppose brought them to the house?"

"I keep my mind open as to that.  Possibly Mr. Corbeck himself; the
matter might be too risky to trust to a third party."

"Then the natural extension of your inference is that Mr. Corbeck is a
liar and a fraud; and that he is in conspiracy with Miss Trelawny to
deceive someone or other about those lamps."

"Those are harsh words, Mr. Ross.  They're so plain-spoken that they
bring a man up standing, and make new doubts for him.  But I have to go
where my reason points.  It may be that there is another party than Miss
Trelawny in it.  Indeed, if it hadn't been for the other matter that set
me thinking and bred doubts of its own about her, I wouldn't dream of
mixing her up in this.  But I'm safe on Corbeck.  Whoever else is in it,
he is!  The things couldn't have been taken without his connivance--if
what he says is true.  If it isn't--well! he is a liar anyhow.  I would
think it a bad job to have him stay in the house with so many valuables,
only that it will give me and my mate a chance of watching him.  we'll
keep a pretty good look-out, too, I tell you.  He's up in my room now,
guarding those lamps; but Johnny Wright is there too.  I go on before he
comes off; so there won't be much chance of another house-breaking.  Of
course, Mr. Ross, all this, too, is between you and me."

"Quite so!  You may depend on my silence!" I said; and he went away to
keep a close eye on the Egyptologist.

It seemed as though all my painful experiences were to go in pairs, and
that the sequence of the previous day was to be repeated; for before
long I had another private visit from Doctor Winchester who had now paid
his nightly visit to his patient and was on his way home.  He took the
seat which I proffered and began at once:

"This is a strange affair altogether.  Miss Trelawny has just been
telling me about the stolen lamps, and of the finding of them in the
Napoleon cabinet.  It would seem to be another complication of the
mystery; and yet, do you know, it is a relief to me.  I have exhausted
all human and natural possibilities of the case, and am beginning to
fall back on superhuman and supernatural possibilities.  Here are such
strange things that, if I am not going mad, I think we must have a
solution before long.  I wonder if I might ask some questions and some
help from Mr. Corbeck, without making further complications and
embarrassing us.  He seems to know an amazing amount regarding Egypt and
all relating to it.  Perhaps he wouldn't mind translating a little bit
of hieroglyphic.  It is child's play to him.  What do you think?"

When I had thought the matter over a few seconds I spoke.  We wanted all
the help we could get.  For myself, I had perfect confidence in both
men; and any comparing notes, or mutual assistance, might bring good
results.  Such could hardly bring evil.

"By all means I should ask him.  He seems an extraordinarily learned man
in Egyptology; and he seems to me a good fellow as well as an
enthusiast.  By the way, it will be necessary to be a little guarded as
to whom you speak regarding any information which he may give you."

"Of course!" he answered.  "Indeed I should not dream of saying anything
to anybody, excepting yourself.  We have to remember that when Mr.
Trelawny recovers he may not like to think that we have been chattering
unduly over his affairs."

"Look here!" I said, "why not stay for a while:  and I shall ask him to
come and have a pipe with us.  We can then talk over things."

He acquiesced:  so I went to the room where Mr. Corbeck was, and brought
him back with me.  I thought the detectives were pleased at his going.
On the way to my room he said:

"I don't half like leaving those things there, with only those men to
guard them. They're a deal sight too precious to be left to the police!"

From which it would appear that suspicion was not confined to Sergeant
Daw.

Mr. Corbeck and Doctor Winchester, after a quick glance at each other,
became at once on most friendly terms.  The traveller professed his
willingness to be of any assistance which he could, provided, he added,
that it was anything about which he was free to speak.  This was not
very promising; but Doctor Winchester began at once:

"I want you, if you will, to translate some hieroglyphic for me."

"Certainly, with the greatest pleasure, so far as I can.  For I may tell
you that hieroglyphic writing is not quite mastered yet; though we are
getting at it!  We are getting at it!  What is the inscription?"

"There are two," he answered.  "One of them I shall bring here."

He went out, and returned in a minute with the mummy cat which he had
that evening introduced to Silvio.  The scholar took it; and, after a
short examination, said:

"There is nothing especial in this.  It is an appeal to Bast, the Lady
of Bubastis, to give her good bread and milk in the Elysian Fields.
There may be more inside; and if you will care to unroll it, I will do
my best.  I do not think, however, that there is anything special.  From
the method of wrapping I should say it is from the Delta; and of a late
period, when such mummy work was common and cheap.  What is the other
inscription you wish me to see?"

"The inscription on the mummy cat in Mr. Trelawny's room."

Mr. Corbeck's face fell.  "No!" he said, "I cannot do that!  I am, for
the present at all events, practically bound to secrecy regarding any of
the things in Mr. Trelawny's room."

Doctor Winchester's comment and my own were made at the same moment.  I
said only the one word "Checkmate!" from which I think he may have
gathered that I guessed more of his idea and purpose than perhaps I had
intentionally conveyed to him.  He murmured:

"Practically bound to secrecy?"

Mr. Corbeck at once took up the challenge conveyed:

"Do not misunderstand me!  I am not bound by any definite pledge of
secrecy; but I am bound in honour to respect Mr. Trelawny's confidence,
given to me, I may tell you, in a very large measure.  Regarding many of
the objects in his room he has a definite purpose in view; and it would
not be either right or becoming for me, his trusted friend and
confidant, to forestall that purpose.  Mr. Trelawny, you may know--or
rather you do not know or you would not have so construed my remark--is
a scholar, a very great scholar.  He has worked for years toward a
certain end.  For this he has spared no labour, no expense, no personal
danger or self-denial.  He is on the line of a result which will place
him amongst the foremost discoverers or investigators of his age.  And
now, just at the time when any hour might bring him success, he is
stricken down!"

He stopped, seemingly overcome with emotion.  After a time he recovered
himself and went on:

"Again, do not misunderstand me as to another point.  I have said that
Mr. Trelawny has made much confidence with me; but I do not mean to lead
you to believe that I know all his plans, or his aims or objects.  I
know the period which he has been studying; and the definite historical
individual whose life he has been investigating, and whose records he
has been following up one by one with infinite patience.  But beyond
this I know nothing.  That he has some aim or object in the completion
of this knowledge I am convinced.  What it is I may guess; but I must
say nothing. Please to remember, gentlemen, that I have voluntarily
accepted the position of recipient of a partial confidence.  I have
respected that; and I must ask any of my friends to do the same."

He spoke with great dignity; and he grew, moment by moment, in the
respect and esteem of both Doctor Winchester and myself.  We understood
that he had not done speaking; so we waited in silence till he
continued:

"I have spoken this much, although I know well that even such a hint as
either of you might gather from my words might jeopardise the success of
his work.  But I am convinced that you both wish to help him--and his
daughter," he said this looking me fairly between the eyes, "to the best
of your power, honestly and unselfishly.  He is so stricken down, and
the manner of it is so mysterious that I cannot but think that it is in
some way a result of his own work.  That he calculated on some set-back
is manifest to us all.  God knows! I am willing to do what I can, and to
use any knowledge I have in his behalf.  I arrived in England full of
exultation at the thought that I had fulfilled the mission with which he
had trusted me.  I had got what he said were the last objects of his
search; and I felt assured that he would now be able to begin the
experiment of which he had often hinted to me.  It is too dreadful that
at just such a time such a calamity should have fallen on him.  Doctor
Winchester, you are a physician; and, if your face does not belie you,
you are a clever and a bold one.  Is there no way which you can devise
to wake this man from his unnatural stupor?"

There was a pause; then the answer came slowly and deliberately:

"There is no ordinary remedy that I know of.  There might possibly be
some extraordinary one.  But there would be no use in trying to find it,
except on one condition."

"And that?"

"Knowledge!  I am completely ignorant of Egyptian matters, language,
writing, history, secrets, medicines, poisons, occult powers--all that go
to make up the mystery of that mysterious land.  This disease, or
condition, or whatever it may be called, from which Mr. Trelawny is
suffering, is in some way connected with Egypt.  I have had a suspicion
of this from the first; and later it grew into a certainty, though
without proof.  What you have said tonight confirms my conjecture, and
makes me believe that a proof is to be had.  I do not think that you
quite know all that has gone on in this house since the night of the
attack--of the finding of Mr. Trelawny's body. Now I propose that we
confide in you.  If Mr. Ross agrees, I shall ask him to tell you. He is
more skilled than I am in putting facts before other people.  He can
speak by his brief; and in this case he has the best of all briefs, the
experience of his own eyes and ears, and the evidence that he has
himself taken on the spot from participators in, or spectators of, what
has happened.  When you know all, you will, I hope, be in a position to
judge as to whether you can best help Mr. Trelawny, and further his
secret wishes, by your silence or your speech."

I nodded approval.  Mr. Corbeck jumped up, and in his impulsive way held
out a hand to each.

"Done!" he said.  "I acknowledge the honour of your confidence; and on
my part I pledge myself that if I find my duty to Mr. Trelawny's wishes
will, in his own interest, allow my lips to open on his affairs, I shall
speak so freely as I may."

Accordingly I began, and told him, as exactly as I could, everything
that had happened from the moment of my waking at the knocking on the
door in Jermyn Street.  The only reservations I made were as to my own
feeling toward Miss Trelawny and the matters of small import to the main
subject which followed it; and my conversations with Sergeant Daw, which
were in themselves private, and which would have demanded discretionary
silence in any case.  As I spoke, Mr. Corbeck followed with breathless
interest.  Sometimes he would stand up and pace about the room in
uncontrollable excitement; and then recover himself suddenly, and sit
down again.  Sometimes he would be about to speak, but would, with an
effort, restrain himself.  I think the narration helped me to make up my
own mind; for even as I talked, things seemed to appear in a clearer
light.  Things big and little, in relation of their importance to the
case, fell into proper perspective.  The story up to date became
coherent, except as to its cause, which seemed a greater mystery than
ever.  This is the merit of entire, or collected, narrative.  Isolated
facts, doubts, suspicions, conjectures, give way to a homogeneity which
is convincing.

That Mr. Corbeck was convinced was evident.  He did not go through any
process of explanation or limitation, but spoke right out at once to the
point, and fearlessly like a man:

"That settles me!  There is in activity some Force that needs special
care.  If we all go on working in the dark we shall get in one another's
way, and by hampering each other, undo the good that any or each of us,
working in different directions, might do.  It seems to me that the
first thing we have to accomplish is to get Mr. Trelawny waked out of
that unnatural sleep.  That he can be waked is apparent from the way the
Nurse has recovered; though what additional harm may have been done to
him in the time he has been lying in that room I suppose no one can
tell.  We must chance that, however.  He has lain there, and whatever
the effect might be, it is there now; and we have, and shall have, to
deal with it as a fact.  A day more or less won't hurt in the long-run.
It is late now; and we shall probably have tomorrow a task before us
that will require our energies afresh.  You, Doctor, will want to get to
your sleep; for I suppose you have other work as well as this to do
tomorrow.  As for you, Mr. Ross, I understand that you are to have a
spell of watching in the sick-room tonight.  I shall get you a book
which will help to pass the time for you.  I shall go and look for it in
the library.  I know where it was when I was here last; and I don't
suppose Mr. Trelawny has used it since.  He knew long ago all that was
in it which was or might be of interest to him.  But it will be
necessary, or at least helpful, to understand other things which I shall
tell you later.  You will be able to tell Doctor Winchester all that
would aid him.  For I take it that our work will branch out pretty soon.
We shall each have our own end to hold up; and it will take each of us
all our time and understanding to get through his own tasks.  It will
not be necessary for you to read the whole book.  All that will interest
you--with regard to our matter I mean of course, for the whole book is
interesting as a record of travel in a country then quite unknown--is the
preface, and two or three chapters which I shall mark for you."

He shook hands warmly with Doctor Winchester who had stood up to go.

Whilst he was away I sat lonely, thinking.  As I thought, the world
around me seemed to be illimitably great.  The only little spot in which
I was interested seemed like a tiny speck in the midst of a wilderness.
Without and around it were darkness and unknown danger, pressing in from
every side.  And the central figure in our little oasis was one of
sweetness and beauty.  A figure one could love; could work for; could
die for . . . !

Mr. Corbeck came back in a very short time with the book; he had found
it at once in the spot where he had seen it three years before.  Having
placed in it several slips of paper, marking the places where I was to
read, he put it into my hands, saying:

"That is what started Mr. Trelawny; what started me when I read it; and
which will, I have no doubt, be to you an interesting beginning to a
special study--whatever the end may be.  If, indeed, any of us here may
ever see the end."

At the door he paused and said:

"I want to take back one thing.  That Detective is a good fellow.  What
you have told me of him puts him in a new light.  The best proof of it
is that I can go quietly to sleep tonight, and leave the lamps in his
care!"

When he had gone I took the book with me, put on my respirator, and went
to my spell of duty in the sick-room!


Chapter X
The Valley of the Sorcerer


I placed the book on the little table on which the shaded lamp rested
and moved the screen to one side.  Thus I could have the light on my
book; and by looking up, see the bed, and the Nurse, and the door.  I
cannot say that the conditions were enjoyable, or calculated to allow of
that absorption in the subject which is advisable for effective study.
However, I composed myself to the work as well as I could.  The book was
one which, on the very face of it, required special attention.  It was a
folio in Dutch, printed in Amsterdam in 1650.  Some one had made a
literal translation, writing generally the English word under the Dutch,
so that the grammatical differences between the two tongues made even
the reading of the translation a difficult matter.  One had to dodge
backward and forward among the words.  This was in addition to the
difficulty of deciphering a strange handwriting of two hundred years
ago.  I found, however, that after a short time I got into the habit of
following in conventional English the Dutch construction; and, as I
became more familiar with the writing, my task became easier.

At first the circumstances of the room, and the fear lest Miss Trelawny
should return unexpectedly and find me reading the book, disturbed me
somewhat.  For we had arranged amongst us, before Doctor Winchester had
gone home, that she was not to be brought into the range of the coming
investigation.  We considered that there might be some shock to a
woman's mind in matters of apparent mystery; and further, that she,
being Mr. Trelawny's daughter, might be placed in a difficult position
with him afterward if she took part in, or even had a personal knowledge
of, the disregarding of his expressed wishes.  But when I remembered
that she did not come on nursing duty till two o'clock, the fear of
interruption passed away.  I had still nearly three house before me.
Nurse Kennedy sat in her chair by the bedside, patient and alert.  A
clock ticked on the landing; other clocks in the house ticked; the life
of the city without manifested itself in the distant hum, now and again
swelling into a roar as a breeze floating westward took the concourse of
sounds with it.  But still the dominant idea was of silence.  The light
on my book, and the soothing fringe of green silk round the shade
intensified, whenever I looked up, the gloom of the sick-room.  With
every line I read, this seemed to grow deeper and deeper; so that when
my eyes came back to the page the light seemed to dazzle me.  I stuck to
my work, however, and presently began to get sufficiently into the
subject to become interested in it.

The book was by one Nicholas van Huyn of Hoorn.  In the preface he told
how, attracted by the work of John Greaves of Merton College,
Pyramidographia, he himself visited Egypt, where he became so interested
in its wonders that he devoted some years of his life to visiting
strange places, and exploring the ruins of many temples and tombs.  He
had come across many variants of the story of the building of the
Pyramids as told by the Arabian historian, Ibn Abd Alhokin, some of
which he set down.  These I did not stop to read, but went on to the
marked pages.

As soon as I began to read these, however, there grew on me some sense
of a disturbing influence.  Once or twice I looked to see if the Nurse
had moved, for there was a feeling as though some one were near me.
Nurse Kennedy sat in her place, as steady and alert as ever; and I came
back to my book again.

The narrative went on to tell how, after passing for several days
through the mountains to the east of Aswan, the explorer came to a
certain place.  Here I give his own words, simply putting the
translation into modern English:

"Toward evening we came to the entrance of a narrow, deep valley,
running east and west.  I wished to proceed through this; for the sun,
now nearly down on the horizon, showed a wide opening beyond the
narrowing of the cliffs.  But the fellaheen absolutely refused to enter
the valley at such a time, alleging that they might be caught by the
night before they could emerge from the other end.  At first they would
give no reason for their fear.  They had hitherto gone anywhere I
wished, and at any time, without demur.  On being pressed, however, they
said that the place was the Valley of the Sorcerer, where none might
come in the night.  On being asked to tell of the Sorcerer, they
refused, saying that there was no name, and that they knew nothing.  On
the next morning, however, when the sun was up and shining down the
valley, their fears had somewhat passed away.  Then they told me that a
great Sorcerer in ancient days--'millions of millions of years' was the
term they used--a King or a Queen, they could not say which, was buried
there.  They could not give the name, persisting to the last that there
was no name; and that anyone who should name it would waste away in life
so that at death nothing of him would remain to be raised again in the
Other World.  In passing through the valley they kept together in a
cluster, hurrying on in front of me.  None dared to remain behind. They
gave, as their reason for so proceeding, that the arms of the Sorcerer
were long, and that it was dangerous to be the last.  The which was of
little comfort to me who of this necessity took that honourable post.
In the narrowest part of the valley, on the south side, was a great
cliff of rock, rising sheer, of smooth and even surface. Hereon were
graven certain cabalistic signs, and many figures of men and animals,
fishes, reptiles and birds; suns and stars; and many quaint symbols.
Some of these latter were disjointed limbs and features, such as arms
and legs, fingers, eyes, noses, ears, and lips.  Mysterious symbols
which will puzzle the Recording Angel to interpret at the Judgment Day.
The cliff faced exactly north.  There was something about it so strange,
and so different from the other carved rocks which I had visited, that I
called a halt and spent the day in examining the rock front as well as I
could with my telescope.  The Egyptians of my company were terribly
afraid, and used every kind of persuasion to induce me to pass on.  I
stayed till late in the afternoon, by which time I had failed to make
out aright the entry of any tomb, for I suspected that such was the
purpose of the sculpture of the rock.  By this time the men were
rebellious; and I had to leave the valley if I did not wish my whole
retinue to desert.  But I secretly made up my mind to discover the tomb,
and explore it.  To this end I went further into the mountains, where I
met with an Arab Sheik who was willing to take service with me.  The
Arabs were not bound by the same superstitious fears as the Egyptians;
Sheik Abu Some and his following were willing to take a part in the
explorations.

"When I returned to the valley with these Bedouins, I made effort to
climb the face of the rock, but failed, it being of one impenetrable
smoothness.  The stone, generally flat and smooth by nature, had been
chiselled to completeness.  That there had been projecting steps was
manifest, for there remained, untouched by the wondrous climate of that
strange land, the marks of saw and chisel and mallet where the steps had
been cut or broken away.

"Being thus baffled of winning the tomb from below, and being unprovided
with ladders to scale, I found a way by much circuitous journeying to
the top of the cliff. Thence I caused myself to be lowered by ropes,
till I had investigated that portion of the rock face wherein I expected
to find the opening.  I found that there was an entrance, closed however
by a great stone slab.  This was cut in the rock more than a hundred
feet up, being two-thirds the height of the cliff.  The hieroglyphic and
cabalistic symbols cut in the rock were so managed as to disguise it.
The cutting was deep, and was continued through the rock and the portals
of the doorway, and through the great slab which formed the door itself.
This was fixed in place with such incredible exactness that no stone
chisel or cutting implement which I had with me could find a lodgment in
the interstices.  I used much force, however; and by many heavy strokes
won a way into the tomb, for such I found it to be.  The stone door
having fallen into the entrance I passed over it into the tomb, noting
as I went a long iron chain which hung coiled on a bracket close to the
doorway.

"The tomb I found to be complete, after the manner of the finest
Egyptian tombs, with chamber and shaft leading down to the corridor,
ending in the Mummy Pit.  It had the table of pictures, which seems some
kind of record--whose meaning is now for ever lost--graven in a wondrous
colour on a wondrous stone.

"All the walls of the chamber and the passage were carved with strange
writings in the uncanny form mentioned.  The huge stone coffin or
sarcophagus in the deep pit was marvellously graven throughout with
signs.  The Arab chief and two others who ventured into the tomb with
me, and who were evidently used to such grim explorations, managed to
take the cover from the sarcophagus without breaking it. At which they
wondered; for such good fortune, they said, did not usually attend such
efforts.  Indeed they seemed not over careful; and did handle the
various furniture of the tomb with such little concern that, only for
its great strength and thickness, even the coffin itself might have been
injured.  Which gave me much concern, for it was very beautifully
wrought of rare stone, such as I had no knowledge of.  Much I grieved
that it were not possible to carry it away.  But time and desert
journeyings forbade such; I could only take with me such small matters
as could be carried on the person.

"Within the sarcophagus was a body, manifestly of a woman, swathed with
many wrappings of linen, as is usual with all mummies.  From certain
embroiderings thereon, I gathered that she was of high rank.  Across the
breast was one hand, unwrapped.  In the mummies which I had seen, the
arms and hands are within the wrappings, and certain adornments of wood,
shaped and painted to resemble arms and hands, lie outside the enwrapped
body.

"But this hand was strange to see, for it was the real hand of her who
lay enwrapped there; the arm projecting from the cerements being of
flesh, seemingly made as like marble in the process of embalming.  Arm
and hand were of dusky white, being of the hue of ivory that hath lain
long in air.  The skin and the nails were complete and whole, as though
the body had been placed for burial over night.  I touched the hand and
moved it, the arm being something flexible as a live arm; though stiff
with long disuse, as are the arms of those faqueers which I have seen in
the Indees.  There was, too, an added wonder that on this ancient hand
were no less than seven fingers, the same all being fine and long, and
of great beauty.  Sooth to say, it made me shudder and my flesh creep to
touch that hand that had lain there undisturbed for so many thousands of
years, and yet was like unto living flesh.  Underneath the hand, as
though guarded by it, lay a huge jewel of ruby; a great stone of
wondrous bigness, for the ruby is in the main a small jewel.  This one
was of wondrous colour, being as of fine blood whereon the light
shineth.  But its wonder lay not in its size or colour, though these
were, as I have said, of priceless rarity; but in that the light of it
shone from seven stars, each of seven points, as clearly as though the
stars were in reality there imprisoned.  When that the hand was lifted,
the sight of that wondrous stone lying there struck me with a shock
almost to momentary paralysis.  I stood gazing on it, as did those with
me, as though it were that faded head of the Gorgon Medusa with the
snakes in her hair, whose sight struck into stone those who beheld.  So
strong was the feeling that I wanted to hurry away from the place.  So,
too, those with me; therefore, taking this rare jewel, together with
certain amulets of strangeness and richness being wrought of
jewel-stones, I made haste to depart.  I would have remained longer, and
made further research in the wrappings of the mummy, but that I feared
so to do.  For it came to me all at once that I was in a desert place,
with strange men who were with me because they were not over-scrupulous.
That we were in a lone cavern of the dead, an hundred feet above the
ground, where none could find me were ill done to me, nor would any ever
seek. But in secret I determined that I would come again, though with
more secure following.  Moreover, was I tempted to seek further, as in
examining the wrappings I saw many things of strange import in that
wondrous tomb; including a casket of eccentric shape made of some
strange stone, which methought might have contained other jewels,
inasmuch as it had secure lodgment in the great sarcophagus itself.
There was in the tomb also another coffer which, though of rare
proportion and adornment, was more simply shaped.  It was of ironstone
of great thickness; but the cover was lightly cemented down with what
seemed gum and Paris plaster, as though to insure that no air could
penetrate.  The Arabs with me so insisted in its opening, thinking that
from its thickness much treasure was stored therein, that I consented
thereto.  But their hope was a false one, as it proved.  Within, closely
packed, stood four jars finely wrought and carved with various
adornments.  Of these one was the head of a man, another of a dog,
another of a jackal, and another of a hawk.  I had before known that
such burial urns as these were used to contain the entrails and other
organs of the mummied dead; but on opening these, for the fastening of
wax, though complete, was thin, and yielded easily, we found that they
held but oil.  The Bedouins, spilling most of the oil in the process,
groped with their hands in the jars lest treasure should have been there
concealed.  But their searching was of no avail; no treasure was there.
I was warned of my danger by seeing in the eyes of the Arabs certain
covetous glances.  Whereon, in order to hasten their departure, I
wrought upon those fears of superstition which even in these callous men
were apparent.  The chief of the Bedouins ascended from the Pit to give
the signal to those above to raise us; and I, not caring to remain with
the men whom I mistrusted, followed him immediately.  The others did not
come at once; from which I feared that they were rifling the tomb afresh
on their own account.  I refrained to speak of it, however, lest worse
should befall.  At last they came.  One of them, who ascended first, in
landing at the top of the cliff lost his foothold and fell below.  He
was instantly killed.  The other followed, but in safety. The chief came
next, and I came last.  Before coming away I pulled into its place
again, as well as I could, the slab of stone that covered the entrance
to the tomb.  I wished, if possible, to preserve it for my own
examination should I come again.

"When we all stood on the hill above the cliff, the burning sun that was
bright and full of glory was good to see after the darkness and strange
mystery of the tomb. Even was I glad that the poor Arab who fell down
the cliff and lay dead below, lay in the sunlight and not in that gloomy
cavern.  I would fain have gone with my companions to seek him and give
him sepulture of some kind; but the Sheik made light of it, and sent two
of his men to see to it whilst we went on our way.

"That night as we camped, one of the men only returned, saying that a
lion of the desert had killed his companion after that they had buried
the dead man in a deep sand without the valley, and had covered the spot
where he lay with many great rocks, so that jackals or other preying
beasts might not dig him up again as is their wont.

"Later, in the light of the fire round which the men sat or lay, I saw
him exhibit to his fellows something white which they seemed to regard
with special awe and reverence.  So I drew near silently, and saw that
it was none other than the white hand of the mummy which had lain
protecting the Jewel in the great sarcophagus. I heard the Bedouin tell
how he had found it on the body of him who had fallen from the cliff.
There was no mistaking it, for there were the seven fingers which I had
noted before.  This man must have wrenched it off the dead body whilst
his chief and I were otherwise engaged; and from the awe of the others I
doubted not that he had hoped to use it as an Amulet, or charm.  Whereas
if powers it had, they were not for him who had taken it from the dead;
since his death followed hard upon his theft.  Already his Amulet had
had an awesome baptism; for the wrist of the dead hand was stained with
red as though it had been dipped in recent blood.

"That night I was in certain fear lest there should be some violence
done to me; for if the poor dead hand was so valued as a charm, what
must be the worth in such wise of the rare Jewel which it had guarded.
Though only the chief knew of it, my doubt was perhaps even greater; for
he could so order matters as to have me at his mercy when he would.  I
guarded myself, therefore, with wakefulness so well as I could,
determined that at my earliest opportunity I should leave this party,
and complete my journeying home, first to the Nile bank, and then down
its course to Alexandria; with other guides who knew not what strange
matters I had with me.

"At last there came over me a disposition of sleep, so potent that I
felt it would be resistless.  Fearing attack, or that being searched in
my sleep the Bedouin might find the Star Jewel which he had seen me
place with others in my dress, I took it out unobserved and held it in
my hand.  It seemed to give back the light of the flickering fire and
the light of the stars--for there was no moon--with equal fidelity; and I
could note that on its reverse it was graven deeply with certain signs
such as I had seen in the tomb.  As I sank into the unconsciousness of
sleep, the graven Star Jewel was hidden in the hollow of my clenched
hand.

"I waked out of sleep with the light of the morning sun on my face.  I
sat up and looked around me.  The fire was out, and the camp was
desolate; save for one figure which lay prone close to me.  It was that
of the Arab chief, who lay on his back, dead.  His face was almost
black; and his eyes were open, and staring horribly up at the sky, as
though he saw there some dreadful vision.  He had evidently been
strangled; for on looking, I found on his throat the red marks where
fingers had pressed.  There seemed so many of these marks that I counted
them.  There were seven; and all parallel, except the thumb mark, as
though made with one hand.  This thrilled me as I thought of the mummy
hand with the seven fingers.

"Even there, in the open desert, it seemed as if there could be
enchantments!

"In my surprise, as I bent over him, I opened my right hand, which up to
now I had held shut with the feeling, instinctive even in sleep, of
keeping safe that which it held.  As I did so, the Star Jewel held there
fell out and struck the dead man on the mouth.  Mirabile dictu there
came forth at once from the dead mouth a great gush of blood, in which
the red jewel was for the moment lost.  I turned the dead man over to
look for it, and found that he lay with his right hand bent under him as
though he had fallen on it; and in it he held a great knife, keen of
point and edge, such as Arabs carry at the belt.  It may have been that
he was about to murder me when vengeance came on him, whether from man
or God, or the Gods of Old, I know not.  Suffice it, that when I found
my Ruby Jewel, which shone up as a living star from the mess of blood
wherein it lay, I paused not, but fled from the place. I journeyed on
alone through the hot desert, till, by God's grace, I came upon an Arab
tribe camping by a well, who gave me salt.  With them I rested till they
had set me on my way.

"I know not what became of the mummy hand, or of those who had it.  What
strife, or suspicion, or disaster, or greed went with it I know not; but
some such cause there must have been, since those who had it fled with
it.  It doubtless is used as a charm of potence by some desert tribe.

"At the earliest opportunity I made examination of the Star Ruby, as I
wished to try to understand what was graven on it.  The symbols--whose
meaning, however, I could not understand--were as follows . . ."

Twice, whilst I had been reading this engrossing narrative, I had
thought that I had seen across the page streaks of shade, which the
weirdness of the subject had made to seem like the shadow of a hand.  On
the first of these occasions I found that the illusion came from the
fringe of green silk around the lamp; but on the second I had looked up,
and my eyes had lit on the mummy hand across the room on which the
starlight was falling under the edge of the blind.  It was of little
wonder that I had connected it with such a narrative; for if my eyes
told me truly, here, in this room with me, was the very hand of which
the traveller Van Huyn had written.  I looked over at the bed; and it
comforted me to think that the Nurse still sat there, calm and wakeful.
At such a time, with such surrounds, during such a narrative, it was
well to have assurance of the presence of some living person.

I sat looking at the book on the table before me; and so many strange
thoughts crowded on me that my mind began to whirl.  It was almost as if
the light on the white fingers in front of me was beginning to have some
hypnotic effect.  All at once, all thoughts seemed to stop; and for an
instant the world and time stood still.

 There lay a real hand across the book!  What was there to so overcome
me, as was the case?  I knew the hand that I saw on the book--and loved
it.  Margaret Trelawny's hand was a joy to me to see--to touch; and yet
at that moment, coming after other marvellous things, it had a strangely
moving effect on me.  It was but momentary, however, and had passed even
before her voice had reached me.

"What disturbs you?  What are you staring at the book for?  I thought
for an instant that you must have been overcome again!"  I jumped up.

"I was reading," I said, "an old book from the library."  As I spoke I
closed it and put it under my arm.  "I shall now put it back, as I
understand that your Father wishes all things, especially books, kept in
their proper places."  My words were intentionally misleading; for I did
not wish her to know what I was reading, and thought it best not to wake
her curiosity by leaving the book about.  I went away, but not to the
library; I left the book in my room where I could get it when I had had
my sleep in the day.  When I returned Nurse Kennedy was ready to go to
bed; so Miss Trelawny watched with me in the room.  I did not want any
book whilst she was present.  We sat close together and talked in a
whisper whilst the moments flew by.  It was with surprise that I noted
the edge of the curtains changing from grey to yellow light. What we
talked of had nothing to do with the sick man, except in so far that all
which concerned his daughter must ultimately concern him.  But it had
nothing to say to Egypt, or mummies, or the dead, or caves, or Bedouin
chiefs.  I could well take note in the growing light that Margaret's
hand had not seven fingers, but five; for it lay in mine.

When Doctor Winchester arrived in the morning and had made his visit to
his patient, he came to see me as I sat in the dining-room having a
little meal--breakfast or supper, I hardly knew which it was--before I
went to lie down.  Mr. Corbeck came in at the same time; and we resumed
out conversation where we had left it the night before.  I told Mr.
Corbeck that I had read the chapter about the finding of the tomb, and
that I thought Doctor Winchester should read it, too.  The latter said
that, if he might, he would take it with him; he had that morning to
make a railway journey to Ipswich, and would read it on the train.  He
said he would bring it back with him when he came again in the evening.
I went up to my room to bring it down; but I could not find it anywhere.
I had a distinct recollection of having left it on the little table
beside my bed, when I had come up after Miss Trelawny's going on duty
into the sick-room.  It was very strange; for the book was not of a kind
that any of the servants would be likely to take.  I had to come back
and explain to the others that I could not find it.

When Doctor Winchester had gone, Mr. Corbeck, who seemed to know the
Dutchman's work by heart, talked the whole matter over with me.  I told
him that I was interrupted by a change of nurses, just as I had come to
the description of the ring.  He smiled as he said:

"So far as that is concerned, you need not be disappointed.  Not in Van
Huyn's time, nor for nearly two centuries later, could the meaning of
that engraving have been understood.  It was only when the work was
taken up and followed by Young and Champollion, by Birch and Lepsius and
Rosellini and Salvolini, by Mariette Bey and by Wallis Budge and
Flinders Petrie and the other scholars of their times that great results
ensued, and that the true meaning of hieroglyphic was known.

"Later, I shall explain to you, if Mr. Trelawny does not explain it
himself, or if he does not forbid me to, what it means in that
particular place.  I think it will be better for you to know what
followed Van Huyn's narrative; for with the description of the stone,
and the account of his bringing it to Holland at the termination of his
travels, the episode ends.  Ends so far as his book is concerned.  The
chief thing about the book is that it sets others thinking--and acting.
Amongst them were Mr. Trelawny and myself.  Mr. Trelawny is a good
linguist of the Orient, but he does not know Northern tongues.  As for
me I have a faculty for learning languages; and when I was pursuing my
studies in Leyden I learned Dutch so that I might more easily make
references in the library there.  Thus it was, that at the very time
when Mr. Trelawny, who, in making his great collection of works on
Egypt, had, through a booksellers' catalogue, acquired this volume with
the manuscript translation, was studying it, I was reading another copy,
in original Dutch, in Leyden.  We were both struck by the description of
the lonely tomb in the rock; cut so high up as to be inaccessible to
ordinary seekers:  with all means of reaching it carefully obliterated;
and yet with such an elaborate ornamentation of the smoothed surface of
the cliff as Van Huyn has described.  It also struck us both as an odd
thing--for in the years between Van Huyn's time and our own the general
knowledge of Egyptian curios and records has increased marvellously--that
in the case of such a tomb, made in such a place, and which must have
cost an immense sum of money, there was no seeming record or effigy to
point out who lay within.  Moreover, the very name of the place, 'the
Valley of the Sorcerer', had, in a prosaic age, attractions of its own.
When we met, which we did through his seeking the assistance of other
Egyptologists in his work, we talked over this as we did over many other
things; and we determined to make search for the mysterious valley.
Whilst we were waiting to start on the travel, for many things were
required which Mr. Trelawny undertook to see to himself, I went to
Holland to try if I could by any traces verify Van Huyn's narrative.  I
went straight to Hoorn, and set patiently to work to find the house of
the traveller and his descendants, if any.  I need not trouble you with
details of my seeking--and finding. Hoorn is a place that has not changed
much since Van Huyn's time, except that it has lost the place which it
held amongst commercial cities.  Its externals are such as they had been
then; in such a sleepy old place a century or two does not count for
much.  I found the house, and discovered that none of the descendants
were alive. I searched records; but only to one end--death and
extinction.  Then I set me to work to find what had become of his
treasures; for that such a traveller must have had great treasures was
apparent.  I traced a good many to museums in Leyden, Utrecht, and
Amsterdam; and some few to the private houses of rich collectors.  At
last, in the shop of an old watchmaker and jeweller at Hoorn, I found
what he considered his chiefest treasure; a great ruby, carven like a
scarab, with seven stars, and engraven with hieroglyphics.  The old man
did not know hieroglyphic character, and in his old-world, sleepy life,
the philological discoveries of recent years had not reached him.  He
did not know anything of Van Huyn, except that such a person had been,
and that his name was, during two centuries, venerated in the town as a
great traveller.  He valued the jewel as only a rare stone, spoiled in
part by the cutting; and though he was at first loth to part with such
an unique gem, he became amenable ultimately to commercial reason.  I
had a full purse, since I bought for Mr. Trelawny, who is, as I suppose
you know, immensely wealthy.  I was shortly on my way back to London,
with the Star Ruby safe in my pocket-book; and in my heart a joy and
exultation which knew no bounds.

"For here we were with proof of Van Huyn's wonderful story.  The jewel
was put in security in Mr. Trelawny's great safe; and we started out on
our journey of exploration in full hope.

"Mr. Trelawny was, at the last, loth to leave his young wife whom he
dearly loved; but she, who loved him equally, knew his longing to
prosecute the search.  So keeping to herself, as all good women do, all
her anxieties--which in her case were special--she bade him follow out
his bent."


Chapter XI
A Queen's Tomb


"Mr. Trelawny's hope was at least as great as my own.  He is not so
volatile a man as I am, prone to ups and downs of hope and despair; but
he has a fixed purpose which crystallises hope into belief.  At times I
had feared that there might have been two such stones, or that the
adventures of Van Huyn were traveller's fictions, based on some ordinary
acquisition of the curio in Alexandria or Cairo, or London or Amsterdam.
But Mr. Trelawny never faltered in his belief.  We had many things to
distract our minds from belief or disbelief.  This was soon after Arabi
Pasha, and Egypt was so safe place for travellers, especially if they
were English.  But Mr. Trelawny is a fearless man; and I almost come to
think at times that I am not a coward myself.  We got together a band of
Arabs whom one or other of us had known in former trips to the desert,
and whom we could trust; that is, we did not distrust them as much as
others.  We were numerous enough to protect ourselves from chance
marauding bands, and we took with us large impedimenta.  We had secured
the consent and passive co-operation of the officials still friendly to
Britain; in the acquiring of which consent I need hardly say that Mr.
Trelawny's riches were of chief importance.  We found our way in
dhahabiyehs to Aswan; whence, having got some Arabs from the Sheik and
having given our usual backsheesh, we set out on our journey through the
desert.

"Well, after much wandering and trying every winding in the interminable
jumble of hills, we came at last at nightfall on just such a valley as
Van Huyn had described. A valley with high, steep cliffs; narrowing in
the centre, and widening out to the eastern and western ends.  At
daylight we were opposite the cliff and could easily note the opening
high up in the rock, and the hieroglyphic figures which were evidently
intended originally to conceal it.

"But the signs which had baffled Van Huyn and those of his time--and
later, were no secrets to us.  The host of scholars who have given their
brains and their lives to this work, had wrested open the mysterious
prison-house of Egyptian language.  On the hewn face of the rocky cliff
we, who had learned the secrets, could read what the Theban priesthood
had had there inscribed nearly fifty centuries before.

"For that the external inscription was the work of the priesthood--and a
hostile priesthood at that--there could be no living doubt.  The
inscription on the rock, written in hieroglyphic, ran thus:

"'Hither the Gods come not at any summons.  The "Nameless One" has
insulted them and is for ever alone.  Go not nigh, lest their vengeance
wither you away!'

"The warning must have been a terribly potent one at the time it was
written and for thousands of years afterwards; even when the language in
which it was given had become a dead mystery to the people of the land.
The tradition of such a terror lasts longer than its cause.  Even in the
symbols used there was an added significance of alliteration.  'For
ever' is given in the hieroglyphics as 'millions of years'.  This symbol
was repeated nine times, in three groups of three; and after each group
a symbol of the Upper World, the Under World, and the Sky.  So that for
this Lonely One there could be, through the vengeance of all the Gods,
resurrection in neither the World of Sunlight, in the World of the Dead,
or for the soul in the region of the Gods.

"Neither Mr. Trelawny nor I dared to tell any of our people what the
writing meant. For though they did not believe in the religion whence
the curse came, or in the Gods whose vengeance was threatened, yet they
were so superstitious that they would probably, had they known of it,
have thrown up the whole task and run away.

"Their ignorance, however, and our discretion preserved us.  We made an
encampment close at hand, but behind a jutting rock a little further
along the valley, so that they might not have the inscription always
before them.  For even that traditional name of the place:  'The Valley
of the Sorcerer', had a fear for them; and for us through them.  With
the timber which we had brought, we made a ladder up the face of the
rock.  We hung a pulley on a beam fixed to project from the top of the
cliff.  We found the great slab of rock, which formed the door, placed
clumsily in its place and secured by a few stones.  Its own weight kept
it in safe position.  In order to enter, we had to push it in; and we
passed over it.  We found the great coil of chain which Van Huyn had
described fastened into the rock.  There were, however, abundant
evidences amid the wreckage of the great stone door, which had revolved
on iron hinges at top and bottom, that ample provision had been
originally made for closing and fastening it from within.

"Mr. Trelawny and I went alone into the tomb.  We had brought plenty of
lights with us; and we fixed them as we went along.  We wished to get a
complete survey at first, and then make examination of all in detail.
As we went on, we were filled with ever-increasing wonder and delight.
The tomb was one of the most magnificent and beautiful which either of
us had ever seen.  From the elaborate nature of the sculpture and
painting, and the perfection of the workmanship, it was evident that the
tomb was prepared during the lifetime of her for whose resting-place it
was intended.  The drawing of the hieroglyphic pictures was fine, and
the colouring superb; and in that high cavern, far away from even the
damp of the Nile-flood, all was as fresh as when the artists had laid
down their palettes.  There was one thing which we could not avoid
seeing.  That although the cutting on the outside rock was the work of
the priesthood, the smoothing of the cliff face was probably a part of
the tomb-builder's original design.  The symbolism of the painting and
cutting within all gave the same idea.  The outer cavern, partly natural
and partly hewn, was regarded architecturally as only an ante-chamber.
At the end of it, so that it would face the east, was a pillared
portico, hewn out of the solid rock.  The pillars were massive and were
seven-sided, a thing which we had not come across in any other tomb.
Sculptured on the architrave was the Boat of the Moon, containing
Hathor, cow-headed and bearing the disk and plumes, and the dog-headed
Hapi, the God of the North.  It was steered by Harpocrates towards the
north, represented by the Pole Star surrounded by Draco and Ursa Major.
In the latter the stars that form what we call the 'Plough' were cut
larger than any of the other stars; and were filled with gold so that,
in the light of torches, they seemed to flame with a special
significance. Passing within the portico, we found two of the
architectural features of a rock tomb, the Chamber, or Chapel, and the
Pit, all complete as Van Huyn had noticed, though in his day the names
given to these parts by the Egyptians of old were unknown.

"The Stele, or record, which had its place low down on the western wall,
was so remarkable that we examined it minutely, even before going on our
way to find the mummy which was the object of our search.  This Stele
was a great slab of lapis lazuli, cut all over with hieroglyphic figures
of small size and of much beauty.  The cutting was filled in with some
cement of exceeding fineness, and of the colour of pure vermilion.  The
inscription began:

"'Tera, Queen of the Egypts, daughter of Antef, Monarch of the North and
the South.' 'Daughter of the Sun,' 'Queen of the Diadems'.

"It then set out, in full record, the history of her life and reign.

"The signs of sovereignty were given with a truly feminine profusion of
adornment. The united Crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt were, in especial,
cut with exquisite precision.  It was new to us both to find the Hejet
and the Desher--the White and the Red crowns of Upper and Lower
Egypt--on the Stele of a queen; for it was a rule, without exception in
the records, that in ancient Egypt either crown was worn only by a king;
though they are to be found on goddesses.  Later on we found an
explanation, of which I shall say more presently.

"Such an inscription was in itself a matter so startling as to arrest
attention from anyone anywhere at any time; but you can have no
conception of the effect which it had upon us.  Though our eyes were not
the first which had seen it, they were the first which could see it with
understanding since first the slab of rock was fixed in the cliff
opening nearly five thousand years before.  To us was given to read this
message from the dead.  This message of one who had warred against the
Gods of Old, and claimed to have controlled them at a time when the
hierarchy professed to be the only means of exciting their fears or
gaining their good will.

"The walls of the upper chamber of the Pit and the sarcophagus Chamber
were profusely inscribed; all the inscriptions, except that on the
Stele, being coloured with bluish-green pigment.  The effect when seen
sideways as the eye caught the green facets, was that of an old,
discoloured Indian turquoise.

"We descended the Pit by the aid of the tackle we had brought with us.
Trelawny went first.  It was a deep pit, more than seventy feet; but it
had never been filled up. The passage at the bottom sloped up to the
sarcophagus Chamber, and was longer than is usually found.  It had not
been walled up.

"Within, we found a great sarcophagus of yellow stone.  But that I need
not describe; you have seen it in Mr. Trelawny's chamber.  The cover of
it lay on the ground; it had not been cemented, and was just as Van Huyn
had described it.  Needless to say, we were excited as we looked within.
There must, however, be one sense of disappointment.  I could not help
feeling how different must have been the sight which met the Dutch
traveller's eyes when he looked within and found that white hand lying
lifelike above the shrouding mummy cloths.  It is true that a part of
the arm was there, white and ivory like.

"But there was a thrill to us which came not to Van Huyn!

"The end of the wrist was covered with dried blood!  It was as though
the body had bled after death!  The jagged ends of the broken wrist were
rough with the clotted blood; through this the white bone, sticking out,
looked like the matrix of opal.  The blood had streamed down and stained
the brown wrappings as with rust.  Here, then, was full confirmation of
the narrative.  With such evidence of the narrator's truth before us, we
could not doubt the other matters which he had told, such as the blood
on the mummy hand, or marks of the seven fingers on the throat of the
strangled Sheik.

"I shall not trouble you with details of all we saw, or how we learned
all we knew. Part of it was from knowledge common to scholars; part we
read on the Stele in the tomb, and in the sculptures and hieroglyphic
paintings on the walls.

"Queen Tera was of the Eleventh, or Theban Dynasty of Egyptian Kings
which held sway between the twenty-ninth and twenty-fifth centuries
before Christ.  She succeeded as the only child of her father, Antef.
She must have been a girl of extraordinary character as well as ability,
for she was but a young girl when her father died.  Her youth and sex
encouraged the ambitious priesthood, which had then achieved immense
power.  By their wealth and numbers and learning they dominated all
Egypt, more especially the Upper portion.  They were then secretly ready
to make an effort for the achievement of their bold and long-considered
design, that of transferring the governing power from a Kingship to a
Hierarchy. But King Antef had suspected some such movement, and had
taken the precaution of securing to his daughter the allegiance of the
army.  He had also had her taught statecraft, and had even made her
learned in the lore of the very priests themselves. He had used those of
one cult against the other; each being hopeful of some present gain on
its own part by the influence of the King, or of some ultimate gain from
its own influence over his daughter.  Thus, the Princess had been
brought up amongst scribes, and was herself no mean artist.  Many of
these things were told on the walls in pictures or in hieroglyphic
writing of great beauty; and we came to the conclusion that not a few of
them had been done by the Princess herself.  It was not without cause
that she was inscribed on the Stele as 'Protector of the Arts'.

"But the King had gone to further lengths, and had had his daughter
taught magic, by which she had power over Sleep and Will.  This was real
magic--"black" magic; not the magic of the temples, which, I may explain,
was of the harmless or "white" order, and was intended to impress rather
than to effect.  She had been an apt pupil; and had gone further than
her teachers.  Her power and her resources had given her great
opportunities, of which she had availed herself to the full.  She had
won secrets from nature in strange ways; and had even gone to the length
of going down into the tomb herself, having been swathed and coffined
and left as dead for a whole month. The priests had tried to make out
that the real Princess Tera had died in the experiment, and that another
girl had been substituted; but she had conclusively proved their error.
All this was told in pictures of great merit.  It was probably in her
time that the impulse was given in the restoring the artistic greatness
of the Fourth Dynasty which had found its perfection in the days of
Chufu.

"In the Chamber of the sarcophagus were pictures and writings to show
that she had achieved victory over Sleep.  Indeed, there was everywhere
a symbolism, wonderful even in a land and an age of symbolism.
Prominence was given to the fact that she, though a Queen, claimed all
the privileges of kingship and masculinity.  In one place she was
pictured in man's dress, and wearing the White and Red Crowns.  In the
following picture she was in female dress, but still wearing the Crowns
of Upper and Lower Egypt, while the discarded male raiment lay at her
feet.  In every picture where hope, or aim, of resurrection was
expressed there was the added symbol of the North; and in many places--
always in representations of important events, past, present, or
future--was a grouping of the stars of the Plough.  She evidently
regarded this constellation as in some way peculiarly associated with
herself.

"Perhaps the most remarkable statement in the records, both on the Stele
and in the mural writings, was that Queen Tera had power to compel the
Gods.  This, by the way, was not an isolated belief in Egyptian history;
but was different in its cause.  She had engraved on a ruby, carved like
a scarab, and having seven stars of seven points, Master Words to compel
all the Gods, both of the Upper and the Under Worlds.

"In the statement it was plainly set forth that the hatred of the
priests was, she knew, stored up for her, and that they would after her
death try to suppress her name.  This was a terrible revenge, I may tell
you, in Egyptian mythology; for without a name no one can after death be
introduced to the Gods, or have prayers said for him. Therefore, she had
intended her resurrection to be after a long time and in a more northern
land, under the constellation whose seven stars had ruled her birth.  To
this end, her hand was to be in the air--'unwrapped'--and in it the Jewel
of Seven Stars, so that wherever there was air she might move even as
her Ka could move!  This, after thinking it over, Mr. Trelawny and I
agreed meant that her body could become astral at command, and so move,
particle by particle, and become whole again when and where required.
Then there was a piece of writing in which allusion was made to a chest
or casket in which were contained all the Gods, and Will, and Sleep, the
two latter being personified by symbols.  The box was mentioned as with
seven sides. It was not much of a surprise to us when, underneath the
feet of the mummy, we found the seven-sided casket, which you have also
seen in Mr. Trelawny's room.  On the underneath part of the wrapping--
linen of the left foot was painted, in the same vermilion colour as that
used in the Stele, the hieroglyphic symbol for much water, and
underneath the right foot the symbol of the earth.  We made out the
symbolism to be that her body, immortal and transferable at will, ruled
both the land and water, air and fire--the latter being exemplified by
the light of the Jewel Stone, and further by the flint and iron which
lay outside the mummy wrappings.

"As we lifted the casket from the sarcophagus, we noticed on its sides
the strange protuberances which you have already seen; but we were
unable at the time to account for them.  There were a few amulets in the
sarcophagus, but none of any special worth or significance.  We took it
that if there were such, they were within the wrappings; or more
probably in the strange casket underneath the mummy's feet.  This,
however, we could not open.  There were signs of there being a cover;
certainly the upper portion and the lower were each in one piece.  The
fine line, a little way from the top, appeared to be where the cover was
fixed; but it was made with such exquisite fineness and finish that the
joining could hardly be seen. Certainly the top could not be moved.  We
took it, that it was in some way fastened from within.  I tell you all
this in order that you may understand things with which you may be in
contact later.  You must suspend your judgment entirely.  Such strange
things have happened regarding this mummy and all around it, that there
is a necessity for new belief somewhere.  It is absolutely impossible to
reconcile certain things which have happened with the ordinary currents
of life or knowledge.

"We stayed around the Valley of the Sorcerer, till we had copied roughly
all the drawings and writings on the walls, ceiling and floor.  We took
with us the Stele of lapis lazuli, whose graven record was coloured with
vermilion pigment.  We took the sarcophagus and the mummy; the stone
chest with the alabaster jars; the tables of bloodstone and alabaster
and onyx and carnelian; and the ivory pillow whose arch rested on
'buckles', round each of which was twisted an uraeus wrought in gold.
We took all the articles which lay in the Chapel, and the Mummy Pit; the
wooden boats with crews and the ushaptiu figures, and the symbolic
amulets.

"When coming away we took down the ladders, and at a distance buried
them in the sand under a cliff, which we noted so that if necessary we
might find them again. Then with our heavy baggage, we set out on our
laborious journey back to the Nile. It was no easy task, I tell you, to
bring the case with that great sarcophagus over the desert.  We had a
rough cart and sufficient men to draw it; but the progress seemed
terribly slow, for we were anxious to get our treasures into a place of
safety.  The night was an anxious time with us, for we feared attack
from some marauding band. But more still we feared some of those with
us.  They were, after all, but predatory, unscrupulous men; and we had
with us a considerable bulk of precious things. They, or at least the
dangerous ones amongst them, did not know why it was so precious; they
took it for granted that it was material treasure of some kind that we
carried.  We had taken the mummy from the sarcophagus, and packed it for
safety of travel in a separate case.  During the first night two
attempts were made to steal things from the cart; and two men were found
dead in the morning.

"On the second night there came on a violent storm, one of those
terrible simooms of the desert which makes one feel his helplessness.
We were overwhelmed with drifting sand.  Some of our Bedouins had fled
before the storm, hoping to find shelter; the rest of us, wrapped in our
bournous, endured with what patience we could.  In the morning, when the
storm had passed, we recovered from under the piles of sand what we
could of our impedimenta.  We found the case in which the mummy had been
packed all broken, but the mummy itself could nowhere be found. We
searched everywhere around, and dug up the sand which had piled around
us; but in vain.  We did not know what to do, for Trelawny had his heart
set on taking home that mummy.  We waited a whole day in hopes that the
Bedouins, who had fled, would return; we had a blind hope that they
might have in some way removed the mummy from the cart, and would
restore it.  That night, just before dawn, Mr. Trelawny woke me up and
whispered in my ear:

"'We must go back to the tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer.  Show no
hesitation in the morning when I give the orders!  If you ask any
questions as to where we are going it will create suspicion, and will
defeat our purpose."

"'All right!" I answered.  "But why shall we go there?'  His answer
seemed to thrill through me as though it had struck some chord ready
tuned within:

"'We shall find the mummy there!  I am sure of it!'  Then anticipating
doubt or argument he added:

"'Wait, and you shall see!' and he sank back into his blanket again.

"The Arabs were surprised when we retraced our steps; and some of them
were not satisfied.  There was a good deal of friction, and there were
several desertions; so that it was with a diminished following that we
took our way eastward again.  At first the Sheik did not manifest any
curiosity as to our definite destination; but when it became apparent
that we were again making for the Valley of the Sorcerer, he too showed
concern.  This grew as we drew near; till finally at the entrance of the
valley he halted and refused to go further.  He said he would await our
return if we chose to go on alone.  That he would wait three days; but
if by that time we had not returned he would leave.  No offer of money
would tempt him to depart from this resolution.  The only concession he
would make was that he would find the ladders and bring them near the
cliff.  This he did; and then, with the rest of the troop, he went back
to wait at the entrance of the valley.

"Mr. Trelawny and I took ropes and torches, and again ascended to the
tomb.  It was evident that someone had been there in our absence, for
the stone slab which protected the entrance to the tomb was lying flat
inside, and a rope was dangling from the cliff summit.  Within, there
was another rope hanging into the shaft of the Mummy Pit.  We looked at
each other; but neither said a word.  We fixed our own rope, and as
arranged Trelawny descended first, I following at once.  It was not till
we stood together at the foot of the shaft that the thought flashed
across me that we might be in some sort of a trap; that someone might
descend the rope from the cliff, and by cutting the rope by which we had
lowered ourselves into the Pit, bury us there alive.  The thought was
horrifying; but it was too late to do anything.  I remained silent.  We
both had torches, so that there was ample light as we passed through the
passage and entered the Chamber where the sarcophagus had stood. The
first thing noticeable was the emptiness of the place.  Despite all its
magnificent adornment, the tomb was made a desolation by the absence of
the great sarcophagus, to hold which it was hewn in the rock; of the
chest with the alabaster jars; of the tables which had held the
implements and food for the use of the dead, and the ushaptiu figures.

"It was made more infinitely desolate still by the shrouded figure of
the mummy of Queen Tera which lay on the floor where the great
sarcophagus had stood!  Beside it lay, in the strange contorted
attitudes of violent death, three of the Arabs who had deserted from our
party.  Their faces were black, and their hands and necks were smeared
with blood which had burst from mouth and nose and eyes.

"On the throat of each were the marks, now blackening, of a hand of
seven fingers.

"Trelawny and I drew close, and clutched each other in awe and fear as
we looked.

"For, most wonderful of all, across the breast of the mummied Queen lay
a hand of seven fingers, ivory white, the wrist only showing a scar like
a jagged red line, from which seemed to depend drops of blood."


Chapter XII
The Magic Coffer


"When we recovered our amazement, which seemed to last unduly long, we
did not lose any time carrying the mummy through the passage, and
hoisting it up the Pit shaft.  I went first, to receive it at the top.
As I looked down, I saw Mr. Trelawny lift the severed hand and put it in
his breast, manifestly to save it from being injured or lost.  We left
the dead Arabs where they lay.  With our ropes we lowered our precious
burden to the ground; and then took it to the entrance of the valley
where our escort was to wait.  To our astonishment we found them on the
move.  When we remonstrated with the Sheik, he answered that he had
fulfilled his contract to the letter; he had waited the three days as
arranged.  I thought that he was lying to cover up his base intention of
deserting us; and I found when we compared notes that Trelawny had the
same suspicion.  It was not till we arrived at Cairo that we found he
was correct.  It was the 3rd of November 1884 when we entered the Mummy
Pit for the second time; we had reason to remember the date.

"We had lost three whole days of our reckoning--out of our lives--whilst
we had stood wondering in that chamber of the dead.  Was it strange,
then, that we had a superstitious feeling with regard to the dead Queen
Tera and all belonging to her?  Is it any wonder that it rests with us
now, with a bewildering sense of some power outside ourselves or our
comprehension?  Will it be any wonder if it go down to the grave with us
at the appointed time?  If, indeed, there be any graves for us who have
robbed the dead!"  He was silent for quite a minute before he went on:

"We got to Cairo all right, and from there to Alexandria, where we were
to take ship by the Messagerie service to Marseilles, and go thence by
express to London.  But

     'The best-laid schemes o' mice and men Gang aft agley.'

At Alexandria, Trelawny found waiting a cable stating that Mrs. Trelawny
had died in giving birth to a daughter.

"Her stricken husband hurried off at once by the Orient Express; and I
had to bring the treasure alone to the desolate house.  I got to London
all safe; there seemed to be some special good fortune to our journey.
When I got to this house, the funeral had long been over.  The child had
been put out to nurse, and Mr. Trelawny had so far recovered from the
shock of his loss that he had set himself to take up again the broken
threads of his life and his work.  That he had had a shock, and a bad
one, was apparent.  The sudden grey in his black hair was proof enough
in itself; but in addition, the strong cast of his features had become
set and stern.  Since he received that cable in the shipping office at
Alexandria I have never seen a happy smile on his face.

"Work is the best thing in such a case; and to his work he devoted
himself heart and soul.  The strange tragedy of his loss and gain--for
the child was born after the mother's death--took place during the time
that we stood in that trance in the Mummy Pit of Queen Tera.  It seemed
to have become in some way associated with his Egyptian studies, and
more especially with the mysteries connected with the Queen.  He told me
very little about his daughter; but that two forces struggled in his
mind regarding her was apparent.  I could see that he loved, almost
idolised her. Yet he could never forget that her birth had cost her
mother's life.  Also, there was something whose existence seemed to
wring his father's heart, though he would never tell me what it was.
Again, he once said in a moment of relaxation of his purpose of silence:

"'She is unlike her mother; but in both feature and colour she has a
marvellous resemblance to the pictures of Queen Tera.'

"He said that he had sent her away to people who would care for her as
he could not; and that till she became a woman she should have all the
simple pleasures that a young girl might have, and that were best for
her.  I would often have talked with him about her; but he would never
say much.  Once he said to me:  'There are reasons why I should not
speak more than is necessary.  Some day you will know--and understand!'
I respected his reticence; and beyond asking after her on my return
after a journey, I have never spoken of her again.  I had never seen her
till I did so in your presence.

"Well, when the treasures which we had--ah!--taken from the tomb had
been brought here, Mr. Trelawny arranged their disposition himself.  The
mummy, all except the severed hand, he placed in the great ironstone
sarcophagus in the hall.  This was wrought for the Theban High Priest
Uni, and is, as you may have remarked, all inscribed with wonderful
invocations to the old Gods of Egypt.  The rest of the things from the
tomb he disposed about his own room, as you have seen.  Amongst them he
placed, for special reasons of his own, the mummy hand.  I think he
regards this as the most sacred of his possessions, with perhaps one
exception.  That is the carven ruby which he calls the 'Jewel of Seven
Stars', which he keeps in that great safe which is locked and guarded by
various devices, as you know.

"I dare say you find this tedious; but I have had to explain it, so that
you should understand all up to the present.  It was a long time after
my return with the mummy of Queen Tera when Mr. Trelawny re-opened the
subject with me.  He had been several times to Egypt, sometimes with me
and sometimes alone; and I had been several trips, on my own account or
for him.  But in all that time, nearly sixteen years, he never mentioned
the subject, unless when some pressing occasion suggested, if it did not
necessitate, a reference.

"One morning early he sent for me in a hurry; I was then studying in the
British Museum, and had rooms in Hart Street.  When I came, he was all
on fire with excitement.  I had not seen him in such a glow since before
the news of his wife's death.  He took me at once into his room.  The
window blinds were down and the shutters closed; not a ray of daylight
came in.  The ordinary lights in the room were not lit, but there were a
lot of powerful electric lamps, fifty candle-power at least, arranged on
one side of the room.  The little bloodstone table on which the
heptagonal coffer stands was drawn to the centre of the room.  The
coffer looked exquisite in the glare of light which shone on it.  It
actually seemed to glow as if lit in some way from within.

"'What do you think of it?' he asked.

"'It is like a jewel,' I answered.  'You may well call it the
'sorcerer's Magic Coffer', if it often looks like that.  It almost seems
to be alive.'

"'Do you know why it seems so?'

"'From the glare of the light, I suppose?'

"'Light of course,' he answered, 'but it is rather the disposition of
light.'  As he spoke he turned up the ordinary lights of the room and
switched off the special ones.  The effect on the stone box was
surprising; in a second it lost all its glowing effect.  It was still a
very beautiful stone, as always; but it was stone and no more.

"'Do you notice anything about the arrangement of the lamps?' he asked.

"'No!'

"'They were in the shape of the stars in the Plough, as the stars are in
the ruby!'  The statement came to me with a certain sense of conviction.
I do not know why, except that there had been so many mysterious
associations with the mummy and all belonging to it that any new one
seemed enlightening.  I listened as Trelawny went on to explain:

"'For sixteen years I have never ceased to think of that adventure, or
to try to find a clue to the mysteries which came before us; but never
until last night did I seem to find a solution.  I think I must have
dreamed of it, for I woke all on fire about it.  I jumped out of bed
with a determination of doing something, before I quite knew what it was
that I wished to do.  Then, all at once, the purpose was clear before
me. There were allusions in the writing on the walls of the tomb to the
seven stars of the Great Bear that go to make up the Plough; and the
North was again and again emphasized.  The same symbols were repeated
with regard to the "Magic Box", as we called it.  We had already noticed
those peculiar translucent spaces in the stone of the box.  You remember
the hieroglyphic writing had told that the jewel came from the heart of
an aerolite, and that the coffer was cut from it also.  It might be, I
thought, that the light of the seven stars, shining in the right
direction, might have some effect on the box, or something within it.  I
raised the blind and looked out. The Plough was high in the heavens, and
both its stars and the Pole Star were straight opposite the window.  I
pulled the table with the coffer out into the light, and shifted it
until the translucent patches were in the direction of the stars.
Instantly the box began to glow, as you saw it under the lamps, though
but slightly. I waited and waited; but the sky clouded over, and the
light died away.  So I got wires and lamps--you know how often I use them
in experiments--and tried the effect of electric light.  It took me some
time to get the lamps properly placed, so that they would correspond to
the parts of the stone, but the moment I got them right the whole thing
began to glow as you have seen it.

"'I could get no further, however.  There was evidently something
wanting.  All at once it came to me that if light could have some effect
there should be in the tomb some means of producing light, for there
could not be starlight in the Mummy Pit in the cavern.  Then the whole
thing seemed to become clear.  On the bloodstone table, which has a
hollow carved in its top, into which the bottom of the coffer fits, I
laid the Magic Coffer; and I at once saw that the odd protuberances so
carefully wrought in the substance of the stone corresponded in a way to
the stars in the constellation.  These, then, were to hold lights.

"'Eureka!' I cried.  'All we want now is the lamps.'"  I tried placing
the electric lights on, or close to, the protuberances.  But the glow
never came to the stone. So the conviction grew on me that there were
special lamps made for the purpose. If we could find them, a step on the
road to solving the mystery should be gained.

"'But what about the lamps?' I asked.  'Where are they?  When are we to
discover them?  How are we to know them if we do find them?  What--"

"He stopped me at once:

"'One thing at a time!' he said quietly.  'Your first question contains
all the rest. Where are these lamps?  I shall tell you:  In the tomb!'

"'In the tomb!' I repeated in surprise.  'Why you and I searched the
place ourselves from end to end; and there was not a sign of a lamp.
Not a sign of anything remaining when we came away the first time; or on
the second, except the bodies of the Arabs.'

"Whilst I was speaking, he had uncoiled some large sheets of paper which
he had brought in his hand from his own room.  These he spread out on
the great table, keeping their edges down with books and weights.  I
knew them at a glance; they were the careful copies which he had made of
our first transcripts from the writing in the tomb.  When he had all
ready, he turned to me and said slowly:

"'Do you remember wondering, when we examined the tomb, at the lack of
one thing which is usually found in such a tomb?'

"'Yes!  There was no serdab.'

"The serdab, I may perhaps explain," said Mr. Corbeck to me, "is a sort
of niche built or hewn in the wall of a tomb.  Those which have as yet
been examined bear no inscriptions, and contain only effigies of the
dead for whom the tomb was made." Then he went on with his narrative:

"Trelawny, when he saw that I had caught his meaning, went on speaking
with something of his old enthusiasm:

"'I have come to the conclusion that there must be a serdab--a secret
one.  We were dull not to have thought of it before.  We might have
known that the maker of such a tomb--a woman, who had shown in other ways
such a sense of beauty and completeness, and who had finished every
detail with a feminine richness of elaboration--would not have neglected
such an architectural feature.  Even if it had not its own special
significance in ritual, she would have had it as an adornment. Others
had had it, and she liked her own work to be complete.  Depend upon it,
there was--there is--a serdab; and that in it, when it is discovered, we
shall find the lamps.  Of course, had we known then what we now know or
at all events surmise, that there were lamps, we might have suspected
some hidden spot, some cachet.  I am going to ask you to go out to Egypt
again; to seek the tomb; to find the serdab; and to bring back the
lamps!'"

"'And if I find there is no serdab; or if discovering it I find no lamps
in it, what then?' He smiled grimly with that saturnine smile of his, so
rarely seen for years past, as he spoke slowly:

"'Then you will have to hustle till you find them!'

"'Good!' I said.  He pointed to one of the sheets.

"'Here are the transcripts from the Chapel at the south and the east.  I
have been looking over the writings again; and I find that in seven
places round this corner are the symbols of the constellation which we
call the Plough, which Queen Tera held to rule her birth and her
destiny.  I have examined them carefully, and I notice that they are all
representations of the grouping of the stars, as the constellation
appears in different parts of the heavens.  They are all astronomically
correct; and as in the real sky the Pointers indicate the Pole Star, so
these all point to one spot in the wall where usually the serdab is to
be found!'

"'Bravo!' I shouted, for such a piece of reasoning demanded applause.
He seemed pleased as he went on:

"'When you are in the tomb, examine this spot.  There is probably some
spring or mechanical contrivance for opening the receptacle.  What it
may be, there is no use guessing.  You will know what best to do, when
you are on the spot.'

"I started the next week for Egypt; and never rested till I stood again
in the tomb.  I had found some of our old following; and was fairly well
provided with help.  The country was now in a condition very different
to that in which it had been sixteen years before; there was no need for
troops or armed men.

"I climbed the rock face alone.  There was no difficulty, for in that
fine climate the woodwork of the ladder was still dependable.  It was
easy to see that in the years that had elapsed there had been other
visitors to the tomb; and my heart sank within me when I thought that
some of them might by chance have come across the secret place.  It
would be a bitter discovery indeed to find that they had forestalled me;
and that my journey had been in vain.

"The bitterness was realised when I lit my torches, and passed between
the seven-sided columns to the Chapel of the tomb.

"There, in the very spot where I had expected to find it, was the
opening of a serdab. And the serdab was empty.

"But the Chapel was not empty; for the dried-up body of a man in Arab
dress lay close under the opening, as though he had been stricken down.
I examined all round the walls to see if Trelawny's surmise was correct;
and I found that in all the positions of the stars as given, the
Pointers of the Plough indicated a spot to the left hand, or south side,
of the opening of the serdab, where was a single star in gold.

"I pressed this, and it gave way.  The stone which had marked the front
of the serdab, and which lay back against the wall within, moved
slightly.  On further examining the other side of the opening, I found a
similar spot, indicated by other representations of the constellation;
but this was itself a figure of the seven stars, and each was wrought in
burnished gold.  I pressed each star in turn; but without result.  Then
it struck me that if the opening spring was on the left, this on the
right might have been intended for the simultaneous pressure of all the
stars by one hand of seven fingers.  By using both my hands, I managed
to effect this.

"With a loud click, a metal figure seemed to dart from close to the
opening of the serdab; the stone slowly swung back to its place, and
shut with a click.  The glimpse which I had of the descending figure
appalled me for the moment.  It was like that grim guardian which,
according to the Arabian historian Ibn Abd Alhokin, the builder of the
Pyramids, King Saurid Ibn Salhouk placed in the Western Pyramid to
defend its treasure:  'A marble figure, upright, with lance in hand;
with on his head a serpent wreathed.  When any approached, the serpent
would bite him on one side, and twining about his throat and killing
him, would return again to his place.'

"I knew well that such a figure was not wrought to pleasantry; and that
to brave it was no child's play.  The dead Arab at my feet was proof of
what could be done!  So I examined again along the wall; and found here
and there chippings as if someone had been tapping with a heavy hammer.
This then had been what happened:  The grave-robber, more expert at his
work than we had been, and suspecting the presence of a hidden serdab,
had made essay to find it.  He had struck the spring by chance; had
released the avenging 'Treasurer', as the Arabian writer designated him.
The issue spoke for itself.  I got a piece of wood, and, standing at a
safe distance, pressed with the end of it upon the star.

"Instantly the stone flew back.  The hidden figure within darted forward
and thrust out its lance.  Then it rose up and disappeared.  I thought I
might now safely press on the seven stars; and did so.  Again the stone
rolled back; and the 'Treasurer' flashed by to his hidden lair.

"I repeated both experiments several times; with always the same result.
I should have liked to examine the mechanism of that figure of such
malignant mobility; but it was not possible without such tools as could
not easily be had.  It might be necessary to cut into a whole section of
the rock.  Some day I hope to go back, properly equipped, and attempt
it.

"Perhaps you do not know that the entrance to a serdab is almost always
very narrow; sometimes a hand can hardly be inserted.  Two things I
learned from this serdab.  The first was that the lamps, if lamps at all
there had been, could not have been of large size; and secondly, that
they would be in some way associated with Hathor, whose symbol, the hawk
in a square with the right top corner forming a smaller square, was cut
in relief on the wall within, and coloured the bright vermilion which we
had found on the Stele.  Hathor is the goddess who in Egyptian mythology
answers to Venus of the Greeks, in as far as she is the presiding deity
of beauty and pleasure.  In the Egyptian mythology, however, each God
has many forms; and in some aspects Hathor has to do with the idea of
resurrection.  There are seven forms or variants of the Goddess; why
should not these correspond in some way to the seven lamps!  That there
had been such lamps, I was convinced.  The first grave-robber had met
his death; the second had found the contents of the serdab.  The first
attempt had been made years since; the state of the body proved this.  I
had no clue to the second attempt.  It might have been long ago; or it
might have been recently.  If, however, others had been to the tomb, it
was probable that the lamps had been taken long ago.  Well! all the more
difficult would be my search; for undertaken it must be!

"That was nearly three years ago; and for all that time I have been like
the man in the Arabian Nights, seeking old lamps, not for new, but for
cash.  I dared not say what I was looking for, or attempt to give any
description; for such would have defeated my purpose.  But I had in my
own mind at the start a vague idea of what I must find.  In process of
time this grew more and more clear; till at last I almost overshot my
mark by searching for something which might have been wrong.

"The disappointments I suffered, and the wild-goose chases I made, would
fill a volume; but I persevered.  At last, not two months ago, I was
shown by an old dealer in Mossul one lamp such as I had looked for.  I
had been tracing it for nearly a year, always suffering disappointment,
but always buoyed up to further endeavour by a growing hope that I was
on the track.

"I do not know how I restrained myself when I realised that, at last, I
was at least close to success.  I was skilled, however, in the finesse
of Eastern trade; and the Jew-Arab-Portugee trader met his match.  I
wanted to see all his stock before buying; and one by one he produced,
amongst masses of rubbish, seven different lamps.  Each of them had a
distinguishing mark; and each and all was some form of the symbol of
Hathor.  I think I shook the imperturbability of my swarthy friend by
the magnitude of my purchases; for in order to prevent him guessing what
form of goods I sought, I nearly cleared out his shop.  At the end he
nearly wept, and said I had ruined him; for now he had nothing to sell.
He would have torn his hair had he known what price I should ultimately
have given for some of his stock, that perhaps he valued least.

"I parted with most of my merchandise at normal price as I hurried home.
I did not dare to give it away, or even lose it, lest I should incur
suspicion.  My burden was far too precious to be risked by any
foolishness now.  I got on as fast as it is possible to travel in such
countries; and arrived in London with only the lamps and certain
portable curios and papyri which I had picked up on my travels.

"Now, Mr. Ross, you know all I know; and I leave it to your discretion
how much, if any of it, you will tell Miss Trelawny."

As he finished a clear young voice said behind us:

"What about Miss Trelawny?  She is here!"

We turned, startled; and looked at each other inquiringly.  Miss
Trelawny stood in the doorway.  We did not know how long she had been
present, or how much she had heard.


Chapter XIII
Awaking From the Trance


The first unexpected words may always startle a hearer; but when the
shock is over, the listener's reason has asserted itself, and he can
judge of the manner, as well as of the matter, of speech.  Thus it was
on this occasion.  With intelligence now alert, I could not doubt of the
simple sincerity of Margaret's next question.

"What have you two men been talking about all this time, Mr. Ross?  I
suppose, Mr. Corbeck has been telling you all his adventures in finding
the lamps.  I hope you will tell me too, some day, Mr. Corbeck; but that
must not be till my poor Father is better.  He would like, I am sure, to
tell me all about these things himself; or to be present when I heard
them."  She glanced sharply from one to the other.  "Oh, that was what
you were saying as I came in?  All right!  I shall wait; but I hope it
won't be long.  The continuance of Father's condition is, I feel,
breaking me down.  A little while ago I felt that my nerves were giving
out; so I determined to go out for a walk in the Park.  I am sure it
will do me good.  I want you, if you will, Mr. Ross, to be with Father
whilst I am away.  I shall feel secure then."

I rose with alacrity, rejoicing that the poor girl was going out, even
for half an hour. She was looking terribly wearied and haggard; and the
sight of her pale cheeks made my heart ache.  I went to the sick-room;
and sat down in my usual place.  Mrs. Grant was then on duty; we had not
found it necessary to have more than one person in the room during the
day.  When I came in, she took occasion to go about some household duty.
The blinds were up, but the north aspect of the room softened the hot
glare of the sunlight without.

I sat for a long time thinking over all that Mr. Corbeck had told me;
and weaving its wonders into the tissue of strange things which had come
to pass since I had entered the house.  At times I was inclined to
doubt; to doubt everything and every one; to doubt even the evidences of
my own five senses.  The warnings of the skilled detective kept coming
back to my mind.  He had put down Mr. Corbeck as a clever liar, and a
confederate of Miss Trelawny.  Of Margaret!  That settled it!  Face to
face with such a proposition as that, doubt vanished.  Each time when
her image, her name, the merest thought of her, came before my mind,
each event stood out stark as a living fact.  My life upon her faith!

I was recalled from my reverie, which was fast becoming a dream of love,
in a startling manner.  A voice came from the bed; a deep, strong,
masterful voice.  The first note of it called up like a clarion my eyes
and my ears.  The sick man was awake and speaking!

"Who are you?  What are you doing here?"

Whatever ideas any of us had ever formed of his waking, I am quite sure
that none of us expected to see him start up all awake and full master
of himself.  I was so surprised that I answered almost mechanically:

"Ross is my name.  I have been watching by you!"  He looked surprised
for an instant, and then I could see that his habit of judging for
himself came into play.

"Watching by me!  How do you mean?  Why watching by me?"  His eye had
now lit on his heavily bandaged wrist.  He went on in a different tone;
less aggressive, more genial, as of one accepting facts:

"Are you a doctor?"  I felt myself almost smiling as I answered; the
relief from the long pressure of anxiety regarding his life was
beginning to tell:

"No, sir!"

"Then why are you here?  If you are not a doctor, what are you?"  His
tone was again more dictatorial.  Thought is quick; the whole train of
reasoning on which my answer must be based flooded through my brain
before the words could leave my lips. Margaret!  I must think of
Margaret!  This was her father, who as yet knew nothing of me; even of
my very existence.  He would be naturally curious, if not anxious, to
know why I amongst men had been chosen as his daughter's friend on the
occasion of his illness.  Fathers are naturally a little jealous in such
matters as a daughter's choice, and in the undeclared state of my love
for Margaret I must do nothing which could ultimately embarrass her.

"I am a Barrister.  It is not, however, in that capacity I am here; but
simply as a friend of your daughter.  It was probably her knowledge of
my being a lawyer which first determined her to ask me to come when she
thought you had been murdered. Afterwards she was good enough to
consider me to be a friend, and to allow me to remain in accordance with
your expressed wish that someone should remain to watch."

Mr. Trelawny was manifestly a man of quick thought, and of few words.
He gazed at me keenly as I spoke, and his piercing eyes seemed to read
my thought.  To my relief he said no more on the subject just then,
seeming to accept my words in simple faith. There was evidently in his
own mind some cause for the acceptance deeper than my own knowledge.
His eyes flashed, and there was an unconscious movement of the mouth--it
could hardly be called a twitch--which betokened satisfaction.  He was
following out some train of reasoning in his own mind.  Suddenly he
said:

"She thought I had been murdered!  Was that last night?"

"No! four days ago."  He seemed surprised.  Whilst he had been speaking
the first time he had sat up in bed; now he made a movement as though he
would jump out. With an effort, however, he restrained himself; leaning
back on his pillows he said quietly:

"Tell me all about it!  All you know!  Every detail!  Omit nothing!  But
stay; first lock the door!  I want to know, before I see anyone, exactly
how things stand."

Somehow his last words made my heart leap.  "Anyone!"  He evidently
accepted me, then, as an exception.  In my present state of feeling for
his daughter, this was a comforting thought.  I felt exultant as I went
over to the door and softly turned the key.  When I came back I found
him sitting up again.  He said:

"Go on!"

Accordingly, I told him every detail, even of the slightest which I
could remember, of what had happened from the moment of my arrival at
the house.  Of course I said nothing of my feeling towards Margaret, and
spoke only concerning those things already within his own knowledge.
With regard to Corbeck, I simply said that he had brought back some
lamps of which he had been in quest.  Then I proceeded to tell him fully
of their loss, and of their re-discovery in the house.

He listened with a self-control which, under the circumstances, was to
me little less than marvellous.  It was impassiveness, for at times his
eyes would flash or blaze, and the strong fingers of his uninjured hand
would grip the sheet, pulling it into far-extending wrinkles.  This was
most noticeable when I told him of the return of Corbeck, and the
finding of the lamps in the boudoir.  At times he spoke, but only a few
words, and as if unconsciously in emotional comment.  The mysterious
parts, those which had most puzzled us, seemed to have no special
interest for him; he seemed to know them already.  The utmost concern he
showed was when I told him of Daw's shooting.  His muttered comment:
'stupid ass!" together with a quick glance across the room at the
injured cabinet, marked the measure of his disgust.  As I told him of
his daughter's harrowing anxiety for him, of her unending care and
devotion, of the tender love which she had shown, he seemed much moved.
There was a sort of veiled surprise in his unconscious whisper:

"Margaret!  Margaret!"

When I had finished my narration, bringing matters up to the moment when
Miss Trelawny had gone out for her walk--I thought of her as "Miss
Trelawny', not as 'Margaret' now, in the presence of her father--he
remained silent for quite a long time.  It was probably two or three
minutes; but it seemed interminable.  All at once he turned and said to
me briskly:

"Now tell me all about yourself!"  This was something of a floorer; I
felt myself grow red-hot.  Mr. Trelawny's eyes were upon me; they were
now calm and inquiring, but never ceasing in their soul-searching
scrutiny.  There was just a suspicion of a smile on the mouth which,
though it added to my embarrassment, gave me a certain measure of
relief.  I was, however, face to face with difficulty; and the habit of
my life stood me in good stead.  I looked him straight in the eyes as I
spoke:

"My name, as I told you, is Ross, Malcolm Ross.  I am by profession a
Barrister.  I was made a Q. C. in the last year of the Queen's reign.  I
have been fairly successful in my work."  To my relief he said:

"Yes, I know.  I have always heard well of you!  Where and when did you
meet Margaret?"

"First at the Hay's in Belgrave Square, ten days ago.  Then at a picnic
up the river with Lady Strathconnell.  We went from Windsor to Cookham.
Mar--Miss Trelawny was in my boat.  I scull a little, and I had my own
boat at Windsor.  We had a good deal of conversation--naturally."

"Naturally!" there was just a suspicion of something sardonic in the
tone of acquiescence; but there was no other intimation of his feeling.
I began to think that as I was in the presence of a strong man, I should
show something of my own strength.  My friends, and sometimes my
opponents, say that I am a strong man.  In my present circumstances, not
to be absolutely truthful would be to be weak.  So I stood up to the
difficulty before me; always bearing in mind, however, that my words
might affect Margaret's happiness through her love for her father.  I
went on:

"In conversation at a place and time and amid surroundings so pleasing,
and in a solitude inviting to confidence, I got a glimpse of her inner
life.  Such a glimpse as a man of my years and experience may get from a
young girl!"  The father's face grew graver as I went on; but he said
nothing.  I was committed now to a definite line of speech, and went on
with such mastery of my mind as I could exercise.  The occasion might be
fraught with serious consequences to me too.

"I could not but see that there was over her spirit a sense of
loneliness which was habitual to her.  I thought I understood it; I am
myself an only child.  I ventured to encourage her to speak to me
freely; and was happy enough to succeed.  A sort of confidence became
established between us."  There was something in the father's face which
made me add hurriedly:

"Nothing was said by her, sir, as you can well imagine, which was not
right and proper.  She only told me in the impulsive way of one longing
to give voice to thoughts long carefully concealed, of her yearning to
be closer to the father whom she loved; more en rapport with him; more
in his confidence; closer within the circle of his sympathies.  Oh,
believe me, sir, that it was all good!  All that a father's heart could
hope or wish for!  It was all loyal!  That she spoke it to me was
perhaps because I was almost a stranger with whom there was no previous
barrier to confidence."

Here I paused.  It was hard to go on; and I feared lest I might, in my
zeal, do Margaret a disservice.  The relief of the strain came from her
father.

"And you?"

"Sir, Miss Trelawny is very sweet and beautiful!  She is young; and her
mind is like crystal!  Her sympathy is a joy!  I am not an old man, and
my affections were not engaged.  They never had been till then.  I hope
I may say as much, even to a father!" My eyes involuntarily dropped.
When I raised them again Mr. Trelawny was still gazing at me keenly.
All the kindliness of his nature seemed to wreath itself in a smile as
he held out his hand and said:

"Malcolm Ross, I have always heard of you as a fearless and honourable
gentleman. I am glad my girl has such a friend!  Go on!"

My heart leaped.  The first step to the winning of Margaret's father was
gained.  I dare say I was somewhat more effusive in my words and my
manner as I went on.  I certainly felt that way.

"One thing we gain as we grow older:  to use our age judiciously!  I
have had much experience.  I have fought for it and worked for it all my
life; and I felt that I was justified in using it.  I ventured to ask
Miss Trelawny to count on me as a friend; to let me serve her should
occasion arise.  She promised me that she would.  I had little idea that
my chance of serving her should come so soon or in such a way; but that
very night you were stricken down.  In her desolation and anxiety she
sent for me!" I paused.  He continued to look at me as I went on:

"When your letter of instructions was found, I offered my services.
They were accepted, as you know."

"And these days, how did they pass for you?"  The question startled me.
There was in it something of Margaret's own voice and manner; something
so greatly resembling her lighter moments that it brought out all the
masculinity in me.  I felt more sure of my ground now as I said:

"These days, sir, despite all their harrowing anxiety, despite all the
pain they held for the girl whom I grew to love more and more with each
passing hour, have been the happiest of my life!"  He kept silence for a
long time; so long that, as I waited for him to speak, with my heart
beating, I began to wonder if my frankness had been too effusive.  At
last he said:

"I suppose it is hard to say so much vicariously.  Her poor mother
should have heard you; it would have made her heart glad!"  Then a
shadow swept across his face; and he went on more hurriedly.

"But are you quite sure of all this?"

"I know my own heart, sir; or, at least, I think I do!"

"No! no!" he answered, "I don't mean you.  That is all right!  But you
spoke of my girl's affection for me . . . and yet . . . !  And yet she
has been living here, in my house, a whole year. . . Still, she spoke
to you of her loneliness--her desolation.  I never--it grieves me to say
it, but it is true--I never saw sign of such affection towards myself in
all the year! . . ."  His voice trembled away into sad, reminiscent
introspection.

"Then, sir," I said, "I have been privileged to see more in a few days
than you in her whole lifetime!"  My words seemed to call him up from
himself; and I thought that it was with pleasure as well as surprise
that he said:

"I had no idea of it.  I thought that she was indifferent to me.  That
what seemed like the neglect of her youth was revenging itself on me.
That she was cold of heart. . . . It is a joy unspeakable to me that her
mother's daughter loves me too!" Unconsciously he sank back upon his
pillow, lost in memories of the past.

How he must have loved her mother!  It was the love of her mother's
child, rather than the love of his own daughter, that appealed to him.
My heart went out to him in a great wave of sympathy and kindliness.  I
began to understand.  To understand the passion of these two great,
silent, reserved natures, that successfully concealed the burning hunger
for the other's love!  It did not surprise me when presently he murmured
to himself:

"Margaret, my child!  Tender, and thoughtful, and strong, and true, and
brave!  Like her dear mother! like her dear mother!"

And then to the very depths of my heart I rejoiced that I had spoken so
frankly.

Presently Mr. Trelawny said:

"Four days!  The sixteenth!  Then this is the twentieth of July?"  I
nodded affirmation; he went on:

"So I have been lying in a trance for four days.  It is not the first
time.  I was in a trance once under strange conditions for three days;
and never even suspected it till I was told of the lapse of time.  I
shall tell you all about it some day, if you care to hear."

That made me thrill with pleasure.  That he, Margaret's father, would so
take me into his confidence made it possible. . . . The business-like,
every-day alertness of his voice as he spoke next quite recalled me:

"I had better get up now.  When Margaret comes in, tell her yourself
that I am all right.  It will avoid any shock!  And will you tell
Corbeck that I would like to see him as soon as I can.  I want to see
those lamps, and hear all about them!"

His attitude towards me filled me with delight.  There was a possible
father-in-law aspect that would have raised me from a death-bed.  I was
hurrying away to carry out his wishes; when, however, my hand was on the
key of the door, his voice recalled me:

"Mr. Ross!"

I did not like to hear him say "Mr."  After he knew of my friendship
with his daughter he had called me Malcolm Ross; and this obvious return
to formality not only pained, but filled me with apprehension.  It must
be something about Margaret.  I thought of her as "Margaret" and not as
"Miss Trelawny", now that there was danger of losing her. I know now
what I felt then:  that I was determined to fight for her rather than
lose her.  I came back, unconsciously holding myself erect.  Mr.
Trelawny, the keen observer of men, seemed to read my thought; his face,
which was set in a new anxiety, relaxed as he said:

"Sit down a minute; it is better that we speak now than later.  We are
both men, and men of the world.  All this about my daughter is very new
to me, and very sudden; and I want to know exactly how and where I
stand.  Mind, I am making no objection; but as a father I have duties
which are grave, and may prove to be painful.  I--I"--he seemed slightly
at a loss how to begin, and this gave me hope--"I suppose I am to take
it, from what you have said to me of your feelings towards my girl, that
it is in your mind to be a suitor for her hand, later on?"  I answered
at once:

"Absolutely!  Firm and fixed; it was my intention the evening after I
had been with her on the river, to seek you, of course after a proper
and respectful interval, and to ask you if I might approach her on the
subject.  Events forced me into closer relationship more quickly than I
had to hope would be possible; but that first purpose has remained fresh
in my heart, and has grown in intensity, and multiplied itself with
every hour which has passed since then."  His face seemed to soften as
he looked at me; the memory of his own youth was coming back to him
instinctively.  After a pause he said:

"I suppose I may take it, too, Malcolm Ross"--the return to the
familiarity of address swept through me with a glorious thrill--"that as
yet you have not made any protestation to my daughter?"

"Not in words, sir."  The arriere pensee of my phrase struck me, not by
its own humour, but through the grave, kindly smile on the father's
face.  There was a pleasant sarcasm in his comment:

"Not in words!  That is dangerous!  She might have doubted words, or
even disbelieved them."

I felt myself blushing to the roots of my hair as I went on:

"The duty of delicacy in her defenceless position; my respect for her
father--I did not know you then, sir, as yourself, but only as her
father--restrained me.  But even had not these barriers existed, I should
not have dared in the presence of such grief and anxiety to have
declared myself.  Mr. Trelawny, I assure you on my word of honour that
your daughter and I are as yet, on her part, but friends and nothing
more!"  Once again he held out his hands, and we clasped each other
warmly.  Then he said heartily:

"I am satisfied, Malcolm Ross.  Of course, I take it that until I have
seen her and have given you permission, you will not make any
declaration to my daughter--in words," he added, with an indulgent smile.
But his face became stern again as he went on:

"Time presses; and I have to think of some matters so urgent and so
strange that I dare not lose an hour.  Otherwise I should not have been
prepared to enter, at so short a notice and to so new a friend, on the
subject of my daughter's settlement in life, and of her future
happiness."  There was a dignity and a certain proudness in his manner
which impressed me much.

"I shall respect your wishes, sir!" I said as I went back and opened the
door.  I heard him lock it behind me.

When I told Mr. Corbeck that Mr. Trelawny had quite recovered, he began
to dance about like a wild man.  But he suddenly stopped, and asked me
to be careful not to draw any inferences, at all events at first, when
in the future speaking of the finding of the lamps, or of the first
visits to the tomb.  This was in case Mr. Trelawny should speak to me on
the subject; "as, of course, he will," he added, with a sidelong look at
me which meant knowledge of the affairs of my heart.  I agreed to this,
feeling that it was quite right.  I did not quite understand why; but I
knew that Mr. Trelawny was a peculiar man.  In no case could one make a
mistake by being reticent. Reticence is a quality which a strong man
always respects.

The manner in which the others of the house took the news of the
recovery varied much.  Mrs. Grant wept with emotion; then she hurried
off to see if she could do anything personally, and to set the house in
order for "Master", as she always called him.  The Nurse's face fell:
she was deprived of an interesting case.  But the disappointment was
only momentary; and she rejoiced that the trouble was over. She was
ready to come to the patient the moment she should be wanted; but in the
meantime she occupied herself in packing her portmanteau.

I took Sergeant Daw into the study, so that we should be alone when I
told him the news.  It surprised even his iron self-control when I told
him the method of the waking.  I was myself surprised in turn by his
first words:

"And how did he explain the first attack?  He was unconscious when the
second was made."

Up to that moment the nature of the attack, which was the cause of my
coming to the house, had never even crossed my mind, except when I had
simply narrated the various occurrences in sequence to Mr. Trelawny.
The Detective did not seem to think much of my answer:

"Do you know, it never occurred to me to ask him!"  The professional
instinct was strong in the man, and seemed to supersede everything else.

"That is why so few cases are ever followed out," he said, "unless our
people are in them.  Your amateur detective neer hunts down to the
death.  As for ordinary people, the moment things begin to mend, and the
strain of suspense is off them, they drop the matter in hand.  It is
like sea-sickness," he added philosophically after a pause; "the moment
you touch the shore you never give it a thought, but run off to the
buffet to feed!  Well, Mr. Ross, I'm glad the case is over; for over it
is, so far as I am concerned.  I suppose that Mr. Trelawny knows his own
business; and that now he is well again, he will take it up himself.
Perhaps, however, he will not do anything. As he seemed to expect
something to happen, but did not ask for protection from the police in
any way, I take it that he don't want them to interfere with an eye to
punishment.  We'll be told officially, I suppose, that it was an
accident, or sleep-walking, or something of the kind, to satisfy the
conscience of our Record Department; and that will be the end.  As for
me, I tell you frankly, sir, that it will be the saving of me.  I verily
believe I was beginning to get dotty over it all.  There were too many
mysteries, that aren't in my line, for me to be really satisfied as to
either facts or the causes of them.  Now I'll be able to wash my hands
of it, and get back to clean, wholesome, criminal work.  Of course, sir,
I'll be glad to know if you ever do light on a cause of any kind.  And
I'll be grateful if you can ever tell me how the man was dragged out of
bed when the cat bit him, and who used the knife the second time.  For
master Silvio could never have done it by himself.  But there! I keep
thinking of it still.  I must look out and keep a check on myself, or I
shall think of it when I have to keep my mind on other things!"

When Margaret returned from her walk, I met her in the hall.  She was
still pale and sad; somehow, I had expected to see her radiant after her
walk.  The moment she saw me her eyes brightened, and she looked at me
keenly.

"You have some good news for me?" she said.  "Is Father better?"

"He is!  Why did you think so?"

"I saw it in your face.  I must go to him at once."  She was hurrying
away when I stopped her.

"He said he would send for you the moment he was dressed."

"He said he would send for me!" she repeated in amazement.  "Then he is
awake again, and conscious?  I had no idea he was so well as that! O
Malcolm!"

She sat down on the nearest chair and began to cry.  I felt overcome
myself.  The sight of her joy and emotion, the mention of my own name in
such a way and at such a time, the rush of glorious possibilities all
coming together, quite unmanned me.  She saw my emotion, and seemed to
understand.  She put out her hand.  I held it hard, and kissed it.  Such
moments as these, the opportunities of lovers, are gifts of the gods! Up
to this instant, though I knew I loved her, and though I believed she
returned my affection, I had had only hope.  Now, however, the
self-surrender manifest in her willingness to let me squeeze her hand,
the ardour of her pressure in return, and the glorious flush of love in
her beautiful, deep, dark eyes as she lifted them to mine, were all the
eloquences which the most impatient or exacting lover could expect or
demand.

No word was spoken; none was needed.  Even had I not been pledged to
verbal silence, words would have been poor and dull to express what we
felt.  Hand in hand, like two little children, we went up the staircase
and waited on the landing, till the summons from Mr. Trelawny should
come.

I whispered in her ear--it was nicer than speaking aloud and at a greater
distance--how her father had awakened, and what he had said; and all
that had passed between us, except when she herself had been the subject
of conversation.

Presently a bell rang from the room.  Margaret slipped from me, and
looked back with warning finger on lip.  She went over to her father's
door and knocked softly.

"Come in!" said the strong voice.

"It is I, Father!"  The voice was tremulous with love and hope.

There was a quick step inside the room; the door was hurriedly thrown
open, and in an instant Margaret, who had sprung forward, was clasped in
her father's arms. There was little speech; only a few broken phrases.

"Father!  Dear, dear Father!"

"My child!  Margaret!  My dear, dear child!"

"O Father, Father!  At last!  At last!"

Here the father and daughter went into the room together, and the door
closed.


Chapter XIV
The Birth-Mark


During my waiting for the summons to Mr. Trelawny's room, which I knew
would come, the time was long and lonely.  After the first few moments
of emotional happiness at Margaret's joy, I somehow felt apart and
alone; and for a little time the selfishness of a lover possessed me.
But it was not for long.  Margaret's happiness was all to me; and in the
conscious sense of it I lost my baser self.  Margaret's last words as
the door closed on them gave the key to the whole situation, as it had
been and as it was.  These two proud, strong people, though father and
daughter, had only come to know each other when the girl was grown up.
Margaret's nature was of that kind which matures early.

The pride and strength of each, and the reticence which was their
corollary, made a barrier at the beginning.  Each had respected the
other's reticence too much thereafter; and the misunderstanding grew to
habit.  And so these two loving hearts, each of which yearned for
sympathy from the other, were kept apart.  But now all was well, and in
my heart of hearts I rejoiced that at last Margaret was happy.  Whilst I
was still musing on the subject, and dreaming dreams of a personal
nature, the door was opened, and Mr. Trelawny beckoned to me.

"Come in, Mr. Ross!" he said cordially, but with a certain formality
which I dreaded.  I entered the room, and he closed the door again.  He
held out his hand, and I put mine in it.  He did not let it go, but
still held it as he drew me over toward his daughter.  Margaret looked
from me to him, and back again; and her eyes fell.  When I was close to
her, Mr. Trelawny let go my hand, and, looking his daughter straight in
the face, said:

"If things are as I fancy, we shall not have any secrets between us.
Malcolm Ross knows so much of my affairs already, that I take it he must
either let matters stop where they are and go away in silence, or else
he must know more.  Margaret! are you willing to let Mr. Ross see your
wrist?"

She threw one swift look of appeal in his eyes; but even as she did so
she seemed to make up her mind.  Without a word she raised her right
hand, so that the bracelet of spreading wings which covered the wrist
fell back, leaving the flesh bare.  Then an icy chill shot through me.

On her wrist was a thin red jagged line, from which seemed to hang red
stains like drops of blood!

She stood there, a veritable figure of patient pride.

Oh! but she looked proud!  Through all her sweetness, all her dignity,
all her high-souled negation of self which I had known, and which never
seemed more marked than now--through all the fire that seemed to shine
from the dark depths of her eyes into my very soul, pride shone
conspicuously.  The pride that has faith; the pride that is born of
conscious purity; the pride of a veritable queen of Old Time, when to be
royal was to be the first and greatest and bravest in all high things.
As we stood thus for some seconds, the deep, grave voice of her father
seemed to sound a challenge in my ears:

"What do you say now?"

My answer was not in words.  I caught Margaret's right hand in mine as
it fell, and, holding it tight, whilst with the other I pushed back the
golden cincture, stooped and kissed the wrist.  As I looked up at her,
but never letting go her hand, there was a look of joy on her face such
as I dream of when I think of heaven.  Then I faced her father.

"You have my answer, sir!"  His strong face looked gravely sweet.  He
only said one word as he laid his hand on our clasped ones, whilst he
bent over and kissed his daughter:

"Good!"

We were interrupted by a knock at the door.  In answer to an impatient
"Come in!" from Mr. Trelawny, Mr. Corbeck entered.  When he saw us
grouped he would have drawn back; but in an instant Mr. Trelawny had
sprung forth and dragged him forward.  As he shook him by both hands, he
seemed a transformed man.  All the enthusiasm of his youth, of which Mr.
Corbeck had told us, seemed to have come back to him in an instant.

"So you have got the lamps!" he almost shouted.  "My reasoning was right
after all. Come to the library, where we will be alone, and tell me all
about it!  And while he does it, Ross," said he, turning to me, "do you,
like a good fellow, get the key from the safe deposit, so that I may
have a look at the lamps!"

Then the three of them, the daughter lovingly holding her father's arm,
went into the library, whilst I hurried off to Chancery Lane.

When I returned with the key, I found them still engaged in the
narrative; but Doctor Winchester, who had arrived soon after I left, was
with them.  Mr. Trelawny, on hearing from Margaret of his great
attention and kindness, and how he had, under much pressure to the
contrary, steadfastly obeyed his written wishes, had asked him to remain
and listen.  "It will interest you, perhaps," he said, "to learn the end
of the story!"

We all had an early dinner together.  We sat after it a good while, and
then Mr. Trelawny said:

"Now, I think we had all better separate and go quietly to bed early.
We may have much to talk about tomorrow; and tonight I want to think."

Doctor Winchester went away, taking, with a courteous forethought, Mr.
Corbeck with him, and leaving me behind.  When the others had gone Mr.
Trelawny said:

"I think it will be well if you, too, will go home for tonight.  I want
to be quite alone with my daughter; there are many things I wish to
speak of to her, and to her alone. Perhaps, even tomorrow, I will be
able to tell you also of them; but in the meantime there will be less
distraction to us both if we are alone in the house."  I quite
understood and sympathised with his feelings; but the experiences of the
last few days were strong on me, and with some hesitation I said:

"But may it not be dangerous?  If you knew as we do--"  To my surprise
Margaret interrupted me:

"There will be no danger, Malcolm.  I shall be with Father!"  As she
spoke she clung to him in a protective way.  I said no more, but stood
up to go at once.  Mr. Trelawny said heartily:

"Come as early as you please, Ross.  Come to breakfast.  After it, you
and I will want to have a word together."  He went out of the room
quietly, leaving us together.  I clasped and kissed Margaret's hands,
which she held out to me, and then drew her close to me, and our lips
met for the first time.

I did not sleep much that night.  Happiness on the one side of my bed
and Anxiety on the other kept sleep away.  But if I had anxious care, I
had also happiness which had not equal in my life--or ever can have.  The
night went by so quickly that the dawn seemed to rush on me, not
stealing as is its wont.

Before nine o'clock I was at Kensington.  All anxiety seemed to float
away like a cloud as I met Margaret, and saw that already the pallor of
her face had given to the rich bloom which I knew.  She told me that her
father had slept well, and that he would be with us soon.

"I do believe," she whispered, "that my dear and thoughtful Father has
kept back on purpose, so that I might meet you first, and alone!"

After breakfast Mr. Trelawny took us into the study, saying as he passed
in:

"I have asked Margaret to come too."  When we were seated, he said
gravely:

"I told you last night that we might have something to say to each
other.  I dare say that you may have thought that it was about Margaret
and yourself.  Isn't that so?"

"I thought so."

"Well, my boy, that is all right.  Margaret and I have been talking, and
I know her wishes."  He held out his hand.  When I wrung it, and had
kissed Margaret, who drew her chair close to mine, so that we could hold
hands as we listened, he went on, but with a certain hesitation--it could
hardly be called nervousness--which was new to me.

"You know a good deal of my hunt after this mummy and her belongings;
and I dare say you have guessed a good deal of my theories.  But these
at any rate I shall explain later, concisely and categorically, if it be
necessary.  What I want to consult you about now is this:  Margaret and
I disagree on one point.  I am about to make an experiment; the
experiment which is to crown all that I have devoted twenty years of
research, and danger, and labour to prepare for.  Through it we may
learn things that have been hidden from the eyes and the knowledge of
men for centuries; for scores of centuries.  I do not want my daughter
to be present; for I cannot blind myself to the fact that there may be
danger in it--great danger, and of an unknown kind.  I have, however,
already faced very great dangers, and of an unknown kind; and so has
that brave scholar who has helped me in the work.  As to myself, I am
willing to run any risk.  For science, and history, and philosophy may
benefit; and we may turn one old page of a wisdom unknown in this
prosaic age.  But for my daughter to run such a risk I am loth.  Her
young bright life is too precious to throw lightly away; now especially
when she is on the very threshold of new happiness.  I do not wish to
see her life given, as her dear mother's was--"

He broke down for a moment, and covered his eyes with his hands.  In an
instant Margaret was beside him, clasping him close, and kissing him,
and comforting him with loving words.  Then, standing erect, with one
hand on his head, she said:

"Father! mother did not bid you stay beside her, even when you wanted to
go on that journey of unknown danger to Egypt; though that country was
then upset from end to end with war and the dangers that follow war.
You have told me how she left you free to go as you wished; though that
she thought of danger for you and and feared it for you, is proved by
this!"  She held up her wrist with the scar that seemed to run blood.
"Now, mother's daughter does as mother would have done herself!"  Then
she turned to me:

"Malcolm, you know I love you!  But love is trust; and you must trust me
in danger as well as in joy.  You and I must stand beside Father in this
unknown peril. Together we shall come through it; or together we shall
fail; together we shall die. That is my wish; my first wish to my
husband that is to be!  Do you not think that, as a daughter, I am
right?  Tell my Father what you think!"

She looked like a Queen stooping to plead.  My love for her grew and
grew.  I stood up beside her; and took her hand and said:

"Mr. Trelawny! in this Margaret and I are one!"

He took both our hands and held them hard.  Presently he said with deep
emotion:

"It is as her mother would have done!"

Mr. Corbeck and Doctor Winchester came exactly at the time appointed,
and joined us in the library.  Despite my great happiness I felt our
meeting to be a very solemn function.  For I could never forget the
strange things that had been; and the idea of the strange things which
might be, was with me like a cloud, pressing down on us all.  From the
gravity of my companions I gathered that each of them also was ruled by
some such dominating thought.

Instinctively we gathered our chairs into a circle round Mr. Trelawny,
who had taken the great armchair near the window.  Margaret sat by him
on his right, and I was next to her.  Mr. Corbeck was on his left, with
Doctor Winchester on the other side. After a few seconds of silence Mr.
Trelawny said to Mr. Corbeck:

"You have told Doctor Winchester all up to the present, as we arranged?"

"Yes," he answered; so Mr. Trelawny said:

"And I have told Margaret, so we all know!"  Then, turning to the
Doctor, he asked:

"And am I to take it that you, knowing all as we know it who have
followed the matter for years, wish to share in the experiment which we
hope to make?"  His answer was direct and uncompromising:

"Certainly!  Why, when this matter was fresh to me, I offered to go on
with it to the end.  Now that it is of such strange interest, I would
not miss it for anything which you could name.  Be quite easy in your
mind, Mr. Trelawny.  I am a scientist and an investigator of phenomena.
I have no one belonging to me or dependent on me.  I am quite alone, and
free to do what I like with my own--including my life!"  Mr. Trelawny
bowed gravely, and turning to Mr. Corbeck said:

"I have known your ideas for many years past, old friend; so I need ask
you nothing. As to Margaret and Malcolm Ross, they have already told me
their wishes in no uncertain way."  He paused a few seconds, as though
to put his thoughts or his words in order; then he began to explain his
views and intentions.  He spoke very carefully, seeming always to bear
in mind that some of us who listened were ignorant of the very root and
nature of some things touched upon, and explaining them to us as he went
on:

"The experiment which is before us is to try whether or no there is any
force, any reality, in the old Magic.  There could not possibly be more
favourable conditions for the test; and it is my own desire to do all
that is possible to make the original design effective.  That there is
some such existing power I firmly believe.  It might not be possible to
create, or arrange, or organise such a power in our own time; but I take
it that if in Old Time such a power existed, it may have some
exceptional survival.  After all, the Bible is not a myth; and we read
there that the sun stood still at a man's command, and that an ass--not
a human one--spoke.  And if the Witch at Endor could call up to Saul the
spirit of Samuel, why may not there have been others with equal powers;
and why may not one among them survive?  Indeed, we are told in the Book
of Samuel that the Witch of Endor was only one of many, and her being
consulted by Saul was a matter of chance.  He only sought one among the
many whom he had driven out of Israel; 'all those that had Familiar
Spirits, and the Wizards.'  This Egyptian Queen, Tera, who reigned
nearly two thousand years before Saul, had a Familiar, and was a Wizard
too.  See how the priests of her time, and those after it tried to wipe
out her name from the face of the earth, and put a curse over the very
door of her tomb so that none might ever discover the lost name.  Ay,
and they succeeded so well that even Manetho, the historian of the
Egyptian Kings, writing in the tenth century before Christ, with all the
lore of the priesthood for forty centuries behind him, and with
possibility of access to every existing record, could not even find her
name.  Did it strike any of you, in thinking of the late events, who or
what her Familiar was?"  There was an interruption, for Doctor
Winchester struck one hand loudly on the other as he ejaculated:

"The cat!  The mummy cat!  I knew it!"  Mr. Trelawny smiled over at him.

"You are right!  There is every indication that the Familiar of the
Wizard Queen was that cat which was mummied when she was, and was not
only placed in her tomb, but was laid in the sarcophagus with her.  That
was what bit into my wrist, what cut me with sharp claws."  He paused.
Margaret's comment was a purely girlish one:

"Then my poor Silvio is acquitted!  I am glad!"  Her father stroked her
hair and went on:

"This woman seems to have had an extraordinary foresight.  Foresight
far, far beyond her age and the philosophy of her time.  She seems to
have seen through the weakness of her own religion, and even prepared
for emergence into a different world.  All her aspirations were for the
North, the point of the compass whence blew the cool invigorating
breezes that make life a joy.  From the first, her eyes seem to have
been attracted to the seven stars of the Plough from the fact, as
recorded in the hieroglyphics in her tomb, that at her birth a great
aerolite fell, from whose heart was finally extracted that Jewel of
Seven Stars which she regarded as the talisman of her life.  It seems to
have so far ruled her destiny that all her thought and care circled
round it.  The Magic Coffer, so wondrously wrought with seven sides, we
learn from the same source, came from the aerolite.  Seven was to her a
magic number; and no wonder.  With seven fingers on one hand, and seven
toes on one foot.  With a talisman of a rare ruby with seven stars in
the same position as in that constellation which ruled her birth, each
star of the seven having seven points--in itself a geological wonder--it
would have been odd if she had not been attracted by it. Again, she was
born, we learn in the Stele of her tomb, in the seventh month of the
year--the month beginning with the Inundation of the Nile.  Of which
month the presiding Goddess was Hathor, the Goddess of her own house, of
the Antefs of the Theban line--the Goddess who in various forms
symbolises beauty, and pleasure, and resurrection.  Again, in this
seventh month--which, by later Egyptian astronomy began on October 28th,
and ran to the 27th of our November--on the seventh day the Pointer of
the Plough just rises above the horizon of the sky at Thebes.

"In a marvellously strange way, therefore, are grouped into this woman's
life these various things.  The number seven; the Pole Star, with the
constellation of seven stars; the God of the month, Hathor, who was her
own particular God, the God of her family, the Antefs of the Theban
Dynasty, whose Kings' symbol it was, and whose seven forms ruled love
and the delights of life and resurrection.  If ever there was ground for
magic; for the power of symbolism carried into mystic use; for a belief
in finites spirits in an age which knew not the Living God, it is here.

"Remember, too, that this woman was skilled in all the science of her
time.  Her wise and cautious father took care of that, knowing that by
her own wisdom she must ultimately combat the intrigues of the
Hierarchy.  Bear in mind that in old Egypt the science of Astronomy
began and was developed to an extraordinary height; and that Astrology
followed Astronomy in its progress.  And it is possible that in the
later developments of science with regard to light rays, we may yet find
that Astrology is on a scientific basis.  Our next wave of scientific
thought may deal with this.  I shall have something special to call your
minds to on this point presently.  Bear in mind also that the Egyptians
knew sciences, of which today, despite all our advantages, we are
profoundly ignorant.  Acoustics, for instance, an exact science with the
builders of the temples of Karnak, of Luxor, of the Pyramids, is today
a mystery to Bell, and Kelvin, and Edison, and Marconi.  Again, these
old miracle-workers probably understood some practical way of using
other forces, and amongst them the forces of light that at present we do
not dream of.  But of this matter I shall speak later.  That Magic
Coffer of Queen Tera is probably a magic box in more ways than one.  It
may--possibly it does--contain forces that we wot not of.  We cannot open
it; it must be closed from within.  How then was it closed?  It is a
coffer of solid stone, of amazing hardness, more like a jewel than an
ordinary marble, with a lid equally solid; and yet all is so finely
wrought that the finest tool made today cannot be inserted under the
flange.  How was it wrought to such perfection?  How was the stone so
chosen that those translucent patches match the relations of the seven
stars of the constellation?  How is it, or from what cause, that when
the starlight shines on it, it glows from within--that when I fix the
lamps in similar form the glow grows greater still; and yet the box is
irresponsive to ordinary light however great?  I tell you that that box
hides some great mystery of science.  We shall find that the light will
open it in some way:  either by striking on some substance, sensitive in
a peculiar way to its effect, or in releasing some greater power.  I
only trust that in our ignorance we may not so bungle things as to do
harm to its mechanism; and so deprive the knowledge of our time of a
lesson handed down, as by a miracle, through nearly five thousand years.

"In another way, too, there may be hidden in that box secrets which, for
good or ill, may enlighten the world.  We know from their records, and
inferentially also, that the Egyptians studied the properties of herbs
and minerals for magic purposes--white magic as well as black.  We know
that some of the wizards of old could induce from sleep dreams of any
given kind.  That this purpose was mainly effected by hypnotism, which
was another art or science of Old Nile, I have little doubt.  But still,
they must have had a mastery of drugs that is far beyond anything we
know.  With our own pharmacopoeia we can, to a certain extent, induce
dreams.  We may even differentiate between good and bad--dreams of
pleasure, or disturbing and harrowing dreams.  But these old
practitioners seemed to have been able to command at will any form or
colour of dreaming; could work round any given subject or thought in
almost any was required.  In that coffer, which you have seen, may rest
a very armoury of dreams.  Indeed, some of the forces that lie within it
may have been already used in my household."  Again there was an
interruption from Doctor Winchester.

"But if in your case some of these imprisoned forces were used, what set
them free at the opportune time, or how?  Besides, you and Mr. Corbeck
were once before put into a trance for three whole days, when you were
in the Queen's tomb for the second time.  And then, as I gathered from
Mr. Corbeck's story, the coffer was not back in the tomb, though the
mummy was.  Surely in both these cases there must have been some active
intelligence awake, and with some other power to wield." Mr. Trelawny's
answer was equally to the point:

"There was some active intelligence awake.  I am convinced of it.  And
it wielded a power which it never lacks.  I believe that on both those
occasions hypnotism was the power wielded."

"And wherein is that power contained?  What view do you hold on the
subject?" Doctor Winchester's voice vibrated with the intensity of his
excitement as he leaned forward, breathing hard, and with eyes staring.
Mr. Trelawny said solemnly:

"In the mummy of the Queen Tera!  I was coming to that presently.
Perhaps we had better wait till I clear the ground a little.  What I
hold is, that the preparation of that box was made for a special
occasion; as indeed were all the preparations of the tomb and all
belonging to it.  Queen Tera did not trouble herself to guard against
snakes and scorpions, in that rocky tomb cut in the sheer cliff face a
hundred feet above the level of the valley, and fifty down from the
summit.  Her precautions were against the disturbances of human hands;
against the jealousy and hatred of the priests, who, had they known of
her real aims, would have tried to baffle them.  From her point of view,
she made all ready for the time of resurrection, whenever that might be.
I gather from the symbolic pictures in the tomb that she so far differed
from the belief of her time that she looked for a resurrection in the
flesh.  It was doubtless this that intensified the hatred of the
priesthood, and gave them an acceptable cause for obliterating the very
existence, present and future, of one who had outrage their theories and
blasphemed their gods.  All that she might require, either in the
accomplishment of the resurrection or after it, were contained in that
almost hermetically sealed suite of chambers in the rock.  In the great
sarcophagus, which as you know is of a size quite unusual even for
kings, was the mummy of her Familiar, the cat, which from its great size
I take to be a sort of tiger-cat.  In the tomb, also in a strong
receptacle, were the canopic jars usually containing those internal
organs which are separately embalmed, but which in this case had no such
contents.  So that, I take it, there was in her case a departure in
embalming; and that the organs were restored to the body, each in its
proper place--if, indeed, they had ever been removed.  If this surmise be
true, we shall find that the brain of the Queen either was never
extracted in the usual way, or, if so taken out, that it was duly
replaced, instead of being enclosed within the mummy wrappings.
Finally, in the sarcophagus there was the Magic Coffer on which her feet
rested.  Mark you also, the care taken in the preservance of her power
to control the elements.  According to her belief, the open hand outside
the wrappings controlled the Air, and the strange Jewel Stone with the
shining stars controlled Fire.  The symbolism inscribed on the soles of
her feet gave sway over Land and Water.  About the Star Stone I shall
tell you later; but whilst we are speaking of the sarcophagus, mark how
she guarded her secret in case of grave-wrecking or intrusion.  None
could open her Magic Coffer without the lamps, for we know now that
ordinary light will not be effective.  The great lid of the sarcophagus
was not sealed down as usual, because she wished to control the air. But
she hid the lamps, which in structure belong to the Magic Coffer, in a
place where none could find them, except by following the secret
guidance which she had prepared for only the eyes of wisdom.  And even
here she had guarded against chance discovery, by preparing a bolt of
death for the unwary discoverer.  To do this she had applied the lesson
of the tradition of the avenging guard of the treasures of the pyramid,
built by her great predecessor of the Fourth Dynasty of the throne of
Egypt.

"You have noted, I suppose, how there were, in the case of her tomb,
certain deviations from the usual rules.  For instance, the shaft of the
Mummy Pit, which is usually filled up solid with stones and rubbish, was
left open.  Why was this?  I take it that she had made arrangements for
leaving the tomb when, after her resurrection, she should be a new
woman, with a different personality, and less inured to the hardships
that in her first existence she had suffered.  So far as we can judge of
her intent, all things needful for her exit into the world had been
thought of, even to the iron chain, described by Van Huyn, close to the
door in the rock, by which she might be able to lower herself to the
ground.  That she expected a long period to elapse was shown in the
choice of material.  An ordinary rope would be rendered weaker or unsafe
in process of time, but she imagined, and rightly, that the iron would
endure.

"What her intentions were when once she trod the open earth afresh we do
not know, and we never shall, unless her own dead lips can soften and
speak."


Chapter XV
The Purpose of Queen Tera


"Now, as to the Star Jewel!  This she manifestly regarded as the
greatest of her treasures.  On it she had engraven words which none of
her time dared to speak.

"In the old Egyptian belief it was held that there were words, which, if
used properly--for the method of speaking them was as important as the
words themselves--could command the Lords of the Upper and the Lower
Worlds.  The 'hekau', or word of power, was all-important in certain
ritual.  On the Jewel of Seven Stars, which, as you know, is carved into
the image of a scarab, are graven in hieroglyphic two such hekau, one
above, the other underneath.  But you will understand better when you
see it!  Wait here!  Do not stir!"

As he spoke, he rose and left the room.  A great fear for him came over
me; but I was in some strange way relieved when I looked at Margaret.
Whenever there had been any possibility of danger to her father, she had
shown great fear for him; now she was calm and placid.  I said nothing,
but waited.

In two or three minutes, Mr. Trelawny returned.  He held in his hand a
little golden box.  This, as he resumed his seat, he placed before him
on the table.  We all leaned forward as he opened it.

On a lining of white satin lay a wondrous ruby of immense size, almost
as big as the top joint of Margaret's little finger.  It was carven--it
could not possibly have been its natural shape, but jewels do not show
the working of the tool--into the shape of a scarab, with its wings
folded, and its legs and feelers pressed back to its sides. Shining
through its wondrous "pigeon's blood" colour were seven different stars,
each of seven points, in such position that they reproduced exactly the
figure of the Plough.  There could be no possible mistake as to this in
the mind of anyone who had ever noted the constellation.  On it were
some hieroglyphic figures, cut with the most exquisite precision, as I
could see when it came to my turn to use the magnifying-glass, which Mr.
Trelawny took from his pocket and handed to us.

When we all had seen it fully, Mr. Trelawny turned it over so that it
rested on its back in a cavity made to hold it in the upper half of the
box.  The reverse was no less wonderful than the upper, being carved to
resemble the under side of the beetle.  It, too, had some hieroglyphic
figures cut on it.  Mr. Trelawny resumed his lecture as we all sat with
our heads close to this wonderful jewel:

"As you see, there are two words, one on the top, the other underneath.
The symbols on the top represent a single word, composed of one syllable
prolonged, with its determinatives.  You know, all of you, I suppose,
that the Egyptian language was phonetic, and that the hieroglyphic
symbol represented the sound.  The first symbol here, the hoe, means
'mer', and the two pointed ellipses the prolongation of the final r:
mer-r-r.  The sitting figure with the hand to its face is what we call
the 'determinative' of 'thought'; and the roll of papyrus that of
'abstraction'.  Thus we get the word 'mer', love, in its abstract,
general, and fullest sense.  This is the hekau which can command the
Upper World."

Margaret's face was a glory as she said in a deep, low, ringing tone:

"Oh, but it is true.  How the old wonder-workers guessed at almighty
Truth!"  Then a hot blush swept her face, and her eyes fell.  Her father
smiled at her lovingly as he resumed:

"The symbolisation of the word on the reverse is simpler, though the
meaning is more abstruse.  The first symbol means 'men', 'abiding', and
the second, 'ab', 'the heart'.  So that we get 'abiding of heart', or in
our own language 'patience'.  And this is the hekau to control the Lower
World!"

He closed the box, and motioning us to remain as we were, he went back
to his room to replace the Jewel in the safe.  When he had returned and
resumed his seat, he went on:

"That Jewel, with its mystic words, and which Queen Tera held under her
hand in the sarcophagus, was to be an important factor--probably the most
important--in the working out of the act of her resurrection.  From the
first I seemed by a sort of instinct to realise this.  I kept the Jewel
within my great safe, whence none could extract it; not even Queen Tera
herself with her astral body."

"Her 'astral body'?  What is that, Father?  What does that mean?"
There was a keenness in Margaret's voice as she asked the question which
surprised me a little; but Trelawny smiled a sort of indulgent parental
smile, which came through his grim solemnity like sunshine through a
rifted cloud, as he spoke:

"The astral body, which is a part of Buddhist belief, long subsequent to
the time I speak of, and which is an accepted fact of modern mysticism,
had its rise in Ancient Egypt; at least, so far as we know.  It is that
the gifted individual can at will, quick as thought itself, transfer his
body whithersoever he chooses, by the dissolution and reincarnation of
particles.  In the ancient belief there were several parts of a human
being.  You may as well know them; so that you will understand matters
relative to them or dependent on them as they occur.

"First there is the 'Ka', or 'Double', which, as Doctor Budge explains,
may be defined as 'an abstract individuality of personality' which was
imbued with all the characteristic attributes of the individual it
represented, and possessed an absolutely independent existence.  It was
free to move from place to place on earth at will; and it could enter
into heaven and hold converse with the gods.  Then there was the 'Ba',
or 'soul', which dwelt in the 'Ka', and had the power of becoming
corporeal or incorporeal at will; 'it had both substance and form. . . .
It had power to leave the tomb. . . . It could revisit the body in the
tomb . . . and could reincarnate it and hold converse with it.'  Again
there was the 'Khu', the 'spiritual intelligence', or spirit. It took
the form of 'a shining, luminous, intangible shape of the body.'. . .
Then, again, there was the 'Sekhem', or 'power' of a man, his strength
or vital force personified.  These were the 'Khaibit', or 'shadow', the
'Ren', or 'name', the 'Khat', or 'physical body', and 'Ab', the 'heart',
in which life was seated, went to the full making up of a man.

"Thus you will see, that if this division of functions, spiritual and
bodily, ethereal and corporeal, ideal and actual, be accepted as exact,
there are all the possibilities and capabilities of corporeal
transference, guided always by an unimprisonable will or intelligence."
As he paused I murmured the lines from Shelley's "Prometheus Unbound":

     "'The Magnus Zoroaster . . . Met his own image walking in the
     garden.'"

Mr. Trelawny was not displeased.  "Quite so!" he said, in his quiet way.
"Shelley had a better conception of ancient beliefs than any of our
poets."  With a voice changed again he resumed his lecture, for so it
was to some of us:

"There is another belief of the ancient Egyptian which you must bear in
mind; that regarding the ushaptiu figures of Osiris, which were placed
with the dead to its work in the Under World.  The enlargement of this
idea came to a belief that it was possible to transmit, by magical
formulae, the soul and qualities of any living creature to a figure made
in its image.  This would give a terrible extension of power to one who
held the gift of magic.

"It is from a union of these various beliefs, and their natural
corollaries, that I have come to the conclusion that Queen Tera expected
to be able to effect her own resurrection, when, and where, and how, she
would.  That she may have held before her a definite time for making her
effort is not only possible but likely.  I shall not stop now to explain
it, but shall enter upon the subject later on.  With a soul with the
Gods, a spirit which could wander the earth at will, and a power of
corporeal transference, or an astral body, there need be no bounds or
limits to her ambition. The belief is forced upon us that for these
forty or fifty centuries she lay dormant in her tomb--waiting.  Waiting
with that 'patience' which could rule the Gods of the Under World, for
that 'love' which could command those of the Upper World.  What she may
have dreamt we know not; but her dream must have been broken when the
Dutch explorer entered her sculptured cavern, and his follower violated
the sacred privacy of her tomb by his rude outrage in the theft of her
hand.

"That theft, with all that followed, proved to us one thing, however:
that each part of her body, though separated from the rest, can be a
central point or rallying place for the items or particles of her astral
body.  That hand in my room could ensure her instantaneous presence in
the flesh, and its equally rapid dissolution.

"Now comes the crown of my argument.  The purpose of the attack on me
was to get the safe open, so that the sacred Jewel of Seven Stars could
be extracted.  That immense door of the safe could not keep out her
astral body, which, or any part of it, could gather itself as well
within as without the safe.  And I doubt not that in the darkness of the
night that mummied hand sought often the Talisman Jewel, and drew new
inspiration from its touch.  But despite all its power, the astral body
could not remove the Jewel through the chinks of the safe.  The Ruby is
not astral; and it could only be moved in the ordinary way by the
opening of the doors.  To this end, the Queen used her astral body and
the fierce force of her Familiar, to bring to the keyhole of the safe
the master key which debarred her wish.  For years I have suspected,
nay, have believed as much; and I, too, guarded myself against powers of
the Nether World.  I, too, waited in patience till I should have
gathered together all the factors required for the opening of the Magic
Coffer and the resurrection of the mummied Queen!"  He paused, and his
daughter's voice came out sweet and clear, and full of intense feeling:

"Father, in the Egyptian belief, was the power of resurrection of a
mummied body a general one, or was it limited?  That is:  could it
achieve resurrection many times in the course of ages; or only once, and
that one final?"

"There was but one resurrection," he answered.  "There were some who
believed that this was to be a definite resurrection of the body into
the real world.  But in the common belief, the Spirit found joy in the
Elysian Fields, where there was plenty of food and no fear of famine.
Where there was moisture and deep-rooted reeds, and all the joys that
are to be expected by the people of an arid land and burning clime."

Then Margaret spoke with an earnestness which showed the conviction of
her inmost soul:

"To me, then, it is given to understand what was the dream of this great
and far-thinking and high-souled lady of old; the dream that held her
soul in patient waiting for its realisation through the passing of all
those tens of centuries.  The dream of a love that might be; a love that
she felt she might, even under new conditions, herself evoke.  The love
that is the dream of every woman's life; of the Old and of the New;
Pagan or Christian; under whatever sun; in whatever rank or calling;
however may have been the joy or pain of her life in other ways.  Oh!  I
know it!  I know it!  I am a woman, and I know a woman's heart.  What
were the lack of food or the plenitude of it; what were feast or famine
to this woman, born in a palace, with the shadow of the Crown of the Two
Egypts on her brows!  What were reedy morasses or the tinkle of running
water to her whose barges could sweep the great Nile from the mountains
to the sea.  What were petty joys and absence of petty fears to her, the
raising of whose hand could hurl armies, or draw to the water-stairs of
her palaces the commerce of the world!  At whose word rose temples
filled with all the artistic beauty of the Times of Old which it was her
aim and pleasure to restore!  Under whose guidance the solid rock yawned
into the sepulchre that she designed!

"Surely, surely, such a one had nobler dreams!  I can feel them in my
heart; I can see them with my sleeping eyes!"

As she spoke she seemed to be inspired; and her eyes had a far-away look
as though they saw something beyond mortal sight.  And then the deep
eyes filled up with unshed tears of great emotion.  The very soul of the
woman seemed to speak in her voice; whilst we who listened sat
entranced.

"I can see her in her loneliness and in the silence of her mighty pride,
dreaming her own dream of things far different from those around her.
Of some other land, far, far away under the canopy of the silent night,
lit by the cool, beautiful light of the stars.  A land under that
Northern star, whence blew the sweet winds that cooled the feverish
desert air.  A land of wholesome greenery, far, far away.  Where were no
scheming and malignant priesthood; whose ideas were to lead to power
through gloomy temples and more gloomy caverns of the dead, through an
endless ritual of death!  A land where love was not base, but a divine
possession of the soul!  Where there might be some one kindred spirit
which could speak to hers through mortal lips like her own; whose being
could merge with hers in a sweet communion of soul to soul, even as
their breaths could mingle in the ambient air!  I know the feeling, for
I have shared it myself.  I may speak of it now, since the blessing has
come into my own life.  I may speak of it since it enables me to
interpret the feelings, the very longing soul, of that sweet and lovely
Queen, so different from her surroundings, so high above her time!
Whose nature, put into a word, could control the forces of the Under
World; and the name of whose aspiration, though but graven on a star-lit
jewel, could command all the powers in the Pantheon of the High Gods.

"And in the realisation of that dream she will surely be content to
rest!"

We men sat silent, as the young girl gave her powerful interpretation of
the design or purpose of the woman of old.  Her every word and tone
carried with it the conviction of her own belief.  The loftiness of her
thoughts seemed to uplift us all as we listened.  Her noble words,
flowing in musical cadence and vibrant with internal force, seemed to
issue from some great instrument of elemental power.  Even her tone was
new to us all; so that we listened as to some new and strange being from
a new and strange world.  Her father's face was full of delight.  I knew
now its cause.  I understood the happiness that had come into his life,
on his return to the world that he knew, from that prolonged sojourn in
the world of dreams.  To find in his daughter, whose nature he had never
till now known, such a wealth of affection, such a splendour of
spiritual insight, such a scholarly imagination, such . . . The rest of
his feeling was of hope!

The two other men were silent unconsciously.  One man had had his
dreaming; for the other, his dreams were to come.

For myself, I was like one in a trance.  Who was this new, radiant being
who had won to existence out of the mist and darkness of our fears?
Love has divine possibilities for the lover's heart!  The wings of the
soul may expand at any time from the shoulders of the loved one, who
then may sweep into angel form.  I knew that in my Margaret's nature
were divine possibilities of many kinds.  When under the shade of the
overhanging willow-tree on the river, I had gazed into the depths of her
beautiful eyes, I had thenceforth a strict belief in the manifold
beauties and excellences of her nature; but this soaring and
understanding spirit was, indeed, a revelation.  My pride, like her
father's, was outside myself; my joy and rapture were complete and
supreme!

When we had all got back to earth again in our various ways, Mr.
Trelawny, holding his daughter's hand in his, went on with his
discourse:

"Now, as to the time at which Queen Tera intended her resurrection to
take place! We are in contact with some of the higher astronomical
calculations in connection with true orientation.  As you know, the
stars shift their relative positions in the heavens; but though the real
distances traversed are beyond all ordinary comprehension, the effects
as we see them are small.  Nevertheless, they are susceptible of
measurement, not by years, indeed, but by centuries.  It was by this
means that Sir John Herschel arrived at the date of the building of the
Great Pyramid--a date fixed by the time necessary to change the star of
the true north from Draconis to the Pole Star, and since then verified
by later discoveries.  From the above there can be no doubt whatever
that astronomy was an exact science with the Egyptians at least a
thousand years before the time of Queen Tera.  Now, the stars that go to
make up a constellation change in process of time their relative
positions, and the Plough is a notable example.  The changes in the
position of stars in even forty centuries is so small as to be hardly
noticeable by an eye not trained to minute observances, but they can be
measured and verified.  Did you, or any of you, notice how exactly the
stars in the Ruby correspond to the position of the stars in the Plough;
or how the same holds with regard to the translucent places in the Magic
Coffer?"

We all assented.  He went on:

"You are quite correct.  They correspond exactly.  And yet when Queen
Tera was laid in her tomb, neither the stars in the Jewel nor the
translucent places in the Coffer corresponded to the position of the
stars in the Constellation as they then were!"

We looked at each other as he paused:  a new light was breaking upon us.
With a ring of mastery in his voice he went on:

"Do you not see the meaning of this?  Does it not throw a light on the
intention of the Queen?  She, who was guided by augury, and magic, and
superstition, naturally chose a time for her resurrection which seemed
to have been pointed out by the High Gods themselves, who had sent
their message on a thunderbolt from other worlds.  When such a time was
fixed by supernal wisdom, would it not be the height of human wisdom to
avail itself of it?  Thus it is"--here his voice deepened and trembled
with the intensity of his feeling--"that to us and our time is given the
opportunity of this wondrous peep into the old world, such as has been
the privilege of none other of our time; which may never be again.

"From first to last the cryptic writing and symbolism of that wondrous
tomb of that wondrous woman is full of guiding light; and the key of the
many mysteries lies in that most wondrous Jewel which she held in her
dead hand over the dead heart, which she hoped and believed would beat
again in a newer and nobler world!

"There are only loose ends now to consider.  Margaret has given us the
true inwardness of the feeling of the other Queen!"  He looked at her
fondly, and stroked her hand as he said it.  "For my own part I
sincerely hope she is right; for in such case it will be a joy, I am
sure, to all of us to assist at such a realisation of hope.  But we must
not go too fast, or believe too much in our present state of knowledge.
The voice that we hearken for comes out of times strangely other than
our own; when human life counted for little, and when the morality of
the time made little account of the removing of obstacles in the way to
achievement of  desire. We must keep our eyes fixed on the scientific
side, and wait for the developments on the psychic side.

"Now, as to this stone box, which we call the Magic Coffer.  As I have
said, I am convinced that it opens only in obedience to some principle
of light, or the exercise of some of its forces at present unknown to
us.  There is here much ground for conjecture and for experiment; for as
yet the scientists have not thoroughly differentiated the kinds, and
powers, and degrees of light.  Without analysing various rays we may, I
think, take it for granted that there are different qualities and powers
of light; and this great field of scientific investigation is almost
virgin soil.  We know as yet so little of natural forces, that
imagination need set no bounds to its flights in considering the
possibilities of the future.  Within but a few years we have made such
discoveries as two centuries ago would have sent the discoverer's to the
flames.  The liquefaction of oxygen; the existence of radium, of helium,
of polonium, of argon; the different powers of Roentgen and Cathode and
Bequerel rays.  And as we may finally prove that there are different
kinds and qualities of light, so we may find that combustion may have its
own powers of differentiation; that there are qualities in some flames
non-existent in others.  It may be that some of the essential conditions
of substance are continuous, even in the destruction of their bases.
Last night I was thinking of this, and reasoning that as there are
certain qualities in some oils which are not in others, so there may be
certain similar or corresponding qualities or powers in the combinations
of each.  I suppose we have all noticed some time or other that the
light of colza oil is not quite the same as that of paraffin, or that
the flames of coal gas and whale oil are different.  They find it so in
the light-houses! All at once it occurred to me that there might be some
special virtue in the oil which had been found in the jars when Queen
Tera's tomb was opened.  These had not been used to preserve the
intestines as usual, so they must have been placed there for some other
purpose.  I remembered that in Van Huyn's narrative he had commented on
the way the jars were sealed.  This was lightly, though effectually;
they could be opened without force.  The jars were themselves preserved
in a sarcophagus which, though of immense strength and hermetically
sealed, could be opened easily.  Accordingly, I went at once to examine
the jars.  A little--a very little of the oil still remained, but it had
grown thick in the two and a half centuries in which the jars had been
open.  Still, it was not rancid; and on examining it I found it was
cedar oil, and that it still exhaled something of its original aroma.
This gave me the idea that it was to be used to fill the lamps.  Whoever
had placed the oil in the jars, and the jars in the sarcophagus, knew
that there might be shrinkage in process of time, even in vases of
alabaster, and fully allowed for it; for each of the jars would have
filled the lamps half a dozen times.  With part of the oil remaining I
made some experiments, therefore, which may give useful results.  You
know, Doctor, that cedar oil, which was much used in the preparation and
ceremonials of the Egyptian dead, has a certain refractive power which
we do not find in other oils.  For instance, we use it on the lenses of
our microscopes to give additional clearness of vision.  Last night I
put some in one of the lamps, and placed it near a translucent part of
the Magic Coffer.  The effect was very great; the glow of light within
was fuller and more intense than I could have imagined, where an
electric light similarly placed had little, if any, effect.  I should
have tried others of the seven lamps, but that my supply of oil ran out.
This, however, is on the road to rectification.  I have sent for more
cedar oil, and expect to have before long an ample supply.  Whatever may
happen from other causes, our experiment shall not, at all events, fail
from this.  We shall see!  We shall see!"

Doctor Winchester had evidently been following the logical process of
the other's mind, for his comment was:

"I do hope that when the light is effective in opening the box, the
mechanism will not be impaired or destroyed."

His doubt as to this gave anxious thought to some of us.


Chapter XVI
The Cavern


In the evening Mr. Trelawny took again the whole party into the study.
When we were all attention he began to unfold his plans:

"I have come to the conclusion that for the proper carrying out of what
we will call our Great Experiment we must have absolute and complete
isolation.  Isolation not merely for a day or two, but for as long as we
may require.  Here such a thing would be impossible; the needs and
habits of a great city with its ingrained possibilities of interruption,
would, or might, quite upset us.  Telegrams, registered letters, or
express messengers would alone be sufficient; but the great army of
those who want to get something would make disaster certain.  In
addition, the occurrences of the last week have drawn police attention
to this house.  Even if special instructions to keep an eye on it have
not been issued from Scotland Yard or the District Station, you may be
sure that the individual policeman on his rounds will keep it well under
observation.  Besides, the servants who have discharged themselves will
before long begin to talk.  They must; for they have, for the sake of
their own characters, to give some reason for the termination of a
service which has I should say a position in the neighbourhood.  The
servants of the neighbours will begin to talk, and, perhaps the
neighbours themselves.  Then the active and intelligent Press will, with
its usual zeal for the enlightenment of the public and its eye to
increase of circulation, get hold of the matter.  When the reporter is
after us we shall not have much chance of privacy.  Even if we were to
bar ourselves in, we should not be free from interruption, possibly from
intrusion.  Either would ruin our plans, and so we must take measures to
effect a retreat, carrying all our impedimenta with us.  For this I am
prepared.  For a long time past I have foreseen such a possibility, and
have made preparation for it.  Of course, I had no foreknowledge of what
has happened; but I knew something would, or might, happen.  For more
than two years past my house in Cornwall has been made ready to receive
all the curios which are preserved here. When Corbeck went off on his
search for the lamps I had the old house at Kyllion made ready; it is
fitted with electric light all over, and all the appliances for
manufacture of the light are complete.  I had perhaps better tell you,
for none of you, not even Margaret, knows anything of it, that the house
is absolutely shut out from public access or even from view.  It stands
on a little rocky promontory behind a steep hill, and except from the
sea cannot be seen.  Of old it was fenced in by a high stone wall, for
the house which it succeeded was built by an ancestor of mine in the
days when a great house far away from a centre had to be prepared to
defend itself. Here, then, is a place so well adapted to our needs that
it might have been prepared on purpose.  I shall explain it to you when
we are all there.  This will not be long, for already our movement is in
train.  I have sent word to Marvin to have all preparation for our
transport ready.  He is to have a special train, which is to run at
night so as to avoid notice.  Also a number of carts and stone-wagons,
with sufficient men and appliances to take all our packing-cases to
Paddington.  We shall be away before the Argus-eyed Pressman is on the
watch.  We shall today begin our packing up; and I dare say that by
tomorrow night we shall be ready.  In the outhouses I have all the
packing-cases which were used for bringing the things from Egypt, and I
am satisfied that as they were sufficient for the journey across the
desert and down the Nile to Alexandria and thence on to London, they
will serve without fail between here and Kyllion.  We four men, with
Margaret to hand us such things as we may require, will be able to get
the things packed safely; and the carrier's men will take them to the
trucks.

"Today the servants go to Kyllion, and Mrs. Grant will make such
arrangements as may be required.  She will take a stock of necessaries
with her, so that we will not attract local attention by our daily
needs; and will keep us supplied with perishable food from London.
Thanks to Margaret's wise and generous treatment of the servants who
decided to remain, we have got a staff on which we can depend.  They
have been already cautioned to secrecy, so that we need not fear gossip
from within. Indeed, as the servants will be in London after their
preparations at Kyllion are complete, there will not be much subject for
gossip, in detail at any rate.

"As, however, we should commence the immediate work of packing at once,
we will leave over the after proceedings till later when we have
leisure."

Accordingly we set about our work.  Under Mr. Trelawny's guidance, and
aided by the servants, we took from the outhouses great packing-cases.
Some of these were of enormous strength, fortified by many thicknesses
of wood, and by iron bands and rods with screw-ends and nuts.  We placed
them throughout the house, each close to the object which it was to
contain.  When this preliminary work had been effected, and there had
been placed in each room and in the hall great masses of new hay,
cotton-waste and paper, the servants were sent away.  Then we set about
packing.

No one, not accustomed to packing, could have the slightest idea of the
amount of the amount of work involved in such a task as that in which in
we were engaged.  For my own part I had had a vague idea that there were
a large number of Egyptian objects in Mr. Trelawny's house; but until I
came to deal with them seriatim I had little idea of either their
importance, the size of some of them, or of their endless number.  Far
into the night we worked.  At times we used all the strength which we
could muster on a single object; again we worked separately, but always
under Mr. Trelawny's immediate direction.  He himself, assisted by
Margaret, kept an exact tall of each piece.

It was only when we sat down, utterly wearied, to a long-delayed supper
that we began to realised that a large part of the work was done.  Only
a few of the packing-cases, however, were closed; for a vast amount of
work still remained.  We had finished some of the cases, each of which
held only one of the great sarcophagi. The cases which held many objects
could not be closed till all had been differentiated and packed.

I slept that night without movement or without dreams; and on our
comparing notes in the morning, I found that each of the others had had
the same experience.

By dinner-time next evening the whole work was complete, and all was
ready for the carriers who were to come at midnight.  A little before
the appointed time we heard the rumble of carts; then we were shortly
invaded by an army of workmen, who seemed by sheer force of numbers to
move without effort, in an endless procession, all our prepared
packages.  A little over an hour sufficed them, and when the carts had
rumbled away, we all got ready to follow them to Paddington.  Silvio was
of course to be taken as one of our party.

Before leaving we went in a body over the house, which looked desolate
indeed.  As the servants had all gone to Cornwall there had been no
attempt at tidying-up; every room and passage in which we had worked,
and all the stairways, were strewn with paper and waste, and marked with
dirty feet.

The last thing which Mr. Trelawny did before coming away was to take
from the great safe the Ruby with the Seven Stars.  As he put it safely
into his pocket-book, Margaret, who had all at once seemed to grow
deadly tired and stood beside her father pale and rigid, suddenly became
all aglow, as though the sight of the Jewel had inspired her.  She
smiled at her father approvingly as she said:

"You are right, Father.  There will not be any more trouble tonight.
She will not wreck your arrangements for any cause.  I would stake my
life upon it."

"She--or something--wrecked us in the desert when we had come from the
tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer!" was the grim comment of Corbeck,
who was standing by. Margaret answered him like a flash:

"Ah! she was then near her tomb from which for thousands of years her
body had not been moved.  She must know that things are different now."

"How must she know?" asked Corbeck keenly.

"If she has that astral body that Father spoke of, surely she must know!
How can she fail to, with an invisible presence and an intellect that
can roam abroad even to the stars and the worlds beyond us!"  She
paused, and her father said solemnly:

"It is on that supposition that we are proceeding.  We must have the
courage of our convictions, and act on them--to the last!"

Margaret took his hand and held it in a dreamy kind of way as we filed
out of the house.  She was holding it still when he locked the hall
door, and when we moved up the road to the gateway, whence we took a cab
to Paddington.

When all the goods were loaded at the station, the whole of the workmen
went on to the train; this took also some of the stone-wagons used for
carrying the cases with the great sarcophagi.  Ordinary carts and plenty
of horses were to be found at Westerton, which was our station for
Kyllion.  Mr. Trelawny had ordered a sleeping-carriage for our party;
as soon as the train had started we all turned into our cubicles.

That night I slept sound.  There was over me a conviction of security
which was absolute and supreme.  Margaret's definite announcement:
"There will not be any trouble tonight!" seemed to carry assurance with
it.  I did not question it; nor did anyone else.  It was only afterwards
that I began to think as to how she was so sure. The train was a slow
one, stopping many times and for considerable intervals.  As Mr.
Trelawny did not wish to arrive at Westerton before dark, there was no
need to hurry; and arrangements had been made to feed the workmen at
certain places on the journey.  We had our own hamper with us in the
private car.

All that afternoon we talked over the Great Experiment, which seemed to
have become a definite entity in our thoughts.  Mr. Trelawny became more
and more enthusiastic as the time wore on; hope was with him becoming
certainty.  Doctor Winchester seemed to become imbued with some of his
spirit, though at times he would throw out some scientific fact which
would either make an impasse to the other's line of argument, or would
come as an arresting shock.  Mr. Corbeck, on the other hand, seemed
slightly antagonistic to the theory.  It may have been that whilst the
opinions of the others advanced, his own stood still; but the effect was
an attitude which appeared negative, if not wholly one of negation.

As for Margaret, she seemed to be in some way overcome.  Either it was
some new phase of feeling with her, or else she was taking the issue
more seriously than she had yet done.  She was generally more or less
distraite, as though sunk in a brown study; from this she would recover
herself with a start.  This was usually when there occurred some marked
episode in the journey, such as stopping at a station, or when the
thunderous rumble of crossing a viaduct woke the echoes of the hills or
cliffs around us.  On each such occasion she would plunge into the
conversation, taking such a part in it as to show that, whatever had
been her abstracted thought, her senses had taken in fully all that had
gone on around her.  Towards myself her manner was strange.  Sometimes
it was marked by a distance, half shy, half haughty, which was new to
me.  At other times there were moments of passion in look and gesture
which almost made me dizzy with delight.  Little, however, of a marked
nature transpired during the journey.  There was but one episode which
had in it any element of alarm, but as we were all asleep at the time it
did not disturb us. We only learned it from a communicative guard in the
morning.  Whilst running between Dawlish and Teignmouth the train was
stopped by a warning given by someone who moved a torch to and fro right
on the very track.  The driver had found on pulling up that just ahead
of the train a small landslip had taken place, some of the red earth
from the high bank having fallen away.  It did not however reach to the
metals; and the driver had resumed his way, none too well pleased at the
delay.  To use his own words, the guard thought "there was too much
bally caution on this 'ere line!'"

We arrived at Westerton about nine o'clock in the evening.  Carts and
horses were in waiting, and the work of unloading the train began at
once.  Our own party did not wait to see the work done, as it was in the
hands of competent people.  We took the carriage which was in waiting,
and through the darkness of the night sped on to Kyllion.

We were all impressed by the house as it appeared in the bright
moonlight.  A great grey stone mansion of the Jacobean period; vast and
spacious, standing high over the sea on the very verge of a high cliff.
When we had swept round the curve of the avenue cut through the rock,
and come out on the high plateau on which the house stood, the crash and
murmur of waves breaking against rock far below us came with an
invigorating breath of moist sea air.  We understood then in an instant
how well we were shut out from the world on that rocky shelf above the
sea.

Within the house we found all ready.  Mrs. Grant and her staff had
worked well, and all was bright and fresh and clean.  We took a brief
survey of the chief rooms and then separated to have a wash and to
change our clothes after our long journey of more than four-and-twenty
hours.

We had supper in the great dining-room on the south side, the walls of
which actually hung over the sea.  The murmur came up muffled, but it
never ceased.  As the little promontory stood well out into the sea, the
northern side of the house was open; and the due north was in no way
shut out by the great mass of rock, which, reared high above us, shut
out the rest of the world.  Far off across the bay we could see the
trembling lights of the castle, and here and there along the shore the
faint light of a fisher's window.  For the rest the sea was a dark blue
plain with an occasional flicker of light as the gleam of starlight fell
on the slope of a swelling wave.

When supper was over we all adjourned to the room which Mr. Trelawny had
set aside as his study, his bedroom being close to it.  As we entered,
the first thing I noticed was a great safe, somewhat similar to that
which stood in his room in London.  When we were in the room Mr.
Trelawny went over to the table, and, taking out his pocket-book, laid
it on the table.  As he did so he pressed down on it with the palm of
his hand.  A strange pallor came over his face.  With fingers that
trembled he opened the book, saying as he did so:

"Its bulk does not seem the same; I hope nothing has happened!"

All three of us men crowded round close.  Margaret alone remained calm;
she stood erect and silent, and still as a statue.  She had a far-away
look in her eyes, as though she did not either know or care what was
going on around her.

With a despairing gesture Trelawny threw open the pouch of the
pocket-book wherein he had placed the Jewel of Seven Stars.  As he sank
down on the chair which stood close to him, he said in a hoarse voice:

"My God! it is gone.  Without it the Great Experiment can come to
nothing!"

His words seemed to wake Margaret from her introspective mood.  An
agonised spasm swept her face; but almost on the instant she was calm.
She almost smiled as she said:

"You may have left it in your room, Father.  Perhaps it has fallen out
of the pocket-book whilst you were changing."  Without a word we all
hurried into the next room through the open door between the study and
the bedroom.  And then a sudden calm fell on us like a cloud of fear.

There! on the table, lay the Jewel of Seven Stars, shining and sparkling
with lurid light, as though each of the seven points of each the seven
stars gleamed through blood!

Timidly we each looked behind us, and then at each other.  Margaret was
now like the rest of us.  She had lost her statuesque calm.  All the
introspective rigidity had gone from her; and she clasped her hands
together till the knuckles were white.

Without a word Mr. Trelawny raised the Jewel, and hurried with it into
the next room.  As quietly as he could he opened the door of the safe
with the key fastened to his wrist and placed the Jewel within.  When
the heavy doors were closed and locked he seemed to breathe more freely.

Somehow this episode, though a disturbing one in many ways, seemed to
bring us back to our old selves.  Since we had left London we had all
been overstrained; and this was a sort of relief.  Another step in our
strange enterprise had been effected.

The change back was more marked in Margaret than in any of us.  Perhaps
it was that she was a woman, whilst we were men; perhaps it was that she
was younger than the rest; perhaps both reasons were effective, each in
its own way.  At any rate the change was there, and I was happier than I
had been through the long journey.  All her buoyancy, her tenderness,
her deep feeling seemed to shine forth once more; now and again as her
father's eyes rested on her, his face seemed to light up.

Whilst we waited for the carts to arrive, Mr. Trelawny took us through
the house, pointing out and explaining where the objects which we had
brought with us were to be placed.  In one respect only did he withhold
confidence.  The positions of all those things which had connection with
the Great Experiment were not indicated. The cases containing them were
to be left in the outer hall, for the present.

By the time we had made the survey, the carts began to arrive; and the
stir and bustle of the previous night were renewed.  Mr. Trelawny stood
in the hall beside the massive ironbound door, and gave directions as to
the placing of each of the great packing-cases.  Those containing many
items were placed in the inner hall where they were to be unpacked.

In an incredibly short time the whole consignment was delivered; and the
men departed with a douceur for each, given through their foreman,
which made them effusive in their thanks.  Then we all went to our own
rooms.  There was a strange confidence over us all.  I do not think that
any one of us had a doubt as the the quiet passing of the remainder of
the night.

The faith was justified, for on our re-assembling in the morning we
found that all had slept well and peaceably.

During that day all the curios, except those required for the Great
Experiment, were put into the places designed for them.  Then it was
arranged that all the servants should go back with Mrs. Grant to London
on the next morning.

When they had all gone Mr. Trelawny, having seen the doors locked, took
us into the study.

"Now," said he when we were seated, "I have a secret to impart; but,
according to an old promise which does not leave me free, I must ask you
each to give me a solemn promise not to reveal it.  For three hundred
years at least such a promise has been exacted from everyone to whom it
ws told, and more than once life and safety were secured through loyal
observance of the promise.  Even as it is, I am breaking the letter, if
not the spirit of the tradition; for I should only tell it to the
immediate members of my family."

We all gave the promise required.  Then he went on:

"There is a secret place in this house, a cave, natural originally but
finished by labour, underneath this house.  I will not undertake to say
that it has always been used according to the law.  During the Bloody
Assize more than a few Cornishmen found refuge in it; and later, and
earlier, it formed, I have no doubt whatever, a useful place for storing
contraband goods.  'Tre Pol and Pen', I suppose you know, have always
been smugglers; and their relations and friends and neighbours have not
held back from the enterprise.  For all such reasons a safe hiding-place
was always considered a valuable possession; and as the heads of our
House have always insisted on preserving the secret, I am in honour
bound to it.  Later on, if all be well, I shall of course tell you,
Margaret, and you too, Ross, under the conditions that I am bound to
make."

He rose up, and we all followed him.  Leaving us in the outer hall, he
went away alone for a few minutes; and returning, beckoned us to follow
him.

In the inside hall we found a whole section of an outstanding angle
moved away, and from the cavity saw a great hole dimly dark, and the
beginning of a rough staircase cut in the rock.  As it was not pitch
dark there was manifestly some means of lighting it naturally, so
without pause we followed our host as he descended.  After some forty or
fifty steps cut in a winding passage, we came to a great cave whose
further end tapered away into blackness.  It was a huge place, dimly lit
by a few irregular slits of eccentric shape.  Manifestly these were
faults in the rock which would readily allow the windows be disguised.
Close to each of them was a hanging shutter which could be easily swung
across by means of a dangling rope. The sound of the ceaseless beat of
the waves came up muffled from far below.  Mr. Trelawny at once began to
speak:

"This is the spot which I have chosen, as the best I know, for the scene
of our Great Experiment.  In a hundred different ways it fulfils the
conditions which I am led to believe are primary with regard to success.
Here, we are, and shall be, as isolated as Queen Tera herself would have
been in her rocky tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer, and still in a
rocky cavern.  For good or ill we must here stand by our chances, and
abide by results.  If we are successful we shall be able to let in on
the world of modern science such a flood of light from the Old World as
will change every condition of thought and experiment and practice.  If
we fail, then even the knowledge of our attempt will die with us.  For
this, and all else which may come, I believe we are prepared!"  He
paused.  No one spoke, but we all bowed our heads gravely in
acquiescence.  He resumed, but with a certain hesitancy:

"It is not yet too late!  If any of you have a doubt or misgiving, for
God's speak it now!  Whoever it may be, can go hence without let or
hindrance.  The rest of us can go on our way alone!"

Again he paused, and looked keenly at us in turn.  We looked at each
other; but no one quailed.  For my own part, if I had had any doubt as
to going on, the look on Margaret's face would have reassured me.  It
was fearless; it was intense; it was full of a divine calm.

Mr. Trelawny took a long breath, and in a more cheerful, as well as in a
more decided tone, went on:

"As we are all of one mind, the sooner we get the necessary matters in
train the better.  Let me tell you that this place, like all the rest of
the house, can be lit with electricity.  We could not join the wires to
the mains lest our secret should become known, but I have a cable here
which we can attach in the hall and complete the circuit!"  As he was
speaking, he began to ascend the steps.  From close to the entrance he
took the end of a cable; this he drew forward and attached to a switch
in the wall.  Then, turning on a tap, he flooded the whole vault and
staircase below with light.  I could now see from the volume of light
streaming up into the hallway that the hole beside the staircase went
direct into the cave.  Above it was a pulley and a mass of strong tackle
with multiplying blocks of the Smeaton order.  Mr. Trelawny, seeing me
looking at this, said, correctly interpreting my thoughts:

"Yes! it is new.  I hung it there myself on purpose.  I knew we should
have to lower great weights; and as I did not wish to take too many into
my confidence, I arranged a tackle which I could work alone if
necessary."

We set to work at once; and before nightfall had lowered, unhooked, and
placed in the positions designated for each by Trelawny, all the great
sarcophagi and all the curios and other matters which we had taken with
us.

It was a strange and weird proceeding, the placing of those wonderful
monuments of a bygone age in that green cavern, which represented in its
cutting and purpose and up-to-date mechanism and electric lights both
the old world and the new.  But as time went on I grew more and more to
recognise the wisdom and correctness of Mr. Trelawny's choice.  I was
much disturbed when Silvio, who had been brought into the cave in the
arms of his mistress, and who was lying asleep on my coat which I had
taken off, sprang up when the cat mummy had been unpacked, and flew at
it with the same ferocity which he had previously exhibited.  The
incident showed Margaret in a new phase, and one which gave my heart a
pang.  She had been standing quite still at one side of the cave leaning
on a sarcophagus, in one of those fits of abstraction which had of late
come upon her; but on hearing the sound, and seeing Silvio's violent
onslaught, she seemed to fall into a positive fury of passion. Her eyes
blazed, and her mouth took a hard, cruel tension which was new to me.
Instinctively she stepped towards Silvio as if to interfere in the
attack.  But I too had stepped forward; and as she caught my eye a
strange spasm came upon her, and she stopped.  Its intensity made me
hold my breath; and I put up my hand to clear my eyes.  When I had
done this, she had on the instant recovered her calm, and there was a
look of brief wonder on her face.  With all her old grace and sweetness
she swept over and lifted Silvio, just as she had done on former
occasions, and held him in her arms, petting him and treating him as
though he were a little child who had erred.

As I looked a strange fear came over me.  The Margaret that I knew
seemed to be changing; and in my inmost heart I prayed that the
disturbing cause might soon come to an end.  More than ever I longed at
that moment that our terrible Experiment should come to a prosperous
termination.

When all had been arranged in the room as Mr. Trelawny wished he turned
to us, one after another, till he had concentrated the intelligence of
us all upon him.  Then he said:

"All is now ready in this place.  We must only await the proper time to
begin."

We were silent for a while.  Doctor Winchester was the first to speak:

"What is the proper time?  Have you any approximation, even if you are
not satisfied as to the exact day?"  He answered at once:

"After the most anxious thought I have fixed on July 31!"

"May I ask why that date?"  He spoke his answer slowly:

"Queen Tera was ruled in great degree by mysticism, and there are so
many evidences that she looked for resurrection that naturally she would
choose a period ruled over by a God specialised to such a purpose.  Now,
the fourth month of the season of Inundation was ruled by Harmachis,
this being the name for 'Ra', the Sun-God, at his rising in the morning,
and therefore typifying the awakening or arising.  This arising is
manifestly to physical life, since it is of the mid-world of human daily
life.  Now as this month begins on our 25th July, the seventh day would
be July 31st, for you may be sure that the mystic Queen would not have
chosen any day but the seventh or some power of seven.

