"Certainly. This is Saturday morning; one sails at noon from New
York to-day; but I could not catch that."

"Of course not; but the 'Oceana' sails from Boston on Wednesday."

"Yes; I shall go by her. But, Ishmael, can you go with me?" inquired
the judge, with visible anxiety.

"Certainly," promptly replied the young man, never hinting at the
sacrifices he would have to make in order to accompany his friend on
so long a journey.

"Thank you, thank you, my dear Ishmael! I knew you would. You will
be of great assistance. Of course we must oppose this rascally
viscount's petition, and do our best to unmask his villainy. But how
to do it? I was never very quick-witted, Ishmael; and now my
faculties are blunted with age. But I have much to hope from your
aid in this case. I know that you cannot appear publicly for Lady
Vincent; but at the same time you may be of inestimable value as a
private counselor. Your genius, acumen, and wonderful insight will
enable us to expose this conspiracy, defeat the viscount, and save
Claudia, if anything on earth can do so. Thank you, thank you, good
and noble young friend!" said the judge, taking and cordially
pressing his hand.

"Judge, you know that you are most heartily welcome to all my
services. There is no one in the world that I would work for with
more pleasure than for you," replied the young man, returning the
pressure.

"I know it, my boy. Heaven bless you!"

"And now let us arrange for our journey. As the steamer leaves
Boston on next Wednesday morning, we should leave here on Tuesday
morning at latest."

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Therefore, you see, we have but three days before us; and, as the
Sabbath intervenes, we have really but two for preparation--to-day
and Monday."

"That will be sufficient."

"Yes, sir. But, judge, I must run down into St. Mary's, and take
leave of my betrothed, before starting on so long a journey."

"Oh, Ishmael, you will not have time. Suppose you should be too late
to meet the steamer?"

"I will not be too late, Judge Merlin. I will hire a horse and start
this morning. I can get fresh horses at several places on the road,
and reach the Beacon before twelve o'clock at night. I can spend the
Sabbath there, and go to church with the family. And on Monday
morning I will make an early start, so as to be here on Monday
night."

"Oh, Ishmael, it will be a great risk."

"Not at all; I shall be sure to come up in time. And, besides, you
know I must see Bee before I go," said Ishmael, with that confiding
smile that no one could resist.

"Well, well, I suppose it must be so; so go on; but only be
punctual."

"I surely will."

"And oh, by the way, Ishmael, tell Mr. Middleton all about it; that
is, all we know, which is very little, since neither Lady Vincent
nor Lady Hurstmonceux has given us any details."

"Then Mr. Middleton knows nothing of this?"

"Not a syllable. I left the neighborhood without breathing a hint of
it to any human being. I did not even think of doing so. Oh,
Ishmael, I was in a state of distraction when I left home! Think of
it! I had been tormented with anxiety for weeks before the receipt
of these letters. For, listen: you know that Claudia sailed on the
first of October. Well; I calculated it would take about two weeks
for her to reach Liverpool, and about two more weeks for a letter to
return. So I made myself contented until the first of November,
when, as I expected, I received my first letter from her. It was a
very long letter, dated at various times from the sea, and written
during the voyage, and mailed at Queenstown. Three days later I
received another and shorter letter, merely advising me of her safe
arrival in England, and mailed from Liverpool. Still three days
later a letter dated Aberdeen, and informing me of her journey to
Scotland.