"Here's your saviour!" said one of the men, patting Roger's shoulder.
"It was all along of him that we found you. Want to know how?
Well--about three o'clock it was, maybe a little earlier, maybe a little
later, my wife woke me up. 'Do you hear that?' she says. I listened and
heard a horse in the lane before the door, neighing,--I can't tell you
exactly how it was,--like as if he'd call up the house. 'T was rather
queer, I thought, so I got up and looked out of window, and it seemed to
me he had a saddle on. He stamped, and pawed, and then he gave another
yell, and stamped again. Says I to my wife, 'There's something wrong
here,' and I dressed and went out. When he saw me, he acted the
strangest you ever saw; thinks I, if ever an animal wanted to speak,
that animal does. When I tried to catch him, he shot off, run down the
lane a bit, and then came back as strangely acting as ever. I went into
the house and woke up my brother, here, and we saddled our horses and
started. Away went yours ahead, stopping every minute to look round and
see if we followed. When we came to the water, I kind o' hesitated, but
't was no use; the horse would have us go on, and on, till we found you.
I never heard tell of the like of it, in my born days!"

Gilbert did not speak, but two large tears slowly gathered in his eyes,
and rolled down his cheeks. The men saw his emotion, and respected it.

In the light of the cold, keen dawn, they reached a snug farm-house, a
mile from the Brandywine. The men lifted Gilbert from the saddle, and
would have carried him immediately into the house, but he first leaned
upon Roger's neck, took the faithful creature's head in his arms, and
kissed it.

The good housewife was already up, and anxiously awaiting the return of
her husband and his brother. A cheery fire crackled on the hearth, and
the coffee-pot was simmering beside it. When Gilbert had been partially
revived by the warmth, the men conducted him into an adjoining bed-room,
undressed him, and rubbed his limbs with whiskey. Then, a large bowl of
coffee having been administered, he was placed in bed, covered with half
a dozen blankets, and the curtains were drawn over the windows. In a few
minutes he was plunged in a slumber almost as profound as that of the
death from which he had been so miraculously delivered.

It was two hours past noon when he awoke, and he no sooner fully
comprehended the situation and learned how the time had sped, than he
insisted on rising, although still sore, weak, and feverish. The good
farmer's wife had kept a huge portion of dinner hot before the fire, and
he knew that without compelling a show of appetite, he would not be
considered sufficiently recovered to leave. He had but one desire,--to
return home. So recently plucked from the jaws of Death, his life still
seemed to be an uncertain possession.

Finally Roger was led forth, quiet and submissive as of old,--having
forgotten his good deed as soon as it had been accomplished,--and
Gilbert, wrapped in the farmer's cloak, retraced his way to the main
road. As he looked across the meadow, which told of the inundation in
its sweep of bent, muddy grass, and saw, between the creekbank trees,
the lodged timber to which he had clung, the recollection of the night
impressed him like a frightful dream. It was a bright, sharp, wintry
day,--the most violent contrast to that which had preceded it. The hills
on either side, whose outlines he could barely guess in the darkness,
now stood out from the air with a hard, painful distinctness; the sky
was an arch of cold, steel-tinted crystal; and the north wind blew with
a shrill, endless whistle through the naked woods.

As he climbed the long hill west of Chadd's Ford, Gilbert noticed how
the meadow on his right had been torn by the flood gathered from the
fields above. In one place a Hessian skull had been snapped from the
buried skeleton, and was rolled to light, among the mud and pebbles. Not
far off, something was moving among the bushes, and he involuntarily
drew rein.

The form stopped, appeared to crouch down for a moment, then suddenly
rose and strode forth upon the grass. It was a woman, wearing a man's
flannel jacket, and carrying a long, pointed staff in her hand. As she
approached with rapid strides, he recognized Deb. Smith.

"Deborah!" he cried, "what are you doing here?"

She set her pole to the ground and vaulted over the high picket-fence,
like an athlete.

"Well," she said, "if I'd ha' been shy o' you, Mr. Gilbert, you wouldn't
ha' seen me. I'm not one of them as goes prowlin' around among dead
bodies' bones at midnight; what I want, I looks for in the daytime."

"Bones?" he asked. "You're surely not digging up the Hessians?"

"Not exackly; but, you see, the rain's turned out a few, and some on
'em, folks says, was buried with lots o' goold platted up in their
pig-tails. I know o' one man that dug up two or three to git their
teeth, (to sell to the tooth-doctors, you know,) and when he took hold
o' the pig-tail to lift the head by, the hair come off in his hand, and
out rattled ten good goolden guineas. Now, if any money's washed out,
there's no harm in a body's pickin' of it up, as I see."

"What luck have you had?" asked Gilbert.

"Nothin' to speak of; a few buttons, and a thing or two. But I say, Mr.
Gilbert, what luck ha' _you_ had?" She had been keenly and curiously
inspecting his face.

"Deborah!" he exclaimed, "you're a false prophet! You told me that,
whatever happened, I was safe from Sandy Flash."

"Eh?"

There was a shrill tone of surprise and curiosity in this exclamation.

"You ought to know Sandy Flash better, before you prophesy in his name,"
Gilbert repeated, in a stern voice.

"Oh, Mr. Gilbert, tell me what you mean?" She grasped his leg with one
hand, while she twisted the other in Roger's mane, as if to hold both
horse and rider until the words were explained.

Thereupon he related to her in a brief, fierce way, all that had
befallen him. Her face grew red and her eyes flashed; she shook her fist
and swore under her breath, from time to time, while he spoke.

"You'll be righted, Mr. Gilbert!" she then cried, "you'll be righted,
never fear! Leave it to me! Haven't I always kep' my word to you? You're
believin' I lied the last time, and no wonder; but I'll prove the truth
o' my words yet--may the Devil git my soul, if I don't!"

"Don't think that I blame you, Deborah," he said. "You were too sure of
my good luck, because you wished me to have it--that's all."

"Thank ye for that! But it isn't enough for me. When I promise a thing,
I have power to keep my promise. Ax me no more questions; bide quiet
awhile, and if the money isn't back in your pocket by New-Year, I give
ye leave to curse me, and kick me, and spit upon me!"

Gilbert smiled sadly and incredulously, and rode onward. He made haste
to reach home, for a dull pain began to throb in his head, and chill
shudders ran over his body. He longed to have the worst over which yet
awaited him, and gain a little rest for body, brain, and heart.


CHAPTER XXII.

MARTHA DEANE TAKES A RESOLUTION.


Mary Potter had scarcely slept during the night of her son's absence. A
painful unrest, such as she never remembered to have felt before, took
complete possession of her. Whenever the monotony of the drenching rain
outside lulled her into slumber for a few minutes, she was sure to start
up in bed with a vague, singular impression that some one had called her
name. After midnight, when the storm fell, the shrill wailing of the
rising wind seemed to forebode disaster. Although she believed Gilbert
to be safely housed in Chester, the fact constantly slipped from her
memory, and she shuddered at every change in the wild weather as if he
were really exposed to it.

The next day, she counted the hours with a feverish impatience. It
seemed like tempting Providence, but she determined to surprise her son
with a supper of unusual luxury for their simple habits, after so
important and so toilsome a journey. Sam had killed a fowl; it was
picked and dressed, but she had not courage to put it into the pot,
until the fortune of the day had been assured.

Towards sunset she saw, through the back-kitchen-window, a horseman
approaching from the direction of Carson's. It seemed to be Roger, but
could that rider, in the faded brown cloak, be Gilbert? His cloak was
blue; he always rode with his head erect, not hanging like this man's,
whose features she could not see. Opposite the house, he lifted his
head--it _was_ Gilbert, but how old and haggard was his face!

She met him at the gate. His cheeks were suddenly flushed, his eyes
bright, and the smile with which he looked at her seemed to be joyous;
yet it gave her a sense of pain and terror.

"Oh, Gilbert!" she cried; "what has happened?"

He slid slowly and wearily off the horse, whose neck he fondled a moment
before answering her.

"Mother," he said at last, "you have to thank Roger that I am here
tonight. I have come back to you from the gates of death; will you be
satisfied with that for a while?"

"I don't understand you, my boy! You frighten me; haven't you been at
Chester?"

"No," he answered, "there was no use of going."

A presentiment of the truth came to her, but before she could question
him further, he spoke again.

"Mother, let us go into the house. I'm cold and tired; I want to sit in
your old rocking-chair, where I can rest my head. Then I'll tell you
everything; I wish I had an easier task!"

She noticed that his steps were weak and slow, felt that his hands were
like ice, and saw his blue lips and chattering teeth. She removed the
strange cloak, placed her chair in front of the fire, seated him in it,
and then knelt upon the floor to draw off his stiff, sodden top-boots.
He was passive as a child in her hands. Her care for him overcame all
other dread, and not until she had placed his feet upon a stool, in the
full warmth of the blaze, given him a glass of hot wine and lavender,
and placed a pillow under his head, did she sit down at his side to hear
the story.

"I thought of this, last night," he said, with a faint smile; "not that
I ever expected to see it. The man was right; it's a mercy of God that I
ever got out alive!"

"Then be grateful to God, my boy!" she replied, "and let me be grateful,
too. It will balance misfortune,--for that there it misfortune in store
for us. I see plainly."

Gilbert then spoke. The narrative was long and painful, and he told it
wearily and brokenly, yet with entire truth, disguising nothing of the
evil that had come upon them. His mother sat beside him, pale, stony,
stifling the sobs that rose in her throat, until he reached the period
of his marvellous rescue, when she bent her head upon his arm and wept
aloud.

"That's all, mother!" he said at the close; "it's hard to bear, but I'm
more troubled on your account than on my own."

"Oh, I feared we were over-sure!" she cried. "I claimed payment before
it was ready. The Lord chooses His own time, and punishes them that
can't wait for His ways to be manifest! It's terribly hard; and yet,
while His left hand smites, His right hand gives mercy! He might ha'
taken you, my boy, but He makes a miracle to save you for me!"

When she had outwept her passionate tumult of feeling, she grew composed
and serene. "Haven't I yet learned to be patient, in all these years?"
she said. "Haven't I sworn to work out with open eyes the work I took in
blindness? And after waiting twenty-five years, am I to murmur at
another year or two? No, Gilbert! It's to be done; I _will_ deserve my
justice! Keep your courage, my boy; be brave and patient, and the sight
of you will hold me from breaking down!"

She arose, felt his hands and feet, set his pillow aright, and then
stooped and kissed him. His chills had ceased; a feeling of heavy,
helpless languor crept over him.

"Let Sam see to Roger, mother!" he murmured. "Tell him not to spare the
oats."

"I'd feed him with my own hands, Gilbert, if I could leave you. I'd put
fine wheat-bread into his manger, and wrap him in blankets off my own
bed! To think that Roger,--that I didn't want you to buy,--Lord forgive
me, I was advising your own death!"

It was fortunate for Mary Potter that she saw a mysterious Providence,
which, to her mind, warned and yet promised while it chastised, in all
that had occurred. This feeling helped her to bear a disappointment,
which would otherwise have been very grievous. The idea of an atoning
ordeal, which she must endure in order to be crowned with the final
justice, and so behold her life redeemed, had become rooted in her
nature. To Gilbert much of this feeling was inexplicable, because he was
ignorant of the circumstances which had called it into existence. But he
saw that his mother was not yet hopeless, that she did not seem to
consider her deliverance as materially postponed, and a glimmer of hope
was added to the relief of having told his tale.

He was still feverish, dozing and muttering in uneasy dreams, as he lay
back in the old rocking-chair, and Mary Potter, with Sam's help, got him
to bed, after administering a potion which she was accustomed to use in
all complaints, from mumps to typhus fever.

As for Roger, he stood knee-deep in clean litter, with half a bushel of
oats before him.

The next morning Gilbert did not arise, and as he complained of great
soreness in every part of his body, Sam was dispatched for Dr. Deane.

It was the first time this gentleman had ever been summoned to the
Potter farm-house. Mary Potter felt considerable trepidation at his
arrival, both on account of the awe which his imposing presence
inspired, and the knowledge of her son's love for his daughter,--a fact
which, she rightly conjectured, he did not suspect. As he brought his
ivory-headed cane, his sleek drab broadcloth, and his herbaceous
fragrance into the kitchen, she was almost overpowered.

"How is thy son ailing?" he asked. "He always seemed to me to be a very
healthy young man."

She described the symptoms with a conscientious minuteness.

"How was it brought on?" he asked again.

She had not intended to relate the whole story, but only so much of it
as was necessary for the Doctor's purposes; but the commencement excited
his curiosity, and he knew so skilfully how to draw one word after
another, suggesting further explanations without directly asking them,
that Mary Potter was led on and on, until she had communicated all the
particulars of her son's misfortune.

"This is a wonderful tale thee tells me," said the Doctor--"wonderful!
Sandy Flash, no doubt, has reason to remember thy son, who, I'm told,
faced him very boldly on Second-day morning. It is really time the
country was aroused; we shall hardly be safe in our own houses. And all
night in the Brandywine flood--I don't wonder thy son is unwell. Let me
go up to him."

