On such a night, a week since the High Priest met his fate, Saronia went
up the side of Pion to the cave of Endora.

Disguised as she was, Chios did not know her, and she might have passed
by unknown had she not turned towards the place where he waited to
receive her.

She entered, and sat down wearily. There was great anxiety in her eyes.
Chios unfastened the cloak which enveloped her and let it fall back over
her shoulders.

'What ails thee, Saronia?'

'What ails me? My heart is rending; I am weary. The soul truly never
grows old, but the flesh tires. I am tired of all, and would I were at
rest. The surges ever move towards the strand, sometimes gently like the
breaking of the day; but with me always the waves beat ruthlessly around
my imprisoned spirit, until now, like a drowning man clinging to the
last vestige of his wrecked ship, I would fain let go my hold, and sink
backwards into the seething waves which wait to engulf me.'

'Do not despair, Saronia.'

'No, I do not despair. I have ever sought to do the right and know the
truth, and fear not the future.

'I must find the home best suited for this soul, as I have evolved it,
but I feel I have no power to go forward, and I may as well cease my
yearnings for light. Perchance more may be meted to me in the ages
beyond. That I shall live again and move onwards I know. I know this: it
is the jewel left me--it is the anchor of my soul. Break the cordage
which fastens me to it, and I drift aimless, hopelessly.'

'Nay, nay, Saronia, do not talk in such a strain. What weighs so heavily
on thee?'

'The death of the High Priest. Canst thou clear the mystery, Chios?'

He looked towards Endora. The woman stood leaning against the side of
the cave, with eyes aglow, and burning with desire to speak. She stood
forth, firmly erect, with head thrown back.

'I slew him, lady--slew him in self-defence; killed him to save the
truest, noblest woman on earth, and the man who loveth her, Chios the
Greek. He would have strangled me, would have wrenched thy whereabouts
from me--did try--until his iron grip upon my throat well-nigh put out
my life. Now listen, mighty priestess, and you cultured man of Ephesus.
The man I slew killed my love and spirit's aspirations years ago--long
ago. The dead priest, who rose to be the highest in Asia, was _my
husband_--the husband of Endora!'

'Thy husband?' exclaimed Saronia.

'Yea, it is true. He left me to my fate. I followed him hither, watched
his career, and saw the people of Ephesus fooled with his whining
hypocrisy. He knew me not until the fated night. When he fell I stooped
and whispered in his ear my name, but _it was not Endora_! Thou heard'st
the second shriek? The whisper of my name caused it. He shattered my
life and left me to die; but I did not die, neither will I for his
death. My line of life is not broken. I wait events.'

Saronia was speechless, and Chios quivered like a leaf on a restless
tree. Gathering strength, he staggered towards the door to breathe the
air, and the two women were left alone.

Endora felt the power of the priestess, and dared not speak.

'Hast thou told Chios who thou art? Does he know thou art his mother,
and by thine own hand thou hast slain his sire?'

'No, and the secret kills me. Oh that I could die, disappear from the
gaze of my son! Thou canst fancy my bursting soul, how my heart aches to
hear one loving word from my only child! No, no; this cannot be. Endora,
Myrtile the false, accursed, bloodstained, must never be known to Chios,
my son, my son! But when I am gone--it will not be long--when I have
finished here, tell him--tell him all, and that to the last my longing
soul yearned to behold his manly face. Tell him that a mother's
instincts, a mother's love, deadened by the curse, still dwelt within
me. Mighty Saronia, thou wilt be left to him. Give him the love which a
mother could not reveal. As I have said, I shall soon be on my great
journey--yea, before the leaves fall from the trees in autumn.

'Now to business. Intendest thou to deliver me to be weighed in the
scales of justice?'

'No. I mourn over the fatal act. 'Twas done in self-defence. I will not
interfere. Wert thou tried, no one would believe thee. I do. My betrayal
of thee would rest a murder on my own soul. The Fates must rule. Go thy
way, and render thine account in the great hereafter. The gods will
judge thee, and mete out justice. Keep thy counsel. 'Tis better none
should know who thou art. Should I outlive thee, I will tell him, and
say, blackened as thou art, cursed and full of sin, there was yet a
spark of the Divine in thee, a spark which anon shall fire and blaze and
burn the dross, and leave thee pure and unsullied as the air in which
the gods dwell.'

Chios returned within the cave. The women were silent, until the silence
was broken by the footfall of a stranger. It was Judah the Christian.

'What a strange gathering!' murmured Chios, as he went forth to meet his
friend.

Endora glided out like a panther, leaving the two men alone with the
priestess.

Saronia drew her black cloak closely around her, covering her priestly
robes.

Judah knew her. 'Lady of the Temple, thou art safe. Speak; I will not
betray thee. Thou art not the first who came in this way. A young ruler
in Judea came to my Master by night and learned of Him, and what thou
wilt hear from me are the echoes of that Master's voice. Say on.'

Then answered Saronia. 'Behold in me a priestess of the goddess Diana,
skilled in the mysteries of her faith, touching the fringe of knowledge
as it emanates from my divine mistress, carrying with me a belief hoary
with the ages. But a short time since it permeated every cranny of my
being, leaving no room for doubt until I heard from Chios thou hadst won
him to thy faith. Knowing Chios well, and observing his peace, the
things thou hast told him now rise for hearing in my soul. Judah, if
thou hast more of truth than I, then show it me! I have power--power to
cast around us darkness--thick darkness--and anon fill this darkened
cave with spirits of fire, so that it shall blaze with light! Believest
thou this? I do not boast to show this power, but to prove I seek not
power, but truth and peace. Speak.'

Then said he: 'Thou hast no power here. Thou art shorn of thy strength.
The presence of my God is too strong! Invoke thy goddess, or thy gods;
they will be dumb to thee. I challenge thee, invoke thy spirits! Call
them hither, they will be as dead men to thee!'

She arose, towering with majestic beauty, and, stretching forth her
arms, whispered, with a voice full of command:

    Spirits of the Temple Altar,
    Ye who guard the sacrifice,
    Ye whose pinions never weary
    Serving Hecate, Diana,
    Serving Luna, Queen of Heaven,
    Come ye, by my summons bidden,
    Light your torches deep in Hades,
    Wave your brightness in this darkness,
    Fill this place with light and splendour!

But Saronia was powerless. Her strength was gone, and she stood aghast.
Looking first at Chios, then at Judah, she spoke not a word, and her
eyes were filled with tears as she learned a greater than Diana was
there, and the priestess was a broken reed.

It was then Judah spoke:

'Holy Father, by whose power the north was stretched over the empty
space, whose o'ershadowing wings give shelter to unnumbered souls, whose
mercy endureth for ever! Holy Son, reclining on the bosom of the Father
when the morning stars sang together and the sons of God shouted for
joy! Holy Spirit, dispensing peace! Holy Trinity, Great Eternal, Love
illimitable--hear Thy servant, and show us Thy goodness!'

Then a Presence passed between them, and Saronia knew the Christ of God
was there; but He entered not into her soul.

